
Karl Pearson


Karl Pearson
THE SCIENTIFIC LIFE IN A STATISTICAL AGE
Theodore M. Porter
P R I N C E T O N
U N I V E R S I T Y
P R E S S
P R I N C E T O N
A N D
O X F O R D

Copyright © 2004 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 3 Market Place, Woodstock,
Oxfordshire OX20 1SY
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Porter, Theodore M., 1953–
Karl Pearson : the scientiﬁc life in a statistical age / Theodore M. Porter.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-691-11445-5 (acid-free paper)
1. Pearson, Karl, 1857–1936. 2. Statisticians—Great Britain—Biography. I. Title.
QA276.P64P67 2004
519.5'092—dc21
[B]
2003054820
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Galliard
Printed on acid-free paper. 
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Contents
Preface and Acknowledgments
vii
CHAPTER ONE
Introduction: An Improbable Personage
1
CHAPTER TWO
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler
13
CHAPTER THREE
Apostle of Renunciation: A New Werther
43
CHAPTER FOUR
Pearson’s Progress: A Nineteenth-Century Passion Play
69
CHAPTER FIVE
Cultural Historian in a Political Age
91
CHAPTER SIX
Intellectual Love and the Woman Question
125
CHAPTER SEVEN
Ether Squirts and the Inaccessibility of Nature
178
CHAPTER EIGHT
Scientiﬁc Education and Graphical Statistics
215
CHAPTER NINE
The Statistical Reformation
249
CHAPTER TEN
Epilogue: Composing a Life
297
Bibliography
315
Index
329


Preface and Acknowledgments
THIS BOOK FOLLOWS the life of a singular individual, one who shaped in
many ways the form and the ethic of twentieth-century statistical meth-
ods. Given the immense role of statistics in modern science and modern
life, Karl Pearson must be counted among the leading scientiﬁc ﬁgures of
the contemporary era. I explore the connections of intellectual activities
ranging from romantic literature, socialism, cultural history, and feminist
theories of the origin of society to ether physics, scientiﬁc method, and
graphical geometry, concluding with the statistical impulse that seized him
at about the age of thirty-ﬁve. His statistical work provides much of the
raison d’être for this study but I devote only about a quarter of the book
to it. While I try to write precisely enough that statisticians will be able to
recognize mathematical forms where mathematics is at issue, the book has
no equations and certainly does not pretend to deal comprehensively with
Pearson’s career as a mathematical statistician. I am interested here prima-
rily in the moral and intellectual presumptions of the statistical life, the
ways Pearson helped to form, and yet dissented from, a new, more rigor-
ously quantitative style of science that came to prevail in a variety of bio-
logical, social, and applied ﬁelds around the beginning of the twentieth
century. I have also seized the opportunity to link scientiﬁc experience to
humanistic conceptions and personal life, and to ponder in conclusion
what ideals of individuality are encouraged by the public culture of mod-
ern science.
My own interest in this project and in some of the broad issues I raise—
topics that might well be taken up in a preface—I have discussed in a
somewhat reﬂexive epilogue. Readers who would prefer to be informed of
methodological and stylistic choices and to examine conclusions before
they confront the historical material that supports them might want to
look at my ﬁnal chapter ﬁrst, as well as last. I have avoided the straightfor-
ward, somewhat stylized form of the standard biography in hopes of do-
ing justice to an extraordinary life and to the political, cultural, literary,
and scientiﬁc milieu in which it was formed. I deliberately do not follow
the theories of any particular psychological school, but am of course quite
aware that I depend on the interpretive insights of a post-Freudian tradition.
Pearson’s letters and papers, which survive in unusual abundance, con-
tain many traces of the reasons for their preservation and availability to
scholars. I have Karl Pearson himself, in part, to thank for that, but also his
statistician son Egon Pearson, and especially his daughter, Helga Hacker,
neither of whom was still alive when I began this research. I have made

frequent use of the Pearson Papers at University College, London, with
much friendly assistance from archivists and staff. I gratefully acknowledge
the Manuscripts Division for permission to quote from letters and other
documents. I would mention in particular Gillian Furlong and Susan Stead,
who were there from the beginning to the end of the project. I gratefully
acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the National Science Foundation,
grants SBER94-12396 and SES00-80104, the Max Planck Institute for
History of Science in Berlin, the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences So-
ciales in Paris, the University of California Humanities Research Institute
in Irvine, and the Academic Senate of UCLA. 
I would like on this occasion to express appreciation for some teachers
from my youth. At Chimacum School on the Olympic Peninsula in Wash-
ington I will single out Bernie Mueller, who made history engaging, and
Carolyn Mueller and Susan Phillips, who cared about writing and litera-
ture. As a Stanford undergraduate I appreciated especially the teaching
and support of Harold Bacon in mathematics, and Paul Robinson in intel-
lectual history. My mathematical education owed much also to my father,
who taught me at home and at school, and whose death a few years ago
from leukemia was a painful loss. I thank him and my mother, above all for
a home full of love.
Many colleagues and students contributed to this work by listening to
presentations, asking questions, and discussing the project. For comments
on chapters, I thank Ken Alder, Lorraine Daston, Ellen DuBois, Anne
Mellor, Peter Reill, Dorothy Ross, Stephen Stigler, Mary Terrall, and
Norton Wise. Dan Eshet, Minghui Hu, and Gabriel Wolfenstein provided
able research assistance. I owe special thanks to Mary Morgan and Charles
Baden Fuller, who gave me a place to stay as well as their sympathetic,
scintillating company repeatedly, often for several weeks, whenever I came
to London to read in the archives. Finally, I offer these few words of writ-
ten appreciation to Diane Campbell and David Campbell Porter, who
have put up with Pearson for eight years, and with my perhaps unreason-
able commitment to work of this kind for still longer.
Theodore M. Porter
March, 2003
viii • Preface

Karl Pearson


C H A P T E R  O N E
Introduction:
AN IMPROBABLE PERSONAGE
When I get my hand in sufﬁciently I think I will write “Karl
Pearson, a Tragedy.” Can anything be done to rescue you from
your professorship?
—George Bernard Shaw to Karl Pearson, 20 June 1893
(Pearson Papers 627)
BEGINNING IN 1892, when he took up statistics as his scientiﬁc vocation,
Karl Pearson devoted himself relentlessly to a project of almost universal
quantiﬁcation. This work, the invention of a mathematical ﬁeld of statis-
tics, deﬁned one of the landmark transitions in the history of the sciences,
or indeed of public rationality. Until then he had been a thoroughly rest-
less intellectual, as involved in politics, literature, and history as in science.
These studies and experiences set up his wide-ranging career as a quanti-
ﬁer, and at the same time created conditions for enduring doubts about
this mission, to which he thereafter dedicated his career, and about the
form of society it helped to fashion. Having sought through philosophy,
history, marital partnership, scientiﬁc method, and statistics to discipline
and socialize the egoistic self, he came increasingly to fear that the modern
project of specialized science would fragment selfhood and suppress indi-
viduality.
When Pearson was twenty-three, in 1880, the autobiographical Arthur
of his novel The New Werther effervesced to his lover, Ethel: “What mean-
ing has the word ‘kiss’ to him who does not know that through the elec-
tric contact of a moment two ﬁery souls may feel united for an eternity?
What meaning has the word ‘life’ for him who has only existed in order to
hand down his name to posterity in the footnotes of a classic or as inven-
tor of an integral?” Half a century later, as his wife (he thought) lay dying,
he recalled his grand scientiﬁc ambitions and pronounced his career a fail-
ure. “Twenty years hence a curve or a symbol will be called ‘Pearson’s’ &
nothing more remembered of the toil of the years.” In this his most tragic
voice he ascended to prophecy, for this “Pearson” has survived primarily as
the name of a correlation coefﬁcient. Forgotten is not only a complex in-
dividual, but also the historical mood, the ethical and political aspirations,

2 • Chapter One
the literary and philosophical sources, and the scientiﬁc vision that
brought into being this technical art, which in the twentieth century
would reconﬁgure scientiﬁc and social reason.1
As revolutions devour their children, so science has meant the compres-
sion of memory. Artists and authors are at least memorialized by their
works, which may then be linked to the circumstances of their lives and
times. The sciences reduce even their most eminent men and women to a
few discrete discoveries, a single dimension. The legitimacy, perhaps even
necessity, of forgetting is often seen as concomitant to scientiﬁc progress,
and statistics in the twentieth century has been integral to this aspect of
the scientiﬁc identity. Pearson, who was unfailingly attentive to the past,
recognized this characteristic of the institutions to which he devoted his
life, and lamented it. In later life he devoted much attention to the history
of his ﬁeld. Beginning in his youth he wrote a series of more-or-less dis-
guised or ﬁctionalized autobiographies, stories of a dissatisﬁed man with
grand ambitions, later the apostle of a new faith. He preserved an immense
fund of documents, whether ﬂattering or not, among the most extraordi-
nary of which is the letter just mentioned, addressed to his sister-in-law,
Elisabeth Cobb. In it he summed up his career and his marriage, both as
tragic failures. “Please destroy,” it begins, followed by a salutation: “My
dear Bessie, I want you when you have read this to destroy this at once. I
should not like it to come by accident into any other person’s hands and
you must let me know that you have destroyed it.” Below his signature 
he reiterated, “As I have said, destroy at once.” But she never had the op-
portunity. At the top of the last page, in thinner script, we ﬁnd: “Never
sent. K. P.”
From youth on, Pearson’s acquaintances often characterized him as
cold, emotionless, and rationalistic. In view of his ﬁerce intellectuality and
disposition to theorize about everything from religious faith to sexual
love, it was a pardonable misperception. Yet he cultivated also—and he
wanted the world to know—a different self, one that pondered deeply and
suffered, living a life that he alternately imagined as tragic and as tri-
umphant, but that in any case was formed against a background of fateful
social and intellectual change. Most of the time he was self-consciously in
revolt against the dominant tendencies of his age, yet in retrospect he has
seemed often to epitomize some of its less attractive features, especially by
his faith in eugenics. An opponent of all compartmentalization, he was a
strong advocate of cultural history, which for him was made up of folklore,
religion, economy, labor, art, and science, of emotion and reason, none
separable from the others. He saw his own life in these terms and deliber-
1 “Loki” [Karl Pearson], The New Werther, 4; KP to Elisabeth Cobb (unsent), 2 April
1927, Pearson Papers 9/6.

ately left behind its traces, from which his younger daughter, Helga, later
gathered up, organized, and annotated a vast collection of letters and
other documents. Through these papers his intense commitments and
wide-ranging intellectual ambitions can be reconstructed, and with them,
some of the richness of his connections to his age. We are reminded that
rationality, even in its guise as calculation, does not reduce to scientiﬁc and
administrative routines. In Pearson’s life we experience it in a scene of per-
sonal cultivation and social struggle, where it has inspired the ﬁercest of
passions.
Pearson’s research interests were almost bewilderingly disparate. He was
sometimes proud of the range of his scholarly activities, but he also wor-
ried of falling into dilettantism. He wanted badly to believe that there was
some coherence to it all, or at least to the trajectory of his development.
For contemporary humanistic scholarship, which adores fragmentation
and is skeptical of unitary “metanarratives,” his self-conception must ap-
pear largely as wishful thinking. Indeed, no life achieves full coherence,
and his centrifugal tendencies were stronger than most. Yet Pearson was
right. My aim here is to examine the ways that it all holds together—how,
for example, the author of an unsuccessful “nineteenth-century passion
play” left his imprint on the philosophy of scientiﬁc method and even on
statistics.
After trying out a sequence of possible careers and displaying vast icon-
oclastic ambition in each, Pearson made his mark in what seems one of the
more mundane areas of modern life. He endeavored to provide appropri-
ate tools of measurement and calculation for the quantitative analysis of
social and scientiﬁc problems. This statistical project has been a curious
and paradoxical one. It has brought forth many prophets and missionar-
ies—calling for a great reformation of scientiﬁc or practical life, and work-
ing to reshape a discipline or a professional practice—but no saints. It has
never been personiﬁed, at least not to a larger public. Pearson himself
preached impersonally on behalf of “Saint Biometrika,” and in his gloomy
letter to Cobb he explained that his ambition had been to establish “a new
tool in science which would give certainty where all was obscurity and hy-
pothesis before.” It seemed a thankless task. “I have made many enemies
and few friends in the process for I was upsetting old idols and endeav-
ouring to replace them by new gods whom scientists of the old training
would not accept.”2
For this unrelenting controversialist, statistics meant battles unceasing
against numberless opponents for methods that, as he thought, must in
the end prevail because they were right, and because the future would
An Improbable Personage • 3
2 KP to Florence Joy Weldon, 19 Oct. 1906, Pearson Papers 266/8; also KP to Cobb (see
previous note).

require them. He also made many enemies from within the camp of statis-
tics, most notably the equally acerbic Ronald Aylmer Fisher, who, by the
brilliance of his work and the scorn of his commentaries, contributed to
the dimming of Pearson’s reputation among his disciplinary heirs.3 Few
outside the ﬁeld have recognized the extent of disagreement and contro-
versy within it, and so few have been able to appreciate the richness and
contingency, the ﬁerce emotions and vaulting ambitions, that have charac-
terized its history. It is a story full of ironies, of an enterprise that was cre-
ated to manage the chaos of chance, and to answer by measurement and
calculation what others could only debate.
TELEOLOGY AND PURPOSE: HISTORICAL IMPLICATIONS
The statistical project, Pearson’s endeavor, has not been passed over en-
tirely by the historical gaze. Statisticians are no less interested in the his-
tory of their ﬁeld than most other scientists, and there is by now a wealth
of serious historical research from various perspectives on its development.
The ideas and practices of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when
governments and reformers imposed quantitative order on unruly popula-
tions, have been particularly interesting to historians and social scientists.4
In the twentieth century, the role of mathematics has become increasingly
decisive, and studies of these new statistical tools and practices are gradu-
ally being written, episode by episode and discipline by discipline.5 In the
end, a picture will emerge of a powerful body of mathematics, allied to
schemes for gathering data and designing experiments, that has become
one of the most important sources of scientiﬁc expertise and guarantors of
objectivity in the modern world. It is the narrow gate through which must
pass new pharmaceuticals, manufacturing processes, ofﬁcial measures of all
descriptions, and the empirical ﬁndings of psychologists, economists, biol-
ogists, and many others. In that sense, its import goes far beyond the his-
tory of a mathematical discipline. Statistics has functioned as no narrow
specialty, but as a vital if often invisible element in the cultural history of
government, business, and the professions, as well as of science.
In some sense this is widely understood, though more often by social
scientists than by cultural or political historians. Sociology has a body of
theory ready-made for explaining developments of this kind, one associ-
4 • Chapter One
3 Gigerenzer et al., Empire of Chance, chaps. 3, 7; MacKenzie, Statistics in Britain.
4 Some books on the subject: Stigler, History of Statistics; Porter, Rise of Statistical Think-
ing; Hacking, Taming of Chance; Desrosières, Politics of Large Numbers.
5 For example, Krüger et al., The Probabilistic Revolution; Danziger, Constructing the Sub-
ject; Dehue, “Deception, Efﬁciency, and Random Groups”; Morgan, History of Econometric
Ideas; Marks, Progress of Experiment.

ated particularly with the name of Max Weber, which presents a process of
“rationalization” as intrinsic to modernity, and identiﬁes science and bu-
reaucracy as its standard-bearers. From this perspective, the development
of quantitative methods is readily seen as important, but also as natural
and even inevitable. The reconstruction of history as teleology has to some
degree been the fate of all the sciences, whose stories continue to be told
in textbooks and journalism as epics (or often mere lists) of theoretical and
experimental advances. Even if this were an adequate way to write the in-
ternal history of science (most historians of science these days think not),
there is nothing inevitable about its cultural and political role.
The very boringness, as most people suppose, of quantitative methods
testiﬁes to their pervasiveness and to a common assumption that their ap-
plication is virtually automatic. Yet their success was never easy or routine,
but was challenged repeatedly on many levels. That point is immediately
evident in any serious historical study of measurement and quantiﬁcation
in practice. Their aggressive impersonality may not point to any inherent
tendency of bureaucratic activity or scientiﬁc investigation, but rather to a
ﬂight from the subjective in the face of suspicions and challenges.
This book explores the topic of objectivity and its contradictions from a
different angle, focusing on an individual rather than a set of impersonal
institutions. It is, in a way, the life of a great statistician, yet the ﬁrst seven
of the book’s ten chapters are not mainly about statistics. I discuss in the
epilogue the implications of my attention to a single person, and the
standing of the individual in science. Here I emphasize some of the ad-
vantages that the more tightly focused perspective brings, apart from the
immense fascination of this varied and tormented life. Its protagonist
emerges as receptive and yet doctrinaire, participating in the great scien-
tiﬁc and social movements of his time but never at ease with them. His
mission, as it emerged in the early 1890s, was formed of many ingredients,
including religiosity and unbelief, historical vision, “the woman’s ques-
tion,” eugenic socialism, applied mathematics, and evolutionary biology.
These materials were made available to him by his culture, and a crucial el-
ement of the story is how he sought to integrate them into a coherent life.
He wanted science to become the basis of shared values and a uniﬁed cul-
ture, as the Church had been for medieval Europe. Yet he lived at a time
when strong moves to disciplinary specialization were narrowing the pub-
lic role of science. His own ﬁeld of statistics, despite its universalist claims,
tended more to advance than to inhibit these developments.
If an “age of science” means that scientiﬁc knowledge or training should
bring access to the levers of power, then Pearson’s time was not really one
of these. Although he was able through his immense determination to
build a “biometric school,” he was rarely a consultant to the powerful, and
his methods only slowly penetrated a civil service dominated by men
An Improbable Personage • 5

formed on very different principles from those he offered. What he adver-
tised as a new, general method, they understood as a technical specialty,
which, as such, would at best be suited to contribute to the consideration
of certain narrow questions. Pearson optimistically anticipated that in the
end the governors would recognize their need for his tools, and in a way
this proved right, but he could not have felt himself, in his own time, sup-
ported by the crushing force of modernity. His was, in a way, a utopian
project, even a hopeless quest, and quantiﬁers had to play a role in creat-
ing the conditions under which their methods would become inﬂuential.
Such methods have never been hegemonic, except in very particular do-
mains. A focus on a single career, and especially this one, brings the seem-
ing colossus of quantiﬁcation, and its sibling “scientiﬁc method,” into the
contingent domain of history. It reveals many of the cultural components
out of which these ambitions were fashioned, how they were situated in a
ﬁeld of competing alternatives, and how a program for science such as
Pearson’s presumed also a vision of the moral character of its practitioners.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF A LIFE
A life such as Pearson’s would provide excellent materials for a novel, and
I have tried in this book to develop some of its novelistic aspects. But
these, too, can be historically situated, and they pertain to an enterprise
that has made a difference. Pearson helped to create something new and
important, a body of applied mathematics allied to a conception of scien-
tiﬁc rationality as a form of personal renunciation. These intellectual and
moral qualities were suited, he thought, to the vital role the scientist must
assume in the coming socialist state. Obviously it was not in his power to
determine the form and role of expertise in his or any other polity, but in
time the ﬁeld of statistics took on a key role in deﬁning objective knowledge
in administrative as well as scientiﬁc contexts. Pearson’s philosophical con-
ception of science was particularly inﬂuential in relation to policy-oriented
sciences, and provided a model, convincing to many, of the moral qualities
of the scientist. Pearson’s career as a historian, feminist, and socialist, and
the sense of rational selfhood he worked out through those efforts, mark
an important episode in the history of the scientist as a form of life and as
a professional category.
From this perspective, the central document in the Pearson corpus is his
book The Grammar of Science, ﬁrst published in 1892. It was the outcome
of his physical researches on the mathematics of elasticity in relation to a
bold theory that would explain the whole range of physical and chemical
phenomena in terms of ether pulsations or, later, “ether squirts.” The
Grammar of Science expressed wider ambitions as well, joining a philo-
6 • Chapter One

sophical skepticism about our access to an independently existing world of
things in themselves with a bold claim for the unlimited scope of science.
To this was added a moral vision of scientiﬁc method as the very basis for
modern citizenship, because it provides standards of knowing that are in-
dependent of all individual interests and biases.6 The epistemology pre-
served and modiﬁed the German philosophical idealism to which he had
recourse when he lost his Christian faith; the moral arguments were dis-
tilled from more than a decade of his lectures and writings on socialism,
religious history, and feminism; and the vision of impersonal science was
among other things a solution to his intensely personal anxieties about
egoism.
It was also an important book for its age. Lenin, who thought that Pear-
son’s explicit philosophical idealism exposed the true reactionary tenden-
cies of the new positivism, offered backhanded praise for his philosophical
consistency. Henry Adams, in one of the more memorable sections of his
autobiography, declared epigrammatically that “the rise or fall of half-a-
dozen empires interested the student of history less than the rise of the
‘Grammar of Science.’” He interpreted it as one mark of those scientiﬁc
and technological changes to which he, a scion of New England patriarchy,
had been unable to adapt. Pearson, he thought, had destroyed the order of
nature, leaving a chaos of chance, and had reduced “truth” to “a medium
of exchange.”7 Others were more favorable, and some saw the Grammar
as the beginning of a new age, a work of revolutionary boldness. Albert
Einstein in 1902 formed a little reading group in Bern, which began its
study with Pearson, and there is evidence of a Karl Pearson reading group
at the University of California about the same time. Radical social scientists
were delighted at how Pearson joined socialism to the scientiﬁc standpoint.
Many were enchanted by the prospect of quantitative objectivity. Lancelot
Hogben, late in life, reminisced that his generation had “been suckled on
the Grammar of Science,” receiving it as a new evangel.8
While others were becoming excited about his Grammar, Pearson was
beginning to receive the gospel of statistics, ﬁrst as a graphical method,
and then as a program of biological measurement and quantitative analy-
sis. In the early twentieth century, the Grammar was understood by many,
including by Pearson himself, as a philosophical rationale for statistics,
though in fact he took up statistics only after completing its ﬁrst edition.
An Improbable Personage • 7
6 Porter, “Death of the Object,” and Porter, Trust in Numbers.
7 V. I. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism: Critical Comments on a Reactionary
Philosophy (1909; Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1952); Henry Adams,
The Education of Henry Adams (1918; Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1961), 450, 456.
8 Albert Einstein, Letters to Solovine, trans. Wade Baskin (New York: Philosophical Library,
1987), intro. by Maurice Solovine, 8; Hogben, Statistical Theory, 326; W. M. Conway to KP,
30 Dec. 1901, Pearson Papers.

Thereafter, right to the end of his life, Pearson would make it his mission
to reshape science using the tools of statistical mathematics. From 1893 to
about 1905 he published a series of papers that gave a new direction to the
ﬁeld of statistics. In 1901 he founded, in collaboration with Francis Gal-
ton and W.F.R. Weldon, the journal Biometrika, which was dedicated to
this project. He personally wrote or put in motion the research for most
of its contents, and he felt responsible to make almost every paper an 
adequate expression of his conception of the ﬁeld. That is, he ran it with
the heaviest of editorial hands, setting a standard against which modern
literary questions about the meaning of “authorship” appear thin and aca-
demic. Little wonder, given his refusal to tolerate dissent on such impor-
tant matters, that he was engaged in perpetual controversy. Those who
would push the project further, including some of his own students, could
not avoid his wrath, yet they remained practitioners of the discipline
that he established. Some, such as R. A. Fisher, inherited also his mission-
ary ambitions, which bear some responsibility for the continued fractious-
ness of the ﬁeld of statistics, the obverse of this Pearsonian faith in the one
true way.
Pearson’s third great missionary campaign, though it has appeared in-
creasingly disreputable since the 1930s, was eugenics. In this, as in statis-
tics, he was a proud follower of Galton, and the broad argument for the
relations between his statistical and his eugenic ambitions remains con-
vincing.9 He refused to compromise himself by joining any movements or
by engaging in concrete politics. Yet he sponsored and delivered a regular
program of public lectures on the urgent need for scientiﬁc study of eu-
genics, which should lead in time to a program of political action, a new
socialist program. Pearson derived from eugenics also a sense of connect-
edness with the deeper purposes of life, a pantheistic wholeness recalling
his early admiration for Spinoza that was hard to reconcile with the posi-
tivist’s alienation from nature.
My investigation of these topics has drawn me also into the more private
domain of family tensions, religious angst and connectedness with nature,
tangled relationships of friendship and love, and even sexual experiences.
In his youth he imagined himself a poet, and as a young man he undertook
repeatedly to reconstruct his life as a witty or tragic novel. These episodes
I ﬁnd fascinating in themselves, and it has not been my aim to dispatch
them efﬁciently. All, however, are in the end incorporated into a narrative
that forms an argument, one that integrates the private into the scientiﬁc
life of this applied mathematician with, I believe, a richness that has rarely
been possible in writing about science. A history of this sort depends on
the rich horde of documents Pearson preserved, but also on the peculiar
8 • Chapter One
9 See discussion of eugenics in chapter 9.

character of the man. Pearson universalized the life of the mind, analyzing
and theorizing about what most others have seen as strictly personal mat-
ters. For him, science had no limits, and scientiﬁc method was all the more
urgent in regard to what seemed most unreasonable. He came before the
world as a distinctive scientiﬁc persona, but he worried without end about
the implications of science for the person—one might almost say the soul.
He did not reduce the relation between the self and the natural or social
order to one of mirroring; but every genre in which he wrote, including
mathematics, drew from and had implications for a moral sense of person-
hood and a vision of cultural reformation.
Pearson was in many ways poorly socialized, a thoroughly original char-
acter who, while drawing deeply and repeatedly from the cultural re-
sources of his time, rejected many of the conventions of his class and his
profession. It would be absurd to present him as typical of anything, and
no straightforward generalizations can be founded on a study of this odd
life. Yet there is a sense also in which his experience makes richly visible
what is, if not the rule, certainly much more than the exception: interpen-
etrating deﬁnitions of science and scientist; complex trajectories of intimacy
with and detachment from nature; a tangled relationship, no mere oppo-
sition, between understandings of the personal and claims about the uni-
versal; and the ambition to construe scientiﬁc method not merely as the
discipline necessary to produce expert knowledge, but as a cognitive and
moral framework for the formation of citizens and elites.
THE PERSONAL AND THE IMPERSONAL
The “impersonal” for Pearson and for other Victorian moralists was not the
contradiction of personal cultivation, but its fulﬁllment, representing the
possibility of raising oneself above selﬁsh egoism. Not for nothing did he
regard Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister as a formative work, for Pearson viewed
life in the guise of a bildungsroman. Intensely self-conscious as he was, he
constantly assessed himself against this standard of individual growth. The
profusion of his own research interests, while allowing the development of
all his capacities, threatened also a fracturing or dissolution of the integral
self. The consummate meritocrat, he worried throughout the 1880s that he
had squandered his talents by dabbling. Yet he did not want to be trapped
in professional deformation, the narrowing and distortion of self that advo-
cates of “culture” identiﬁed with research science. Statistics was the answer
to his quest for a life mission, a ﬁeld deﬁned by methodology and mathe-
matics that licensed him to make incursions into every man’s specialty.
Science was also, for him, the legitimate object of passion, a release from
sectarianism. He praised the virtues of impartiality ﬁrst of all in his researches
An Improbable Personage • 9

on Reformation Germany, a topic about which nobody in Christian Eu-
rope could write impartially. The scientiﬁc attitude took on a deeper
meaning in the group he set up in 1885, the “Men and Women’s Club,”
where impersonality was cherished particularly by women for the access it
gave them to the intellectual world of men. The novelist and club member
Olive Schreiner, echoing Pearson’s admiration for Spinoza, celebrated his
devotion to “intellectual love,” even if she sometimes wrote with biting
irony of his icy detachment. Her ambivalence reﬂected some contingent
circumstances, for impersonality is naturally less appealing in a person with
whom one has fallen in love. Since the club gave rise to a thicket of pas-
sionate attachments, among them Pearson’s for the club secretary, Maria
Sharpe, dispassionate inquiry became all the more necessary to preserve
the ideal of friendship “from man to man.”
An intense dialogue about surface and depth runs through much of
Pearson’s work. As a young man, he recorded several ecstatic encounters
with nature, which he regarded as among the most powerful moments of
his life. These were notably unscientiﬁc experiences, and his subsequent
identiﬁcation of knowledge with numbers and cool precision was a real act
of renunciation for him. In The Grammar of Science, he made rationality
stand for distance from objects of desire, knowledge being only of sensa-
tions or appearances. This could scarcely have been satisfying to a man
who repeatedly condemned “sham” and disguise, and whose habit of self-
revelation reﬂected a need to feel understood. To be sure, there was always
an element of metaphysical idealism—implying a different and deeper re-
ality—in his denial that we can make contact with the material world. This
dimension, however, became less and less prominent as he placed increas-
ing emphasis on the instrumental efﬁciency of measurement and calcula-
tion in a world of endless Darwinian struggle. Whether from resignation
or heroic self-denial, he sacriﬁced much of the satisfaction of intimate 
connection with nature for the sake of detached, impersonal, quantitative
formulations.
Science also meant the control of individualistic egoism. As a historian,
he expressed this moral viewpoint with his strong preference for “Catholic
socialism” over the reign of exploitative self-interest brought by Martin
Luther. Protestantism he saw as the progenitor of the capitalistic economic
system against which he struggled in his own time, and which he thought
was destined soon to pass away. He held up scientiﬁc method as the only
proper basis for true, socialist citizenship, since it provided standards of
knowledge and belief that were binding on everyone. As ever, Pearson’s
public campaign was also a personal one. As he explained to Maria Sharpe
in 1889 during the ﬁrst phase of their traumatic engagement, he feared his
inherited tendency to selﬁsh egoism. Woman, as mother, stood for the
possibility of selﬂess love, yet by sacriﬁcing themselves, women also en-
10 • Chapter One

couraged the excesses of male egoism that were depicted so disturbingly in
the literature of Henrik Ibsen and George Meredith, as well as in the sad
domestic scenes of Pearson’s childhood. The emancipation of women, es-
sential for the ideal of self-development that he applied evenhandedly to
boys and girls, was required also for the morality of the new man. Pear-
son’s emphatic identiﬁcation of science and impersonality was thus but
one element in an enduring campaign to subordinate the self, especially
his own, to higher ends.
Pearson was anything but the passive recipient of inﬂuences. He was a
distinctly headstrong socialist, increasingly unwilling to participate in any-
thing he did not found. He even withdrew to a large degree from the
community of science, skipping most meetings of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science, and (after 1900) publishing mainly in his
own journals and pamphlet series. Yet he consistently emphasized, often
with particular reference to himself, the ways that every person is the prod-
uct of their age. His obsession with personal development, far from im-
plying isolation from his culture, demanded that he seek out the best
teachings he could ﬁnd on religion, philosophy, history, politics, and sci-
ence. His responsiveness to literature, in particular, reveals to what extent
his scientiﬁc sensibility was rooted in a time and place. I do not deﬁne that
rootedness in terms of effects on Pearson and then of his contributions to
knowledge, but of the formation of an individual in perpetual engagement
with his world. The person here is never isolated or independent, but nei-
ther does he disappear. Pearson was one of the ﬁrst to talk of a dissolution
of the subject, but his career of self-cultivation meant a tireless endeavor to
ﬁnd meaning and purpose in the world. Although some of those meanings
now seem repugnant to me, and probably to most potential readers, I have
tried to write in a way that takes them seriously.
In his biography of Galton, Pearson proposed a statistical solution to the
problem of identity. “It would be an interesting problem to determine
what is the degree of likeness of a man to himself, by correlating the habits
and modes of thought of individuals at selected ages. We might thus obtain
a measure of the permanence of individuality.”10 He added that Galton dis-
played a “marvelous sameness” over the decades. Marvelous it must have
been, for Galton’s mode of life and research interests changed utterly be-
tween the ages Pearson mentioned, twenty and sixty. Pearson’s own life was
no less wide-ranging, and he would no doubt have appreciated a statistical
proof of its fundamental coherence. Neither reducing a life to an equation
nor parceling it out among various scientiﬁc, intellectual, and personal am-
bitions was tolerable to him. For all his dedication to objectivity, he insisted
on the role of individuality in science, the search for truth as the expression
An Improbable Personage • 11
10 Pearson, The Life, Letters, and Labours of Francis Galton, vol. 3A (1930), 279.

of intellectual love. Yet in an age of teeming specialization, of reason re-
duced to calculation, science seemed less and less hospitable to the creative
individual, restlessly seeking truth. Pearson’s life, the story of an aggressive,
angular, and deeply self-conscious scientist, is also an account of the chang-
ing possibilities of the scientiﬁc self in an age that has inclined to conﬁne it
and to isolate it from other aspects of this sometimes passionate process we
call living, by making it selﬂess and objective.
12 • Chapter One

C H A P T E R  T W O
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler
Nevertheless, its aspect awed the father as already it had awed the
nurse. The creature looked so unutterably solemn. It ﬁxed its
eyes upon Sir Peter with a melancholy reproachful stare; its lips
were compressed and drawn downward as if discontentedly
meditating its future destinies. The nurse declared in a frightened
whisper that it had uttered no cry on facing the light. It had
taken possession of its cradle in all the dignity of silent sorrow.
—Edward Bulwer Lytton, Kenelm Chillingly (1873)
But I think darling you are too premature in deciding that you
cannot be happy.
—Fanny Pearson to her son Carl, 30 September 1873
IF ALL BIOGRAPHY is in part autobiography, then there is much to be
learned from Karl Pearson’s reductio ad absurdum of the pious Victorian
genre of life and letters, four quarto volumes, copiously illustrated, on his
predecessor Francis Galton. It begins with a long chapter on Galton’s an-
cestry, indispensable background to the life of the father of eugenics. The
modern reader, at least, ﬁnds these pages to be full of ingenuous just-so
stories: a quantitative disposition reﬂecting the hereditary business sense
of the Quaker Galtons; a wanderlust—over scientiﬁc as well as terrestrial
continents—inherited from two other branches of the Galton tree; and of
course scientiﬁc ability from his Darwin ancestors. This did not mean that
the child, father to the man, was formed independently of his surround-
ings, but rather that, through the force of inborn traits of personality, he
contributed to the fashioning of an environment in which those disposi-
tions could develop. The eugenic life meant a triumph of personal charac-
ter over environmental inﬂuences. Pearson was fascinated also by his own
progenitors, though they were not so renowned, and he spent many sum-
mer months near Danby in the North York moors, walking on the ances-
tral ground and inveigling the farmers there to bring him property records
and marriage licenses for his genealogy. As with everything that interested
him, he executed his project on a grand scale.1 He considered that only an
1 The genealogical tables he compiled from 1897 to 1900 are in Pearson Papers 2.

overwhelming hereditary stubbornness had enabled Galton’s Quaker an-
cestors, and by implication his own, to hold out through the centuries of
persecution. On one public occasion he summed up his own Quaker
legacy as the source of two characteristics: “a capacity for hard work and a
capacity for roving into other people’s preserves.”2 No specialist barriers
would block his forays into other disciplines when he believed that scien-
tiﬁc right was on his side.
By the time he pronounced these lines, near the end of his life, he was
thinking principally of the stream of controversies that marked his statisti-
cal career. As he recognized, however, the opportunity to roam widely as an
“intellectual buccaneer” was not merely a happy by-product of his turn to
statistics, but an important part of its initial appeal. His intellectual ambi-
tions were still more far-ﬂung in the 1880s, before his turn to statistics. He
was acutely conscious of his tendency to range widely, initially because he
sometimes reproached himself as a mere dilettante, and later when he re-
called his early life as a triumphant romp through open ﬁelds of knowledge.
He reminisced about his initial appointment at University College London:
“Then Professor Beesley, just because I had lectured to revolutionary clubs,
Professor Croom Robertson, just because I had written on Maimonides in
his Journal, Mind, Professor Alexander Williamson, just because I had pub-
lished a memoir on Atoms, and Professor Henry Morley, just because I had
attended and criticised his lectures on the Lake Poets, pressed me to be-
come a candidate for the chair of Mathematics.” 3 His point in this story,
that he was happily engaged in the practice of law when these men per-
suaded him to think of a mathematical career, is quite false, and is most
charitably understood as the pardonable hyperbole of an old man. It does
not, however, exaggerate the extent of his interests. Whether for hereditary
or other reasons, he had set his own course, pursuing the forms of knowl-
edge he thought most vital with immense determination, and at a consis-
tently high level. In addition to the studies he mentioned, Pearson had also
by 1884 published on the cultural history of Germany in the Reformation
period and tried his hand at a nineteenth-century passion play. He was then
beginning to think systematically about “the woman’s question.”
His determined and wide-ranging explorations were in no way light-
hearted, but were driven also by a deep urgency, a personal and cultural
crisis ﬂowing from a youthful loss of Christian faith. In this respect, at
least, he was a good Victorian. We have no record of his early doubts, but
only a diary entry from the summer or fall of 1877, during his twenty-ﬁrst
14 • Chapter Two
2 Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 1 (1914), 9, 29–31, 40; Pearson, Speeches Delivered at a
Dinner, 20. Neither Galton nor Pearson was raised as a Quaker. There were many expulsions
in the nineteenth century, due especially to restrictions on marrying outsiders. Quakers, nev-
ertheless, were often successful in business or the professions. Watts, The Dissenters.
3 Pearson, Speeches, 20–21.

year, announcing that he no longer thought himself a Christian. Darwin-
ian evolution was central to his later scientiﬁc career, but his religious con-
victions were not upset by science. He seems rather, like Galton, to have
been troubled by the hypocrisy and insincerity of Christians. As he ex-
pressed himself in 1879:
The antients felt and lived the creed they’d got;
But now, where’er you turn you still will ﬁnd,
We think ours, write it, preach it, live it not.
Missionaries, Manchester and murder are our lot.4
The old faith no longer provided a moral compass for society in this age of
capitalism and consumption. Nor could it give direction to his own life.
Pearson was desperate to ﬁnd a sense of purpose, a calling. This was
linked, for him, to questions about his place in the world, and to the pos-
sibility of knowledge about the world. He also yearned to know if and how
the individual personality would survive after death.
His mature scientiﬁc philosophy was in many ways very skeptical on is-
sues of this kind, dismissing most of the “great questions” as meaningless.
The abandonment of Christianity for intellectual reasons despite an in-
tense emotional commitment was, as he came to think, the prototype of
the spirit of renunciation required by science. Already in 1880, within a
few years of this crisis, he represented it in a published letter as a heroic act
of self-overcoming: “No man rejects Christianity without a great and con-
tinuous struggle. . . . A battle like this, is in itself a purifying process, nay,
a self-sacriﬁce, and by showing a man his intellectual impotence at least
teaches him intellectual humility.” It was a familiar Victorian autobio-
graphical form, the record of a religious conversion, demanded by truth
and achieved at the cost of great anguish. In the end, he discovered within
science a sense of historical purpose as well as personal commitment: sci-
ence deﬁned the next, decisive phase in what he conceived as a grand saga
of human progress. Personally, however, maturation meant for him a des-
perate search for meaning, which inspired, if it could not guide, his early
efforts as a scholar, scientist, and writer.5
FAMILY MATTERS
He was born Carl Pearson (he changed the spelling to Karl in 1880) on
27 March 1857, the second of three children of William Pearson and
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 15
4 From Pearson’s Urwerther, written 1879, discussed in chapter 3, Pearson Papers 11/4;
on Galton, see Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking, 132–134.
5 Karl Pearson, letter to Cambridge Review, 2 (3 Nov. 1880), 55; Turner, “Crisis of
Faith,” 80–81.

Fanny (Smith) Pearson. The family resided in several neighborhoods
north of London until 1866, when they moved to a house on Mecklen-
burgh Square in Bloomsbury. His brother Arthur was sent to Rugby,
where, it may be noted, his father pressed successfully a request that the
boy should begin studies in German. William Pearson saw knowledge as
the key to success and told his boys that this required thoroughness in
study. Cramming, as he explained to Arthur, “produces appearances only,
with no substance behind—mere husk and shell which when opened
shows no fruit,” and he called for “much patient and painful industry
steadily and perseveringly applied.”6 Karl, in contrast to Arthur, never
spared himself that industry, nor had his father.
This family background was not without its tensions. His father had
grown up among Quaker relatives in York, but his ambitions had driven
him to Edinburgh, where he took an LL.D. degree, and then to London,
where he read law at Inner Temple and became a barrister. His intelligence
and hard work raised him to the top of his profession, an appointment as
Queen’s Counsel (“Q. C.”) in 1875. The price of this success was a sepa-
ration from the Yorkshire countryside, which he always loved, and appar-
ently his alienation also from his own parents. At least Karl never met his
paternal grandmother, though he was twenty-ﬁve when she died.7 At the
time of William’s death, in 1907, Karl recalled him in these terms:
An iron man with boundless working power, who never asked a favour in his
life, and never really got on because he forgot to respect any man’s prejudices,
and never knew when he was beaten. I learnt many things from him, and know
that I owe much to him, physically and mentally. But we were too alike to be
wholly sympathetic. He thought my science folly and I thought his law narrow-
ing,—the view of both of us being due to an inherited want of perspective in
the stock!
He elsewhere described his father as cool and remote; as rising before
dawn to read briefs and prepare arguments, and returning home only in
time for dinner and then bed, so that the children scarcely saw him.8 Karl
seems to have exaggerated; William Pearson could be blunt, and he had a
temper, but an unmistakable concern and even tenderness show through
in his letters to the youth. The difﬁculties of their relations were greatly
exacerbated by a rift between “the Pater” and “Mère” (as she signed her
letters). Fanny Pearson presented herself to the children as vulnerable and
16 • Chapter Two
6 Edward Scott to William Pearson, 30 Sept. 1870, Pearson Papers 9/3; William P to
Arthur Pearson, 30 March 1873, Hacker Papers, Box 8, “Heritage 4.”
7 KP to William P, 5 May 1882, Pearson Papers 927, on the occasion of Elizabeth Beilby
Pearson’s death. His grandfather, Thomas Pearson, died in 1859.
8 KP to Galton, 16 Oct. 1907, Galton Papers 293, printed in Pearson, Life of Galton,
vol. 3A (1930), 327–328; Pearson, Speeches Delivered at a Dinner, 19–24.

Figure 1. William Pearson. The stern, egotistical Pater? (Courtesy of University
College London)

Figure 2. Fanny Smith Pearson. The generous, vulnerable Mère. (Courtesy of
UCL)

mistreated, virtually compelling the boys to take sides. They chose her.
She was especially close to and dependent on her most sensitive son, Carl.
In 1912, in the course of researches into his eugenic background, Pear-
son asked his mother’s Yorkshire neighbors, who had known his parents in
childhood, about the family “temper, waywardness, or habits.” One of
them replied that his parents’ marriage had been troubled from the start
and blamed it on the self-indulgence of Fanny, who with eyes open had
married this intensely ambitious young man and then allowed herself to
become unhappy because he did not lavish attention on her.9 This was not
how it had seemed to the sons, who took it on themselves to defend their
mother against the paternal asperity. Vacations were particularly tense, and
in the late summer of 1873 there was such a crisis that Fanny ﬂed to seek
refuge with some of her relatives. Arthur and Carl joined forces on her be-
half. “Papa is very silent, merely asking questions,” wrote Arthur to her
the next day, “but at dinner he said something which caused me to ﬁre up
and I gave it him ‘hot and strong’; let him know that I entirely agreed with
you.” Carl declared that he could “never I think look on Papa as I have
done after what he has said and done.”10 A few weeks later he told his
mother that he could never be happy, and his bitterness toward his father
remained with him for years. Since, however, he became increasingly con-
vinced that he was cut from the same cloth, his discontent was perhaps not
directed exclusively outward. By contrast, his relations to Fanny remained
close. He told her about interesting experiences, shared at least some of
his anxieties, and exchanged opinions on books and other intellectual mat-
ters. For many years, each looked to the other for emotional support.11
Parents and children alike supposed that the sons would grow up to fol-
low their father’s profession, though they seemingly were not pressured to
do so.12 Carl’s intense intellectuality made this more doubtful, and by
1884 when he received his university appointment he was in truth im-
mensely relieved to escape the law. His brother Arthur, who also was called
to the bar, practiced only in a desultory way, living on family money and
then on an inheritance that had once been intended for Carl. This was
from Mr. Gee, a childless client of William Pearson, who had proposed to
confer his fortune on the second son on condition that he take Gee’s
name. But Karl and Gee had a falling out, probably as a result of a meet-
ing in Innsbruck in 1881, supported by Gee’s well-grounded suspicions of
longer standing that Karl disdained him “for his lack of culture.” Karl told
his mother on this occasion that Gee was the worst specimen of the
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 19
9 Eliza Rains to Pearson, 11 Aug. 1912, typed in Hacker Papers, Box 7.
10 Arthur P to Fanny P, 2 Sept. 1873 (Hacker Papers, Box 8) and KP to Fanny P, 3 Sept.
1873, Pearson Papers 924.
11 Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics, 22.
12 See further discussion of this point in chap. 5 below.

Englishman abroad, and that he had abandoned his own plans to continue
to Vienna so he could avoid meeting once more his awful benefactor. The
will was rewritten in favor of Arthur, whom it eventually supported in gen-
tlemanly idleness.13 Gee, and even Arthur, embodied for Karl the evils of
inherited wealth. Arthur’s early death in 1896 moved Karl to write a bru-
tal letter to his mother about the venereal ailment that carried him off, but
it occasioned few signs of emotional loss.14
AN EARNEST CHILD
What documents survive from Pearson’s youth give the unmistakable im-
pression of an earnest and highly sensitive boy. He was not sent to face the
rigors of a “public” boarding school, such as Rugby, but stayed at home
until age ﬁfteen and studied at University College School. Even this was a
strain for him; the boy was evidently plagued by delicate health. In late
March 1873 his father mentioned in a letter to Arthur that Carl was “low
and miserable.” “We are all much pained and disappointed at Dear Carl’s
breakdown,” wrote a sympathetic school ofﬁcial at this time.
His parents hoped that a quieter life might suit the lad, and his father
began looking for “a good Cambridge Wrangler—a beneﬁced clergyman
in the country—to take him and prepare him for Cambridge.”15 In Sep-
tember, young Pearson went off to the vicarage at Hitchin, about 30 miles
north of home, to study with Lewis Hensley, who had been senior wran-
gler and Smith’s prizeman in 1846. That is, he had taken both the top
mathematical prizes at Cambridge. Once more, Carl was miserable. “I can
understand Arthur’s ﬁrst trials at Rugby now, but there all was routine and
life, I am left entirely alone with nothing to do but break down. . . . Papa
will laugh & say I shall get over this & perhaps I shall, but if there was only
some fellow of mine own age instead of these smoking brutes.” He alone
among the students at the vicarage was not living just for the moment. “I
feel very sad about getting on, no-one here works at all . . . , for instance
I have been vainly trying to work this afternoon, but the others having
been playing the banjo & singing have completely prevented it, so that I
20 • Chapter Two
13 KP, “Childhood Memories,” Hacker Papers, Box 8, “Heritage 2,” gives the date as
1878–79 and says he had objected during a holiday abroad when Gee was “abominably
rude” to a waiter. But there is no evidence that he met Gee during his German stay in 1879,
and the incidents described in letters to his mother broadly match his description. See KP to
Fanny P, 12 Sept. 1881 and 16 Sept. 1881; also Fanny P to KP, 7 Nov. 1879, Pearson Pa-
pers 787.
14 KP to Fanny P, 19 Jan. 1896.
15 E. R. Horton to William P, 31 March 1873, Hacker Papers, Box 8, “Heritage 4.”

Figure 3. Karl Pearson. Schoolboy with cricket bat. (Courtesy of UCL)

had to give up.” If he could not pursue a real education, he feared, “I lose
all chance of ever doing anything either at Cambridge or in the world.”16
Fanny’s response, though consoling, reafﬁrmed the implacable necessity
of work if he was to “get on in life. . . . Papa & I ever feel that you will do
your best to get on. Oh darling don’t disappoint us.” The boy was also
“sick” of the “indecent conversation” of his fellows, perhaps, he reﬂected,
because of resentment that he was excluded, and perhaps on account of
“my own sense of what is right.” He was sincerely religious, attending
services regularly during this period. The smoking brutes were less pious:
“I was the only one down to prayers last night.”17
Carl Pearson’s depression was, as his parents recognized, partly a matter
of homesickness. His mother responded always with support and affec-
tion. Even his father did not, as he gloomily anticipated, lightly dismiss his
suffering, but sent encouragement as well as advice. The advice included
instructions on “how to take a cold bath properly.” He should not slouch
his body all over, but only sit in the cold water while sponging himself with
tepid water from a separate vessel. “You cannot bear the driving of the
blood from the extremities—either hands, feet, or head,” which might 
indeed bring on heart disease. As for his education, William Pearson took
seriously his discontent, allowing the boy to apply to be tutored at Cam-
bridge prior to entering the university as an undergraduate. This meant a
round of examinations in March 1874, while visiting his brother at Trin-
ity Hall College. His success at this level entitled him to take up residence
at Merton Hall in September and to commence in earnest the competitive
life of Cambridge meritocracy.18 Two tutors, James R. Harris and John
Peter Taylor, began in the fall to prepare him for the college “exhibitions,”
or scholarship examinations.
In January 1875, encouraged by his father, he started work with the
most celebrated of Cambridge mathematical “coaches,” E. J. Routh,
whose students dominated the all-important Mathematical Tripos for two
decades. Among those in his cohort was William Martin Conway, subse-
quently Pearson’s intimate friend. At this point Carl was obsessed with the
hoops through which he was expected to leap, and he complained to his
mother that Routh’s tutorial work that term would “not be of the least use
22 • Chapter Two
16 KP to Fanny P, 29 Sept. 1873.
17 Fanny P to KP, 21 Oct. and 16 Nov. 1873; KP to Fanny P, 7 Oct. 1873. He discussed
the experience in Hitchin with more detachment in “Old Tripos Days,” 28. On Hensley, see
Venn, Alumni Cantabrigienses, vol. 3, 333.
18 The Student’s Guide to the University of Cambridge, 3rd ed. (Cambridge, UK:
Deighton, Bell, 1874), is devoted almost entirely to preparation for the various Triposes,
through which honors were awarded, and to the merit scholarships and prizes awarded by
the various colleges. Pearson and his father clearly had Cambridge honors in mind from a
young age.

for this exam.” By this he seems to have meant the spring scholarship ex-
amination at Trinity College. His father told him in reply that he should
hire a tutor such as Harris to work up materials for his more pressing
needs, and not study too hard for Routh.19
In the event, he was only partly successful in the examinations later that
spring. The examiners at Trinity, the most prestigious of the Cambridge
colleges, determined (as they informed him) “that you have been hurried
on too soon into the higher subjects before having obtained a thorough
grounding in the lower ones.” This was clearly a criticism of some kind, ei-
ther of Routh for teaching abstruse materials to a student so young, or 
of Pearson for beginning with a Tripos coach before he had even entered
as an undergraduate.20 The time was not, however, wasted, since Routh’s
topic for that term, the mathematical theory of elasticity, provided the 
basis for Pearson’s research program in applied mathematics right up to
his switch to statistics in the early 1890s.21
Sixty years later, in an oft-cited essay, Pearson spoke of the experience as
if he had been indifferent to the pressure to succeed, and had simply ex-
ulted in the abundance of mathematical and other intellectual opportuni-
ties at Cambridge. There he identiﬁed the unfamiliar material as Legendre
functions, and the questions as elementary for anyone who had studied
them. In contrast to the contemporary description of his desperation, he
imagined his youthful self as almost serene. He was fascinated, he recalled,
by the ingenuity of an examiner who could invent such interesting func-
tions, and so, out of curiosity, devoted most of his attention to them.22
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 23
19 See KP to Fanny P, 27 Jan. and 4 Feb. 1875; William P to KP, 7 Feb. 1875; Conway,
Episodes in a Varied Life, 49. Pearson also recalled the coaching from Routh in 1875 in “Old Tri-
pos Days,” 28. These fascinating recollections, written sixty years after the fact, have many errors
and inconsistencies. But I think he was accurate in recalling that at ﬁrst, in the spring of 1875, he
and the other (pre-undergraduate) “beast,” Conway, met alone with Routh. After one term,
Conway dropped out, and for the rest of the year Routh lectured to him alone in a weekly ses-
sion at 7:00 A.M. In the next term, Pearson joined a regular coaching session, but he may have
continued to study elasticity alone with Routh. Conway, who left Pearson entirely out of his au-
tobiography, claimed that he gave up on Routh’s coaching sessions because J. J. Thomson’s per-
formance so far surpassed his own. Evans, The Conways, 56, has Conway being coached with
both Pearson and Thomson. But Thomson did not come up to Cambridge until 1876.
20 E. W. Blore to KP, 10 April 1875, Pearson Papers 11/3, transcribed in Hacker Papers,
Box 8; Pearson, “Old Tripos Days,” 30, mentions the possibility that the examiners were sus-
picious of his advanced reading with Routh. He recalled this letter as having come from the
mathematician James Glaisher.
21 Pearson’s recollection on this point is conﬁrmed by a contemporary letter, Conway to
KP, April 1875, Pearson Papers 666/3. Routh had assigned them “Lamé’s Elasticity, . . . a
nasty French book printed on blotting paper.” Contrary to Pearson’s reminiscences in “Old
Tripos Days,” it was among the books recommended for Tripos preparation.
22 See “Old Tripos Days.”

But he was not yet so headstrong. His tutors, who knew better, offered ex-
planations and consolation for his failure at Trinity. Harris told him that
the Trinity exam was ill-chosen to bring out his strengths, and predicted
that in the all-important Tripos he would beat most or all of those who
had scored above him this time. Taylor explained to father William that
the Trinity examination was based on a “bad plan,” designed to challenge
more mature students as well as new candidates, so that the latter in-
evitably confronted unfamiliar material. “Your son broke down completely
on the ﬁrst paper, an easy paper,” which excluded him despite a very
strong performance on the second and third papers. Carl had done more
work than he had ever seen by anyone else in the same length of time:
“[H]e has ﬁne abilities & is most industrious—he is no doubt a little pe-
culiar. We think him somewhat like the character of Kenelm Chillingly in
Bulwer’s novel—his principles are excellent, his conduct exemplary and
we are very fond of him. I think he will take a ﬁrst rate degree. Pray do not
press him. He is a most willing horse—rather delicate too I think.23
AT KING’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
Pearson was consoled for the setback at Trinity by his success in the en-
trance examination for his second choice among Cambridge colleges,
King’s. This was above all a matter of honor, but meant also an annual
scholarship of £80 and free tuition, amounting to perhaps half the ex-
penses of residence there for a student of comfortable but not opulent
background and habits.24 The documents are silent on how he chose
King’s, which would be more puzzling for an aspiring mathematician than
for a youth with literary and historical interests who was preparing to fol-
low his father and elder brother into the law. King’s College might almost
have been a part of Oxford rather than Cambridge. Humanistic studies
were notably prominent there, and the required mathematics lectures
were too elementary for Pearson, or indeed for anyone being coached by
Routh. Far more of his college friends took honors in classics or in the new
modern history Tripos than in mathematics. Among those who wrote him
letters I found several who subsequently took religious orders, and at least
three who made careers teaching or writing about art; also a historian, a
24 • Chapter Two
23 J. R. Harris to KP, 11 April 1875, Pearson Papers 11/3, transcribed in Hacker Papers,
Box 8; John Peter Taylor to William Pearson, 15 April 1875, Pearson Papers 865/9. Bulwer-
Lytton, a product of Trinity College, published Kenelm Chillingly in 1873.
24 Student’s Guide to Cambridge, 461–462. Under the new statutes, King’s College was to
consist of at least forty-eight undergraduates and forty-six fellows. It was to award twenty-
four scholarships to Etonians and twenty-four more open scholarships. On college expenses
see ibid., 69–103.

classicist, a schoolteacher, a lawyer, a physician, and just one serious math-
ematician. This last, William Herrick Macaulay, was by one year Pearson’s
senior and had completed the Mathematical Tripos—as sixth wrangler—a
few months before he wrote his ﬁrst (surviving) letter thanking Pearson
for the loan of a book of Heine’s poetry. Perhaps, as Pearson later implied,
most mathematical students were so ﬁxated on the grind of Tripos prep-
aration, and the honor of ﬁnishing as one of the top wranglers, that they
had no time to become interesting or well-rounded individuals. “Intellec-
tual Cambridge at the present time is strictly monotheistic and its god is
Tripos,” wrote one of his contemporaries.25
King’s College formed with Eton, the famous “public school,” a single
foundation. It preserved more liberty within the university than the other
colleges, and it had been particularly resistant to the forces of reform.
Some of the fellows in Pearson’s time had been appointed under an older
system when the college was more nearly a system of sinecures than a ﬁeld
of competition. Oscar Browning, a celebrated personage at Cambridge
during the last quarter of the nineteenth century and a vocal advocate of
change, spoke with seeming irony of the alliance with Eton as “a magniﬁ-
cent system for the endowment of research. An Eton Colleger went in due
time to King’s, if there was a vacancy for him, became a Fellow, took his
degree without examination, and remained till the end of his days with in-
creasing income and dignity unless he married or took a living.”26 King’s
and Eton were noted for cricket in those days.
Eventually, in 1851, King’s lost or gave up its exemption from examina-
tions. In 1860, for the ﬁrst time, one of its students performed well enough
on the mathematical Tripos to be a wrangler—there were usually about
twenty-ﬁve wranglers. Browning, uninhibited by false modesty, identiﬁed
the new era in the history of the college with the “scholars who came up
in 1856,” of which he was one. He added, however, that while he received
instruction at King’s, his “education” took place at Trinity.27 When, in 1876,
Browning resumed his fellowship at King’s, he set about raising it to the
standard of a ﬁrst-rate Continental institution, such as the Ecole Normale
in Paris, his favorite. But Trinity and the other Cambridge colleges formed
a more potent model, since it was backed by pressure from Westminster.
This model made the university into a system of assessment, to which 
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 25
25 Macaulay to KP, March 1878, Pearson Papers 753. In “Old Tripos Days,” where Pear-
son celebrated the possibilities of the system in those days, he also complained that most of
the mathematics students were interested in nothing but their Tripos results. He told of ask-
ing to breakfast a fellow freshman (!) mathematical student, who politely declined “because
he was too busy working for the Tripos.” On monotheism, see Ernest A. Parkyn, “Special-
isation at Cambridge,” Cambridge Review, 1 (3 March 1880), 71.
26 Browning, Memories, 15.
27 Morris, King’s College, 40, 44; Browning, Memories, 19, 28.

education was largely subordinated. In the 1850s, King’s had a reputation
as “the only Cambridge college devoted to a genuine intellectual ideal, the
only one whose students did not look upon examinations as the sole road
to success.”28 That ideal persisted, somehow, through the reforms, and in
the last quarter of the century the college ﬂourished as never before. By
Pearson’s time, King’s was particularly strong in historical research. It also
provided opportunities to study art, literature, and philosophy.
In 1861, the college was ﬁnally opened to non-Etonians, and during
Pearson’s residence this group made up about half of the students. Brown-
ing and the other reforming dons such as university librarian Henry Brad-
shaw and historian George Prothero regarded Pearson as an exemplary, if
somewhat prickly, specimen of the new King’s undergraduate, and they
supported him in more than one confrontation with college authorities.
Unfortunately, almost nothing has survived from his life there in the
whole period from the fall of 1875 to the spring of 1877. So complete a
silence contrasts starkly with his next two years, which are documented by
letters to his parents and to several college friends, and by his notebooks
and incoming correspondence. There is reason to think he was lonely and
unhappy during his ﬁrst years at Cambridge. An oblique diary reference
from the summer of 1877 implies a sense of isolation and low spirits. Both
his father and mother encouraged him repeatedly to be more sociable so
that he might make friends, and cautioned him against damaging his
health by working too intensely. His academic success is evident from the
King’s examinations in June 1877, when he scored at the top of the list,
with 1545 points compared to a second place 1115, and many now saw
him as a future senior wrangler.29 The pressure of such expectations may
have been hard to bear. After 1877 his social problems lightened, and dur-
ing the next two years he appears to have been well liked by his contem-
poraries and admired by his juniors at college.30
It is impossible to know just when or why his religious crisis began. The
documentation of his life resumes in May 1877, when he demanded and
obtained ﬁrst an end to compulsory divinity lectures, and then to compul-
sory chapel attendance. Pearson, in old age, interpreted this episode as ev-
idence of his strong-willed iconoclasm, not a wholly unreasonable boast.
When, in the course of his appeal, he was asked to supply a statement of
26 • Chapter Two
28 Rothblatt, Revolution of the Dons, 221–222.
29 William P to KP, 26 April 1875, 4 March 1877, 16 Aug. 1876; Fanny P to KP, 14 April
1875. I. D. Binney to KP, 11 June 1877, Pearson Papers 636/4; on senior wrangler, see KP
to Browning, 18 Sept. 1877, Modern Archive Center, King’s College Library.
30 E.g., W. Rhys Roberts to KP, 18 Feb. 1901, “Probably you little think how much your
example meant to your juniors at King’s, & with what admiration they have watched you liv-
ing the students’ life & enjoying year after year in persistent & well-directed work.” Pearson
Papers, 829/8. Also Robert Somervell to KP, 28 Dec. 1882, Pearson Papers 859/2.

principle, he was ready with one. “I have conscientious objections to any
form of compulsion in Religious matters, believing that freedom is the
very essence of Religion, and considering that compulsory attendance at
services which are liable to be wearisome, whether the mind is ﬁtly dis-
posed for devotion or not, tends to destroy entirely all religious feeling.”
This argument, however, was mixed with various other considerations.
His appeal emphasized also pressure of time as an important reason he
should be freed from divinity lectures. Having attended them in his sec-
ond year, he was required to continue into his third only because he twice
failed a required examination on religion. He did not, in fact, stand against
the united forces of college conservatism, but was supported throughout
the ordeal by Browning, as well as by a certain London barrister, now
Queen’s Counsel. In the end, Pearson threatened to leave King’s for an-
other college, taking, one supposes, his Tripos prospects with him, and
this ﬁnally brought the college around. His victory won, he continued
from time to time to be seen at chapel. He explained that he objected only
to compulsory attendance.31
RELIGIOUS DOUBTS, AND LIFE MADE FICTION
By this time, he was suffering acutely from religious doubt. Agnosticism
was becoming the rule rather than the exception at Cambridge in these
years, if we are to believe the recollections of a King’s student three years
his junior.32 Pearson also had been driven very hard in his studies—and for
what? He may have been conscious of analogies between his situation and
John Stuart Mill’s well-known crisis, and, like Mill, he looked ﬁrst to liter-
ature for guidance and consolation. In the summer of 1877 he started a
Commonplace Book.33 At the beginning, where some of the pages are
dated, they proceed from October backward in time to July. These ﬁrst
thirty-two pages consist of poems and short prose passages, sometimes
with commentary, from books he was reading, and also some verses of his
own. This material is followed by an introspective essay of fourteen pages,
and then by an ironic commentary.
The authors he was reading included Shelley, Rousseau, Voltaire, and
Goethe, his favorite. He also copied extracts from Tennyson’s “In Memo-
riam” and Edward Young’s graveyard poem, the “Night Thoughts.” He
rendered his own sadness literary in a verse that he later incorporated into
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 27
31 Draft letter, KP to J. E. Nixon, Pearson Papers 11/3 ﬁle 1; also Hacker Papers, Box 8.
32 Somervell, Autobiography, 74–76.
33 His mother had recommended Mill’s autobiography to him. What follows is from his
Commonplace Book I, Pearson Papers 11/4.

several ﬁctionalized versions of this time of troubles. “Thou mystic god-
dess of my soul!” it begins, “O ﬁckle Melancholy dear!” His skeptical
gloom appears also in a copied passage from Wilhelm Meister about the
world being woven of chance and necessity, and of how the uncontrollable
results of the former are attributed retrospectively to divine plan.34 From
Rousseau’s Essay on Inequality came the sentiment that mental reﬂection
is “against nature.” He included jokes and laments about the ﬁckleness
and impurity of women, but also bitter rebukes of the economic system
that compelled so many to sell themselves on the streets. His melancholy,
indeed, was not linked exclusively to religious doubt, but was equally the
outcome of frustrated ambition and an outraged social conscience. From
essays by John Morley, radical editor of the Fortnightly Review, he learned
that Rousseau and Voltaire had been “the two great forces” of the French
Revolution. “Society had hitherto been a mass of hypocrisy & cant, this
Rousseau was to overturn by an appeal to Nature, an appeal purely to the
sentiments.” Such readings inspired his poetic megalomania, clearly rec-
ognized as such, in some verses on “wild ambitions.” “I thought there was
a mighty poet born,” he imagined:
A Byron Keats or Shelley would I be.
(I thought in truth I could be all three.)
The world forsooth I’d revolutionize.
Abolish kings, priests, customs, mockeries.
His introspective essay in the diary concerned mainly his religious
doubts. “I have often thought I would try to analyse my feelings till I was
left with some deﬁnite idea of what religious belief I have or whether I have
any at all,” he began. But “all I am sure of is that my mind is chaos at pres-
ent. I think I have deﬁnitely rejected Christianity, perhaps more from dis-
gust of its professors than of real knowledge of its virtues & vices.” It
“seems to me a dying faith,” he continued, one that had “played a glorious
part in its day,” but began necessarily to decline once it set itself against the
new learning and against “progress.” The ironizing quotation marks around
progress reveal the gloomy admirer of Rousseau, who adored nature and
was drawn to the primitive. He loved to be alone in the country, and when
he thought of divinity in relation to the natural world rather than society,
he sometimes supposed he might still be a deist. Indeed, to be surrounded
by all this beauty, seemingly created for his beneﬁt, made him feel as if he
was equal to the gods, he told himself. In civilization, on the other hand,
he found nothing but “misery, hypocrisy, and blasphemy.” The existence of
so much poverty, when he could enjoy the luxury of passing the time in
28 • Chapter Two
34 From Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship, Book 1, chapter 17; the passage is in German,
though he quotes also from Carlyle’s translation.

beautiful surroundings reading Goethe, burned his social conscience. “In
such moods I hate mankind, society appears blacker & blacker to me & the
contrast makes nature fairer & fairer.” He thought of escaping somewhere
to the backwoods, “of playing the man of nature out there like Thoreau.”
And he contemplated suicide, in order to unpuzzle by ﬁat the tormenting
mystery of whether there be an afterlife.
No less revealing than Pearson’s painful self-examination is the next frag-
ment in this Commonplace Book, wherein our author created an alter ego
to take on the burden of this literary life. Pure earnestness became dissem-
bling revelation, the self reconstructed as ﬁction. For this he invented Ralph
Hewitt, a “strange dreamy being,” often to be found taking solitary rambles
in the country, who subsequently escaped civilization to Texas, where he
died of marsh fever. “Hewitt & I had been contemporaries two years ago at
college”—Trinity College, the manuscript explains. Hewitt was expected to
rank high in the Tripos, “even senior some said,” though he was often “in
hot water for breaking some college rule or other. He hated any bond or re-
striction to his liberty.” In fact, a James Hewitt had entered Caius College in
1875, Pearson’s year, then left in 1877 without taking a degree.35 It would
be remarkable if this historical Hewitt perished in Texas, and still more so if
his sister passed along to Pearson his notebook, “ﬁlled with an odd miscel-
lany enough, scraps from Goethe in the original & in rhymed translations,
criticisms of Voltaire & Rousseau, & several pieces of original verse which is
very poor.” Hewitt’s “eccentric ways” would, in that case, have been re-
vealed in a longer essay, dated one week before his departure for Texas. “It
is as follows—(see M.S.S.),” Pearson explained, referring back, we must sup-
pose, to his own essay. Thus was his commonplace book, transformed into
the fragmented literary remains of an odd, discontented, nature-loving
utopian who, through death, had learned at last “the secret of existence.”36
The life of this ﬁctionalized Hewitt, who had left behind little more than
some “very illegible pages,” recalls Thomas Carlyle’s excellent conceit: six
paper bags containing “miscellaneous masses of Sheets, and oftener Shreds
and Snips, written in Professor Teufelsdröckh’s scarce-legible cursiv-schrift”
that arrived in reply to an imagined editor’s query about the life of the great
clothes-philosopher.37 Since Pearson read Sartor Resartus, most admir-
ingly, in the summer of 1878, and did not begin his second commonplace
book until after the Tripos in 1879, his ironical commentary in this ﬁrst
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 29
35 Venn, Alumni Cantabrigiensis, vol. 3, 350.
36 Pearson Commonplace Book I. This impatience to learn the secret of the afterlife is a
particularly acute version of that dedication to science discussed in Levine, Dying to Know,
esp. chaps. 10–11 on Pearson.
37 Thomas Carlyle, Sartor Resartus (1833–34, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987),
Book I, chapter 11. Pearson referred to the “Teufelsdröckhian position” in a letter about his
New Werther (see next chapter): KP to Conway, 7 Oct. 1880, Pearson Papers 910.

commonplace book was probably written a year after the other pages. It
was, by intention, funny and whimsical, as indeed was the life of Teufels-
dröckh, and Pearson was evidently working toward a literary strategy like
Carlyle’s, which, through ironical ﬁction, placed some distance between
himself and his extravagantly mystical alter ego. Carlyle, as a literary scholar
explains, had allowed himself “full rein with the rhapsodic visionary Teufels-
dröckh, while cannily retaining a commonsense, deﬂating presence in the
form of the professor’s English editor.”38 Conscious that he was making
his way through uncharted waters, and recognizing the element of self-
obsession in his ravings, Pearson was nevertheless very much in earnest.
Teufelsdröckh preached redemption in work, as did Carlyle subsequently.
Pearson would suffer intensely from his inability to ﬁnd a mission for which
to labor. He looked to philosophy, and above all to German idealism, for a
sense of meaning and purpose.
A PHILOSOPHICAL WRANGLER
By the summer of 1877, when the paper trail of Pearson’s life resumes, he
was reading seriously in philosophical literature. At about this time he wrote
in his commonplace book that “Goethe’s Faust & Wilhelm Meister and
Shelley Poems have been the greatest revelations to me of anything I have
read.” Although the archives reveal very little about the circumstances of his
reading in those years, we can surmise that his encounters with literature and
political philosophy were guided by Oscar Browning. For Rousseau this can
be documented, and also for Goethe. Browning particularly admired the
great German, and a few years later would write a long entry on Goethe for
the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. There were reasons to
doubt his scholarly acumen, and Pearson would eventually treat him as al-
most an object of derision,39 but in 1876–77 the two were very close.
Browning had a long-established habit of traveling during the summer
with a favorite student and a John Murray guidebook. There were suspi-
cions, which cannot be entirely discounted, that his dismissal from Eton
was occasioned by relationships with his boys that went beyond the bounds
of propriety, as in later years they almost certainly did.40 Such rumors did
30 • Chapter Two
38 Ashton, German Idea, 75.
39 Somervell, who was among the ﬁrst to take honors in the modern history Tripos, was
also distinctly unimpressed by Browning, at least in retrospect; see Autobiography, 67–70.
40 The pretext for his dismissal, which became a cause célèbre, was a technical violation of
rules, a late application for permission to tutor more than forty students. The real reason may
have been the one offered by Browning himself, a disagreement with the then headmaster
about educational reform. Browning always insisted (too much?) on the need for guarding
the morality of his boys. But see Anstruther, Oscar Browning, 5–11. Virginia Woolf, in Three
Guineas, implied a relation between his misogyny and homosexual pedophilia.

Figure 4. Karl Pearson. Can he ever be happy? (Courtesy of UCL)

not prevent him from forming close and personal friendships with students
at King’s after he was transplanted there, and he was very fond of Pearson.
In June 1877, the two set off together for a tour of the Continent. Pearson
informed his mother in his ﬁrst letter home, from Lucerne, that he and
Browning had been reading Faust together on the train.
The journey was a ﬁne opportunity for the lad to cultivate his taste, or
at least to articulate it. Grandiose Paris, as reconstructed by Baron Hauss-
mann, was disappointing: “Everything looked too new, no old houses &
streets.” In Switzerland, he adored the mountains, glaciers, cliffs, and wa-
terfalls “beyond anything I could think possible,” although the thunder in
Andermatt did not echo so resonantly through the mountains as he had
imagined it. This was made up on Monte Ceneri, looking down on Lago
Maggiore: “As we reached the top a most violent thunderstorm hid the
lake from sight. I cannot possibly describe the scene.” In Como, he was
sent into “raptures” by his ﬁrst Italian cathedral, and the “dress & face of
the peasants” he thought “beyond description for their beauty.” “Switzer-
land is grand, but Italy is simply sublime.” Unfortunately the weather was
too hot, so back they went to St. Moritz, where he was enchanted by
the “vaulted passages & staircases leading everywhere & nowhere” in his
hotel, and then through Innsbruck to Munich.41 Neither his reading nor
his taste in architecture and landscapes bespeaks a sober rationalist.
No later than July of the same year he started his Commonplace Book,
with its dreary introspection and unconvincing irony. At Cambridge in
1878 he began reading systematically in philosophy, especially German
philosophy. Browning may have helped to get him started. Pearson took
as guides to his philosophical reading two German histories of philosophy,
by Kuno Fischer and Eduard Zeller, of which the latter was a favorite of
Browning’s.42 There is no indication that he received serious philosophi-
cal instruction at Cambridge. He seems rather to have investigated the
ﬁeld on his own, in close association with other students, especially Robert
Parker.
Pearson and Parker were part of a tennis foursome at King’s, along with
John Lawrence Green and Edwin Cooper Perry. Tennis proved to be a
philosophical game. Presumably there were conversations during term at
college. In the summer of 1878 they materialized as documents, when
Pearson began corresponding about German philosophy with Parker and
Green. Parker, an Etonian and son of a reverend, entered King’s in 1876,
the year after Pearson. He subsequently took honors in the classical Tripos
32 • Chapter Two
41 KP letters to Fanny P, undated, June (and July?) 1877. Browning recalled the trip,
which he dated incorrectly to 1878, in his Memories, 267–268. In Como, he explained,
“Pearson suffered severely from the heat, and we had to go into the Engadine.”
42 Browning, Memories, 227.

in 1880, bracketed ﬁfth, and went on to a successful career as legal coun-
sel and then judge, rising to lord of appeal and to the Privy Council. Even-
tually he fell heir to the family baronetcy, and took a prominent role in the
House of Lords during the First World War.43 Pearson’s friendship with
him at King’s quickly developed an important personal as well as intellec-
tual dimension, yet its intensity in these early years derived from a shared
appreciation of German literature and philosophy, driven mainly by Pear-
son’s need for a philosophical listener. Parker, less radical in his politics and
more restrained in his metaphysics, was more often the recipient than the
author of urgent philosophical explorations. Still, he willingly joined this
journey of discovery through a landscape of Teutonic metaphysical ideal-
ism, which would have seemed lonelier to a pair of King’s undergraduates
in 1878 than it appears in retrospect. In fact, for most of the next decade,
Pearson would move largely in Germanophile circles.
The contrast between the commercial and somewhat philistine Wilcoxes
and the highly cultured Schlegels in E. M. Forster’s 1910 novel, Howard’s
End, gives some idea of what German culture was coming to mean already
among the late Victorians. Goethe’s early reputation among the English
for immorality was by then a distant memory, and he had come to be
deeply admired by earnest writers and intellectuals of diverse political
views. Many endorsed German biblical criticism as the basis of a heroic
search for truth and a sacriﬁce of the comforts of blind faith. In the 1870s,
a German-inspired philosophical idealism grew to prominence, especially
at Oxford. It was strongly opposed to the individualistic utilitarianism of
Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, and to the old liberalism that
aimed to minimize the role of the state. German philosophy was redolent
of higher ideals, of self-sacriﬁce and improvement. Benjamin Jowett, re-
former and then master of Balliol College, fought particularly for this ethic
of service and against the pursuit of commercial gain. In his edition with
commentaries of Plato’s dialogues, he introduced also a more modern ally,
G.W.F. Hegel, the “true countryman” of Goethe and Schiller and deadly
critic of Locke and Hume.
This new moral idealism did not, to be sure, look only to Germany.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s Social Contract attained the status of a classic in
these years, and Auguste Comte’s religion of humanity was applauded by
a generation of hopeful elite reformers, who took upon themselves the
burden of relieving the condition of the laboring poor. The now-uniﬁed
German state was coming to be seen as the site of a promising social ex-
periment, and German idealism, which for much of the century had been
held tantamount to atheism, gained favor in the context of the revival of
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 33
43 Sumner, “Parker.”

classical education on the Greek model. Increasingly, idealistic philosophy
gained currency as a promising basis for a metaphysical quasi-religion.44
Pearson and Parker, joining an intense philosophical quest with a growing
social concern, looked to the Germans for guidance.
Pearson’s turn to philosophy coincided not only with religious doubts,
but also with a reconsideration of his professional ambitions. He had be-
come disillusioned with the legal career for which he thought himself des-
tined, and may well have decided that the price to be senior wrangler was
too high. In a sharply worded letter at the beginning of a new year, 1878,
he told his father that he was not seeking a degree for “getting on in the
world,” but wished only to earn enough to assure his independence. “I
could not work, and would not, as you have done,” but would prefer £300
and time to follow hobbies to £6000 and “grind my whole life out.”45
By March, Pearson was beginning to regard himself as a disciple of Spin-
oza, who “at least offers a satisfactory, if some-what deep solution of the
great question [i.e., personal immortality]. His criticism of the Divine Law
as exhibited in the Bible is splendid & carefully distinguishes the kernel
from the husk in that somewhat confusing book.”46 In the spring, he re-
ported to Parker and unnamed others on the importance of the three
reverences in Wilhelm Meister’s Wanderjahre. In September their corre-
spondence hit upon theosophy with Pearson seemingly more enthused
than Parker about a philosophy that regarded the universe “as a thought
of God.”47 This, too, led to Spinoza, whom Pearson here understood as
drawing a sharp line between feeling and intellect and consigning religion
to the domain of feelings. His tennis companion Lawrence Green, who
was to become a man of the cloth, argued that this reading originated with
Spinoza’s German interpreters and not with the great philosopher himself.
Green pressed, in the name of Hegel, a more radical idealism that would
allow a personal spirit to survive the death of the body, while Pearson held
that the soul was absorbed into the “individuality of the universe.”48
34 • Chapter Two
44 Ashton, German Idea, 23; Den Otter, British Idealism and Social Explanation; Turner,
Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain, 418; Newsome, Victorian World Picture, 170.
45 KP to William P, 4 Jan. 1878, Hacker Papers, Box 8. He also said he would rather be a
recluse than a family man.
46 KP to Fanny P, 29 March 1878, Pearson Papers 11/3.
47 Only Parker’s letters on these matters survive: Parker to KP, June 1878 and 2 Sept.
1878, Pearson Papers 780. We have, however, Pearson’s notes on the three reverences (rev-
erence for what is above us, “symbolized by old Jewish faith,” for what is around us, “the re-
ligion of Wisdom,” and for what is beneath us, “symbolized by Christianity”) in Pearson
Papers 11/6. As for theosophy, apparently written as “Neosophie” in Pearson’s letter,
Madame Blavatsky’s Isis Unveiled was published in 1877.
48 Lawrence Green to KP, 15 Aug. 1878 and undated, fall or winter 1878–79, Pearson 
Papers 706/3.

It appears from this correspondence that Pearson and Parker ﬁrst en-
countered Hegel in early 1878 in Jowett’s commentaries on Plato. Pear-
son later formed the habit of sneering at Balliol men, and perhaps
implicitly also at Green, for what he saw as rearguard efforts to make
Hegel a support of Christianity and for the Oxford neglect of science. Yet
the evanescence of individuality, and particularly his own, distressed him
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 35
Figure 5. Robert Parker. Philosophical partner (Courtesy of UCL)

throughout his life. His turn to radical idealism the next year meant an ex-
altation of the self, which took him even to the borders of solipsism. He
pondered what Jowett called Hegel’s “faith or conviction, that God is im-
manent in the world,—within the sphere of human mind, and not beyond
it.”49 An English admirer of German literature and philosophy was almost
necessarily drawn also to Carlyle. Pearson’s delight with Sartor Resartus
reveals much about his frame of mind during his last year at Cambridge:
I have not since Faust II read anything that so suited my cravings. You are al-
ways blaming me for my love of the ideal, even when it has no application to the
practical & my brother does the same, but somehow, since all my religious dog-
matic faith fell to the ground, I feel I can only be happy by adding a mystic ide-
ality to everything & looking at everything from a religious point of view. This
does not add & rather impedes my practical action but it supplies a want I feel.
It is this spirit of the ideal which Carlyle tries to cast over everything & which
delights me so.50
By comparison to the urgency of his metaphysical quest, natural science
occupied Pearson only a little during his last university year. Experimental
science had but a modest role in undergraduate study at Cambridge in
Pearson’s day, and still less at King’s than at other colleges. Toward the end
of 1878, however, he reacted strongly to a scientiﬁc debate between Rudolf
Virchow and Ernst Haeckel. At the 1877 meeting of the Congress of Ger-
man Scientists and Physicians, Haeckel had argued for reorienting educa-
tion around an evolutionary monism, which, he proposed, could bridge the
divide between the two great competing modes of instruction, the classical-
historical and the exact mathematical. Virchow, his former teacher, replied
a few days later that the Darwinian ideas of human descent and of the spon-
taneous appearance of life were mere hypotheses, and dangerous ones,
since they had been appropriated by the radical Social Democrats. Coming
from this accomplished scientist and liberal politician, no apologist for
Christianity, Virchow’s reply was lauded by the conservative German press
as an impartial critique of Darwinism. It was also picked up in London by
the Times, which interspersed long translated excerpts with fawning com-
mentary. The Times in turn was answered by William Kingdon Clifford and
then John Tyndall, who defended Darwinian naturalism in that instantly
successful new review, The Nineteenth Century. The scientiﬁc journal Na-
ture, which had published the original exchange in the fall of 1877, printed
long translated extracts from Haeckel’s rejoinder in December 1878.51
36 • Chapter Two
49 Benjamin Jowett, ed. and trans., The Dialogues of Plato, 2d ed., 5 vols., vol. 4 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1875), “Introduction to Plato’s ‘Sophist,’” 409–424, on 424.
50 KP to Parker, 31 Aug. 1878.
51 Ernst Haeckel, “The Present Position of Evolution Theory,” Nature, 16 (4 Oct. 1877),
492–496; Rudolf Virchow, “The Liberty of Science in the Modern State,” Nature, 17 

Pearson’s comments on the debate, written within days of the appear-
ance of this 1878 summary in Nature, are the ﬁrst indication of a serious
engagement with science to appear in his letters. Straightaway he faced the
question of the limits of knowledge. Clifford had defended science as a
combination of bold hypothesis and critical analysis, arguing that evolu-
tion should be taught in the schools—not as dogma, but concretely, with
its evidence and its limitations. For him, the scientiﬁc attitude was more
important than any particular doctrine. Tyndall, more conservatively, held
that evolution was not yet suited for the classroom, and should “bide its
time” until it was better understood. He was, however, no more inclined
than Clifford to exclude hypothesis from science. “I call a theory a princi-
ple or conception of the mind which accounts for observed facts, and
which helps us to look for and predict facts not yet observed.”
Throughout these exchanges, arguments for the unavoidable imperfec-
tion and partly subjective character of knowledge were used by both sides.
Haeckel, a bold scientiﬁc metaphysician who fashioned the soul out of car-
bon, countered Virchow with the argument that his demand for perfect
certainty would exclude all of biology, chemistry, and, indeed, physics from
science. After all, what do we know of the true nature of atom, force, elec-
tric ﬂuid, and ether? Even mathematics has aspects that cannot be proven,
such as the fourth dimension. One of his unfriendly English reviewers,
Charles Elam, conceded that the “essential nature” of things remains un-
knowable, but sought to discredit evolution by contrasting it to the solid
phenomenal knowledge of real science. This “shibboleth of modern en-
lightenment,” evolution, failed Elam’s test of a valid hypothesis, that it
must function as “an aid to thought or classiﬁcation.” Pearson was initially
disheartened by this talk of the limits of knowledge. What good was solid
science if it could shed no light on the really vital questions that obsessed
him? But he disliked extravagant theories. Perhaps he was impressed by Vir-
chow’s distinction between ﬁrm objective facts and subjective fantasy, for
he pointedly refused to credit Haeckel’s speculations as science.52
Pearson’s reaction was conditioned also by his reading, probably only a
few weeks earlier, of W. H. Mallock’s The New Republic; or, Culture, Faith,
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 37
(22 Nov., 29 Nov., 6 Dec. 1877), 72–74, 92–94, 111–113; Anon., “Natural Science and
Free Thought,” The Times (London), 29 Jan. 1878, 4; W. K. Clifford, “Virchow on the
Teaching of Science,” Nineteenth Century, 3 (April 1878), 712–732; John Tyndall, “Vir-
chow and Evolution,” Nineteenth Century, 4 (Nov. 1878), 809–833.
52 Clifford, “Virchow on the Teaching of Science”; Tyndall, “Virchow and Evolution”;
Anon., “Haeckel on the Liberty of Science and Teaching,” Nature, 19 (5 Dec. and 12 Dec.
1878), 113–115, 135–137; Charles Elam, “Haeckel and Virchow: The Evolution Controversy
in Germany,” Contemporary Review, 35 (Oct. 1878), 540–569, on 554–555, 563. The cited
remarks were inspired by the German edition of Haeckel’s rejoinder, later published in English
translation with a prefatory note by T. H. Huxley as Freedom in Science and Teaching (London:
C. Kegan Paul, 1879), see esp. chap. 5. For Pearson’s reaction, see the following paragraphs.

and Philosophy in an English Country House. The genre became Mallock’s
specialty, a ﬁctitious conversation among prominent British thinkers or
statesmen, always under pseudonyms. Pearson joined the game of match-
ing Mallock’s characters with their prototypes, who included T. H. Hux-
ley, Tyndall, Clifford, John Ruskin, Carlyle, Jowett, Matthew Arnold, and
E. B. Pusey. Clifford’s alter ego, Saunders, played the role of scientiﬁc
fool, rejoicing that science will soon destroy religion and poetry, and ap-
plauding the subordination of “all the vaguer and more lawless sentiments
to the solid guidance of economical considerations.” He exalts progress as
the aim of life, explaining that “progress is such improvement as can be
veriﬁed by statistics, just as education is such knowledge as can be tested
by examinations.”53 Pearson, joining the ridicule, called Haeckel “the
German Clifford” for his combination of naïve faith in human knowledge
with a vague panpsychic materialism. In response to Parker, who disliked
the social inequality implied by Haeckel’s evolutionism and linked it to
Goethe rather than Darwin, Pearson advised: “Pray do not write & ask me
the meaning of any scientiﬁc or philosophic terms in it, you think you do
not understand. I do not possess the knowledge of the cell-soul or the
soul-of-the-cells & the idea of the ‘plastidule’ is maddening.”54
He went on to complain of the German disdain for empiricism, which
could ﬁnd no place under the rubric of a dogmatic metaphysics. But he
was far from content with what science might hope to acquire empirically.
He lamented to his brother:
I have just read Haeckel’s reply to Virchow’s Munich speech. It is most amus-
ing, a regular German Saunders or Clifford. The old battle seems opening
again, ‘Science versus Religion’. [P. G.] Tait and Balfour Stewart have just pub-
lished a sequel to the ‘Unseen Universe’, and our friend Clerk-Maxwell has de-
scended into the arena and written, in a matter worthy of the ‘broad-browed
V[irchow]’: ‘The progress of physical science has added nothing to what has al-
ready been known about the physical consequences of death and has tended to
shew that our personality, with respect to its nature as well as to its destiny, lies
beyond range of science.’ [Here Pearson cited Francis Bacon making a similar
point about scientiﬁc limits.] . . . That is to say, after 300 years of patient “re-
search”, science is said not to have approached any nearer the great question.
What a satire on all our modern thought! No wonder that the doctrine of ‘Ig-
norabimus’ is preached, if our leading physicists talk thus. No wonder such en-
thusiasts as Haeckel and Clifford use strong language, and demand that the
38 • Chapter Two
53 Arthur P to KP, 3 Dec. 1878, Hacker Papers, Box 8; W. H. Mallock, The New Repub-
lic (New York: Scribner and Welford, “new edition,” 1878), 218, 46, 22–23.
54 Parker to KP, 22 Dec. 1878; KP to Parker, 19 Dec. 1878, Pearson Papers 922.

doctrines of evolution, which their opponents say are those of revolution, shall
be taught in our schools.55
This passage shows a deﬁnite interest in broader issues of science, and
unmistakable dissatisfaction with its incapacity to address the issue of
higher purpose and personal destiny. He rejected Tait and Stewart’s incor-
poration of science into a Christian apologetic, as he disapproved Haeckel’s
bombastic anti-Christian scientiﬁc metaphysics. His ﬁnal sentence suggests
that, at the age of twenty-one, this future champion of rigorous Darwinism
may have agreed with Virchow on the speculative character of biological
evolution. But his unhappiness with Emil Du Bois-Reymond’s doctrine of
Ignorabimus, that there are some things we can never know, came straight
out of Haeckel, who criticized Virchow’s binding up of science (Haeckel
called it Restringamur) as still more conﬁning. Here, Pearson refused to
concede that any signiﬁcant questions were necessarily beyond the reach of
science. In later writings, even as he forcefully denied that science can get
to the essence of things, he criticized Du Bois-Reymond quite speciﬁcally
on this point. Evidently he held out hope, despite his gloom, that science
could be of help in his search for religious or philosophical meaning.
THE MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS
Pearson’s increasingly intense exploration of philosophical and religious
questions in 1878 was all the more remarkable because he was about to
compete in the Mathematical Tripos. Although it had long been possible
to take honors at Cambridge in classics, and by Pearson’s time in an ex-
panding array of other ﬁelds of knowledge, there was no ambiguity about
which carried the most prestige. Cambridge was the site of a particular,
somewhat outdated variety of mathematics, perpetuated by the remark-
able status of this famous examination. Having long been dominated by
Newtonian geometry, after midcentury it was converted to analysis,
though still with a strongly physicalist orientation. The problems tended
to be elaborate, even baroque, involving solutions by brute force more
than cunning insight. Wranglers were expected to give mathematical solu-
tions to complicated mechanical problems of pulleys, inclined planes, and
inelastic rolling rings.
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 39
55 KP to Arthur P, 22 Dec. 1878, Pearson Papers 11/3. This passage was inspired by
James Clerk Maxwell’s review of Balfour Stewart and P. G. Tait, Paradoxical Philosophy (se-
quel to their Unseen Universe) in Nature, 19, 19 Dec. 1878, 141–143, quotation abridged
from p. 143; Ignorabimus (“we shall never know”) refers to Emil Du Bois-Reymond, Ueber
die Grenzen des Naturerkennens (1872), which Maxwell’s review also mentions. On Tait and
Stewart, see Heimann, “Unseen Universe.”

There were complaints throughout the century about the form of study
that the Tripos encouraged. Pearson, an outspoken critic in the 1880s,
praised the system in his late essay on “Old Tripos Days,” but his defense
amounted to the claim that he had been able to secure a superb and bal-
anced education despite its rigors. Most of the other candidates, he let on,
were dull and narrow, ﬁxated on this examination result and willing to sac-
riﬁce all else. Candidates were prepared for the Tripos not by university
lectures or college teaching, but by coaches, the Tripos “coach” being the
prototype of a profession now associated almost exclusively with physical
athleticism. Pearson had the beneﬁt of coaching by Routh, whose charges
took most of the top honors for two decades. The Tripos encouraged, as
Pearson noted, an approach to mathematics in terms of problem-solving
rather than strict proofs, and this had deﬁnite advantages for ﬁelds such as
mathematical physics. Still, modern scholarship has tended to support the
critics in most respects. The candidates worked under severe time pres-
sure, and to do well it was necessary to solve problems very quickly. A high
wrangler had to commit a great deal of material to memory so he could re-
produce it quickly in the examination room. It also took great stamina to
hold up for several consecutive days of testing, in a high-ceilinged room
that could be freezing cold in January.56
The Tripos in the late nineteenth century had something like the status
of the Oxford-Cambridge boat race. It would probably have been tele-
vised had the technology been available. Beginning on the ﬁrst Monday
after December 29, the students were examined from 9:00 A.M. until noon
and 1:30 to 4:00 P.M. for four days, and then after a week for ﬁve more
days. Only those who performed at a sufﬁciently high level on the more el-
ementary problems in the ﬁrst three days were allowed to continue to the
advanced topics of the second week. Those who took honors were divided
into wranglers, senior optimes, and junior optimes.57 A great tumult sur-
rounded the announcement of the winners at Senate House. The top
wranglers, especially the senior, had their pictures next day in the newspa-
pers, and then received dozens or hundreds of congratulatory telegrams.
Many college fellowships were offered based on Tripos rankings.
One of the most celebrated of all Tripos announcements took place a
decade after Pearson’s competition, when the highest score was secured by
a woman, Philippa Fawcett, daughter of a noted champion of women’s
rights and of a Cambridge economist. Since women were not allowed to
take degrees or honors, her position was designated as “above the senior
wrangler.” Her mother’s autobiography describes the occasion, which was
40 • Chapter Two
56 Warwick, “Exercising the Student Body”; Warwick, “Mathematical World on Paper”;
Weintraub, How Economics Became a Mathematical Science, 9–25.
57 Student’s Guide to Cambridge, 104–131.

celebrated as a triumph for women. Pearson, himself a spokesman for
women of some standing, taught mathematics to Fawcett in London be-
fore she went to Cambridge, and then advised her mother on coaches. The
daughter replied to his congratulations with a humility that now appears
tragic. “Thank you very much for your kind letter and for the hope which
you express that I may be able in the future to do some scientiﬁc work. But
I am sure you will agree with me that the attainment of a high place in the
Tripos is no evidence of the possession of power to do original work. I can
only regret that the accident of being the ﬁrst woman senior wrangler did
not happen to some one who was capable of such work.”58
Whatever Pearson may have believed in 1890 about the signiﬁcance of
a Tripos result, he could not take a detached view of it in 1879. To be third
wrangler was no modest achievement, and Routh informed him that
the top three were very close. Yet he was almost despondent about the 
result, and he received more condolences than congratulations. Everyone
was disappointed by his performance, he told his father. John Taylor, his tu-
tor from 1875, explained that “nervousness,” no doubt, “had spoiled the
Tripos.” Pearson declared that nobody should expect him to do better on
the Smith’s Prize examination, a less celebrated competition that provided,
however, a better index of ﬁtness for research. He was, he explained, out of
exam form, “and there is no doubt that Allen & Walker are better men.”59
It is a stunning tribute to the psychological force of a meritocratic ex-
amination result that Pearson seems to have lost faith in his own capacity
to do physics at the level to which he aspired. This is remarkable not only
because of the extraordinary force of his personality and his striking inde-
pendence of conventions, but also because in his last two years, at least, he
had clearly not devoted himself wholeheartedly to Tripos preparation. His
later recollections of far-ﬂung intellectual adventures at Cambridge give
every appearance of being accurate, even if the lighthearted self-assurance
he read back into those years was certainly not. Some subsequent testimo-
nials, as by the King’s historian G. W. Prothero in 1881, made the obvious
point that his ranking, while strong, “might have been higher still had he
not wisely preferred a more general course of reading and a wider culture
to the limited range required for the Tripos.”60 His letter decrying narrow
careerism indicated his determination not to put his all into the Tripos,
Lehrjahre of a Poetic Wrangler • 41
58 Philippa Fawcett to KP, 11 June 1890, Pearson Papers 687/9; Millicent Garrett Faw-
cett, What I Remember (1925; London: Hyperion Press, 1976), 137–145 (she does not men-
tion Pearson); [George Udny Yule], “Professor Karl Pearson” (letter to the Times), 30 April
1936, 16b, recalls Philippa Fawcett’s presence in one of Pearson’s University College courses.
59 KP to William P, 26 Jan. 1879, and John Taylor to William P, 24 Jan. 1879, both in
Pearson Papers 11/3.
60 Testimonial by G. W. Prothero in Pearson’s printed application to Owens College,
Manchester, May 1881, Pearson Papers 11/9.

and in the months leading up to the examination he was reading philoso-
phy with ever greater intensity.
He must have contemplated the possibility of a career in physics while
at Cambridge, and he continued to do so throughout the period that fol-
lowed, but his expectation of becoming a mediocrity in science weighed
against this. In the ﬁrst volume of his biography of Galton, written in
1914, he called the Tripos “a pernicious examination system . . . which
ruined the College career of men who distinguished themselves in later
life.” This “indictment” applied speciﬁcally to Galton, who had broken
down under the pressure of Tripos preparation, and not in any obvious
way to a third wrangler, yet the autobiographical overtones are hard to
miss. Galton’s failure was not due to mathematics alone, Pearson summed
up, but to “the impossible attempt to combine those studies with a very
wide range of other interests and occupations.”61
Whatever career he might eventually pursue, he could afford to wait.
Third wrangler, as he appreciated, was good enough to gain him a fellow-
ship in a year or two, which it did. And there were more pressing matters:
to broaden his education and to ﬁnd his way to a more satisfactory philo-
sophical or religious standpoint at that mecca of science and scholarship,
the German university. Earlier in 1878 he had acquired “the standard 
history of German philosophy,” presumably Kuno Fischer’s. In October
he corresponded with Fischer about this work. In January 1879, after the
Tripos result, he informed his father that he had been reading philosophy
and intended to go to Heidelberg in the spring to study with Fischer, to
compensate for what he then criticized as the narrowness of the Cam-
bridge system, and to improve his German. He added, disingenuously, that
this would not delay by much his legal career.62 In fact, he wavered in this
period as much about career as about metaphysics, and in Heidelberg he
told acquaintances of his plan to pursue a career in mathematical physics.
Pearson went to Germany in order to resolve his abundant doubts, in
search of a calling and a basis for truth.63
42 • Chapter Two
61 Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 1, 179, 194.
62 KP to Fanny P. Helga Hacker guesses at a date of May 1878 (Hacker Papers, Box 8);
Kuno Fischer to KP, 23 Oct. 1878, and KP to William P, 26 Jan. 1879, both in Pearson Pa-
pers 11/3.
63 After the Tripos he began doing experimental work in an engineering laboratory (KP to
Arthur P, 16 Feb. 1879, Hacker Papers, Box 8), and he told at least one of his German
friends in Göttingen of his intention to become a physicist. See Julius Eisenach to KP, 
31 Nov. 1879, Pearson Papers 682/5, which refers to his “Wechsel vom Physiker zum Juris-
ten” while in Berlin.

C H A P T E R  T H R E E
Apostle of Renunciation:
A NEW WERTHER
But whereas I felt relieved and serene for having transformed
reality into poetry, my friends were misled into thinking that
poetry must be transformed into reality.
—J. W. von Goethe (on Werther) in Poetry and Truth
“TWENTY-THREE and nothing done for immortality,” complained the im-
mortal Schiller. Karl Pearson, in the same spirit, returned from his Wan-
derjahre in Germany and composed his ﬁctionalized autobiography, The
New Werther, looking within to deﬁne the plight of his generation. It was
a self-conscious work of romantic effusion, of longing to embrace the
world, to get behind its masks, and to ﬁnd for himself a purpose. That is,
it laid out some of the enduring issues of his scientiﬁc life. As he would
write later of Francis Galton: “The ﬁve years which follow most men’s
University careers are the most developmental of their lives.”1
For Pearson, this formative period from 1879 to 1884 was deﬁned
mainly by philosophical, literary, historical, and political efforts. His earli-
est writing reﬂected quite speciﬁcally his effort to ﬁnd a way through the
maze of philosophical and religious questions that now oppressed him. To
this end he studied German romantic philosophy with great hope, and
adopted a form of metaphysical idealism that would form the basis of his
mature philosophy of science. Spinoza he read with an admiration that
would endure, especially for his teachings on the ethical relationship of
man to God. An increasingly bitter recognition of social injustice inspired
Pearson to study radical social and economic writings, and perhaps, as he
later claimed, to give lectures on Marx and Ferdinand Lassalle to working-
men’s clubs.2 By 1883, when he lectured on “The Ethic of Freethought,”
he was able to synthesize his social discontent with a naturalized religious
doctrine. By then, too, he had largely renounced his metaphysical quest in
1 Pearson, Life of Francis Galton, vol. 1, v.
2 As he claimed in Speeches Delivered at a Dinner (1934). The only contemporary evi-
dence I ﬁnd of this is in KP to Conway, 22 Oct. 1881, where he refers to a request from a
working-men’s club for lectures, and proposes to “give them one on Lassalle later on.”

favor of the bold pursuit of empirical knowledge to the end of improving
the lot of humanity, and especially of the downtrodden. He made himself
an apostle of scientiﬁc enthusiasm, as a necessary guide and balance to po-
litical enthusiasm. Social activism without unbiased knowledge would in-
evitably go wrong.
Much of this chapter concerns Pearson’s social and philosophical writ-
ings, viewed to a large degree through the prism of literature. Especially as
a young man, he believed in the power of poetry and ﬁction. Although he
probably never imagined making his living as a writer, from about 1877 to
1881 he entertained grand literary aspirations. These place him rather out-
side the clustering of personality types one commonly associates with sta-
tistics. His ﬁrst published book contained long poetic extracts of his own
composition, and his second was written entirely in verse. His talent,
though not to be despised, fell far short of his aims, and he proceeded in
a way that almost assured failure. He did not seek out criticism or draw 
inspiration from contemporary poetry, but was largely isolated and incor-
rigibly unfashionable. He aspired in his literary works to lay bare the
dilemmas of his age, as revealed in his own spiritual struggles; to con-
tribute to its regeneration, and to his. Terriﬁed of failure, at least where so
much personal revelation was at issue, he withheld his name from these
youthful writings and cloaked his ambition in unassuming earnestness.
Any reader who looked inside the cover of Pearson’s New Werther was
greeted with ﬂamboyant humility. “There is only one excuse for publish-
ing the following letters, namely, they truly image the mind of him who
has written them. . . . They are beneath the notice of the critic.”3
Pearson’s rationale is the premise of this chapter. In these youthful writ-
ings we encounter a different aspect of the great quantiﬁer. Just how
“truly” they “image” this mind is another question. He lived to a remark-
able degree on the border between truth and ﬁction, revelation and dis-
guise, identity and plurality. As Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister used theater to
cultivate different aspects of his personality, Pearson expressed himself
through multiple genres, refusing the conﬁnement of self implied by nar-
row specialization. He wanted badly to hold these diverse roles together,
and displayed remarkable consistency across the many, seemingly incom-
patible, genres of intellectual activity that he made his own, even if they re-
veal different patterns of light and shade. In literary efforts he often gave
direct expression to his intense emotionality. Having taken possession of
the key, we can recognize the passions written into his perspective on
other topics as well, even mathematics. He was reluctant, however, to ex-
press these directly. It was easier to tell the truth through ﬁction.
44 • Chapter Three
3 “Loki,” The New Werther, iii.

PEARSONIAN FICTIONS
Pearson read serious literature, and discussed it with family and friends,
throughout his life. He was formed through an engagement with litera-
ture as well as religion, philosophy, politics, and science. Human life, a bil-
dungsroman, naturally invited literary expression. He felt he was wrestling
with the great questions of the age, and that his experience should have
value for others. A bit solipsistic, as he himself understood, he was given to
self-dramatization. His strong inclination to ﬁnd larger signiﬁcance in his
own life, and to offer his own dramatic story to the world, was checked by
fear that he was taking himself too seriously, and that his very personal rev-
elations might be ridiculed. He chose for his youthful memoirs the literary
form of an epistolary novel, which allowed for uninhibited confession
while conﬁning every psychological disclosure to the particular moment
when the letter was written. Then, to disguise his overwrought revela-
tions, perhaps chieﬂy from himself, he ﬁctionalized it by inserting what he
hoped would be recognized as “gush.” On the cover he placed a name
from Norse mythology, the subversive and protean Loki, whom the trans-
planted Oxford philologist and folklorist Max Müller had characterized as
“a mischievous person” but “not a ﬁend.”4 Despite these clues, his few
readers were unable to construe the work as light and playful. They un-
derstood it, correctly, as the outpouring of an anguished soul. Oscar Wilde
supplied the correct principle for interpreting Pearson’s literary persona:
“Man is least himself when he talks in his own person. Give him a mask
and he will tell you the truth.”5
Yet Pearson was deeply sincere, as an author and also as a reader of ﬁc-
tion. He did not insist strictly on realism, but appreciated symbolic lan-
guage, and he could be particularly moved by epic forms and epic heroes.
Still, he looked to literature for deep truth, involving, for example, “the
true relationship between a variety of emotions.” In his more theoretical
moments, he applied to it his view of the function of science, a caricature
perhaps of George Eliot’s defense of realist ﬁction, arguing that its proper
role was to provide a concise summary of experience. Only a scientiﬁc in-
terpretation, it seems, can “satisfy the aesthetic judgment.”6 In discussing
individual works, he did not rely on handy philosophical formulas. He
Apostle of Renunciation • 45
4 Max Müller, Chips from a German Workshop, vol. 2: Essays on Mythology, Traditions, and
Customs (London: Longmans, Green, 1867), 235. Pearson mentions this line of Müller’s in
KP to Conway, 12 Dec. 1880, Pearson Papers 910. On Loki, and on The New Werther gen-
erally, see Levine, Dying to Know, 237 and chap. 10. 
5 Oscar Wilde, “The Critic as Artist” (1890–91), quoted in Beckson, London in the 1890s.
6 KP comment on a debate regarding “the inﬂuence of realism in literature and art on
morality,” Pearson Papers 35, undated, ca. 1900–5; Pearson, Grammar of Science, 42–43.

looked to novels for social as well as psychological insight into the devel-
opment of personality and the inﬂuence of characters on one another. He
disliked those whose protagonists lacked depth or conscience. And he in-
stinctively supposed that characters were drawn from personal experience,
even autobiographically. He and Shaw, for example, discussed the latter’s
marriage in reference to the plot of The Philanderer. “I hope for your sake,
your wife’s sake and her own sake that the original of Julia is dead, or she
may yet be revenged for the cash you have made out of your passions,”
Pearson concluded.7
Pearson had many reasons to deny the seriousness and ﬁdelity to life of
his gushing novel, The New Werther. There was the immorality, by con-
ventional standards, of the author’s imagined relationship with the in-
vented recipient of his letters. There were unkind digs at an unnamed
Oscar Browning, whose European trip with the protagonist is recalled in
the text. “But I remembered him who was then with me, and to whom I
looked with all the admiration of a boy, fancying I had found inexhaustible
springs of mind and boundless intellectual aid, where afterwards I was to
discover the false prophet of a sham culture, a paper-knife in human
form.”8 Above all, there was the risk that readers would ﬁnd it shallow,
trivial, or ridiculous (which they generally did not), or would charge that
a self-absorbed author had made bad literature out of a sympathetic life
(which some did).
So, in his correspondence with those who were entrusted with the secret
of authorship, he made light of his little story. To his King’s College math-
ematical friend, William Herrick Macaulay, he explained that “in April two
friends (unnameable) & myself used to meet at 1 o’clock A.M. and being an
impecunious trinity determined to write a book in the genuine gush style.
The whole was completed in a fortnight.” He added: “you must on no ac-
count reveal to any one my connection with it, as such revelation would be
simply damning to my reputation whatever that may be. So remember ab-
solute secrecy.” The other persons of this trinity were Robert Parker and
William Conway. Conway, the ﬁrst to ﬂee the enterprise, received the fol-
lowing assessment of it from Pearson just before publication: “All that is
mine is thine that is to say if you care to take a share of a £40 to £80 deﬁcit
you are welcome. . . . I am dreadfully afraid that K[egan] P[aul] & Co may
come down on me for further sums before producing this damned folly of
mine & I wish I was well out of the whole thing.” Kegan Paul published the
volume on commission, estimating charges of £21 to print ﬁve hundred
46 • Chapter Three
7 Shaw to KP, 4 July 1898, Pearson Papers 853; KP to Shaw, 5 July 1898, in Shaw Papers
50513 f196, British Library. The Philanderer, written in 1893, was published in 1898.
8 New Werther, 89–90. “The Paper-Knife” was the title of a column on books in the Cam-
bridge Review and here implied perhaps an indiscriminate eclecticism.

copies, £10 or £15 for advertising, about £6 for binding, plus a publisher’s
fee of £5/5 and postage for review copies and the like.9 After the critics
began to write, most of them sober and unfavorable, Pearson complained
to Conway of their failure to perceive the signiﬁcance of Loki, the jokester.
“I wish they had seen Parker & I roaring over the ﬁrst letters.” When
Browning found the book in February, and recognized himself as an oc-
casion for disappointment and the apostle of sham, Pearson denied any re-
semblance to reality. “Do you really think the ‘N.W.’ is biographical and
that the author has therein depicted his friends?”10
The answer to this question, based on all the evidence, would have to be
“yes.” The book, while deliberately exaggerated, was anything but a joke,
and if indeed he wrote it in two weeks, this was by incorporating thoughts
and sometimes long passages from his notebooks of the previous two
years. Pearson’s third Commonplace Book, most or all of it written while
he was studying in Heidelberg in the spring of 1879, includes two earlier
efforts to make literature of his recent struggles. The ﬁrst is a composition
in rhyming verse about a troubled Englishman who ventures to Germany.
It leaves off after the forty stanzas of Canto I when the hero, disappointed
by a woman, ﬂees Heidelberg to Italy. Helga Hacker, Pearson’s younger
daughter and annotator of his manuscripts, called this verse the “song of
Arthur.” I will refer to it as Pearson’s Urwerther. The second, a draft of the
ﬁrst chapter of the New Werther, was probably written not long after the
Urwerther, and almost certainly before he returned to England and began
making light of his sufferings with Parker and Conway. He incorporated it
with few deletions into the book, although about a third of the published
ﬁrst chapter is new material.11
Like the book, the draft chapter is in the form of a letter to “Ethel.” The
subsequent additions were intended mainly to distance it from its author,
through ridiculous and uninhibited gushing. They exaggerated still further
the draft chapter’s tendencies to elevate feeling over reason—which for
Pearson was by no means merely insincere. He deﬂated one of the more
ﬂorid passages with a joke: “Man is what his time, his nation, and his liver
Apostle of Renunciation • 47
9 KP to Conway, undated 1880 and 12 Dec. 1880. These ﬁgures come from the Kegan
Paul “Publication Book” in the microﬁlmed archives of the publisher produced by Chadwick-
Healey Ltd, reel 2. In 1886, 274 of the original 500 copies were “sold as waste.” Almost half
of Kegan Paul’s books in these years were published on commission. Howsam, “Forgotten
Victorians; Howsam, Kegan Paul, A Victorian Imprint, chap. 3. In January 1886, Kegan
Paul closed the account; Kegan Paul & Co to KP, 18 Jan 1886, Pearson Papers 732/7.
10 Oscar Browning to Conway (with whom Pearson was then sharing rooms in London),
28 Feb. 1881, Pearson Papers 645/4, and KP to Browning, 1 March 1881, Brownings Papers,
King’s College Archives.
11 Pearson Commonplace Book III, Pearson Papers 11/4.

make him.” He also introduced a more explicit erotic element into the
story. “The very touch of your swelling bosom, when it has pillowed my
weary head, has united us not only in thought, but in what is greater than
thought, the sense of our power over the inﬁnite.” “You ask me, Ethel, why
with that last burning kiss I parted from you, from home, from England?”
And if the theory of renunciation in the Wanderjahre reﬂected Goethe’s
own separation from Friederike Brion, “does not ours exceed it in worth,
who for two years, though double in form, have been one in impulse, soul,
and life—we, who for each other have cast aside the bonds of a hypocritical
society and the cant of custom.”12 This after Ethel, “for the Idea, had re-
nounced all that vulgar custom forbids a woman to surrender.” Well may
two young men at Cambridge, whose experience of their own age and class
was thus far limited also to their own sex, have roared with laughter at pas-
sages like these. And yet it is hard to isolate the temptations of the erotic
from the moral idea of renunciation that structured Pearson’s little book.
The Urwerther cannot be correlated paragraph by paragraph with the
New Werther. About half of its verses were included in the published book,
along with other poems by Pearson, as if sent by Arthur to express his feel-
ings in another genre to Ethel. These verses include also some unmistakable
ﬁctions, yet where they differ from the printed Werther they give the more
faithful representation of Pearson’s thoughts and feelings, and they omit
some of his more blatant inventions. He wrote the verses of his Urwerther
on the recto pages of his notebook and inscribed notes on the facing verso,
explaining some of the Heidelberg scenes as well as literary references. The
verses place our young Englishman speciﬁcally in Cambridge at the outset of
his travels, and announce his disappointment after he “took his grade and
made perhaps his mark,” presumably in the Tripos.13 Although written in
the third person, Arthur is the only real character in any version of this
reverie, and nothing is described there except as it seemed to him. No
Arthurian dimension is made explicit, but the hero does seem to be quest-
ing for the grail, in the form of truth and beauty, and the name would have
evoked, for Pearson and his contemporaries, the hero of Tennyson’s Idylls of
the King. Arthur’s self-obsession and chivalric dreams are nicely combined in
an episode from the song involving one Kätchen, a “simple blue-eyed Ger-
man maid” who waits tables, and seems to understand his suffering. He is
charmed by his own emotional response, “feeling that he/could know a
purer love, from sense apart, / Which unrequited must remain.”14
48 • Chapter Three
12 New Werther, 1–7, 52.
13 Urwerther, stanza 12, Pearson Papers 11/4. There is no indication that this passage has
an actual referent or what it might be.
14 Urwerther, stanza 22. “Kätchen” refers probably to an actual woman, the reason per-
haps for his regular walks to Wolfsbrunnen. His notes to the Urwerther imply that he did not
even know her name, and he used the name of one of Goethe’s ﬁrst loves.

The New Werther, as published, deploys all the resources of a schwär-
merisch romanticism, including thunderstorms over the castle, during
which Arthur felt his soul to be “possessed of a god’s power” and him-
self “the Spirit of the Storm,” and a midnight ascent of the Königstuhl on
Walpurgisnacht, enveloped in a crowd of young maidens who will look
east from the summit at ﬁrst dawn and make their wish, for husbands. Na-
ture here is not cold and indifferent, but offers the possibility of embrace
or even union, as in Goethe’s image from the poem “Ganymede” of mu-
tual absorption, Umfangend umfangen (“embraced embracing”).15 At the
end of Goethe’s Sufferings of Young Werther, the prospect of a union with
nature draws the hero as to a sweet death. Pearson’s drafts and novella play
with themes and tropes from various works of Goethe. In the Urwerther,
the local people at one point recognize Arthur as Faust and his dog as
Mephistopheles. Arthur is indeed a Faustian hero, not least in his cultiva-
tion of a desire for nature that is portrayed as sympathetic but futile.
Goethe himself had begun by the 1780s, after his discovery of Spinoza,16
to emphasize its utter impersonality, and in Faust I the union with nature
ﬁgures only as longing, or temptation. “My friend, all theory is grey, and
green/the golden tree of life,” incants Mephistopheles, who however
characterizes Faust as alien from this, a “learned doctor,” sitting in a cave
“sucking some toad-like sustenance . . . from this dank moss and dripping
stone.” Faust can only pine:
Oh endless Nature, where
Shall I embrace you? Where, you breasts that ﬂow
With life’s whole life? All earth and heaven hangs
On you, who slake the thirsty pangs
Of every heart—and must I languish vainly so?17
Pearson, as we know from letters and diaries, could experience nature
intensely, almost rapturously. His tendency to pantheism included a sen-
suous dimension that was not merely abstract or philosophical. Only rarely
did this surface in his scientiﬁc writings, the uncommon lament at the separa-
tion from nature implied by positivistic science. Yet a sense of his alienated
condition shines through in admiring youthful descriptions of Tyrolean
peasant life, or later during visits to the Yorkshire countryside, from which
Apostle of Renunciation • 49
15 See Boyle, Goethe, 161.
16 On the revival and reinvention of Spinoza as the God-drunken philosopher, see
Barnard, “Spinozism,” which emphasizes Coleridge’s role in transmitting the German Spin-
oza to England and notes that in both countries the Spinoza revival was more literary than
philosophical. Note that George Eliot spent her time in Berlin in 1854–55, working on a
translation of Spinoza’s Ethics; see Haight, George Eliot, 172, 199–200.
17 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust. Part One, trans. David Luke (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1987), 61, 104, 17.

his letters intimated sadness that his father’s ambition, and his own, had torn
the family irretrievably from the blessed innocence of the soil. He wrote
from Danby in 1900: “My forebears were yeomen on these uplands & my
great great grandfather was a fool ever to leave them! I should have known
all about inheritance & never wanted to give expression to it in a law had
he only stuck to the soil!” A few weeks later he headed another letter from
the same location: “Date & day forgotten & no clock to be trusted to 30
ms.”18 The blessed world his family had forsaken, it seems, was a world
without quantitative precision. Despite its personal cost, however, he de-
fended the scientiﬁc life as necessary from an intellectual and ethical point
of view. Science, a moral choice, involved sacriﬁce, which also had literary
meaning. His beloved Goethe expressed for him not only the longing to
be joined to nature as mother or wife, but also the fateful choice by which
this longing was renounced.
Pearson’s early moral essays were concerned centrally with the need to
renounce. The New Werther’s effusions on this subject were not ironical,
but deeply felt. “Do you remember,” Ethel is asked, “when in our ﬁrst
friendship, two years ago, we read Goethe’s ‘Wanderjahre’ together, and
came upon his theory of Renunciation as a means of purifying mankind?”19
Oscar Browning, who had presumably been involved in Pearson’s discus-
sions two years earlier of Wilhelm Meister’s Wanderjahre, became almost
lyrical in discussing the personal meaning of Goethe’s renunciation. While
“always striving for objective truth,” he wrote, Goethe was by no means
cold or selﬁsh. “His nature responded to every inﬂuence of passing emotion.
Like a delicate harp, it was silent if not touched, and yet it gave its music to
every wooing of the wilful wind. The charge of unsympathetic coldness
roused the deep indignation of those who knew him best. He learned by
sad experience that the lesson of life is to renounce.”20 Goethe’s Werther, as
George Henry Lewes explained in his authoritative nineteenth-century bi-
ography, was, for the author, sincere and intensely personal. Yet that book
illustrated by design the evils of a “languishing” sensibility that found proof
of “immense superiority” in its “immense desires,” and so refused to mas-
ter, but yielded to, “the cry of that dim rooted pain.”21
If Goethe’s renunciation was about self-control, it was also about fate.
Lewes explained Goethe’s separation from Friederike, for example, as a
necessity in view of their very different social stations, as well as an expres-
50 • Chapter Three
18 KP to W.F.R. Weldon, 1 July 1900, Pearson Papers 266/9; printed in E. S. Pearson,
Karl Pearson, 124.
19 New Werther, 5.
20 Oscar Browning, “Goethe,” Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed. (U.S.), vol. 10 (1879),
721–737, on 736, echoing in some respects Lewes, Goethe, vol. 1, 408–410. Pearson thought
the Lewes biography to be overrated: Parker to KP, 22 June 1879, Pearson Papers 780.
21 Lewes, Goethe, vol. 1, 218, 223.

sion of the “Egoism of genius,” protecting his literary career from the im-
pediments that marriage would bring.22 For Goethe, renunciation was in
part aesthetic, an aspect of self-cultivation, and need not be strictly op-
posed to inclination. Carlyle, who brought Goethe’s doctrine of renunci-
ation to Britain, understood it in a more Calvinistic way as an act of will
enforcing rigorous self-denial.23 The New Werther’s veneer of exaggerated
“gush” meant that Arthur would recur often to his loss, and to the per-
sonal decision that occasioned it. Yet Pearson’s novella, too, was driven
largely by fate, and Wilhelm Meister was the point of reference for his
moral message. His opening letter, about taking leave from Ethel, echoes
the ﬁrst chapter of the Wanderjahre, when Wilhelm, having ﬁrst re-
nounced Therese for a deeper love, recognizes that he must now separate
also from Natalie. It is unmistakably painful: “What could separate me
from you! from you to whom I belong forever, even if a singular fate parts
me from you and unexpectedly bars the gate of the paradise to which I had
come so near.” But Goethe does not depict a momentous struggle of in-
dividual desire against moral obligation. We have instead an almost alle-
gorical recording of lives driven by a purposeful fate. After the event, the
Abbé, spiritual teacher and leader of Wilhelm and Natalie’s little band, ex-
plains the necessity of all this personal sacriﬁce: “Devotion to family is . . .
no longer sufﬁcient. We must form the concept of devotion to the larger
world, put our genuine humanitarian concerns in to practice on a broad
scale, and further the good not only of those close to us but of all
mankind.”24 Pearson cast Goethe himself as a moral teacher and supplied
the reasons for renunciation in his ﬁrst chapter.
They are something like the Abbé’s. The hero and heroine, Arthur and
Ethel, must grow beyond the selﬁsh pleasures of two lovers and follow the
dictates of social conscience in a world where so many toil unhappily “under
a sham religion, a false custom, and a despotism of wealth.” Thus Goethe’s
story exempliﬁed for Pearson a move to greater impersonality, here in the
romantic mode of dissolving the self into a larger humanity, indeed into the
universe. For Pearson this dissolution had also the dimensions of a bold,
Spinozistic intellectual quest. Arthur explains: “Man, as guided by the force
of innate feeling, is necessarily religious, because he recognizes that he is a
portion of the Divinity.” Or, with Fichte, he makes self and world meta-
physical coequals. Arthur wants to show that materialism and idealism are
Apostle of Renunciation • 51
22 Lewes, Goethe, vol. 1, 147. In Pearson’s notes on Schiller, 1878, Pearson Papers 11/6,
he recorded Schiller’s comment that to sacriﬁce happiness for “genius . . . is a painful &
proud renunciation.”
23 Ashton, German Idea, 89.
24 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Wilhelm Meister’s Journeyman Years, or The Renun-
ciants, ed. Jane K. Brown, trans. Krishna Winston, in Goethe, Collected Works, vol. 10 (New
York: Suhrkamp, 1989), 100, 266.

at bottom the same, because spirit and matter are identical. He aspires, as
he says, to unify the masculine domain of intellect with the feminine do-
main of feeling.25
These are the philosophical and emotional conditions of the plot. In
quest of a reconciliation of opposites, the young man had determined to
travel to Germany to study philosophy, science, and art. His destination
for philosophy was written as “N,” perhaps for the river Neckar that runs
through Heidelberg. In his letters to Ethel, who was left behind in En-
gland, the hero reports on his studies and experiences. A particularly pow-
erful one has him staring out his window into the darkness when a sudden
bolt of lightning illuminates brilliantly the castle ruins he was facing, and
the thunder merged into the crash of giant elm. Driven by an overpower-
ing impulse, he
rushed from the house, and as ﬂash followed ﬂash almost instantaneously, and
the roaring of the thunder engulfed in a sea of sound the crashing of the trees as
they waged battle with the wind, I reached the castle terrace. . . . All my heavi-
ness had passed away. My heart panted; I ﬂung my arms back; my soul seemed
possessed of a god’s power, and I felt I was the Spirit of the Storm. O Ethel, had
you been with me, you would have known that Nature’s God requires no
churches, her religion no framework of creed.26
From here the text moves to an afﬁrmation of Spinozistic pantheism, then
to a Fichtean idealism, in which the universe is created by the mind of the
“I,” and cannot exist except insofar as he is there to grasp it. Arthur de-
clares a deep responsibility to his suffering fellow men, and denounces the
rottenness of society under capitalism as well as the corruptions of a mer-
cenary Christianity.
Of the world’s great teachers, Socrates, Christ, and Spinoza, two were
Jews, he explains. The logic of the novella thus seems to require that he
should meet and be taught by a Jew, here embodied in the person of one
Raphael, whose features reveal “apostolic nobility and depth.” Consistent
with the essential solipsism of the story, however, Raphael’s profoundest
utterances reveal him as a Pearsonian double. He is made a socialist, with
“utopia” as his “gospel,” an antirevolutionary gradualist, and a mystic 
after Maimonides. He sees in man an essential religious element, beyond
the reach of science at present, yet ever being supplanted by knowledge,
until there should come about at last a union of faith and reason. At the
same time, he “half despises all women, considering that all like Ophelia,
are sensuous at core.”27
52 • Chapter Three
25 New Werther, 10–12. For other clear Fichtean elements, 58–59.
26 New Werther, 8–9.
27 New Werther, 30–36.

Although Arthur stands up for womanhood, Ethel ﬁnds it difﬁcult from
the beginning to follow his intellectual pilgrimage. When he sends her a
book by the Austrian poet Robert Hamerling, whom Pearson was coming
to regard as Goethe’s equal, she sees only painful details and “great faults
of taste.” He reproves her for thinking that all the great systems of philos-
ophy are mere fallacies, and his study of them a sickness. However, he is
himself soon disenchanted by the results of his philosophical study—Pear-
son in real life complained “that philosophy tells for nothing that appeals
to any other part of you than your reason.” Arthur is reduced to hoping
for better results from the investigation of science or art. To learn science
beyond the “dead scholasticism” of “our universities” he has made plans
to study in Leipzig. But ﬁrst he wanders off on a solitary pilgrimage on
foot through the Black Forest, all the while seeking meaning for the un-
holy nineteenth century by reading poetry from the twelfth. Through a
“scientiﬁc faith,” he hopes, his age can become “objective” rather than
“subjective.” He instances Darwin, then the prospect of physics reduced
to the mechanics of a universal ether, and ﬁnally—an act of distancing—a
transparent joke using curves and surfaces of human feelings to demon-
strate the progress of science.28 Yet in the next letter he spurns science as
an utterly limited form of knowledge that excludes through its tyranny the
needful human impulse to seek meaning in religion. And ﬁnally he de-
spairs also of art, which in a mechanical age has abandoned the ideal of
beauty for spiritless reproduction of degraded scenes.
Meanwhile, Ethel had traveled to Paris, and when Arthur learns that
Raphael also had plans to go there, he naturally arranges for them to meet.
They should become friends, and her high moral character would en-
lighten Raphael about women. A bit later, in despair at the collapse of
his quest for truth, Arthur announces his intention to reclaim the one
thing that remains, their perfect love. He arrives in Paris to learn that his
Guinevere has been unfaithful, that Raphael and Ethel are now lovers. He
has but one recourse, the destiny of Werther, and the story ends self-
mockingly. “Ethel, Raphael, do not take the ﬂattering unction to your
souls that I ﬂy from you. No, I ﬂy from something greater from your small
existences—I ﬂy from myself. . . . Ethel—beloved—I die!”
POETIC EFFUSION AND TRUTH
When in the fall of 1880 the Heidelberg law student Raphael Wertheimer
received by post a book package from England, he was startled by the 
Apostle of Renunciation • 53
28 New Werther, 40, 84, 91 98; Parker to KP (reciting what he called Pearson’s “dictum”),
17 Sept. 1879.

experiences and character developments it contained. It strained his En-
glish, but he knew enough to pronounce it geistvoll, ingenious. He also
was able without difﬁculty to identify Loki, the author. Just one thing per-
plexed him. “Wer ist Ethel??! Who is Ethel??! Who Raphael is, I believe I
can divine, although I do not consider ‘Utopia’ as my ‘ideal Gospel’ and
do not ‘all women despise,’ etc.”29
Pearson’s little book was, as Wertheimer recognized, a mixture of life
and invention. He really was seeking some kind of philosophical or scien-
tiﬁc meaning, and with it a purpose in life, when he went off to Germany.
When he grew discouraged with philosophy, which he decided could
never teach him how to think and live, he told Parker of his hope that nat-
ural science might yet convey by way of experience what philosophy could
not achieve through pure reason.30 In Heidelberg he lived at Hauptstrasse
235, opposite the famous castle ruins, from which he viewed and was
soaked by the exhilarating thunderstorm celebrated in the novella. Forty
years later, when the Great War had reduced to ruins his old love of Ger-
many, he ﬁxed on just that experience to epitomize all that had been lost.
Back then he had rejoiced in the terrible awe of echoing thunder, a tri-
umphant ascent “through deluge and crash” of the Königstuhl, “rejoic-
ing . . . in the spirit of the storm as if it were one’s own youthful strength.”
Now, in 1920, the sound of thunder evoked nothing but a helpless, inex-
pugnable fear of German bombs.31 But he could still use the novel to re-
call that year of self-discovery. The itinerary mapped out by the towns
inscribed at the beginning of each letter seems to match his actual journey
through the Black Forest at the end of his stay in Heidelberg. He did not
travel in solitude, however, but was accompanied by his brother Arthur.
Leipzig, where he studied science, stood in for Berlin, recommended to
him by Oscar Browning because “Geist ﬂows like water” there.32 Frank
Taussig, with whom he had boarded, responded to Pearson’s gift of the
book by recalling that he had already heard “much of what it con-
tained . . . during our walks in Berlin.”33
As for Raphael, his literary persona involved a measure of license. Pear-
son had met him by advertising for a walking companion with whom to
54 • Chapter Three
29 Raphael Wertheimer to KP, 9 Oct. 1880, Pearson Papers 892/2. “Wer Raphael ist,
glaübe ich richtig zü vermüthen, trotzdem ich nicht ‘Utopia’ als mein ‘ideal Gospel’ betrachte
& nicht ‘all women despise,’ usw.” From a Heidelberg University address book in Pearson 
Papers 11/5 we learn that Wertheimer came from Bühl in Baden.
30 KP to Parker, 12 July 1879.
31 Karl Pearson, “Impressions. The Aftertaste,” ms. dated 6 July 1920, Pearson Papers 24/4.
In The New Werther, the hero ascended instead to a castle terrace, a more likely destination.
32 Oscar Browning to KP, 9 Jan. 1880, Pearson Papers 645/4. “Berlin is one of the most
delightful capitals in Europe. Geist ﬂows like water in the Trinkhallen.”
33 Frank W. Taussig to KP, 10 July 1881, Pearson Papers 865/6.

exchange German for English conversation. Although he was indeed a
proponent of academic socialism, of economic transformation from above,
it was not Wertheimer but some Berlin students who in real life had pro-
voked Pearson’s bemusement by their confusion of More’s Utopia with a
real socialist program. Wertheimer was fully secular, a contented atheist,
which Pearson at ﬁrst found slightly shocking, and it would be rash even
to presume that “the Jew” rather than Pearson initiated their discussions
of Maimonides. Most signiﬁcantly, on the sensuality of women Pearson in-
dulged in a reversal, for Pearson in these years was obsessed by the sexual
impurity of women. His 1877 Commonplace Book, for example, includes
this versiﬁcation of a story he said he had heard while traveling with Oscar
Browning: “In the Tyrol lies a valley / Where midst clustered groups of
chalet / Stands a church with tower inclined / Threatening downfall on
mankind. / Once a pure & holy virgin / Past that village with the church
in / Straight that tower did to her bend / And homage to her virtue lend.
/ Thus three hundred years it’s rested / Waiting else that legend jested /
Till another virtuous maiden / Passes by, it then will straighten.”34
The Urwerther, concealing less than the printed Werther, depicts Arthur
as so disappointed by the Tripos results at Cambridge that he resolves to for-
sake truth for the epicurean life, putting his trust in women. “What needeth
here to tell the rest?” it continues. “To free himself from pleasure’s cancer-
ous rust / He left his native land and ﬂed the charms of lust.” Those lines,
though probably fantasy, represent his attitude about women in 1879. What
his Arthurian double told Raphael in the Urwerther has the ring of truth:
Yet, though more seldom, had they love discussed.
Women, the Jew opined, were angels upon earth;
While Arthur held they had nor faith nor trust,
And lived alone for pleasure, sense and mirth;
He never yet had seen their higher worth.
“Art thou no poet? Hast though never loved?”
The last line here matches Pearson’s Heidelberg diary, which he kept in
German, as transcribed in a letter to Parker. On one of their ﬁrst walks, the
two began discussing poetry. “Then he [Wertheimer] continued. ‘Have
you never loved?’ ‘Never,’ I answered. He assumed a tragic bearing and
cried out: ‘You are twenty-two and have never been in love!’ ‘Never
loved’! I said . . . ‘Have you no heart?’ ‘Evidently not,’” Pearson replied,
as he ﬂed the scene.35
Pearson’s absolute unfamiliarity with love, if he spoke truthfully, would
seem to reduce Ethel to a playful invention of the gushing ironist. But she
Apostle of Renunciation • 55
34 Pearson Commonplace Book, I, 23, Pearson Papers 11/4.
35 Urwerther, stanzas 12, 25; KP to Parker, 1 May 1879 (original in Pearson’s German).

is not to be dismissed so easily. In the spring of 1880, when Pearson was
back in Cambridge with his friends Parker and Conway, he tried to con-
script them into his autobiographical fantasy. The three seem to have
played the roles in midnight badinage, with Pearson, of course, as Arthur.
In 1879, Pearson had left behind an intellectual soulmate, one with whom
he subsequently shared an intense, deeply personal correspondence, satu-
rated with the same philosophical groping and then frustration as was at-
tributed to Arthur. This correspondent, though sympathetic, could not
quite follow Pearson’s wild ravings, and he journeyed Ethel-like to Paris
while Pearson was mired in Teutonic metaphysics. The role of Ethel was
an elaboration of Pearson’s friendship with Robert Parker.36
Given the reputation of upper-class male relationships at school in the
Victorian era, and the efﬂorescence of homosexual activity at King’s Col-
lege and elsewhere in the next generation, the reincarnation of Parker as
Ethel may seem suggestive. There is no evidence to support, and much
reason to doubt, that this friendship was ever explicitly sexual. At issue
here was not sexual union, still less that social institution, with all its legal
constraints, that bound together a man and a woman for purposes of pro-
creation. The ideal was friendship, whose freedom, as it was supposed,
from sexual impulse raised it above the love between man and woman, an
ideal that was especially inﬂuential at Oxford’s Balliol College under
Jowett. His translations of Plato’sDialogues offered a clear classical model
of masculine bonding, with the sexual dimension expurgated or ignored.
From that standpoint, the homosexual acts for which Oscar Wilde was
tried for sodomy in 1895 were a betrayal and not a consequence of this
noble ideal. Sexuality, as such, was not contemplated here, but an endur-
ing alliance of souls, providing the conditions for spiritual and intellectual
growth, certainly was.37 Or rather, as it now often seems, the sexual di-
mension was masked by an image of innocent manly friendship. Mean-
while, as almost everyone understood, youthful improprieties abounded,
sometimes inﬂicted on weaker boys, and sometimes shared in a deeply felt
intimacy. Tennyson’s other Arthur besides the king was Arthur Henry
Hallam, whose tragic loss his “In Memoriam” lamented: “I, the divided
half of such / A friendship as had master’d Time.” Pearson’s literary sub-
stitution of a free marital union for an intense friendship between young
men, like other elements of gush in The New Werther, was much more than
a joke.38
56 • Chapter Three
36 Helga Hacker identiﬁes the relevant materials and gives a plausible reading in her notes
on this episode in Hacker Papers, Box 8. From a reference to Conway as the “woman in scar-
let” it seems that he spoke Ethel’s lines in their 1880 play acting, but Pearson scarcely knew
him in 1879.
37 Richards, “Passing the Love of Women”; Dowling, Hellenism and Homosexuality.
38 Alfred, Lord Tennyson, “In Memoriam,” canto lxxxv.

Indeed, his emotional commitment to this form of friendship was par-
ticularly strong. A few years later, as we will see in chapter 6, he tried to de-
velop the same model as a basis for intellectual intimacy with women. The
results were dramatic, and not quite as planned. Finally, in 1889, he con-
sidered forming a free marital union on the principle of Ethel and Arthur,
another experiment that went somewhat awry. From about 1878 to 1884,
however, he was resolved to remain single, and he repeatedly emphasized
to his contemporaries at college the tragic loss they would incur by enter-
ing marriage and starting a family. He expressed himself in this fashion to
some of his closest friends on the occasion of their engagements, and his
wedding congratulations to Conway took this form:
But marriage, Josh? What shall I say thereof ?—It opens wide & new experi-
ences, it is necessary for him who would taste every side of life, but the life
bondage, is it quite possible for the “progressive soul”? . . . The poor unfortu-
nate individual—how the race enslaves him for the sake of its own progress!—
thrusts its fetters upon him in order that it may prosper the better at his
expense! Man the individual invented love; man the race, marriage.39
In letters of these years to his ﬁrst close female correspondent, Elisabeth
Cobb, he lamented the weddings of each of his male friends in turn, as if
they had died and he were abandoned. Among them was Ralph Thick-
nesse, who recalled years later to Helga Pearson the night in August 1883,
“when your Father took me out into the most exquisite valley in the Tyrol
in the moonlight and said that all I wanted to make me perfect was for me
to give up my belief in God & to throw over the girl I was engaged to be
married to.”40
Such recollections, and this case is not unique, would seem to blur the
line between experience and gush in Pearson’s ﬁction. The Thicknesse
episode, whose setting seems so appropriate for a proposal of marriage,
evokes most sensuously the confusion and rivalry between friendship and
sexual love. A few years later, Pearson would incur the ironical wrath of his
opposites in the Men and Women’s Club by comparing sexual intercourse
to mountain climbing, both vigorous activities giving pleasure that is
shared with a partner. Allowing that to this point he seemingly had experi-
enced only one of the delights in question, there are grounds here for asso-
ciating with friendship at least a nebulous eroticism. It does not, however,
Apostle of Renunciation • 57
39 KP to Conway, 7 July 1984. Pearson’s views on men and women in 1884 were rather
close to those his friend Shaw would preach in Man and Superman (1903), by which time he
thought them scientiﬁcally mistaken.
40 Ralph Thicknesse to Helga Pearson, 1 Sept. 1921, Pearson Papers 867/2; I date the
event based on KP to Fanny Pearson, 20 Aug. 1883. In Berlin in 1879 or 1880 he and Frank
Taussig made an agreement of some kind, involving a commitment by Pearson to remain un-
married for at least ten years. Taussig to KP, 10 July 1881, Pearson Papers 865/5.

reduce to a relationship of desire between two people, but involves also the
shared pursuit of a goal. For Ethel and her Arthur, that goal was truth
joined to beauty. And in every case there is present also a third party—not
only the friends or lovers, but the mountain or the moonlit Tyrolean valley.
For Pearson, nature too was unmistakably an object of desire, capable of
diffusing her charm over the entire situation in which she was encountered.
At the same time, she was maddeningly elusive.
Pearson adored natural settings and linked some of them to intense
emotional experiences. One of these, in The New Werther, takes place dur-
ing Arthur’s solitary wander through the Black Forest. Just a mile below
Schapbach (a real village), Arthur explains, he lay down among the ferns
and long grass, and was lulled to sleep by the water rushing over a weir and
falling into a pool:
How long I slept I do not know; but judge my surprise on waking to ﬁnd the
place transformed—ten or twelve village maidens, unconscious of my presence,
and knowing better than I the merits of that spot, had also come to enjoy the
pleasure of an evening bathe! There they were, with loosened hair falling to
their waists, splashing and sporting in the pool before me, as we fancy the
nymphs did in the happy pastoral days of old! O Ethel, was it a sin for me to
gaze on Nature in all her unveiled beauty?41
The watery rusticity and naked nymphs deﬁne the scene as mythical, and
the presumed message is that nature for him could be like those beautiful
maidens; it could, like the greatest works of art, transport him into “rapt
ecstasy.”
Such exultation did not allow for statistical speciﬁcity; the nymphs num-
bered ten or twelve. These rapturous experiences of nature were, for Pear-
son, notably unscientiﬁc ones. The thunderstorm over the Heidelberg
Schloss, drenching Pearson in his own feeling of divinity as well as the pour-
ing rain, is another. His letters from the early 1880s offer several further ex-
amples. The most luminous of these cannot be viewed directly, but only as
refracted through Elisabeth Cobb, since his letters to her have disappeared.
He was journeying joyously on foot through the Austrian Tyrol with
Thicknesse, who walked too slowly for him, in August 1883, the occasion
for his wild proposal of atheism and celibacy. They may also have experi-
enced serious danger while climbing that summer. Pearson complained to
Cobb that something in her letter had distracted him (as she paraphrased),
“from those wonderful mountain solitudes.” She was aggrieved. Why, she
demanded, “did you ask me to write to you when my letters were to come
to you inharmoniously; why not give yourself up altogether to the mighty
Mother’s magic, forgetting everything connected with men’s Icons? . . . I
58 • Chapter Three
41 New Werther, 78.

know so well what you describe, the longing to become part of Nature. But
I think we can only have it when quite alone.”42
SHAM, SUPERFICIALITY, AND DETACHMENT
In life, as in his art, Pearson was deeply frustrated in these years by his stud-
ies of philosophy and science. The reader may well wonder why the wan-
derer Arthur, having experienced so movingly the beauties of nature, should
regard his studies as a failure and be driven to a miserable suicide. But what
nature offered in life was inaccessible through science. In the mountains he
could embrace nature, and feel her life within him, while science offered
only description. There was, he thought, something noble in renouncing
the abundant sensuality of immersion in sublime landscapes and assuming a
position of remote detachment. It did not, however, provide the same satis-
faction. Pearson expressed repeatedly, in a variety of circumstances, his utter
discontent with falseness and sham. These he identiﬁed with the sad deﬁ-
ciencies of modern existence.
He came to the position that all science is mere description very early in
life, if we are to believe his later recollections. To take his word on faith,
however, would be rash, since his memory was so effectively stimulated by
the urgency of denying that the Scottish physicist Peter Guthrie Tait had
anything to do with this discovery. When Tait’s Edinburgh ally and future
biographer C. G. Knott published an unsympathetic review in Nature of
Pearson’s Grammar of Science, implying among other things that he had
failed to give due credit to Tait for his conception of force, Pearson re-
sponded angrily: “I happened to be one of the unfortunate Cambridge stu-
dents whose ﬁrst notions of matter and force were obtained from the
‘Treatise on the Dynamics of a Particle’ [by Tait and W. J. Stele], and it was
therefore a relief to me when I met with [Gustav] Kirchhoff ’s ‘Mechanik’ in
1876, and found the subjectivity of force clearly insisted on.” Or, still more
pointedly, it was Kirchhoff and not Tait “who ﬁrst helped many of us out of
the mental obscurity as to dynamical principles produced by our study of the
expositions of the laws of motion due to the Edinburgh school.”43 Indeed,
Apostle of Renunciation • 59
42 Elisabeth Cobb to KP, 29 Aug. 1883, Pearson Papers 663. Courtney, “Ralph Thick-
nesse,” 186, has them in Switzerland rather than Austria. She reports that Thicknesse’s diary
speaks of a near disaster and of his gratitude that his family was spared this great sorrow.
There is no evidence of this in Pearson’s correspondence.
43 C. G. K[nott], review of The Grammar of Science, Nature, 46 (2 June 1892), 97–99;
quotes from Pearson’s replies in Nature, 46 (30 June 1892), 199–200, and 14 July 1892,
247. The reference is presumably to the third edition of Peter Guthrie Tait and William John
Stele, A Treatise on Dynamics of a Particle (London: Macmillan, 1871). Tait was a combat-
ive fellow, aggressively religious and stubbornly unreasonable on all questions of scientiﬁc
credit. In Nature, 32 (11 June 1885), 124–125, he criticized Pearson’s editing of Clifford’s
Common Sense of the Exact Sciences. In later years, Pearson remembered the review, incor-
rectly, as an attack on the idealism of his Grammar of Science.

the ﬁrst edition of Pearson’s Grammar of Science invokes Kirchhoff for “the
only consistent view of mechanism and the true conception of scientiﬁc
law,” and cites the original, 1876 edition of his Lectures on Mathematical
Physics.44 It is likely, nevertheless, that he exaggerated the impression made
on him as a boy of eighteen or nineteen by Kirchhoff’s treatise. In 1885,
when he found it necessary to write a section on “mass” in the course of
completing Clifford’s Common Sense of the Exact Sciences, he supported his
deﬁnition, as a ratio of accelerations, by citing the arguments of Ernst
Mach’s recent Mechanics, and did not mention Kirchhoff.45
Pearson was, however, vitally concerned with the status of scientiﬁc laws
during these crisis years of 1879 and 1880, for reasons having mainly to
do with his religious struggles. In June 1879 he outlined for Parker a
thoroughly skeptical interpretation of science. “The more I have studied
science & physics, the more surely I see that we know nothing of what we
call nature, of electricity light and attraction we know nothing, what is the
sense or truth of calling light a vibration? Or that gravity is a force between
particles of matter if such exist.” This was on a day when he felt “at a lower
ebb of despair with regard to truth than I have ever felt before in my life,
and believe if I only knew an energetic priest, he might easily make a con-
vert and even a priest.” Had the old Werther, like the new, been so utterly
an intellectual, the sacriﬁce of reason in such a conversion might have been
his suicide: “I believe my fate will be the Catholic Church, if I could only
send my reason to the dust, for it is merely negative, it has never lead [sic]
me to truth,” Pearson wrote. The failure of science and reason to provide
access to nature was one source of his depression. Philosophy since Kant,
he said, shows that the mind makes laws of nature. “Fancy truth a function
of that absurd humbug man’s mind!”46
In Berlin, where he arrived in October 1879, his discontent about sci-
ence became still more intense. In January 1880 he expressed himself as if
from underground, not sure whether to attribute his foul mood to a
toothache, a need to fall in love, or the inability to ﬁnd a suitable object for
his immense ambition. He wished the new year could bring
something to call one to action, to give one a duty—were it even a second
French Revolution! Shall I tell you what I would wish my son to be? Not a man
60 • Chapter Three
44 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 139. On 361 he dealt harshly with Dynamics of a Particle.
45 William Kingdon Clifford, The Common Sense of the Exact Sciences (1885; New York:
Dover, 1955), 239–243; also Pearson’s preface, lxv: “I should hardly have ventured to put
forward these views had I not recently discovered that they have (allowing for minor differ-
ences) the weighty authority of Professor Mach, of Prag,” citing “his recent book, Die
Mechanik in ihrer Entwickelung, Leipzig, 1883.” He reafﬁrmed the point in a letter to Mach,
18 July 1897, Pearson Papers 921/1.
46 KP to Parker, 20 June 1879.

of the world, not a trader, not a lover of books, but a student of Nature in her-
self and not thro’ mathematical science, typifying idealising the beauty in that
Nature for the beneﬁt of mankind, the elevating mankind in spite of themselves,
not for his own fame, nor with idea that he merely beneﬁtted mankind, but be-
cause Art impelled, because she was his goddess, in short he should be Artist in
the truest sense.”47
He was a man without hope, wishing on behalf of some hypothetical son
for what he, at age twenty-two, could no longer imagine for himself. The
science he knew could do no more than grasp at appearances. What he
longed for was to experience the beauty of unadorned nature.
Pearson’s ﬁrst formulation of an argument that science is mere descrip-
tion was no philosophy of science triumphant, but sad and resigned. It co-
incided with his greatest discontent about the deceit of surfaces. For
several years he had complained that Christianity, in a capitalistic nation
based on greed and exploitation, had become a sham, the foundation of
hypocrisy and no more. This criticism of modern life as a sham culture was
a common Victorian trope, scarcely unexpected in an admirer of Carlyle.48
Pearson’s mother had complained of “so much sham & profession now”
that a “fearless denouncing” of it must be wholesome. (She also spoke of
her husband’s life of “deception.”) Karl’s own obsession with false ap-
pearances and misleading exteriors went far beyond the commonplace.
The New Werther has an abundance of examples. Modern painting, as
Arthur declares, is merely sensuous, never even attempting to reach “the
ideal beauty in painting of the depth of plastic repose.” Holiness, love, and
friendship have become the mere “tawdry garments with which the whole
Humanity would cover its corruptions.” The “sham culture” of the un-
named Oscar Browning was deﬁned as “well-hidden shallowness” and “a
mockery of art.” Only on the magical night of Walpurgis did Pearson dare
hope to compel the “Spirit of the Universe” to “raise its veil.”49
Outside of his ﬁction, as well as within it, he was becoming increasingly
unhappy about another veil: “I wish the subjects which are considered
immoral were more openly discussed between men & women, and that we
could return to some of that Greek teaching which saw nothing immoral
in maidens & youths racing naked together, but alas! the ﬁg leaf grows
daily larger & larger, till its very size creates a prurient curiosity to know
what is behind it.”50
Apostle of Renunciation • 61
47 KP to Parker, 12 Jan. 1880, responding to Parker to KP, 1 Jan. 1880, who referred to
an article in Macmillan’s by John Robert Seeley on the materialistic aspirations of English fa-
thers for their sons.
48 The Oxford English Dictionary, 2d ed. (1991), s.v. “sham,” credits Carlyle’s Past and
Present as introducing the “generalized sense” of the term.
49 Fanny P to KP, 5 Feb. 1874 and 2 Nov. 1875; New Werther, 106–107, 114, 90, 25.
50 KP to Parker, 29 July 1879.

Heidelberg had already failed to live up to the idealized image of Ger-
many—Browning’s image—that had drawn him there. Berlin, however,
he disliked more intensely. He felt oppressed by the ubiquitous police and
complained of the martial paintings and grand monuments to military
leaders, notwithstanding the stars and double stars assigned by his
Baedeker guidebook.51 He gathered up most of the defects of the place
under the rubric of artiﬁciality and pretense. In his ﬁrst letter to his mother
from Berlin, in October, he called it “a city of very broad streets and stucco
palaces which at ﬁrst impress you but afterwards rather pall.” “The Lin-
den,” he added, “is humbug.” Left alone at Christmas, he fumed quietly
about the city. “Unter den Linden . . . is a sham, in fact all Berlin is a
sham, and London is a handsome city, compared with it.”
Finally, in February he was able to travel with his closest Berlin friend,
the German-American and future Harvard economist Frank W. Taussig,
to Dresden. Dresden was a city of rococo palaces and splendid collections
of old German art. It was then very popular with British tourists, includ-
ing Oscar Browning, who went there for the opera. John Murray’s guide-
book repeated Herder’s designation for it, the “German Florence,” while
Baedeker interpreted the rococo style as characteristically superﬁcial.52
Pearson, in raptures, adored its most celebrated painting, Albrecht Dürer’s
Cruciﬁxion, and gloriﬁed the town, if not its monuments, as authentically
German: “With the town I was delighted after Berlin, . . . the streets were
crooked, the houses picturesque and the people good natured & genuine
Germans while good honest Bierkellars & Lokals abound and not the hor-
rible Vienna Cafés which crowd Berlin. It awoke again the fast dying love
for Germany which four months of this stucco, Prussianism, sham, half-
Paris, half-London, nothing-truly-German capital had beinahe [almost]
extinguished.”53
The one thing needful, it seems, was to avoid stucco, despised by Pear-
son’s generation for its falseness. The condemnation was applied most
sharply at home, often with hints that the buildings stood in for something
more general. “As dishonest a sham,” we read in an 1874 architectural
62 • Chapter Three
51 K. Baedeker, Northern Germany: A Handbook for Travelers, 6th ed. (Leipsic): Karl
Baedeker, 1877). There are at least two mentions of Baedeker guidebooks in his correspon-
dence, though not with respect to Berlin. Oscar Browning traveled with the guides of John
Murray, but Baedeker was synonymous with cultured travel in Pearson’s day, and he liked
when possible to go off the guidebook routes. Bernard Shaw deploys an obvious joke about
guidebook stars and craven tourists in “Widower’s Houses” (1893) in Collected Plays with
their Prefaces, vol. 1 (London: Bodley Head, 1970), 54. On travel and guidebooks, see Silli-
toe, Leading the Blind.
52 Baedeker, Northern Germany, 216; Murray’s Hand-Book for North Germany and the
Rhine, 19th ed. (London: John Murray, 1877), 297.
53 KP to Parker, 15 Feb. 1880.

guide, “as the stucco stone ‘orders’ of modern Regent Street.” Walter
Thornbury observed with bemused tolerance that the Duke of Somerset’s
Sion House, designed by Robert Adam in 1762, had once been regarded
as light and elegant, in a beautiful antique style. Happily, we have grown
wiser, and “despise stucco now as false and ﬂimsy and pretending to be
what it is not.”54 Stucco abroad, from more remote times, was a different
matter. John Ruskin, who preached that every material should be worked
in its characteristic way so as not to mislead the eye, was prepared to ad-
mire Venetian stucco on condition that there be no pretenses. “What? The
reader asks in some surprise,—Stucco! And in the great Gothic period?
Even so, but not stucco to imitate stone. Herein lies all the difference.”
William Morris similarly praised the “delicate richness of effect” of Pom-
peiian stucco wall decorations, where there was no effort “to disguise
the fact of its being a solid wall and a ﬂat surface.”55 Ruskin and Morris
had a deep commitment to the honesty of art, art as truth. Pearson’s 
contempt for Berlin stucco reveals once more the young Londoner, an
earnest Victorian, who wandered to Germany in search of truth and dis-
covered only misleading surfaces. Contrast Oscar Wilde’s ironies in the
1890s, in Lady Bracknell’s assessment of her nephew’s proposed marriage
partner. “A hundred and thirty thousand pounds! And in the Funds! Miss
Cardew seems to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.
Few girls of the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qual-
ities that last, and improve with time. We live, I regret to say, in an age of
surfaces.”56
Pearson did ﬁnd, intermittently, some consolation in idealistic meta-
physics. Having departed from Cambridge with an up-to-date British rev-
erence for Hegel, Pearson found that in Germany his reputation had faded
into the shadows cast by Fichte and Schelling. Or so it was, at least, in
philosophical Heidelberg.57 Kuno Fischer’s early Hegelianism had got
him into political trouble in 1848. In 1852 he was accused of pantheism
on account of his praise of Spinoza, and for twenty years he was a philoso-
pher in exile. His work on history of philosophy, which helped to initiate
the “return to Kant,” was strongly idealistic in its tendencies—Kant
Apostle of Renunciation • 63
54 John T. Micklethwaite, Modern Parish Churches (1874), quoted in Oxford English Dic-
tionary, s.v. “sham”; Walter Thornbury, A Tour Round England, 2 vols. (London: Hurst and
Blackett, 1870), vol. 1, 25–26.
55 John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849; New York: Noonday Press,
1961), 58; Ruskin, The Stones of Venice, 3 vols. (1851–53; Boston: Dana Eyles, 1900), 
vol. 3, 24; William Morris, “Mural Decoration,” in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed.
(1884), vol. 17, 34–48, on 37.
56 Oscar Wilde, The Importance of Being Earnest (1894; London: Nick Hern Books,
1995), 71.
57 KP to Parker, 25 May 1879.

viewed through Fichtean spectacles.58 Although Fischer’s lectures during
the spring of 1879 were on ancient philosophy, Pearson drank up Fichte
in those months. More than mere idealism, this bordered on solipsism, the
apotheosis of self, and Pearson remarked in letters, half in jest, that Fichte
supported his natural egoism.59 Arthur’s report to Ethel on his wild ascent
as “Spirit of the Storm” to the terrace of the Heidelberg castle ruins con-
cluded with Fichtean remarks about the inﬁnite “I” that creates the world
by grasping it.60
Although dissatisﬁed with German philosophy, he still preferred it to
the alternatives. In one of his earliest publications, a review in late 1880 of
Frederick Pollock’s study of Spinoza, he tried out the view that the active
mind constructs its own world, according to a pure logic of thought or
ideas. He announced there what he would continue to hold to the end of
his life, that “Spinoza is the philosopher for men of science.” But it was, as
he called it, an “inverted Spinozism,” a Spinozism modiﬁed by Fichte.
Thought and matter are indeed identical, but this does not reduce mind
to thinking matter. It is rather the mind that creates the world, in accor-
dance with the laws of mind. “Space and time have long been recognised
as sensation-frames, matter and force must now be added. . . . The outer
world, as we conceive it, is the production of the conceiving ‘Ego,’ not an
objective reality enforcing its laws upon the subjective sensitive centre.”
Because the logic of mind is universal, all individuals must experience the
same sensations, and since “no law of nature can break a law of thought,”
miracles are clearly impossible.
Pearson thus reached, by way of idealistic philosophy, a philosophical
view of science that has usually been described as Machian, but that owed
nothing as yet to Mach, and not much to Kirchhoff. On this occasion he
was apparently stimulated by Pollock, Clifford’s friend and posthumous
editor, who called “force” a “mere compendious symbol,” which, with
matter, was disappearing into energy, and referred to cause and effect as 
“a convenient artiﬁce.”61 Laws of nature, Pearson concluded, are nothing
more than laws of thought, and are “necessary to simplify the complices of
sensation which we call light, heat, planetary motion, etc.”62
German idealists had largely presided over the nineteenth-century
resurrection of Spinoza’s reputation, and Pearson’s Fichtean reading in
1880 was not especially original. For a scientist, however, his radical ideal-
64 • Chapter Three
58 Willey, Back to Kant; Köhnke, Rise of Neo-Kantianism.
59 KP to Parker, 12 June 1879: “As I said to my German Lehrerinn (sic) today ‘Vielleicht kön-
nen Sie den Einﬂuss der Fichteschen Ich-Vergötterung in meinem heutigen Egoismus sehen.’”
60 New Werther, 8–10.
61 Frederick Pollock, Spinoza: His Life and Philosophy (London: C. Kegan Paul, 1880), 82,
160–161.
62 Karl Pearson, “Pollock’s Spinoza,” Cambridge Review, 2 (17 Nov. 1880), 94–96.

ism was unusual, and he never abandoned it, even after he renounced
Hegelian metaphysics as no longer of interest except to those pitiable
young men from Balliol seeking a reconciliation of Christianity with
reason. Pearson wanted a religion without theology, one that involved
science more intrinsically. He insisted on Spinoza’s pantheism, on the
mystic element in his philosophy, which incorporated the world, including
humanity, into the godhead.63 Pollock, whom he otherwise admired,
viewed this mysticism as a “bugbear,” whereas for Pearson, much truth
was hidden in it. The best men of all times—Plato, Goethe, Carlyle, Je-
sus—“have been more or less mystics.” Spinoza, he argued, was greatly in-
ﬂuenced by Maimonides, by the view that God knows the world as a part
of himself. Again and again he stressed Spinoza’s idea of the amor dei in-
tellectualis, the intellectual love of God, which required that God be
approached through the study of nature, and made love proportional
to knowledge. Science by this reading was not merely ﬁnite and human,
but something divine, an aspect of the process by which God came to
a fuller self-knowledge.64 Spinoza, he hoped, could satisfy those “crav-
ings for a higher religion and a higher morality consonant with modern
science and nineteenth century Humanism,” for “a scientiﬁc faith, which,
while satisfying the emotional cravings, shall at the same time be founded
in reason.”65
Yet in an important way the mystic god of Spinoza was quite out of
reach. Pearson was seeking a philosophy that would give meaning to “those
ecstatic moments” of connection with Nature when he “felt the divine
presence.”66 These were sentiments he shared with such men as Leslie
Stephen, who fancied that in the Alps he could ascend to “those lofty rever-
ies in which the true mystic imagines time to be annihilated, and rises into
beatiﬁc visions untroubled by the accidental and the temporary.” And, like
John Tyndall, Pearson was drawn to pantheism as an aspect of nature wor-
ship.67 Spinoza’s pantheism allowed a feeling of connectedness, but his god
was, so to speak, entirely self-absorbed. To the individual, Spinoza offered
Apostle of Renunciation • 65
63 This despite the arguments of one of Pearson’s favorite works on Goethe, E. Caro, La
Philosophie de Goethe (Paris: Hachette et Cie., 1866), 46. “Unfortunate Germany,” he re-
marked: “It thought itself Spinozist when it was only pantheist.” He continued that Goethe
also made this mistake of his pays. Pearson’s notes on Caro are in Pearson Papers 11/6, but
he did not call attention to this passage, nor to Caro’s interpretation of Faust as an allegory
of the French Revolution.
64 Ibid.; Karl Pearson, “Maimonides and Spinoza” (1884), in Ethic of Freethought, 137–155.
65 Karl Pearson, “Martineau’s ‘Spinoza,’ ” Cambridge Review, 4 (22 Nov. 1882), 114–116;
Pearson, “Pollock’s Spinoza.”
66 KP to Parker, 29 July 1879. I would guess that this letter followed closely the thunder-
storm episode.
67 Leslie Stephen, “The Alps in Winter,” Cornhill Magazine (1877), quoted in Dale, In
Pursuit of a Scientiﬁc Culture, 208; Barton, “John Tyndall, Pantheist.”

not rapture but renunciation. Goethe admired particularly Spinoza’s
“boundless disinterestedness,” as in the passage where he called for a love
of god so selﬂess as to require no love in return.68 Goethe’s account, in its
turn, was admired throughout the nineteenth century, not least by Pearson.
By 1883, this was the spirit in which he interpreted the sense of oneness
with nature. We ﬁnd in the Cambridge Review, volume 5, a scholarly re-
view by Pearson on Kuno Fischer’s critique of Kant, dated “St. Leonhard
in Passeir, Aug. 1883.” This was the same Tyrolean journey that inspired
his moonlight proposal to Ralph Thicknesse, and his explanation to Elisa-
beth Cobb of his yearning for oneness with nature. The pursuit of things
in themselves, the review exhorted, is merely a hereditary emotion left be-
hind from a more primitive state. “Can we not renounce once and forever
our supersensuous cravings, in order to gain the fuller life and light of the
sensuous world?” To renounce these cravings, “this grasping after ab-
solute knowledge of the supersensuous,” is very hard, yet therein lies the
way to feel “the deep joy of that [sensuous] world.”69
Such “deep joy” was rare enough for Pearson, far less common than his
moments of black depression. Moreover, it was not only the supersensuous
divine that he was driven to renounce. Alone in the Alps he could hope to
dissolve himself into nature. But at his desk, writing mathematics, nature
was nowhere within reach. In science, renunciation meant not the dissolu-
tion of self but the suppression of all personal desires. “I shall consider 
human actions and desires in exactly the same manner, as though I were
concerned with lines, planes, and solids,” wrote Spinoza. Under the head-
ing “Of Human Bondage, or the Strength of the Emotions,” he added:
“When a man is prey to his emotions, he is not his own master.”70 Kuno
Fischer, mixing biographical narrative into his history of philosophy, ex-
plained how Spinoza once fell in love, and the perfectly calm resignation
with which he accepted its disappointment. Goethe, as Pearson would have
known, looked to Spinoza’s doctrine of renunciation to calm the raging
passions, a moral lesson he incorporated into Faust.71 Pearson, as a rational
66 • Chapter Three
68 Goethe, From My Life: Poetry and Truth, trans. Robert R. Heitner, ed. Thomas P. Saine
and Jeffrey L. Sammons (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1987), vol. 1, 459. Pear-
son’s notes on Goethe, Aus meinem Leben, probably from 1878, survive as Pearson Papers
11/6, where he noted particularly Goethe’s reaction to this line in Book 16 as well as his
praise of Spinoza’s “utter disinterestedness.” He continued that Goethe, unlike Spinoza,
would have “demanded his individuality.” This ﬁle contains also Pearson’s notes on Lewes’s
biography of Goethe, where these themes are discussed on p. 281, and his note, on Caro’s
Philosophie de Goethe, see p. 59.
69 Karl Pearson, “Kuno Fischer’s New Critique of Kant,” Cambridge Review, 5 (28 Nov.
1883), 109–111.
70 Benedict de Spinoza, The Ethics, in On the Improvement of the Understanding / The
Ethics / Correspondence, trans. R.H.M. Elwes, (New York: Dover, 1955), 129, 187.
71 Kuno Fischer, Geschichte der neuern Philosophie. Erster Band, Zweiter Theil. Descartes’
Schule, 2d ed. (Heidelberg: Friedrich Bassermann, 1865), 121–123, 543.

scientist and philosopher, largely resigned himself to this more temperate
view of knowledge, spurning the temptations of rapturous union.
OBJECTIVE SPIRIT
Pollock introduced a new sense of the term objective into English, explain-
ing that it was less familiar in England than the correlative term subjective,
“but is freely used by German writers to denote absence of prejudice and
distortion, faithfulness in reproduction, and the like.” “We are growing
objective, and ceasing to be subjective,” declared Arthur in The New
Werther.72 By 1880, when both passages were published, Pearson was
strongly committed to this ideal. He emphasized renunciation as part of
an effort to be more objective, to subdue the merely personal and to quiet
his restless striving. He was in 1880 only beginning to be conscious of any
disquiet arising, as for Goethe, from love or sexual desire. He thought of
his unsettledness mainly in terms of a religious crisis and a longing for re-
assurance about God, for connectedness with nature, and for a purpose in
life. His New Werther expressed this desire in metaphysical and scientiﬁc
terms, a deep frustration at the wall that seemed to block him from grasp-
ing nature herself through reason and observation.
As in his novella, Pearson pondered suicide as the end of his problems.
He was tempted also by other possibilities. One was the Catholic Church,
which he understood as the sacriﬁce of intellect to unreasoning authority.
Still more like suicide was the course of action on which he in fact resolved,
to give up philosophy and science and resume preparation for the law. This
owed nothing to any pressure from his parents. His mother expressed fear
that “it is not quite what your taste & inclination would really dictate,”
and his father, despite having paid more than £40 to have him admitted at
Inner Temple in 1876, was displeased at his decision now to enter “this
overcrowded profession.” The bar was for Pearson the counsel of despair.
But it became his main project for Berlin, rather than, as he had originally
planned, the study of physics in Hermann von Helmholtz’s laboratory.
Being the person he was, he continued despite his best intentions to read
and study much more widely than his university courses dictated. The
project of throwing philosophy to the winds was also blocked by the un-
fortunate disposition of the Berlin law faculty to teach their subject philo-
sophically, so that he was soon back in the “claws” of that “mystic”
Hegel.73 German idealism, always alluring, never quite brought satisfac-
tion. The yearning of the scientist to get beneath appearances to nature
Apostle of Renunciation • 67
72 Pollock, Spinoza, 190; New Werther, 91.
73 Fanny P to KP, 2 Nov. 1879; William P to KP, 29 Oct. 1879; Parker to KP, 26 Oct.
1879, and KP to Parker, 15 Nov. 1879.

herself, or to ascend to God, seemed ever less philosophically credible to
him. His most consequential application of the doctrine of renunciation
was precisely to these desires.
In this sense, he was still drawing lessons from Goethe’s words, if not al-
ways his deeds. Goethe had explained that we are prone to see nature in
relation to ourselves, and to measure it against a yardstick of human plea-
sures and desires. The student of nature must renounce these absolutely, he
continued, although the “history of science teaches us how difﬁcult this
renunciation is for man.”74 Lewes drew this moral from Goethe’s tempes-
tuous life: “Activity and sincerity carry us far, if we begin by Renunciation,
if we at the outset content ourselves with the Knowable and Attainable,
and give up the wild impatience of desire for the Unknowable and Unat-
tainable. The mystery of existence is an awful problem, but it is a mystery,
and placed beyond the boundaries of human faculty. Recognize it as such,
and renounce!”75 Or, if we follow Pearson’s own lead in The New Werther
and acknowledge how desire for nature could be like love, his career ap-
pears like the early Lehrjahre of Wilhelm Meister, a triumph of renuncia-
tion, the abandonment of ecstatic union in favor of statistical description.
Wilhelm, in the novel, was drawn to the theater and fell in love with an ac-
tress, Marianne. Through an unfortunate misunderstanding, he thought
she had been unfaithful to him. Failing, as it seemed, at love, he aban-
doned the theater and took up business, the life of double-entry book-
keeping that his sober and orderly friend Werner had praised above all
others. He became, in short, a quantiﬁer: “And so our friend resigned
himself fully to active participation in the world of business. To the aston-
ishment of Werner and to the great delight of his father, no one was more
industrious than Wilhelm in the countinghouse, on the exchange, in the
ofﬁce or the warehouse. . . . But sometimes he was unable to suppress a
sigh even when his best faculties were being engaged.”76
68 • Chapter Three
74 Goethe, “The Experiment as Mediator between Object and Subject,” in Goethe, Col-
lected Works, vol. 12: Scientiﬁc Studies (New York: Suhrkamp, 1988), 11–17. On the limits of
Goethe’s application of this maxim in his own work, see Gillispie, Edge of Objectivity, 192–198.
For a different view, Richards, Romantic Conception of Life.
75 Lewes, Goethe, vol. 2, 339.
76 Goethe, Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship, ed. and trans. Eric A. Blackell (New York:
Suhrkamp, 1989), 43.

C H A P T E R  F O U R
Pearson’s Progress:
A NINETEENTH-CENTURY PASSION PLAY
Wisset, im Schwarmgeist brauset das Wehen des ewigen Geistes!
Was da Grosses gescheh’n, das thaten auf Erden die Schwärmer.*
[Know ye, in zealotry rushes the breath of the eternal spirit,
When what’s great comes to pass, that’s done upon Earth by the zealot.]
—Robert Hamerling, Der König von Sion (1868)
BY LATE 1880, Pearson had found a doctrine to express his political dis-
content and began calling himself a socialist. He assumed at almost the
same time a deep commitment to history as a mode of scientiﬁc under-
standing and of literary expression, of knowledge and passion. Under this
sign he conceived in 1881 two failed schemes of social prophecy. One was
his proposal to translate Marx’s Capital, which the author declined. The
other was to write a passion play for the nineteenth century, which he did
in fact complete, only to see it fall stillborn from the press. Like the New
Werther, this last provides an excellent guide to Pearson’s sentimental ed-
ucation, even if it lacks speciﬁcally autobiographical material. The play re-
veals deep anxieties about maintaining a moral commitment to the public
good in the face of worldly temptations. It is also a sexual fantasy of the
most ambivalent kind.
While he was in many respects a notably restrained individual, Pearson
displayed Dionysian abandon in his intellectual life, seeking personal and
social meaning in almost everything he did. In literature, as in science, he
idealized bold restraint. Schwärmerei (meaning zealotry or enthusiastic
fervor) and renunciation, the outstanding ethical values of his youthful
writing, are close to being opposites. Pearson treated them as comple-
mentary, preaching that enthusiasm must be channeled by reason, and
that reason in turn demands sacriﬁce of self. He defended as warmly the
* Epigraph: Pearson particularly liked this line. In The New Werther, 41, it is quoted with
mistakes, and in Ethic of Freethought, 25, correctly. Since Hamerling introduced the word
here as an epithet of the respectable for the Anabaptists, which Jan van Leyden then reclaims,
I’ve translated Schwärmer as “zealot” and Schwärmgeist as “zealotry.” Pearson frequently
identiﬁed his intellectual and moral position, and even his own temperament, with
Schwärmerei but always translated it as “enthusiasm.”

virtues of enthusiasm as of renunciation, and proved at last to be a
Schwärmer for science—for the impersonal standards and self-denial that
deﬁned it. Renunciation was not simply a check on untamed human
drives, but itself a thing to be celebrated, the basis of collective order. This
moral discourse supported his philosophy of science, one that called on
the individual to give up prejudice, and indeed all that is merely personal
for the sake of society. Renunciation was thus to emerge as the leitmotiv of
Pearson’s form of positivism, which built a wall between mind and the
world it studied, allowing as reward for the disciplined investigation of na-
ture nothing more than an efﬁcient catalog of empirical regularities. Yet
such moral and intellectual attitudes would lead to a new form of society.1
The new order demanded by history would be a socialist one. Intellec-
tually, Pearson’s historical socialism owed something to his Berlin law lec-
tures in the winter of 1879–80. Their historicist spirit was consistent with
the outlook of his father, who preferred historical to dogmatic under-
standings of the law and devoted years of meticulous research to a manu-
script, never completed, on the eleventh-century Domesday Book.2
Ideologically, Pearson loathed the deductions of classical economics based
on the selﬁsh pursuit of personal gain, and looked, as many in Britain and
Germany were doing in the 1870s and 1880s, to history as the basis for a
moral economy of collective action.
Indeed, a commitment to history was the most direct outcome of his re-
ligious and intellectual groping during 1880 and 1881. I array the sources
of Pearson’s historicism under three broad headings, all of which began to
take shape during his German year. The ﬁrst is his continuing religious tur-
moil and his deep sympathy for Catholicism. Next is his growing political
discontent, which crystallized during this year as a commitment to social-
ism. Finally, and perhaps most important, was his belief in the redemptive
role of literature. In 1880 he was entranced ﬁrst by the historical ﬁction of
the Austrian poet Robert Hamerling, and then by folk productions of re-
ligious epics. The next year, after the failure of his New Werther, he under-
took to write his equally unsuccessful and equally revealing passion play.
NOT QUITE A CATHOLIC
The New Werther implies, truthfully, that Pearson arrived in Germany seek-
ing in philosophy or science some equivalent to a religion. It does not stress
sufﬁciently his continued concern with faith of a more traditional sort. In
70 • Chapter Four
1 Karl Pearson, “The Ethic of Renunciation” (1883), in Ethic of Freethought, 78–114.
2 William P to KP, 5 Jan. 1880, transcribed in Hacker Papers, Box 8; Pearson’s Berlin An-
meldungsbuch, Pearson Papers 31/5.

the event, the issue posed itself. In Heidelberg, registering himself at the
university, he was obliged to indicate his creed. Having, as he explained to
his brother, no religion “but only religiosity,” he accepted the suggestion
of the Quästor, who duly inscribed “Confessionslos ” (without religion) in the
prescribed space. That word, he wrote in his German diary, “expressed my
religious viewpoint as truly as if I had written ‘nihilist’ when asked for my
political standpoint. I held divine services in the cathedral of nature and
took a long walk.”3 When he recollected the experience in a public lecture
nine years later, he emphasized particularly the conﬁned space provided on
the form for his answer, the tyrannical instrument of standardized belief
that left no room for thought or originality. Having been snared in the sta-
tistical net by an imperious German ofﬁcial, he remembered (as he now
imagined) “the hundred and more large pages occupied by the Augsburg
Confession in my edition.” “Why even Luther could not get his faith into
a square inch,” he muttered. “It had never entered the mind of the little
man, who spent his Sundays in gazing at a Lutheran hymn-board, that any
one could have a confession of his own which could not be labelled and 
ﬁtted into a square inch.”4 The reminiscence has a certain poetic truth,
though it is unlikely that he owned or had even read this work of Luther in
the spring of 1879. Indeed, he was at this time acutely conscious of how
much easier life would become if he could just squeeze his unruly self into
one of those Procrustean boxes. He wrote passionately in letters to Parker
of his “longing to believe,” and of his desperate wish that someone could
deﬁne for him his duty. These were the days when he complained most 
despairingly of the uselessness of reason as a purely negative force, and
thought of abandoning it to become a Catholic.
While he never accepted Catholicism, even momentarily, it was much
more than a joke for him, and he sometimes went to Catholic mass. One
Sunday in June 1879, for example, he traveled with an Irish Presbyterian
called Robinson from Heidelberg to nearby Speyer, signiﬁcant historically as
the town where Luther’s revolt was ﬁrst called “Protestant.” His friend
“took up the cudgels against Rome during service in the Cathedral. Of
course I was bound to support her, the debate grew furious, we were turned
out!”5 He thought increasingly of religion in terms of feeling rather than
reason during those years. Alluding to his reading of Spinoza, he remarked:
“My God is unknown, undeﬁned if you like, but never unfelt.” “Gefühl ist
alles,” he recited from Faust. “These lines ever come back to me.”6
Pearson’s Progress • 71
3 KP to Arthur P, 26 April 1879, Pearson Papers 11/5: “Ich habe keine Religion, sondern
allein Religiosität”; copy from Pearson’s German diary, included in KP to Parker, 1 May
1879.
4 Pearson, Positive Creed of Freethought, 4.
5 KP to Parker, 20 June 1879.
6 (“All is feeling.”) KP to Parker, 29 July 1879.

His German instructor in Heidelberg, Frau C. de Castella, was a
Catholic. He was on excellent terms with her, and they often discussed lit-
erature and philosophy together. Whether religion was also on the agenda
is uncertain, but she knew of his metaphysical and religious uncertainties.
Their subsequent correspondence suggests a degree of spiritual closeness.
She responded to his New Werther by commenting on the difﬁculty of sep-
arating its Objectivität from its Subjectivität, meaning, presumably, truth
from ﬁction. She sympathized with its Sturm und Drang, its turbulent
spirit. The novella inspired her to remark that no institution was so ele-
vated as the Roman Catholic Church, which, she must have supposed,
could help him to still this storm and stress. Later she commented on the
fundamental psychological insights embodied in the Church’s dogmas
and ceremonies.7
These were close to Pearson’s own thoughts, which may well have owed
something to their conversations, though he and Parker had also discussed
the temptations of the Roman church. Pearson was moving in this forma-
tive period of his life to the view that traditional religion had its own legit-
imacy, in a domain quite separate from science and reason. He soon
determined that Protestant condemnation of religious forms for lack of
biblical warrant was quite misguided. From the time of Luther, Protes-
tants had been unable to comprehend that such symbolism could “have
arisen from some craving of mankind, some deep want of the human heart
seeking to satisfy itself by outward ceremony.”8 The reference was not
simply to the ignorant masses, but to himself. As usual, he was deeply am-
bivalent on these matters, since he soon began working to establish
“Freethought” as a nonreligious faith grounded in science. Still, religion
had to appeal to the emotions. Unitarianism, with its claims to a superior
rationality, became the object of his withering scorn. If, he argued, we can
accept on faith a God with the anthropomorphized characteristic of love,
the Trinity is by comparison a small mystery.9 He long held great sympa-
thy for the Roman Catholic Church. In his defense against that Presbyte-
rian Robinson, before the Holy Mother evicted both of them, he called it
72 • Chapter Four
7 KP to Fanny P, 11 May 1879, Pearson Papers 11/4; KP to Parker, 12 July 1879; C. de
Castella to KP, 29 Aug. 1880, 12 Nov. 1880, and 30 June 1880, Pearson Papers 654. She
gave lessons in German, French, and English in Heidelberg, and was already acquainted in
some capacity with one or more of Pearson’s Cambridge friends. Her husband, from an Ital-
ian canton of Switzerland, taught Italian.
8 Parker to KP, 22 June 1879; [Pearson], review of First Principles of the Reformation,
Athenaeum, Jan.–June 1884, 146–147.
9 Pearson review of Gaston Bonet-Maury, Early Sources of English Unitarian Christianity,
Academy, 26 (13 Sept. 1884), 162–163; also Pearson, “Martineau’s Spinoza,” Cambridge
Review, 4 (22 Nov. 1882), 114–116.

“the only possible form of Christianity” and appealed “to the beauty of its
service and its historical position.”10 The legitimacy of religion was to be
found in history, and the historical role of Catholicism was central to his
researches of the early 1880s.
SOCIALISM
He was, however, only secondarily interested in the history of Church
dogma. What particularly attracted the attention of Karl Pearson, historian,
was the social and economic role of religion, what he called the “old
Catholic socialism.” His dedication to socialism, while growing out of his
criticisms of his own nation, developed particularly during his year in Ger-
many and has often been attributed to his friendship with Raphael
Wertheimer. This ascription rests entirely on Pearson’s (quasi-) ﬁctions. In
his verse “Urwerther,” the “Hebrew” Raphael is credited with vaguely rad-
ical positions. His printed New Werther identiﬁes Raphael quite speciﬁcally
as a social democrat and socialist of the chair (Kathedersozialist) and relates
a full page of biographical background, including a strict orthodox up-
bringing, escape to a university chemistry laboratory, and trouble with the
police in Berlin before he came to Heidelberg.11 Almost none of this can be
conﬁrmed from Pearson’s correspondence, unless one assumes the accu-
racy of everything Wertheimer didn’t actually deny in his response to the
book. In Pearson’s letters we encounter “an avowed atheist and I shrewdly
suspect a socialist” with whom he “debated about religion and philoso-
phy,” particularly “the Kantian & Hegelian theories of God.” But he also
told his mother that German students, unlike English ones, shun politics.
Wertheimer, as characterized in Pearson’s contemporary letters, intoned
phrases such as “Gott und Vernunft” (God and reason), but was a skeptic
about metaphysics, and answered Pearson’s epithet “Gelehrter” (scholar)
by calling him a Schwärmer.12 The only indication of politics, beyond that
shrewd suspicion expressed three weeks after they began their walks, comes
from a letter, almost two years later, responding to Pearson’s inquiry about
Kathedersozialismus. Wertheimer unburdened himself of an elementary lec-
ture about the importance of keeping one’s head out of the clouds, work-
ing gradually, and introducing socialism from above. This would scarcely
have been necessary if Pearson had long since been converted to socialism
Pearson’s Progress • 73
10 KP to Arthur Pearson, 19 June 1879, Pearson Papers 11/5.
11 Norton, “Karl Pearson and Statistics,” 22–24; MacKenzie, Statistics in Britain, 75–76;
Pearson, New Werther, 52–53.
12 KP to Arthur P, 18 May 1879, 22 June 1879, 4 July 1879; KP to Fanny P, 11 May 1879,
Pearson Papers 11/5. The sentence about atheism and socialism may conceivably have re-
ferred to his other German walking companion, Julius Eisenach (see Pearson Papers 682/5).

by Wertheimer’s conversations. A few months after this letter, Pearson at-
tributed this thought about the need for gradualism to “a German” in a
published essay. Several years after that, he doubted in print whether he
“had ever met an educated German who was also a Socialist.”13
Pearson already thought of himself as a political radical by the summer
of 1879. When he informed Oscar Browning of his plans for Berlin,
Browning offered introductions and told him not to be shy about “going
into society.” Pearson replied querulously—“have you forgotten that I am
a democrat and in sentiments and language one of the hoi polloi?”14 But
his only mention of socialism sounds negative: a letter to his mother in
which he complained of Bismarck’s effort to govern without a parliament,
on the pretense of being above party. “No wonder that socialism ad-
vances.”15 In November, after his arrival in Berlin, Parker told him of a de-
bate “at the [Cambridge] union, on Socialism,” which, since nobody
knows what it means, is gaining power “as a panacea for this poor world,
a passport to millennium bliss.” Pearson said nothing of politics in his 
reply, but lamented Maxwell’s death (of which Parker informed him in the
same letter) and mentioned that he had taken lodgings with an American
son of German parents.16
This was Frank Taussig, the future economist, also planning eventually
to take up law, though he was enrolled at Berlin as a student of philosophy.
He probably had more to do with Pearson’s conversion to socialism than
Wertheimer. Subsequently, in the spring of 1881, Pearson sent Taussig his
ﬁrst essay on socialism along with his New Werther. Taussig is the most
plausible source for a sentence in that essay, placed just before Pearson’s
mention of the German who had called for revolution from above: “Oft
have Americans told me that the social question was the great problem of
the future, and that they felt convinced that in England the ﬁrst attempts
at solution would be made.” Taussig responded to this missive that he had
great faith in American workers, and looked for a revolution from below
and not from above.17
74 • Chapter Four
13 Raphael Wertheimer to KP, 7 March 1881, Pearson Papers 892/2. On 2 January
he had explained sadly the new racialist anti-Semitism, which could no longer be escaped
even by conversion to Christianity. The allusion to Wertheimer’s letter is in Pearson, “Anar-
chy,” Cambridge Review, 2 (30 March 1881), 268–270. On the lack of educated German 
socialists, see Pearson, “The Coming Factor in European Progress,” Cambridge Review, 7 
(21 Oct. 1885), 26–28.
14 “Hoi polloi” appears in Greek characters. Oscar Browning to KP, 7 Oct. 1879, Pearson
Papers, 645/4; KP to Browning, undated, Browning Papers, King’s College Archives.
15 KP to Fanny Pearson, 22 July 1879, Pearson Papers 11/4.
16 Parker to KP, 9 Nov. 1879; KP to Parker, 15 Nov. 1879.
17 Pearson, “Anarchy,” 270. Frank Taussig to KP, 10 July 1881, Pearson Papers 865/5.
Pearson’s letters to Taussig do not survive, but Taussig’s acknowledgment of an essay on so-
cialism could refer only to this paper.

Pearson and Taussig experienced many of the difﬁculties of Berlin life
together. Their move to the Französische Strasse, in the center of the city,
during the second week of November 1879 coincided with a series of vis-
its by the Berlin police. Because of Taussig’s name and his excellent spo-
ken German, the police were loath to believe he was an American, and
wanted to impress him into the army. Pearson commented to his mother
a few weeks later that his letters might arrive opened, and that the police
had probably rummaged his books in his absence. “Perhaps the discovery
of Marx’s Capital, [Albert Schäfﬂe’s] The Quintessence of Socialism, and
Spinoza, to say nothing of that Leitfaden [guiding thread] of Social
Democracy the New Testament, has made them suspicious.” “No wonder
the German ofﬁcials are suspicious,” commented Parker, “when you write
that you have ‘no respect for God or man, especially when they take the
form of authorities.’”18
Taussig can scarcely be ﬁngered as a pure evangelist for socialism. Pear-
son became friendly with him at a time of increasingly intense political in-
volvement, ostensibly for both men. Their stay in Germany was in the
immediate aftermath of Bismarck’s change of direction in 1878, which
closed down social democracy as a political party and initiated new forms of
social insurance. It was, in a very limited way, a prototype of the socialist
revolution from above, backed up by the Polizei. Bismarck’s police state
was more intrusive in Berlin than Heidelberg, and the capital gave Pearson
an opening to exciting and unfamiliar political ideas. He had the habit of
following politics closely, as is clear from his ceaseless requests for newspa-
pers from home whenever he traveled. In his letters to friends and family he
discussed with alternating disdain and admiration the political scene in
Berlin. He applauded Bismarck’s social insurance initiatives, and warmly
endorsed the German system of public education and its universal suffrage.
On the other hand, the military ethos, oppressive ofﬁcialdom, and the
ubiquity of the police were disquieting. “The system must be expensive,”
he joked, “if such a highly respectable person as myself excites their suspi-
cions.” He was bafﬂed by German political assumptions. “Poor Germany!
and then every professor here lectures that freedom does not consist in the
right to a sphere of individual action, but that the individual should bring
himself to see the ‘Vernunft’ [reason] which lies in the laws.”19
These professors, however, also took socialism very seriously and probably
gave Pearson his introduction to it. “It is curious,” he wrote in late Novem-
ber, “how all the professors drag even into Law lectures, the discussion of So-
cialism, for instant, in Jurisprudence the idea of socialists & Communists
from Sir Thomas More to Marx. The Utopia of the former is quite a gospel
Pearson’s Progress • 75
18 KP to Fanny P, 24 Nov. 1879; KP to Parker, 10 Dec. 1879; Parker to KP, 23 Dec.
1879.
19 KP to Parker, 12 Jan. 1880; KP to Fanny P, 2 Jan. 1880 and 24 Nov. 1879.

of some of the socialists here.”20 This last thought, it may be recalled, was at-
tributed to Raphael in The New Werther, then disowned by Wertheimer in his
response. Perhaps now it is clear why the ﬁctional Raphael had to have spent
time in Berlin. We may note that Marx required no introduction when Pear-
son ﬁrst mentioned him in a letter to his mother. Still, Pearson was probably
moved to acquire Das Kapital by his Berlin law lectures in the late fall
of 1879. There is no indication that he was at ﬁrst particularly impressed,
and indeed he often learned to appreciate on reﬂection what he initially
dismissed. After mentioning his acquisition of Das Kapital to Parker in De-
cember, he said not a word about its contents but entered immediately on a
discussion of Carlyle’sFrench Revolution and the need to choose a credo for
which to work, putting aside metaphysical squabbles.21 The Berlin social
democrats seemed to place as much hope in Darwin as in Marx, which Pear-
son in 1879 thought bizarrely misguided. In addition to his law lectures, he
had gone in November to hear Du Bois-Reymond lecture on Darwinismus,
which thoroughly disappointed him. “He has an audience of perhaps 400
students, who think that some solution of their difﬁculties is to be obtained
from the theories of evolution. Poor fellows they go & listen attentively to
the possibility of producing a permanent race of mules, as if that could be
any cure for tea at 6p a lb., and no marmalade at 1⁄4 a pot!”22
Within a few years, Pearson would enlist himself in the effort he here dis-
missed, to seek solutions to the problems of society in Darwinian biology. He
also began by 1881 to proclaim the cause of socialism. On the whole, how-
ever, his discontent with British capitalism was in the tradition not of Marx but
Carlyle, represented in his own time by John Ruskin and William Morris.
Their critique was explicitly aesthetic and moral as well as economic and
looked back to an idealized Middle Ages in search of a lost wholeness and
sense of community. Carlyle, especially in his later life, and Ruskin were deeply
opposed to liberal individualism and cosmopolitanism. Their leadership of the
defense of Governor Eyre, whose brutal suppression of a slave uprising in Ja-
maica had been condemned by such liberals as Mill and Huxley, displayed their
racism in its most naked form. Ruskin argued that wage labor in England was
white slavery, and that it must be eliminated before black slavery would be-
come a legitimate issue. Pearson in these years was anti-imperialist, but on the
now unthinkable ground that British administration was a costly beneﬁt to far-
away backward peoples, which workers at home could ill afford.23
76 • Chapter Four
20 KP to Fanny Pearson, 24 Nov. 1879.
21 KP to Parker, 10 Dec. 1879.
22 KP to Fanny P, 24 Nov. 1879.
23 Burrow, A Liberal Descent, 240–242; Semmel, Governor Eyre Controversy, 102–113;
Sherburne, Ruskin; KP to Parker, 28 Dec. 1879: “What has ﬁghting with the Afghans or 
Zulus to do with the millions of toilers? It only sends up the price of their food. . . . If India
causes the price of bread to be 1d dearer for the masses, then let India perish!”

Pearson’s historical studies, though remarkable for their freedom from
anachronistic presentism, grew out of the concerns of his own day. His po-
litical commitments found expression also in other ways, among them a
moment of particular enthusiasm for Marx’s work. His correspondence
during 1880 gives no indication of how he came to this position, although
his ﬁrst letter to Marx on 9 February 1881 indicates that Capital was then
on the intellectual agenda at Cambridge, where Pearson had lived during
the previous fall. Indeed, Marx was just beginning to acquire a reputation
in Britain, after three decades of residence in London and many years
reading ofﬁcial reports in the British Museum. It would be years, however,
before he attracted anything like the attention showered on the American
Henry George, whose proposals to tax the “unearned increment” of prop-
erty value made him the most notorious author in the upswing of British
socialism. There had been only a few serious discussions of Marx in British
periodicals by this time. Pearson’s interest was still quite unusual, as it pre-
ceded by some months the ﬁrst organized socialist movements in England,
and by several years the ﬁrst efforts to translate Marx’s major works.24
The ﬁrst efforts, that is, apart from Pearson’s own. In his February let-
ter to Marx, Pearson proposed himself as translator of Das Kapital. He of-
fered as reasons for the translation “ﬁrst the almost absolute and gross
ignorance of Englishmen of the most elementary doctrines of Social
Democracy in Germany; secondly, the particularly opportune time which
presents itself for extending the knowledge of these doctrines among the
working classes in this country,” and ﬁnally the signs of demand for the
volume in Cambridge, where readers were compelled to use the French
translation because most were ignorant of German. Pearson advertised his
own residence in Heidelberg and Berlin and his studies of German
thought and literature as evidence of his capacities as translator. He
avowed also his “ﬁrm belief in the soundness of the fundamental doctrines
of Socialism.”25 The translation, however, never came off. Marx replied on
15 February with an invitation to call on him two days hence. Pearson, re-
grettably, was not available on Thursdays, and asked Marx to respond by
mail or name another date. Marx must have asked for a sample translation,
and in any case he received one, which he rejected, perhaps with some
Pearson’s Progress • 77
24 Willis, “Marxist Thought in Britain,” Historical Journal. John Macdonnell, “Karl Marx
and German Socialism,” Fortnightly Review, 23 (1875), 382–391, argued that Marx had
been unjustly overshadowed by Lassalle. John Rae, in “Ferdinand Lassalle and German So-
cialism,” Contemporary Review, 39 (1880), 921–943, and “The Socialism of Karl Marx and
the Young Hegelians,” Contemporary Review, 40 (1881), 585–607, mentioned his impor-
tance as a theorist but discussed mainly his political career as an organizer.
25 KP to Karl Marx, 9 Feb. 1881, International Institute of Social History, Amsterdam.
Pearson’s three letters, and one reply by Marx, appear in an unpublished paper by Lewis
Feuer, “Karl Pearson and Karl Marx: The Evolution of a Social Biologist.”

78 • Chapter Four
26 Pearson’s other letters to Marx, dated 16 Feb. and 11 April 1881, are also held by the
International Institute of Social History. See also Marx to KP, Pearson Papers 760/4, and KP
to Parker, 13 April 1881. In 1885, John Broadhouse consulted Pearson on translating Marx;
see Broadhouse to KP, 15 Sept. and 23 Sept. 1885, Pearson Papers 644/4.
27 Haldane, “Karl Pearson,” 304, proposed also a more general explanation in terms of
homage to German culture, which is more plausible. Pearson began using “Karl” consis-
tently in late 1880 after some wavering earlier in the year, which by itself is possibly consis-
tent with an act of reverence for Marx. He also signed “Karl Pearson” to letters to Parker on
18 Sept. 1878 and 29 July 1879, long before Marx’s work meant anything to him. In the fall
of 1880 he was immersed in old German history, and in a letter to Conway, 9 Oct. 1880, he
referred to Charlemagne as “Karl.”
28 John Neville Keynes to KP, 10 July 1883, Pearson Papers 734/8. Pearson’s proposals
to Keynes, a fellow at Pembrook College, Cambridge, were mediated by Thomas Thornely,
another Cambridge friend, and an admirer of Ruskin: Thornely to KP, 25 June 1883 and 
9 July 1883, Pearson Papers 871/2.
hints of his trademark scorn, as inadequate. Pearson told Parker in April
that he had received “a sarcastic note” from Marx “which ends our con-
nection.” He evidently destroyed that communication, and his ﬁnal letter
to Marx indicates that the great man had criticized his translation skills.26
A purely speculative suggestion by J.B.S. Haldane, in a centenary address
on Pearson, introduced into the scholarship the idea that Pearson’s switch
in 1880 from Carl to Karl in the spelling of his ﬁrst name may have owed
to his admiration for Marx. This is now sometimes repeated as a fact, but
there is no contemporary evidence for the claim, and there are reasons to
doubt it.27 Still, his appreciation of Marx was real, especially in early 1881.
In his ﬁrst essay on socialism he called Marx “one of the most extraordinary
characters which this century has produced,” and listed him with Adolf
Held, Adolph Wagner, and Albert Schäfﬂe among the leading “Katheder-
Socialisten.” Marx, he said, was a powerful, logical thinker, though a failure
as a practical politician. Happily he was no anarchist; Pearson seems to have
suppressed Marx’s advocacy of revolution. Throughout the 1880s, he was
an advocate of Marx’s theory of surplus value, or “surplus labour” as he
called it. In 1883 he proposed a radical economic paper for the British As-
sociation meetings, then withdrew when they offered him only a half hour
to present what was intended as a withering critique of the English school.
“I am very sorry,” wrote John Neville Keynes, “that we shall not have your
paper on Socialism at the British Association. I should have been particu-
larly interested in hearing you demolish us poor economists.”28
But he never engaged in any detail with the theories of classical or neo-
classical political economy. Marx always stood for something quite general
in Pearson’s view, more signiﬁcant as a serious, scholarly socialism based on
extensive empirical studies than for any particular arguments. In Pearson’s
earliest papers on socialism he said nothing of theories of value, but simply
listed Marx with other Germans as an advocate of the “historical method”
of political economy rather than the “hypothetical method” of the inhu-

Pearson’s Progress • 79
29 KP to Oscar Browning, 16 Jan. 1880, Browning Papers, King’s College Archives.
British disdain for contemporary German literature was increasingly common in the 1870s
and after; see Schramm, “Englands Verhältnis zur deutschen Kultur,” 140.
30 Pearson’s library has been dispersed, but Helga (Pearson) Hacker has left notes on Pear-
son’s markings in his copies of four books by Hamerling: Ahasver in Rom (dated by Pearson
Jan. 1880), Der König von Sion (20 Jan. 1880), Die Sieben Todsünden (21 Feb. 1880), and As-
pasia (20 Aug. 1881). Later he lent these books to Elisabeth Cobb, who also marked them, and
this attribution to Pearson is my surmise. Pearson praised König in a letter to Parker, 3 March
1880. For his recollections, [Karl Pearson], “Wie steht’s mit der deutschen Cultur,” 34.
man Ricardo, the inhuman Mill, and “Manchesterdom.” Because it was
purely hypothetical, the English method might have nothing to do with ac-
tual economies. Historical research was thus in every way to be preferred.
The Marx whom Pearson admired was at one with Carlyle, Ruskin, and
Morris in the encouragement he gave to historical and empirical study.
THE POET AS SCHWÄRMER: ROBERT HAMERLING
Although Pearson undoubtedly read at least parts of Marx’s Capital dur-
ing that winter of 1879 to 1880 in Berlin, his letters and notebooks from
this period contain not a word about Marx’s theories. His great discovery
of the period was not in science or social theory, but in literature. On the
whole, he was unimpressed by the intellectual life of contemporary Ger-
many. He expressed this bitterly in a letter to Oscar Browning, whose ide-
alization of Berlin Geist he held responsible for his own disappointment.
The Germans were not intellectuals, but they simply piled up information,
and they were dirty and unhealthy to boot. Their wit was “coarse, inde-
cent & barbaric,” and modern literature by such authors as Gustav Frey-
tag lacked depth. He made one exception: “for poets the greatest I have
come across is Robert Hamerling,” though even he did not yet strike
Pearson as the equal of Tennyson.29
This letter, signiﬁcantly, was dated 16 January 1880, when Pearson was at
his most despondent due to lonesomeness and a toothache as well as his fail-
ure to ﬁnd interest or purpose in the law. He had just read Hamerling’s
Ahasver in Rom, the verse epic that made its author’s reputation. The
coarseness and uninhibited egoism of its leading character, Nero, could not
support much of the moral purpose or personal growth that Pearson de-
manded of literature, and perhaps the remarkable thing is that he went on
with Hamerling. A few days later he began Der König von Sion (the King of
Zion), a long book in unrhymed hexameter about the Anabaptists of Mün-
ster. Pearson began soon to praise it as “to my taste the most important
work written in Germany since Faust.” Thirty-ﬁve years later, his taste in this
respect had not altered, except that he was no longer so sure about Faust.30

80 • Chapter Four
31 See Klimm, Zwischen Epigonentum und Realismus.
32 “Holden Wahnsinn der Romantik;” Feodor Wehl, quoted in Robert Hamerling, Statio-
nen meiner Lebenspilgerschaft, Sämtliche Werke, vol. 13 (Leipzig: Hesse & Becker Verlag,
n.d.), 228.
Although it is difﬁcult, as always, to speak of Hamerling’s “inﬂuence” on
Pearson, these works clearly spoke to him. His passion play, his social essays,
his concern with women’s issues, and his evolving sensibility about nature
were all shaped through his engagement with Hamerling’s language, char-
acter depiction, and plot development. Hamerling offered stories of
beauty and pragmatism, temptation and purity, cynicism and faith, enthu-
siasm and renunciation—of ideals that Pearson came to identify as the
forces of history and as keywords for his own sense of historical mission.
Hamerling was an Austrian, born in a small town, and made his living
as a schoolteacher until he achieved popular literary success with Ahasver
in 1865. He prided himself on giving “realistic form to ideal content
(Gehalt), or, inversely, clothing realistic content (Inhalt) in ideal form.”
The realism of his form has been doubted. Ahasver portrays a mythical
world that is typically golden or shimmering, populated by Nereids, sirens,
and tritons, and the landscapes of the King of Zion are repeatedly de-
scribed as strange, portentous, or bewitched. Yet critics understood his
idealized verses concerning distant times as full of meaning for the con-
temporary world, and this was also how Pearson read them. They did not
construe Hamerling as providing light entertainment through fanciful
tales of magic kingdoms, but as a serious and demanding author whose
works would endure. His more favorable critics compared his work to
Shakespeare, Goethe, and Homer, and the last of these has at least some
plausibility, since his King of Zion relied heavily on the vocabulary of J. H.
Voss’s nineteenth-century translation of the Odyssey. He was antimaterial-
istic and consciously wrote against the bourgeois realism of his time. To-
ward the end of the century he became increasingly apolitical, and he
criticized the rising socialism as utopian, but he distanced himself from
German nationalism, especially the resurgent anti-Semitism. He nonethe-
less was appropriated by a völkisch interpretation, Hamerling als Erzieher,
for which he was celebrated during World War I. After that he was increas-
ingly forgotten.31 Although there were many translations of his works, in-
cluding an American one, he was almost unknown in Britain.
Hamerling was proud to have combined in his epics, as one critic said of
the King of Zion, a classical form with the “sweet madness of the roman-
tics.”32 He was, perhaps above all, the great literary champion of Schwär-
merei. In Ahasver, Nero embodies cynical hedonism, rejecting reason and
faith alike as obstacles to pure egoism and the absolutism of will. Any hint

Pearson’s Progress • 81
33 Robert Hamerling, Ahasver in Rom (1865), vol. 3 of Michael Maria Rabenlechner, ed.,
Hamerlings sämtliche Werke (Leipzig: Hesse & Becker Verlag, n.d.). In an “Epilog an die
Kritiker,” Hamerling explained, plausibly, that Ahasver is not really the ewige Jude but the
ewige Mensch. Plotting the career of the wandering Jew as the migrations of the world spirit was
already an established form in Hamerling’s day. Nero’s “Ist [Vernunft] mein eignes Ich? / O
nein, mein Wille nur, das bin ich selbst! / Unendliche Wollen ist unendlich Leben!” (118)
would seem to echo Schopenhauer, who became a celebrated philosopher after the collapse
of the 1848 revolutions. Hamerling denied any inﬂuence.
34 La Vopa, “The Philosopher and the Schwärmer”; Oxford English Dictionary, s.v.
“Schwärmer.”
of moral values, as among the Christians, brings forth from him the epi-
thet Schwärmer. At the end, with Rome in ruins, he ﬁnds himself in the
power of a Christenschwärmer, indeed a German one, who is capable of re-
nunciation and is able to forgive. The world, Nero realizes, is being re-
newed, even as his Roman empire falls apart. His suicide releases the spirit
of Ahasver, the eternal or wandering Jew, signifying here the “eternal 
human (ewige Mensch).” Ahasver’s migration to the North is the victory of
enthusiasts, of German Christianity, and the beginning of the next phase
of world history.33
The King of Zion, however, was unmistakably his greatest novel of
Schwärmerei and, not by coincidence, Pearson’s favorite. The historical
resonances of this German term are highly relevant here. It is cognate with
swarms, as of bees or perhaps moths. Martin Luther gave it its modern
meaning by applying it to radical enthusiasts and revolutionaries such as
Thomas Muentzer, leader of the peasant rebellion. By the same logic it
would apply perfectly to the Anabaptists. A Schwärmer was so conﬁdent of
divine inspiration and of unmediated knowledge of the “living word” that
he could dispense even with the Bible. Goethe’s Werther, who was dreamy
and ineffective, provided one model of the Schwärmer at the end of the
eighteenth century. The French Revolution, with its wild ambitions, gave
another. In Britain, Schwärmerei began to be used after the revolution as
more or less the opposite of English, thank God. To speak of a German
writer or philosopher as free from Schwärmerei was to hold his work suit-
able for domestic consumption.34 Throughout the history of this word,
opponents of radical enthusiasm in Britain or Germany might yet recog-
nize that passive indifference and dead legalism were also undesirable.
Hamerling deployed the concept as a positive ideal, not merely as critique.
By putting bold and memorable lines about Schwärmerei in the mouths of
his Anabaptist zealots in besieged Münster, he gave grounds for a defense
where the term was most vulnerable.
Was he seeking to redeem his own experience as a student in Vienna in
1848? He had been a Schwärmer then, writing in a newspaper about that

82 • Chapter Four
35 Hamerling, Stationen meiner Lebenspilgerschaft, 103–107, 113.
36 KP to Parker, 3 March 1880.
37 “Schwärmer benennen sie uns—ja! Schwärmer, das müssen wir werden; /Herrscht
nicht lange genug schon das nüchterne Wort und der Buchstab?” says the prophet Jan van
Mathys: Robert Hamerling, Der König von Sion: Epische Dichtung in zehn Gesängen, 6th ed.
(Hamburg: J. F. Richter, 1874), 16.
glorious year as the threshold of a new era, where subjection and raw force
would give way to a principle of reason, and above all to that fundamental
ingredient of human well-being, which alone gives value to freedom,
namely love. Hamerling understood from his own experiences in radical
Vienna the pressures of a siege, with its deceptions and false attacks, as its
enemies waited for the revolution to corrupt itself from within.35 He could
not, in his maturity, condone the absolute idealism and absolute insou-
ciance of this romantic quest, yet still he found much to admire in its pu-
rity of motive.
On these points, Pearson was in complete accord. He praised Hamer-
ling’s book as the account of a moral struggle:
It is the contest between “Fleisch” & “Geist” [ﬂesh and spirit] and again be-
tween the two and the union of them both in the aesthetic ideal of beauty. The
“Geist” takes the form of the rebirth of mankind in the Anabaptists of Münster.
Their king (Sion’s König) is Jan van Leyden & magniﬁcently portrayed in his
struggles to a higher ideal yet accompanied by sensuous beauty (Greek Ideal).
The “Fleisch” is represented by a somewhat demoniacal gypsy woman, the aes-
thetic ideal by a rebaptised nun, the contest of course lies between the two for
the king’s possession. The “Zeitgeist” is admirably given in these somewhat cu-
rious & tawdry yet generally historical personages. Language worthy of Shelley
as in fact Hamerling’s generally is.36
Hamerling’s epic was populated by historical characters and based on
scholarly study of the Münster uprising, though he took some clear liber-
ties with the plot. As Pearson explained, it revolves around a struggle be-
tween purity and sensuality, each embodied in the form of a woman. The
Anabaptists take on as their own the term of abuse invented by their ene-
mies, Schwärmer. Luther had led them out of Egypt, but it remained to
enter the promised land, and for this they must overcome the dry legalism
of the Word.37 Their zealotry takes extreme forms, including an orgy of
book burning, in which Bibles too are consigned to the ﬂames—although
the “king,” Jan van Leyden, speaking eloquently for art, entreats them to
save works of literature.
Not Schwärmerei, but impurity, brings about their downfall. The
prophet of Haarlem, Jan Mathys, warns that these are pregnant times: woe
if our hearts be impure. Toward the end, when catastrophe looms, this line

Pearson’s Progress • 83
38 “Groß ist die Zeit und gewaltig, doch Wehe, wenn unsere Herzen / Rein nicht sind:
wie sollen im riesigen Kampf wir bestehen?” Hamerling, König von Sion, 15 (erster Gesang),
258 (neunter Gesang). Pearson marked this passage and used it as the epigraph for The New
Werther.
39 Hamerling, König von Sion, 104–105. “Keuscher als Unschuld selbst, und frömmer als
selbst die Entsagung.” The couplet was marked in Pearson’s copy.
40 Klimm, Zwischen Epigonentum und Realismus, 190–196.
is repeated by Jan van Leyden.38 Purity did not require sensual denial. Jan
van Leyden, after hearing the beautiful nun Hilla’s story and falling in love
with her, tells her in rhyming verse of his heart’s longing for a realm where
earthly and heavenly happiness can be combined:
Immer verlangte das Herz mir, nach Kronen des Glückes zu greifen,
Immer erträumt ich ein Reich, wo sich Himmliches, Irdisches einten.
[Ever my heart must desire the crown of delight to reach after,
Ever imagines a realm where the earthly with heaven united.]
She is to be his Minne, his Dulcinea, “as proper as innocence itself, and more
pious even than renunciation.”39 They exchange passionate kisses, and there-
after, as a reminder, he will keep on his breast the little rose she gives him. But
the joys of love are not to be confused with wantonness. The dark gypsy
temptress Divara, who wants to be queen, personiﬁes the forces that bring
down the new Jerusalem. With support from the crowd, she presses for
polygamy, and despite the reminder of Hilla’s Röslein, Jan is sorely tempted.
Finally, his moral resolve is brought down by demagogy. His reluctance to
embrace the principle of plural wives brings from the rabble-rouser
Krechtling the signiﬁcant accusation of Schwärmer. Krechtling, free of all ide-
alism, invokes considerations of utility, the need for population increase, in
defense of polygamy. Cold sober reason is supported by the concupiscence of
the unattached women. Jan succumbs, though not without regrets, to these
dark forces, and Münster sinks rapidly into corruption and decay. The col-
lapse of Zion was not, in Hamerling’s poetic retelling, a military defeat by
forces of emperor and bishop, but a moral collapse from within.40
Pearson’s response to the sensual aspect of Hamerling’s writing, devel-
oped still more explicitly in his subsequent Aspasia, is particularly relevant
to the topic of chapter 6, on women and the woman question. Like Jan van
Leyden, he too was seeking a reconciliation of beauty and passion with
an earthly if not a heavenly faith, the moral and intellectual demands of 
science. Hamerling also provided material and inspiration for Pearson’s 
social and historical vision. Pearson endorsed wholeheartedly, and with
still less irony than the poet, the necessary role of enthusiasm in a campaign
of social reconstruction. He translated Hamerling’s tragic story into a pos-
itive vision of rapturous Schwärmerei guided by reason, of religious values

84 • Chapter Four
41 KP to Parker, 27 July 1880 and 5 Sept. 1880.
42 KP to Conway, 17 April 1881.
that could be re-created and advanced by science. In his endorsement of
enthusiasm, Pearson reiterated his contempt for a purely utilitarian ethic.
The faith he developed during these years raised up impartial objectivity
not as cool value-neutrality, but as a rational enthusiasm. Science could
bring about the union of enthusiasm and renunciation, Schwärmerei and
Entsagung.
LIFE AS A PASSION PLAY
By the time Pearson left Berlin, in March 1880, he was taking a more fa-
vorable view of Germany again, even musing about a “genteel appoint-
ment” in Berlin for a few years. He was, in any case, deeply dissatisﬁed
with the law and would eagerly have taken a physics post had one been of-
fered. Meanwhile he decided to take rooms at King’s College for the sum-
mer and fall. He hoped for a fellowship, which indeed soon came through,
providing support for three years at a modest level. At Cambridge, after
The New Werther was out of his hands, he began reading in earnest for the
bar. Soon he was disgusted, and again bruiting a change of course: “There
seems no order, no method, only a historical hotch-pot to be made out of
Eng. Law. I hate it profoundly. . . . Most of my time given to absolutely
useless ‘Mittelhochdeutsch’ & the rest to grumbling.”
The medieval German was, however, for a purpose, and soon he was en-
tranced by it. He had identiﬁed twelfth-century Germany as a “heroic pe-
riod,” one that he preferred to Greek antiquity because he possessed a
“northern actional & not a southern restful spirit.” “Yes, old fellow, away
with German literature of this later day. These dark old ﬁgures are like
Rembrandt wrapped in a magic mystery which even exceeds the Greek re-
pose & beauty.”41 By April 1881, at the latest, he was reading systemati-
cally on passion plays, having acquired some German books on the
subject. “I shall devote my time to the religious productions of German
literature before 1300,” he explained in a letter written on Easter Day. “I
believe there is much hidden in the early ‘Mystiker,’ the root of all mod-
ern Christian philosophical idealism.”42
He applied in the fall of 1880 to lecture for Cambridge Extension, in
part because of ﬁnancial need, although he feared he could not be ready in
time to meet their scheduling demands. “Visions also of the intelligent
working man on Sunday evenings hanging on my ‘atheistical and inﬁdel’
oratory have been raised.” Perhaps it was discouragement at the reception
of hisNew Werther that led him on 23 November to declare once more his

Pearson’s Progress • 85
43 KP to Parker, 5 Sept. 1880 and 9 Nov. 1880; KP to Conway, undated Dec. 1880; 
Oscar Browning to KP, 7 Oct. 1879, Pearson Papers 645/4. He had breakfast with Brown-
ing on 12 November 1879.
44 KP to Parker, 30 Nov. 1880.
45 KP to Parker, 17 Sept. 1879.
46 Edward V. Arnold to KP, 24 March 1882, Pearson Papers 628/2.
unwavering resolution to sacriﬁce these intellectual dalliances and devote
himself wholly to law. Yet he drew back almost instantly from what Brown-
ing called “the clutches of the remorseless bar.”43 Only a week later, he an-
nounced a “life project” to ﬁll his spare time as a barrister. It was to be a
“19th century ‘Passionspiel’ or ‘Mystery.’” In outline, it was to be as fol-
lows: “The Trinity. A Mystery. Part I The All-father. Obedience or Duty.
II The Son. Love. III The Holy Ghost. Thought or Reason.” Part I re-
mained nebulous in conception, but he attributed the inspiration for parts
II and III to Goethe’s Poetry and Truth and to Spinoza, respectively. He
would begin with part II, seeking to separate “as far as possible Jesus the
man from the legendary God-myth.”44
He had witnessed a passion play the year before, but its effect on
him was not altogether uplifting. “We saw a Passion Play in the Schwarz-
wald & were much amused, the costumes were very good but the ass! The
Lord’s supper after Leonardo da Vinci was a success, though the peasants
hardly appreciated it I think.”45 Most likely his readings on twelfth-
century Germany stimulated him to attribute increased signiﬁcance to this
cultural form (his 1883 course of lectures on passion plays is discussed in
the next chapter). Hamerling had something to do with this interest also,
as we learn from a lecture Pearson gave in Cambridge on 30 April 1882.
The lecture was part of a series of conferences on “Moral Teachers of the
Present Day,” organized by Edward V. Arnold. Invited to present some-
thing on philosophy in modern-day Germany, preferably Schopenhauer,
he offered Hamerling. This occasioned a certain disquiet: “I am afraid we
know very little of Hamerling, and from what I can gather here I feel some
alarm at the subject. While . . . admitting the necessity of discussion (on
occasions) of questions of sensual and sexual morality, I do not think it
would be wise to raise any such discussion at one of our meetings, which
are public in character, and attended by women in the very difﬁcult posi-
tion of Newnham students.”46
Pearson, the most resolute of men, was not deterred. Hamerling’s
work, he explained to this mixed audience, was about the relation between
“Sense pleasure and Soul-joy.” The King of Zion provided a perspective
from the Christian standpoint, with Jan van Leyden illustrating “the value
of the enthusiast & his conversion of life into a Passion Play.” This meant
that virtue was to be “made one with pleasure.” Jan’s project had to fail,
he explained, because it sought change through revolution rather than

86 • Chapter Four
47 KP, “Lecture on Robert Hamerling” for “The Cambridge Religious Conferences,”
Pearson Papers 47/2.
48 E. Johnson to KP, beginning 9 Dec. 1881, Pearson Papers 730/2; Robert Hamerling
to KP, 11 July 1882. Pearson glued Hamerling’s letter into his copy of Ahasver in Rom,
which I have not traced, but Helga Hacker’s transcription may be found in Hacker Papers,
Box 10.
49 Edward V. Arnold in Cambridge Review, 3 (7 June 1882), transcript in Hacker Papers,
Box 10.
50 I introduce Hamerling’s Aspasia in chapter 6.
51 Fanny P to KP, undated, summer 1881; Parker to KP, 4 July and 20 July 1881.
evolution. But much of the responsibility lay on Divara the “Demon-
Wife,” who corrupted this noble ambition by preaching a pure gospel of
sense and by cynically dismissing all “higher striving” as vain.47
Just a few days after his lecture, Pearson’s passion play was issued anony-
mously by the Cambridge publisher E. Johnson. It was Part II of his grand
scheme, subtitled The Son; or, Victory of Love. Pearson had paid about £30
for the printing of three hundred copies, but the publisher, unwisely as it
happened, agreed to take his own fees from sales. Pearson sent a copy of
the book with his lecture outline to Hamerling in Graz, who responded
with praise for the poetic language and blessed it as “pervaded by the Ger-
man spirit (beseelt mit dem deutschen Geist).”48 Hamerling appears also to
have arranged a ﬂattering German review.
Edward Arnold assessed the volume for the Cambridge Review. Having
had occasion to learn something of Pearson’s intellectual formation, he
observed that the character Mary Magdalene, who preached the gospel of
love “in its sensuous form,” was “a kind of Jewish Aspasia.”49 This referred
to Pericles’s concubine, but really to the altogether seductive heroine in
the prose work by Hamerling that bore her name, his only book that had
been translated into (American) English.50 Arnold’s comments were very
much on the mark. Pearson believed that a passion play for the nineteenth
century had to address the crucial matter of sensuality.
It is difﬁcult to imagine, especially after the experience of The New
Werther, that he could have expected his anonymity to be preserved. His
sensitivity about the book is easier to comprehend. He was once more try-
ing his hand at poetry, in spite of the discouraging results thus far, and the
preliminary reactions to this attempt were no more promising. His
mother, responding to early chapters, feared that it was leading to a se-
duction of Jesus and hoped for a triumph over baser nature. “I cannot but
feel some great sorrow has cast its shadow over your life making you write
so morbidly & even bitterly of my sex.” Robert Parker expressed worries
about the verse, and about the consuming sensuality of Mary Magdalene,
which would never by itself have attracted such a man as Jesus. He also
wondered if Pearson was right to suppose that woman has less idealizing
power than man.51

Pearson’s Progress • 87
52 C. Kegan Paul, Memories (London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1899), esp.
364–365; KP to Parker, 24 Oct. 1881.
53 [Pearson], The Trinity: UK: v. That he may have defended the book by privileging
thought over form is suggested by a letter of his friend Robert Blanchard Rafﬂes, 16 Oct. 1882,
Pearson Papers 823/5. Rafﬂes, then a teacher of Shakespeare to schoolboys, was unimpressed.
A still more severe critique came from Charles Kegan Paul, who had
published Pearson’s New Werther. Kegan Paul was a King’s graduate from
an earlier generation and a lapsed English clergyman turned Comtean pos-
itivist, whose spiritual odyssey led by 1890 to his acceptance of Catholi-
cism. His assessment, as Pearson summarized, was “crushing, absolutely
damning.” The verse he pronounced rough and often prosaic. Particularly
unfortunate were the short octo-syllabic lines, which really required the
talent of a Goethe or a Matthew Arnold. He doubted the possibility of so
strong a sexual impulse in women as Pearson had bestowed on the Mag-
dalene, and also the propriety of publishing such material, especially in
connection with Jesus. It was not only wrong, but worse, it was tasteless;
“it would blow any publisher & author into the air.” Finally, he con-
demned its inaccuracy as history. The characters, such as his cobblers and
clowns, would have been impossible in the time and place of Jesus, even
apart from their nineteenth-century slang. A harlot would have gone
veiled, and would not talk to working people in the street. Pearson was not
quite convinced by all of this. Weren’t Shakespeare’s characters so true to
life because he gave form to them “in the language of his own day?” And
hadn’t many poets, including Hamerling, Swinburne, Morris, Goethe,
and even Tennyson, presented sexuality more or less openly. “If he had
read König von Sion, he would have seen more what I mean by the prob-
lem & its connection even with a man like Christ.”52
Although Pearson had plausible replies to most of the objections, he
was crushed by so severe a critique from this learned publisher, especially
as it coincided with, and helped to bring on, another crisis regarding his
loathing of the law and his failure to settle on a profession. A more perti-
nent question than why he published anonymously is why he put himself
to the expense and risk of publishing this work at all. A partial answer is
that he believed deeply in the ideas he was expressing and hoped these
could compensate for the imperfections of poetic form. This was how he
justiﬁed the book in his foreword. Writing of himself in the third person,
he explained that on rereading the book, “full of doubt, he seemed half
conscious of an element of truth therein.” There was also, however, a clear
element of self-revelation. The apologia continues: “. . . for he had written
them earnestly,—and Earnestness and Truth are twin sisters, if they be not
two names for the only daughter of God.”53
The book was, after all, intensely personal, and it calls out to be read as
an effort to validate his groping and indecision of the previous three

88 • Chapter Four
54 Passion-Play, v.
55 Conway to KP, 22 June 1882.
56 Passion-Play, 12. Ernest Renan, The Life of Jesus (1863; Garden City, NY: Dolphin
Books, n.d.), 113, 132, 236, 273. Another inﬂuential naturalistic account of the life of Jesus,
also known to Pearson, was published anonymously by the Cambridge historian John Robert
Seeley: Ecce Homo (Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1866).
years—indeed his life—by ﬁnding in his struggles a lesson of transcendent
signiﬁcance. As before, Pearson’s preferred genre for the presentation of
self was ﬁction. Here the form was not autobiographical, and so he could
afﬁrm, rather than disguise, his utter sincerity. He did, however, undertake
to forestall the doubters by anticipating their superﬁcial condemnation.
“The critic, turning over the uncut pages, will with unerring judgment
settle the character of this book off-hand: ‘wanting in all historic spirit;—
the lines limp, being rather prose than verse;—the subject is one far too
close to most men’s hearts to be thus treated;—the writer is evidently cal-
low both in life and thought.’”54 With his disclaimer, according to a close
friend who knew of the project throughout its maturation, he gave himself
away. “Don’t expect to pass undiscovered. I will and have been as silent as
Death but the ﬁrst man that reads the preface will know who wrote the
book—I mean the ﬁrst of your Cambridge friends.”55 Indeed, the author
was found out almost immediately.
The play begins with a “Prologue in Chaos,” narrated by a “Spirit of
Negation” and “demons” of lust, ambition, and doubt, in a form modeled
on Goethe’s Faust. The Jesus of the play is to be tempted by these three
forces to abandon his great mission. It is crucial that Jesus be thoroughly
human, even if he will not for many centuries be recognized as such, so
that, as the fable of his divine paternity dissolves, he can stand for “man’s
divinity.” This human Christ was informed by such naturalistic biographi-
cal accounts as that by Ernest Renan, one of Pearson’s favorite authors,
whose Jesus had renounced politics, had taught a religion of the heart
rather than one of formal observances, and had been able to achieve a
“sweet union of ideas” with women.56 Pearson’s Jesus, however, nurtured
ideals and anxieties modeled most closely on those of the author himself.
His life was plagued for many years by indirection, testing the faith of all
but his mother. His self-doubts, identiﬁed by the three demons, form the
principal topic of the text.
Jesus is tempted least by the demon of ambition, represented unsympa-
thetically by Judas, who gives up in frustration when Jesus refuses to lead
the revolution that will bring earthly power. In the language of Pearson’s
ethical-religious writings, Judas represents the “enthusiasm of the market-
place,” which prefers to act precipitously rather than to think. One of the
pharisees, in a moment of wisdom, observes that the revolutionary poten-
tial of the “proletariat” is no creation of a heroic leader but the conse-

Pearson’s Progress • 89
57 Passion-Plays, 99, 102, 168, 73–74, 50, 91.
58 Ibid., 18, 30, 38, 153, 201.
59 Ibid., 22, 36. “Intellectual love” is an allusion to Spinoza.
quence of “a fever in the age.” Jesus refuses to act as demagogue but is al-
ways an intellectual, exalting “mental work” as “God’s vocation.” He
prays to a philosophical, Spinozistic God, who “Through endless time
dost contemplate/Thine own perfection in the Universe.”57
Self-doubt is represented by a cobbler, Nathan, whose crusty cynicism
was the result of disappointment in love. Nathan is the anti-Schwärmer,
who scoffs at the spirit of enthusiasm even as Jesus celebrates it. He will
have nothing of the intellectual life, nor can he credit the possibility of
achieving great things on earth. He supposes that at bottom all men are
egoists. While the maelstrom swirls around him, he stays in his shop and
tends to his hammer. At the scene of the cruciﬁxion, however, he at last is
moved by this man Jesus to recover his faith in the possibility of love.58
Love, indeed, is the most urgent problem of this book. The demon of
lust is represented in the play by Mary Magdalene, who in the time of the
play is more or less a harlot. She wants nothing of marriage, insisting that
love must be free. She is bored with the common run of lovers and is de-
lighted by the challenge of this holy Jesus.
These are my weapons, naught but womanhood,
Yet armed with these a woman rules the world;
Fight must mean victory, and each fresh foe
Must fall as Adam fell of old.
I’ll test this prophet’s intellectual love. . . .
I’ll teach him life is brief, that youth
Is briefer still, and briefest joy,
So that its moments must in time be seized.59
Jesus, the holy one, should be made a woman’s toy. Yet Magdalene soon
proves herself no mere temptress, but a needed complement to the puri-
tanical Jesus. The pure love he preaches at the beginning has no room for
the sexual, which, indeed, he dreads. He fears there may be truth in the
skeptical position that at bottom, love, even his love, is no more than sen-
suality. When she persuades him to meet her privately, she thinks her vic-
tory is gained. Instead, he brings her around to faith in his higher love.
At the same time, she vindicates the sensual to him. “Poor prophet
man!” she tells him: “Acting an ideal, while the soul’s consumed / By the
same passion as the common herd’s.” As she is redeemed by his exalted
ideals, so she rescues him from the torture of desire denied. These earthly
needs, she explains—to eat, to drink, to sleep—must be fulﬁlled, if one is
to think of higher things. Although we might infer from Kegan Paul’s

90 • Chapter Four
60 Ibid., 59–60, 65–66, 120, 201; last lines spoken by Nathan.
comments that there was a scene of consummation in an early draft, there
is none in the printed version. Still, Jesus and Mary Magdalene come to
epitomize a union of spiritual and sensual love, even if the corporeal ap-
pears principally as a means to a higher end. It is to be achieved on Earth.
In the concluding couplet, the cruciﬁxion is made symbolic:
O men! The god in him ye crucify!
Your sons the man in him may deify!60
Pearson’s passion play thus turned the religious idiom back in the end
to worldly concerns, to social problems of his day as well as to personal
anxieties about the moral life. The concerns about sexuality, purity, and
friendship between the sexes, expressed here in the guise of ﬁction, would
move Pearson three years later to form his “Men and Women’s Club.” His
admiration of Hamerling’s historical ﬁction and his authorship of a mod-
ern passion play reveal his passionate commitment to the union of renun-
ciation and enthusiasm, a secular teleology of social activism that he
wanted more and more to ground in an ethic of science. But what were
the proper limits of self-denial? As a personal fantasy, his passion play rec-
onciled the higher calling of the moral life with joyous sensual experience.
In his life, and in his stern view of science, the problem of detachment was
not so easily solved.
The play is also about applying lessons from study of medieval culture to
the needs of the present. This work drew from his earliest serious histori-
cal research and gave direction to his subsequent efforts. It was emblem-
atic of the distinctive voice and original arguments he would cultivate in
researches spanning most of the decade of the 1880s. The need was to res-
cue faith and ritual from the degradation of modern economic material-
ism, while expanding the role of science as a foundation of social morality
and political justice. At the same time, man must be released from the ego-
ism of a capitalist economy and of a sexual system that degraded women.
This seemed a worthy calling for a Schwärmer and renunciant.

C H A P T E R  F I V E
Cultural Historian in a Political Age
That it is impossible to sympathize with dogmatic faith 
breaking into the intolerance of ignorance is in the nineteenth
century a truism; but there is an historical sympathy which
recognizes that a positive evil of the present may have been a
great formative force in the past, and, as such, a valuable factor
in human development.
—Karl Pearson in The Athenaeum, 1885
LATE IN LIFE, in his study of Galton, Pearson would claim that biography
was the richest form of history. But he also was drawn to history as biog-
raphy, the development of Germanic peoples as the formation of his own
culture. The progress of any people possesses a logic of its own, a conti-
nuity that could rarely be broken by forces from outside, and its possibili-
ties for the future were contained within its own past. In the German
Middle Ages he found a background of popular socialism, sustained by
folk rituals and linked to the Catholic faith, which stood in many ways as a
model for what might be again. The intermediate stage of capitalist indi-
vidualism was necessary but unfortunate, and Martin Luther’s intolerant
dogmatism had made it much worse than it might have been. Pearson was
deeply historicist in his faith that institutions and beliefs now retrograde
were once fruitful and progressive, and should be understood on their
own terms. Such comprehension would then support a wiser engagement
with contemporary issues and ideas, in an era that was pregnant, he sup-
posed, with a new socialism based on science. He organized historical
study into a distinctive program of knowledge and reform, of social and
personal regeneration.
From his return to England in 1880 until he was appointed professor of
applied mathematics at University College London in June 1884, Pear-
son’s research interests were divided between mathematical physics and
cultural history. Indeed, at the very time his permanent appointment ﬁ-
nally came through, he was also under serious consideration for a posi-
tion as lecturer in German literature and history at Cambridge, the ﬁeld
for which he was just then helping to design a syllabus. In May he had
told Henry Bradshaw of King’s College, alluding to the German position,

92 • Chapter Five
1 KP to Henry Bradshaw, 12 May 1884 and 16 May 1884, King’s College Archives; KP
to Conway, 20 May 1886.
2 Karl Pearson, “Preface” to Ethic of Freethought, 5.
3 Pearson, “Socialism and Sex” (1887), in Ethic of Freethought, 430.
of his intention to “accept any post established (supposing the tripos
scheme carried) which I should get a chance of.” Seemingly he withdrew
his application at the last minute for fear that the electors at University
College, where he was teaching in a replacement position, might get wind
of it and decide that he was still uncertain of his commitment to mathe-
matics. His choice owed as much to career considerations as to his intel-
lectual commitments, and two years later he indicated again that he might
sacriﬁce some income for the sake of his “love of German bibliography”
if offered a suitable post. For years afterwards he continued to write and
publish historical essays involving very serious study. Only with his turn
to statistics in the early 1890s was history reduced deﬁnitively to an avo-
cation for him.1
In retrospect, to those who know how Pearson’s career turned out, the
idea that he might have become a historian of medieval and Reformation
Germany may seem risible. But this is mistaken. His engagement with his
historical subject matter was passionate, and his writings were deeply re-
searched and startlingly original. His historical sensitivity and erudition
show through even much later in his scientiﬁc reviews and essays. I would
put my point more strongly: if we put aside what we know about his sub-
sequent career in statistics and assess his work in mathematical physics
through 1884 against his historical essays, it appears that the man was a
born historian.
Pearson insisted that his immensely disparate writings of the 1880s were
held together by a “unity of purpose and a similarity of treatment.”2 “The
future Darwin of the history of civilization will probably recognize that his
subject falls into two great divisions—the history of sex and the history of
possession, into the changes in sex-relationship and the changes in the
ownership of wealth.”3 This is, broadly, the division between the next
chapter and this one, although in many respects the topics run together.
The interest of these writings goes well beyond the ﬁeld of history, whose
Darwin he gave up hope of becoming, and extends to his statistical pro-
gram. For the importance of Pearson’s statistical efforts can in no way be
reduced to the power and originality of his mathematics. His competence
in mathematics was backed up with immense learning and a bold concep-
tion of natural science, philosophy, and history. Above all, he was a man
with a vision of the role that his new ﬁeld of applied mathematics could
play in a reconstructed world. He wanted to tame the impulse to individ-

Cultural Historian • 93
ualistic egoism, to deﬁne a social order in which scientists and scholars,
workers of the head, could advance the interests of a larger society, mainly
those who worked with their hands. He would strive, gradually, to replace
the chaos of capitalistic competition with an efﬁcient, organized, and
moral order under the rational administration of the State. Cultural his-
tory provided the idiom within which he ﬁrst emphasized the primacy of
the collective over the individual
To be sure, his ambitions for science in the new world of statistics did
not simply follow from the social vision implied by his historical writings.
He was perpetually in dialogue with himself and drew inspiration from a
startling range of sources, some already inﬂuential, and some virtually un-
known. As autobiographer and as historian, he wanted to believe that
every stage of life, however strange, was incorporated into the next phase
of progress. Although he often spoke as if he were deﬁning the one true
way, and although he was much more a synthesizer than a bricoleur, there
remained deep tensions in his social and scientiﬁc program. No one could
be expected to establish an enduring unity of idealist philosophy, cultural
history, education and the molding of character, the woman question,
ether physics, biological evolution, mathematical statistics, and state so-
cialism. What Pearson did was to gather up and refashion the contradic-
tions. The statistical and eugenic program of his maturity was both a
fulﬁllment and a rejection of the moral vision worked out through his en-
gagement with history.
HISTORICAL CHOICES
King’s College already stood for a historical school when Oscar Browning
returned there, one year after Pearson arrived as an undergraduate. It was
identiﬁed at ﬁrst with the name of George Prothero. Although Browning
and Prothero did not get along, the reputation of the college grew in
subsequent decades. Pearson’s friend Robert Somervell, who took honors
in history and later pursued it as a profession, recalled Prothero as a pain-
staking lecturer who aimed mainly to prepare students for examinations. Be-
ing a new subject, he continued, modern history was taught by men “who
were anxious to give it a ‘scientiﬁc’ aspect. . . . We almost got the impres-
sion that accurate and well founded statements of facts, logically put to-
gether, was the ideal of historical writing.” Indeed, the new English
Historical Review announced in 1886 that “the object of history is to dis-
cover and set forth facts.” Of the Cambridge Modern History, in which
Prothero took a leading role, Somervell recalled that some sections “are
just fair specimens of what can be done by the outpouring of well ﬁlled

94 • Chapter Five
4 Somervell, Autobiography, 66–67; Harvie, Lights of Liberalism, 44. Somervell entered
King’s in 1878 at the age of twenty-seven. In a letter he called Pearson “the ﬁrst friend I
made at Cambridge.” Somervell to KP, 28 Dec. 1882, Pearson Papers 859/2.
5 KP to Oscar Browning, 3 Oct. 1879, King’s College Archives. He was not alone in his
disdain. Somervell, Autobiography, 70, reports declining an invitation to join the Apostles, as
did his friend Arthur Clough. Their assessments provide a worthwhile corrective to the im-
mense self-importance of this little club, as it shines through in the scholarship. On Brown-
ing and the Apostles, see Lubenow, Cambridge Apostles, 287–303; Levy, Moore: G. E. Moore
and the Cambridge Apostles, 79–80.
6 Browning, Memories, passim. The Oberammergau passion play is described in John
Murray, A Handbook for Travelers in South Germany and Austria, 14th ed. (London: John
Murray, 1881), 154, as “elaborately prepared and creditably executed.”
7 (Twain said Wagner’s music is better than it sounds.) Frank Taussig to KP, 30 Dec.
1879, Pearson Papers 865/5. On Pearson and Wagner, see Fanny P to KP, undated May
1876 (she hopes they can see Lohengrin and Tannhäuser); KP to his sister Amy Pearson
(later Hatton), 21 Dec. 1879, after hearing Tannhäuser, “which strange to say I enjoyed”;
KP to Fanny, 12 July 1881, on experiencing “Wagner’s music, black bread, black beer, and
cheese” at the Heidelberg Schloss; also G. W. Prothero to KP, 9 June (1880?), Pearson Pa-
pers 821, on Pearson’s appreciation of the Meistersinger. Later, Pearson advised William
Archer, a prominent ﬁgure in British theater, on Tannhäuser, most likely on the folkloric as-
pects; see Archer to KP, 20 May 1883, Pearson Papers 628/1. A letter from de Castella to
KP, 6 March 1882, Pearson Papers 654, implies that he then had plans to experience the
Ring cycle in Bayreuth.
note-books.”4 Pearson’s ideal of historical science was irreconcilable with
this one.
Browning was still less suitable as an intellectual model than Prothero.
His autobiography reveals a consummate gadﬂy and dilettante. He col-
lected famous people, boasting of friendships with Walter Pater, George
Eliot, Lord Tennyson, Robert Browning (no relative), Hermann von
Helmholtz, Emil du Bois-Reymond, John Henry Newman, Lord Acton,
and Oscar Wilde. He was particularly proud of his distinguished students,
among whom he numbered Pearson as well as George Curzon and Gerald
Balfour. Formerly a Cambridge Apostle, as a don he organized activities
for the Apostles, contributing, as Pearson sweetly put it, to the “plentiful
supply of their annual fodder of hashed metaphysics & religion.”5 He trav-
eled in style on the Continent almost every summer, taking in scenery, art,
and music, and favoring just those locations that drew fashionable En-
glishmen. He was at Oberammergau with Curzon in 1880, and as a pa-
tron of the Wagner Society he got to attend the ﬁrst performances at
Bayreuth.6 Pearson’s cultural reﬁnement, incidentally, seems not to have
extended to music, on account of what Frank Taussig called his “stupid
English ears,” but in these years he was something of a Wagner
Schwärmer, thereby lending indirect support to Mark Twain’s assessment
of the great composer.7
Browning’s publications ranged widely over countries and periods. It
was often criticized as superﬁcial, and as perilously close to the line sepa-

Cultural Historian • 95
8 Browning, Memories, 37.
rating legitimate scholarship from plagiarism. He was well aware of these
rumors. “Then, as now, at Cambridge, it was not so much the knowledge
of any particular subject that gave a man a reputation as the certainty of his
ignorance of other subjects. My notorious polymathy always prevented me
from being considered a scholar.”8 Pearson upbraided him in letters for po-
litical and scholarly failings and exchanged pleasantries with friends about
the likeness of Browning’s physical corpulence to the “all-roundishness” of
his intellect. Pearson could not have approved of Browning’s preoccupa-
tion with politics in his historical writings. All this was compounded be-
cause he saw in Browning’s dilettantism a distorted, or rather inﬂated,
image of his own ever-shifting interests.
As Browning sank in his esteem, his attachment to Henry Bradshaw be-
came increasingly close. Bradshaw is among the more enigmatic ﬁgures in
this account. At his death in 1886, Pearson expressed immense affection
for the man, calling him the closest friend he had ever had. He continued
to speak this way of Bradshaw to the end of his own life, ranking him
alongside the biologist Weldon as a source of inspiration and intellectual
soulmate. Yet their correspondence, both sides of which survive, is mod-
est in volume and mostly rather perfunctory, and Pearson’s rare mention
of Bradshaw in letters to family and friends contrasts with his frequent if
somewhat derisive references to Browning. Their relationship was based
primarily on personal contact, and seemingly became a close one during
Pearson’s residence at King’s College after his return from Berlin. Pearson
traveled often to Cambridge until 1886, and afterwards almost never.
Bradshaw was something of a father ﬁgure for him, a guide and counselor
during these years of turmoil and uncertainty.
Born in 1831, Bradshaw was descended partly from Quakers, but his fa-
ther’s marriage outside the faith meant expulsion, and he was raised in the
Church of England. He had been tempted for a time by Tractarianism and
ended up a moderate High Churchman, though in politics he was an ad-
vanced liberal. An Etonian, he spent most of his life at King’s, and began
working to reform it in the 1850s. As University Librarian at Cambridge
he developed immense erudition about early modern publishing, so that
he could, for example, trace the circulation of woodcuts and typefaces
from visual evidence alone. His publications were few and tightly focused.
Mostly he gave his knowledge away to undergraduates and other library
users. Among those with whom he worked most closely was Pearson’s
close friend William Martin Conway, a Trinity student, who was sent off
on expeditions to the Continent in search of images, and in the end made
his career as an art dealer and historian. By the 1880s Bradshaw was
beloved among King’s undergraduates. He admired Pearson as one of
those outstanding men “who go at truth because they can’t help it,” and

96 • Chapter Five
9 Prothero, Memoir of Henry Bradshaw, esp. his letters to an unnamed correspondent
(KP), 293–295; Bradshaw to KP, 26 Sept. 1882, Pearson Papers 642; Rothblatt, Revolution
of the Dons, 224–227; Conway, Episodes, 46–48; Evans, The Conways, 59–60; Charles Wald-
stein to KP, late Feb. 1886.
10 Pearson obituary notices on Henry Bradshaw in The Athenaeum, 20 Feb. 1886,
262–263; The Academy, 29 (27 Feb. 1886), 147–149; Pearson review of Prothero, Memoir
of Henry Bradshaw in The Academy, 35 (2 Feb. 1889), 68–70; Pearson review of Collected
Papers of Henry Bradshaw, The Athenaeum, July–Dec. 1889, 852–854; Pearson, Die Fronica.
Pearson’s letters to Bradshaw in King’s College Archives and Pearson Papers 909/3 reveal
very little of their friendship.
11 Speeches at a Dinner.
who could make the future of the college. In response to Pearson’s inces-
sant self-doubts, Bradshaw praised his accomplishments and encouraged
him to continue with both mathematics and old German.9
Bradshaw was at the center of a small circle of Cambridge historians
who sought to write cultural history rather than to deﬁne their subject
matter as politics. Pearson lauded his program for the history of publish-
ing because it would make the region or district, and not the book, the
main unit of scholarship. That way the history of books could be inte-
grated with a broader study of regional peculiarities and harmonies, the
history of a people. Bradshaw, according to Pearson, called this a natural
historical method, by analogy to the biological study of varieties and
species. Despite Pearson’s professed indebtedness, there is only the slight-
est resemblance between Bradshaw’s scholarly production and his own.
That similarity is most evident in the book Pearson dedicated to Bradshaw
after his death, on the image of Christ, and particularly the veil of Veron-
ica, in the Middle Ages. There Pearson stayed very close to the details, the
transmission of verses and images from text to text.10 Pearson’s command
of sources on this level was otherwise apparent mainly in his critical re-
views of scholarship. Bradshaw had sometimes visited Pearson at his rooms
in London and accompanied him to the British Museum; “he showed me
what the essentials of true workmanship must be.”11 But the speciﬁc in-
spiration for Pearson’s understanding of the Reformation came primarily
from German scholarship.
LECTURES ON CULTURAL HISTORY
Although cultural history was not quite unknown in England, its reso-
nances in the late nineteenth century were overwhelmingly German, and
Pearson often used the German term Kulturgeschichte rather than its En-
glish equivalent. Its most famous practitioner, in retrospect, was Jakob
Burckhardt in Basel, who was interested in the art and literature of elites.

Cultural Historian • 97
12 Gilbert, History: Politics or Culture?, 46–48, 83–87; Chickering, Karl Lamprecht,
87–89, 213–214.
13 Pearson review of Verres, Luther in Athenaeum, July–Dec. 1884, 729–730.
More typically, however, cultural history focused on the customs and prac-
tices of the common people. In the 1840s, Karl Dietrich Hüllmann argued
for a new approach to history that would encompass “the whole of hu-
manity.” He was particularly concerned with the urban life of the German
folk, and wrote on such topics as guilds, festivals, dress, family life, drink,
and crime. As a ﬁeld, cultural history had a modest place in the universi-
ties. But it subsisted there in the shadow of those histories of politics and
the state that conformed to the Rankean model. Cultural history was often
written for a more popular audience or as a challenge to the primacy of the
state. It tended to conservative skepticism of political and bureaucratic
centralization and was associated, though not infallibly, with Catholicism.
In the 1890s, Karl Lamprecht would scandalize the German historical es-
tablishment by linking cultural history to a record of progress through
stages, following an economic logic and a broadly Darwinian model of
competition among social forms.12
Lamprecht was not quite alone. Pearson, whose interest in history grew
up along with his commitment to socialism and Darwinism, developed his
program of scientiﬁc cultural history before anyone had heard of Lamp-
recht. He understood a properly scientiﬁc perspective to mean the recog-
nition of general historical causes. The individual was by no means passive,
but he saw great individuals as formed through a confrontation with their
age, and as limited by its possibilities. Serious historical students, he wrote,
“sighed in silence over Carlyle’s ‘Hero-Worship.’”13 Pearson regarded po-
litical history as mostly superﬁcial. The sources of progress were of a dif-
ferent order, primarily economic and intellectual. For the historical era
with which he was principally concerned, the Reformation, this meant rec-
ognizing the centrality of religion. Even much later as an extreme eugeni-
cist, when he was obsessed with the competition of race against race and
state against state, he identiﬁed faith, knowledge, and social organization
as the key elements of national efﬁciency. Cultural history did not mean
singling out some particular factor as decisive, but recognizing how, in ﬁt-
ting together, the plural elements deﬁned an age.
For three or four years after Pearson’s return to King’s in June 1880,
German history and folklore were his dominant intellectual interests. For-
mally, however, he was studying for a legal career. In November, as he was
preparing to return to London, he vowed “to strive by ordinary but not
overpowering grind at law to sink into the muck and by 35 to be earning
£800 a year and thinking of marrying.” Although he persisted long enough
to be called to the bar, he spent most of his time working at history, poli-

98 • Chapter Five
14 KP to Parker, 23 Nov. 1880, 24 Oct. 1881.
15 Macrory to KP, 11 March 1882, and William Pearson to KP, 16 Oct. 1882, Hacker Pa-
pers, Box 10.
16 E. T. Cook to KP, 19 April 1882, transmitting report of London Society for the Ex-
tension of University Teaching dated 17 April. For lectures at Blackheath and Hampstead a
year later he was paid a total of £55. Hacker Papers, Box 10.
17 KP to Parker, 16 July 1881 and 31 July 1881, and Parker to KP, 20 July 1881; also, in
general, his summer letters of the 1880s to Parker, to Elisabeth Cobb, and to his mother. In
response to criticism of his review of work on German Bible translation before Luther, Pear-
tics, and philosophy. In the fall of 1881 his father complained that he had
now wasted three years and proposed criminal law as a “most interesting
science.” To which Pearson responded: “God! interesting science, rape
murder & the pettiest of thefts can form an interesting science!”14 Shortly
afterwards he accepted a position in the chambers of a barrister he met
through his father, Macrory, then almost immediately withdrew, profess-
ing his utter dislike of this work. Perhaps because he felt some compunc-
tion about his lassitude at law, he did not draw the allowance his father
offered.15
Instead, he lived from his King’s College fellowship and sought work as
an extension lecturer. Extension teaching was a convenient if not terribly
lucrative way for young Oxbridge graduates to support themselves while
seeking a suitable profession. By the 1880s, such lectures were offered for
the beneﬁt of women as well as working men, and at the end of his ﬁrst
such course, all seven of the candidates who presented themselves for ex-
amination were unmarried women. Most students audited the lectures
without pursuing a degree.16 Pearson devoted some time to mathematics
in 1882 and 1883 and continued to gesture at law, but his rhythms of
work were set largely by extension lecturing, which ﬁlled six months of the
year, and by historical research, often in the British Museum.
Prior to his marriage in 1890, he journeyed for a month or more almost
every summer to Germany and Austria. In July 1881 he discovered an
ideal destination in the village of Saig, a minor Black Forest tourist spot
that had no entry in his Baedeker, and where the landlady told him she
had never before had an English guest. Perhaps in this mountain retreat,
Parker advised him, he might “throw your arms around the inﬁnite mother
and ﬁnd peace in her embrace.” He devoted much of his time there to
study and writing but also cultivated the peasants of this Catholic village,
partly at least in order to experience through them the beliefs and speech
patterns of a bygone era. For a holiday, though still weighted down by his
books, he would set off on a tramp through the Austrian Tyrol, alone or
with an English friend.17
He probably did not study cultural history until he began preparing ex-
tension courses. His ﬁrst lectures focused on medieval German folklore

Cultural Historian • 99
son wrote that he had “passed some considerable time among the German peasantry, and I
have been delighted to ﬁnd them still using words and phrases which occur in the old pre-
Lutheran translations.” Karl Pearson, “German Translations of the Bible before Luther,” The
Academy, 28 (26 Sept. 1885), 199, and 10 Oct. 1885, 240–241.
18 König (ﬁrst name unknown) to KP, 12 May 1882, Pearson Papers 737/2. On his folk-
lore project, Parker to KP, 21 Nov. 1880.
19 Pastor, Johannes Janssen, 39, 41, 46; Johannes Janssen, Geschichte des deutschen Volkes,
seit dem Ausgang des Mittelalters, 8 vols., (1878–1894), vol. 1 (6th ed., Freiburg im Breis-
gau, Herder’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1880), Vorwort, dated 8 Dec. 1879.
and mythology, and for a time he envisioned a book on the topic. But in
the spring of 1882 he started to work up a course on the Reformation. He
inquired to an acquaintance from Saig, one König, who recommended
two Catholic authors on the Reformation, Johann Joseph Ignaz von
Döllinger and Johannes Janssen. Janssen had by then completed three
thick volumes of what was to become an eight-volume history of modern
Germany, bringing the story from the “waning Middle Ages” to 1555.
König’s letter characterized Janssen as “extrem katholisch,” and he
agreed, yet he was deeply impressed by the synthetic richness and origi-
nality of argument in this monumental study. Despite his occasional com-
plaints about Janssen’s partisanship, Pearson endorsed and developed his
basic arguments and defended his book against Protestant critics.18
Although Janssen had entered the priesthood in 1859 and regarded
his meeting with Pope Pius IX in 1864 as a high point of his life, he re-
fused the party label and insisted always on his historical objectivity. In a
foreword dated December 1879, a year after the completion of his ﬁrst
volume, he explained that he had decided in 1854 to write a popular Ger-
man history for the educated public, in accordance with the new cultural-
historical approach. This meant avoiding the preoccupation of earlier
histories with wars, battles, and actions of state. Instead he would examine
the conditions and the destiny of the German folk, their education, reli-
gion, science, art, agriculture, crafts, trade, and economy. He had now
spent a quarter century in Frankfurt laboring at his task. His only aim
was to convey historical truth, he said, and he knew himself to be free
from every other tendency. For this work, he was happy to rely on solid
monographs written, in most cases, by Protestant researchers who stood
above party.19
This last point was perhaps more hopeful and even defensive than de-
scriptive. Janssen wrote and published his ﬁrst volumes from under the
shadow of Bismarck’s anti-Catholic Kulturkampf. Having initially wel-
comed the new Reich, he soon was disillusioned by its unrestrained free
trade, political coalitions, atomistic head counts, sovereignty from below,
attempts to make the capital like Paris, and general moral decay, as well as
its attacks on the Roman church and its secularization of state, schools,

100 • Chapter Five
20 Pastor, Johannes Janssen, 63, 104; Pearson, review of Verres, Luther, Athenaeum,
July–Dec. 1884, 729–730. I suspect he sent the review to Janssen.
21 Chickering, Lamprecht, 89; Dickens and Tonkin, Reformation in Historical Thought,
183–184; Julius Köstlin, Luther und J. Janssen: Der deutsche Reformator und ein ultramon-
taner Historiker, 2d ed. (Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1883), 3, 22–23, 49–50, 70.
and marriage. He was, in sum, distressed by modernity, hearing in it
echoes of the Reformation period, or conversely. Still, as a historian he ad-
vocated Wissenschaft, and his work was at ﬁrst welcomed by most review-
ers. Later the Protestant historical establishment organized against him.
Pearson commented acidly in 1884 on the “‘Verein für Reformations-
geschichte,’ which may shortly be described as a society for the suppres-
sion of Janssen and the perpetuation of the Luther myth”—a line picked
up by Janssen’s biographer.20 Janssen’s most vocal opponent was Julius
Köstlin, author of the standard contemporary Luther biography, who
complained that Janssen had unjustly portrayed the reformer as the de-
stroyer of German prosperity, a fainthearted ally of revolutionaries, and an
almost pornographic writer on sexual matters. Köstlin was particularly af-
fronted by the attractive appearance and energetic style of this insidious
treatise, designed to seduce unwitting Christmas shoppers, including
Protestant ones.21
Indeed, this powerful synthetic account offered a dim view of Luther
and of the Protestant Reformation generally. The late Middle Ages was a
time of unparalleled ﬂourishing of cultural, intellectual, and economic life.
The benevolent role of Catholic faith and institutions was decisive
throughout, whether as sponsor of universities, inspiration for popular fes-
tivals such as passion plays, or framework for the moral economy of the
“old socialism.” It was a system based on mutual obligation and brotherly
love and on urban self-government, providing far more favorable condi-
tions for working people than they would experience under sixteenth-
century conditions of feudal bondage and absolutist government. While
admitting certain shortcomings of the period, such as the widespread ha-
tred of Jews, he declined to see corruption and decay as typical of the last
decades before the Reformation. On the contrary, the end of the ﬁfteenth
century was a remarkable Blüthezeit, a cultural and economic efﬂores-
cence. Indeed, this very prosperity brought luxury and corruption, and
the growing international trade of the Hansa posed a threat to moral rela-
tions. Also, humanistic reverence for pagan antiquity, as of Erasmus,
tended to undercut “Christian-German” institutions. It was especially the
rationalizing, universalizing tendencies of Roman law, welcomed by
princes in their efforts to secure greater control over their territories and
to gain autonomy from the Holy Roman Empire, which undermined the
old system. These moves to princely absolutism had been assisted by uni-

Cultural Historian • 101
22 Janssen, Geschichte. His second volume was issued in 1879, his third in 1881.
23 Pearson, “Notes on Literature, Janssen’s Reformation Vol I,” dated 28 May 1882,
Pearson Papers 85.
versity law professors and opposed by the Church. Grasping princes per-
mitted a somewhat disreputable Martin Luther, with his rather petty ob-
jections to the Church, to provoke a schism and then a revolution, which
threw the whole system into turmoil and brought decline and misery to
Germany.22
Pearson acquired Janssen’s ﬁrst volume as soon as it was recommended
to him, and within two weeks he had written ninety-three pages of notes,
interspersing long German quotations with commentary in English. He
regarded the book in this ﬁrst reading as in some way a vindication of
Catholic morality, but objected that Janssen failed to show the essential
continuity of the Reformation with its historical background. The folk
must have been prepared by a “vast religious working before Luther, . . .
bringing the people to a mood which made them earnestly religious & ﬁt
for the Reformation.” Pearson was not yet, in the spring of 1882, so
ﬁercely anti-Luther as he would soon become, and he thought the move
to religious freedom must have been valuable in terms of science and
learning: “The truth of the matter lies in the result, what has Catholic Eu-
rope done for culture since the Reformation?” (The undeniable achieve-
ments of Italy and France had been “in opposition to the Catholic
Element.”) In terms of the effects of the Reformation on working people,
he supported Janssen wholeheartedly. Individualism had never helped
workers, but had undermined the structures of cooperation and regula-
tion that protected them. The obliteration of guilds had also destroyed a
system of high-quality production. Pearson’s notes reveal an admirer of
Ruskin. It is now impossible to build a cathedral, he remarked. “Could a
modern artisan do a gargoyle without pattern?” Janssen, in a line Pearson
quoted, called the Reformation a “great catastrophe of history.” Pearson
concluded at ﬁrst more ambivalently that it had created “enormous vigour
in the intellectual life & utter decay in the political.” It had given birth to
“Communism,” here identiﬁed as the “lowest form of Individualism not
[the] highest form of Socialism.”23
Döllinger was also important for Pearson, though not to the same ex-
tent. A theologian by profession, he came to be ranked among the most fa-
mous Catholic historians of his generation. He was known in England,
partly through the inﬂuence of his student, Lord Acton. In his study of the
Reformation, Döllinger was concerned above all with Luther’s doctrine of
justiﬁcation by faith, which he saw as theologically and morally corrupt,
and terrible in its consequences. Luther had contrived this element of the-
ology as balm for a well-earned sense of personal guilt regarding deeds,

102 • Chapter Five
24 Johann Ignaz von Döllinger, Die Reformation, ihre innere Entwicklung und ihre Wirkun-
gen, 3 vols., (Regensburg: G. Joseph Manz, 1846–1848), vol. 2, 687–694; vol. 3, 1, 239–240;
Döllinger, Kirche und Kirchen, Papsthum und Kirchenstaat. Historisch-politische Betrachtungen
(Munich: J. G. Cotta, 1861), 333–341; Acton, “Döllinger on the Temporal Power” (an 1861
review of Kirche und Kirchen), reprinted in John Emerich Edward Dalberg-Acton, ﬁrst Baron
Acton, The History of Freedom and Other Essays (London: Macmillan, 1909).
25 Döllinger, Kirche und Kirchen, “Vorrede,” xxx. On Döllinger’s career and travails, Hill,
Lord Acton, xxii–xxiii, 25–26, 36–39, 127–129, 228–235, 321–322; Dickens and Tonkin,
Reformation in Historical Thought, 181–183.
Döllinger thought. Its bankruptcy was revealed in the moral depravity of so
many Protestants of the ﬁrst generation, and still more compellingly in the
strange conduct of schismatic sects in modern America.24 Despite his devo-
tion to the Church, Döllinger refused to toe the papal line. In 1861, as the
papal territories were being lost to Italy, he argued at length that the tem-
poral power of the pope was a comparatively late historical development
and not necessary for the Church. A decade later, he issued reports on po-
litical maneuvers surrounding the declaration of papal infallibility, based on
secret letters from Acton in Rome, and for this he was excommunicated. In
these years he began to write of Luther as a German national hero despite
his immense ﬂaws, and to promote reconciliation between the Roman
Church and the Protestant sects.25 Pearson, however, knew his work mainly
for its harsh criticism of the reformer and his movement.
Pearson’s appreciation for these historians and his distinctive views on
medieval and Reformation German history already shine through in his
extension lectures on “German Social Life & Thought in the 16th Cen-
tury,” delivered in the fall of 1882. He introduced these lectures, which he
wrote out in full, with a grand trajectory of progress, or evolution, begin-
ning with the passage of humanity from the natural to the moral state.
This was in a way the expulsion from paradise, but by eating the apple man
had opened up new opportunities. Here Pearson paraphrased Hegel,
deﬁning “the history of mankind to be the development of man towards
an ideal human freedom.” Freedom meant and depended on knowledge,
and progress had to be attained through painstaking evolution rather than
by revolutions rooted in ignorance. The German Reformation and the
French Revolution broke out when knowledge ran ahead of religious and
political institutions, and similar imbalances would soon bring revolution
to Russia. In this introduction, the Reformation ﬁgured as the necessary
defeat of a great falsehood, “the then Roman church.” Protestantism,
however, created an unfortunate tradition of individualism whose results
had lasted to the present day.
With the introduction behind him, the actual Reformation emerged not
as a phase in a triumphal narrative, but as a tragic diversion caused by a
shortsighted revolution whose consequences had lasted to his own day. If
the phases of history were to be judged by the lot of the common man, the

Cultural Historian • 103
order of the ﬁfteenth century appeared an especially admirable one. Pear-
son, adopting Janssen’s language, referred to it as the “old socialism.”
This was an age of communal determination rather than individuality.
Everything, Pearson explained, was regulated: weddings, gifts, gossip,
production, and prices. The successful craftsman could not ﬂaunt his
wealth in the streets, because dress and ornamentation were determined
by one’s station in life. At this cost to self-expression, medieval Germany
purchased impressive beneﬁts. Every person had a legitimate place in the
eyes of the town. There was little opportunity for accumulation, with al-
most no poverty, and churches took care of what there was. He evoked an
ordering of public and economic life wholly incommensurable with that of
his own day. The medieval tradesman “performed not for the sake of
proﬁt, but under the notion of moral duty towards his fellows, a duty cre-
ated by the advantages the community had conferred upon him.” In con-
sequence, there was no proletariat, and in contrast to the dull routines of
the modern workman who produces only for pounds, shillings, and pence,
the medieval one “was full of energy, artistic and intellectual.” Religion,
too, was not ﬁxed by institutions, but was vibrant and creative, with guilds
inventing their own saints and nurturing legends about their histories.
The old system violated “all the laws of so-called political economy,” since
its agents were “ignorant of the modern gospel of economic individual-
ism” and did not “tremble before the Demogorgon Capital.”
Although Pearson admitted some failings of the Catholic Church in the
waning Middle Ages, his view of it was now highly sympathetic. He cele-
brated its role as an institution of charity and as a support of the reigning
moral socialism, which had been endorsed even by Luther. He offered a
picture of medieval society as life without alienation, culture made whole.
The Church was not an autocratic institution, standing outside society,
but was thoroughly assimilated into folk life. The objects of religion were
not remote and transcendent, but facts of everyday experience. Art,
though overwhelmingly Christian in content, was civic, the property of
the folk, and the interior of a cathedral was an “open museum.” Albrecht
Dürer’s virgin had the appearance of a German hausfrau, with nothing of
the transcendent.
To be sure, these peasants and townsmen did not live wholly outside of
historical change, for a spirit of individualism was ever more visible in the
art of the period. But this, in itself, was healthy, part of the progress of his-
tory toward freedom. The late ﬁfteenth century was, for Pearson, a time of
extraordinary cultural richness, evident in the discovery of the ancient
Greeks, the expansion and reinvigoration of German universities, and the
efforts at reform by Erasmus and the great humanists. Printing was part of
this movement, more symptom than cause of the new spirit of inquiry.
Against Janssen, he celebrated progress, and he criticized Catholic histo-
rians who blamed humanists for the disorder of the sixteenth century. 

104 • Chapter Five
26 Karl Pearson, course of ten lectures, delivered at Blackheath, 1882, on “German Social
Life and Thought in the Sixteenth Century,” Pearson Papers 47/3.
27 Pearson, unsigned review of First Principles of the Reformation, Athenaeum, Jan.–June
1884, 146–147.
Humanism was part of a healthy evolution, which, sadly, had been di-
verted by Luther onto the path of revolution.
How could this have happened? Pearson’s historiographical perspective
was social and cultural, not individualist, and he denied absolutely that his-
tory was made by great or terrible individuals. His dislike of Luther per-
haps burst the bounds of these maxims. Yet he did offer context for the
revolutionary transformation of Germany, following broadly the interpre-
tation of Janssen. In the background was growing world trade, a struggle
for wealth that created the beginnings of a proletariat. The breakdown of
moral socialism owed much to the luxury and corruption brought by 
ﬁfteenth-century prosperity. Still, in these days of the Hansa, even trade
was controlled by guilds, and its disruptive effects were limited. The col-
lapse of Catholic socialism began in earnest with princely efforts to replace
the old German law, made and enforced by the folk, with a codiﬁed Ro-
man law, controlled by rulers and administered by paid advocates. The
separation of law from folk culture was a bid for power by grasping poten-
tates, and an instrument of oppression. Lutheranism, too, triumphed in
the context of princely absolutism, which now would increasingly gain
control of the churches. Pearson, however, emphasized most strongly
Luther’s fanatical superstition and his demagogic appeals to the ignorant
masses, which had led to chaos and war, the destruction of German cul-
ture and learning. It was not a reformation, but a deformation: the “De-
formation Age.” Its effects were still being played out in the contest of his
own day between individualism and its “excrescence,” communism.26
These were learned lectures, full of detail and intricately argued. Al-
though he spoke admiringly of Carlyle on the French Revolution, his syl-
labus was supported mainly by references to German scholarship and to
original sources, such as police archives in south German towns. Some re-
assuring letters from friends and family suggest that these lectures were
too difﬁcult and scholarly to be altogether popular. Still, his historical pur-
poses spoke directly to the concerns of the present. He likened the strug-
gles of the Deformation Age to the modern conﬂict between capital and
labor, which might either bring an advance to a higher socialism or de-
structive revolution. “Two great Church parties representing irreconcil-
able theological conceptions, between them the party of culture and of
gradual educational progress—two great economical schools reﬂecting the
same general ideas in the industrial world—such are the factors common
to both centuries,” the sixteenth and the nineteenth.27 And the outcome

Cultural Historian • 105
28 Pearson, unsigned review of Reginald Lane Poole, Illustrations of the History of Medi-
aeval Thought, Athenaeum, Jan.–June 1885, 148–149.
29 KP to William Martin Conway, 10 Dec. 1881; on his anxieties about the success of his
lectures, KP to Fanny, 1 March 1882, and Fanny to KP, 5 Oct. 1882; the South Place invi-
tation came from Conrad Thies (Pearson’s cousin) to KP, 22 Jan. 1882, Pearson Papers
868/1. On adult education, see Lynd, England in the Eighteen-Eighties, 284.
30 “Do you remember how you pulled the tub from under me in 1880?” he wrote Shaw
in 1921, without explaining to what he was referring. KP to Shaw, 22 June 1921, Shaw 
Papers, British Library 50518 f. 265.
of the modern economic struggle must be a return to some of the values
of the medieval church:
There are genuine human passions—desire for class organization, for unity of
thought, for the spiritual side of the vulgar business of life—to which mediae-
valism essentially appeals. The modern revolt against individualism brings those
passions again prominently to the fore; it is leading to a new catholicity which
will adopt mediaevalism as an element of culture, not as a dogmatic faith. The
renascence of the nineteenth century will be as potent as that of the sixteenth,
but it will add to its Hellenism the very thing the sixteenth century relentlessly
destroyed—the spirit of mediaeval thought and art.28
This was the spirit of Catholic socialism, which must form an element of
the economic system that is to come.
HISTORICAL SOCIALISM
Although he was not exactly a rabble-rouser, Pearson had asked for ab-
solute freedom to deﬁne the content of his lectures. He was lecturing as a
radical socialist, and supporting a contemporary political movement that
in turn had helped to form his views. He gave several courses of lectures at
Blackheath and Hampstead and was invited to repeat some of them at the
South Place Chapel in Finsbury. The governing authorities of the exten-
sion movement, it seems, willingly provided a forum for such expression.
The adult-education movement was one of the principal vehicles by which
socialist ideas were transmitted to workers.29
At Cambridge, socialism was almost unknown in 1879 and common-
place by 1883. London, however, was still more exciting for political rad-
icals, and Pearson became familiar in radical circles in the early 1880s. His
rooms at Inner Temple, where he lived with Parker and sometimes Con-
way from 1881 through 1885 and then alone until 1889, gave him ready
access to bohemian London. He began associating with Bernard Shaw by
1880, if we are to believe his recollections.30 He published translations
from German of “Songs of the Proletariat” in 1881, and he was involved

106 • Chapter Five
31 “K. P.,” “Songs of the Proletariat, I” and “II,” Cambridge Review, 2 (18 May 1881),
335, and 1 June 1881, 367, respectively; KP to Parker, 24 Sept. 1893.
32 Thompson, Rise of Respectable Society, 30; Hoppen, Mid-Victorian Generation,
1846–1886; Jones, Christian Socialist Revival, 31–41; Cannadine, Decline and Fall of the
British Aristocracy, 25, 238–244; Jones, Outcast London, 290–303.
33 W. H. Mallock, “Socialism in England,” Contemporary Review (1883), reprinted in
Property and Progress: or, a Brief Enquiry into Contemporary Social Agitation in England
(London: John Murray, 1884), 85, a review of two books by Hyndman. He said of Marx in
1881 that his method was “in a position like that of Thales. I quite admit that he is a great
collector of facts, but he does not know how to read them.” Mallock, “Civilization and
Equality,” Contemporary Review, 40 (1881), 651–672, on 660.
in such activities as Sunday concerts of the German Social Democratic
Club in Soho. A decade later he reminisced to Parker about their partici-
pation in “Socialists’ & Workmen’s Clubs & I was reading Lassalle’s
speeches & life.”31 Although little record of these activities survives, his
publications alone sufﬁce to demonstrate his attendance at the rebirth of
British socialism.
The early 1880s marked a sea change in British class politics. This was
the beginning of a labor movement, encouraged in many cases by middle-
class activists and intellectuals, that was to lead to an identiﬁable working-
class politics and then to a Labour party in the 1890s. Modern social
history has shown peaks of unemployment in 1879, and again from 1884
to 1887. Contemporaries inclined more and more to see the whole period
from 1873 as a time of joblessness and unacceptable hardship. The Hyde
Park riot in February 1886 and Bloody Sunday in November 1887 made
the general discontent evident to everyone. This unrest, along with falling
agricultural prices and land values, led to a steep decline in the political
power of the landed aristocracy over the decade of the 1880s, just as the
new system of competitive examinations was weakening their position in
the Civil Service. A Reform Bill in 1884 granted the franchise to most
adult males, part of a new liberalism that endeavored to separate out the
respectable poor, who would be allowed a voice in politics, from the
“residuum,” who would be treated more harshly.32
Socialism became increasingly attractive in this context to middle-class
radicals. W. H. Mallock followed a British conservative tradition that went
back to Edmund Burke in attributing socialism to misguided theories. He
was not entirely off the mark. Organized working-class socialism was still
almost invisible when Mallock called it a “commonplace . . . that we
are surrounded by a spirit of social revolution.”33 The Democratic Feder-
ation, later Social Democratic Federation, was founded in 1881 by H. M.
Hyndman, a Trinity man, who had experienced an epiphany while reading
Marx’s Capital in French translation on a business trip to Utah. English
Marxists were from the beginning an idiosyncratic lot, and Marx himself
disapproved of most. Hyndman argued from utilitarianism rather than di-

Cultural Historian • 107
34 MacCarthy, William Morris, 464; Schorske, “Quest for the Grail”; Pierson, Marxism
and the Origins of British Socialism, 64, 97. On decadence, see Thompson, William Morris;
cf. Morris, News from Nowhere (1890).
35 Brougham Villiers, The Socialist Movement in England (London: T. Fisher Unwin,
1908), 19; Beatrice Webb, My Apprenticeship (1926; London: Longmans, Green, n.d.), 125
(referring to the early 1880s).
36 James E. Thorold Rogers, Six Centuries of Work and Wages: The History of English
Labour (New York and London: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1884), 4–6, 326, 357; William Cob-
bett, A History of the Protestant “Reformation” in England and Ireland (London: Charles
Clement, 1824–1827); Letter 1, para. 4; Letter 2, para. 37: “It was not a reformation, but a
devastation, of England.” H. M. Hyndman, The Historical Basis of Socialism in England
(London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, 1883), 1; Morse, High Victorian Culture, 80, mentions
Cobbett as among those who disputed the Whig interpretation of English history.
alectic and was nationalist in his politics. Belfort Bax sought in socialism a
basis for religious or metaphysical meaning. William Morris, who joined
the federation in 1883 and then withdrew at the end of 1884 to form his
rival Socialist League, was interested in the dignity of labor and the
restoration of authenticity and craft.
E. P. Thompson’s evocative and deeply romanticized biography of Mor-
ris argues that the poet was rescued by the vigor of Marxian commitment
from the decadence of medievalist aestheticism. It is a questionable interpre-
tation. Morris, while distinctive in his ideas and ambitions, was typical of
these early British socialists in his preoccupation with the distant past. He
and others looked to the medieval period for values that must be restored
in a socialist future.34 There was in the Middle Ages, wrote Brougham 
Villiers, “more, both of theoretic and what . . . I shall call organic Social-
ism in England than during the ﬁrst three centuries of Protestantism.”
Catholic sympathies were common among British socialists. Beatrice
Webb wrote in her autobiography that the Comtean positivist Frederic
Harrison had taught her “to resist the current depreciation of the mediae-
val social organisation” as he “emphasized the real achievement in their
own time of the Catholic Church and the craft gilds.”35
Late medieval England was perhaps also a model of economic prosper-
ity. In the early 1880s, the economist Thorold Rogers charted the real
value of wages over six centuries, and concluded that the conditions of En-
glish laborers were never better than in the ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth
centuries. They had been reduced to poverty, he thought, by deliberate ac-
tions of Parliament. The medieval church, by contrast to the institutions
of state, had conferred great beneﬁts on mankind, despite its deplorable
superstitions. This was a more moderate version of a bitter argument made
in the 1820s by the Irishman William Cobbett, who blamed the Reforma-
tion for the descent into penury of the laboring population. Hyndman, in
1883, invoked “common consent” for the superiority of working condi-
tions in the ﬁfteenth century over any other, before or since. “Merry En-
gland it was then in spite of all its drawbacks.”36

108 • Chapter Five
37 Harvie, Lights of Liberalism, 11; Kent, Brains and Numbers.
38 McBriar, Fabian Socialism and English Politics, 1–3; Wolfe, From Radicalism to Social-
ism, 172–175; Peters, Bernard Shaw, 51; N. and J. MacKenzie, The Fabians, 138.
39 Charlotte Wilson to KP, 22 Oct. 1884, 28 July 1885, 8 Oct. 1885, Pearson Papers 900.
She wrote him at least forty-eight letters from 1884 to 1896.
40 Hulse, Revolutionists in London, 29–52. Sergius Stepniak wrote twelve letters to Pear-
son beginning 1885; see Pearson Papers 861/7. He came to a meeting of the Men and
Marxian socialism, in the heterodox form of the Social Democratic Fed-
eration, was only one among many rival programs to reorganize the English
future that circulated through London in the 1880s. Charles Bradlaugh’s
secularists were in competition with positivistic followers of Auguste Comte,
advocates of a religion of humanity. They contended and overlapped with
Oxford Hegelians, lapsed Unitarians, theosophists, agnostics, Spinozists,
and anarchists. Many, including Pearson, advocated what John Morley of
the radical Fortnightly Review called an alliance of “brains and numbers,”
the guidance of the masses by their educated sympathizers.37
Most of these programs of reform involved an explicit religious dimen-
sion, generally framed as an alternative to orthodox Christianity. One lead-
ing source of the Fabian Society was the “Fellowship of the New Life,”
founded by the pro-Catholic American Thomas Davidson, who looked to
achieve utopia through the personal regeneration of its members. The
other was a Marx reading group, organized by the Hampstead anarchist
Charlotte Wilson, who had been a particular admirer of William Morris
before she shifted her allegiance to Prince Kropotkin. Annie Besant came
to Fabianism from the secularist movement, and left it in 1890 for
Madame Blavatsky’s theosophy. Shaw was also concerned with religion, at
least for its social function, and tried his hand at a racy passion play in one
of his earliest literary efforts. In 1890, he and Sidney Webb, two of the
leading Fabian socialists, experienced Parsifal at Bayreuth, then proceeded
to Oberammergau for the passion play.38
Pearson knew and corresponded with all these people, especially Shaw
and Wilson. Wilson asked his advice about reading Marx and sought to
justify to him her wonderfully sunny view of human nature (so long as it
was uncorrupted by social inhibitions and restrictions) that called for a
union of “complete animalism” and “higher spiritualism,” and made anar-
chism the only moral system of politics. She solicited his participation,
within the space of a single year, in her Karl Marx Society, then in the
Fabian Society, and ﬁnally in her “Russian Society.”39 His reply to the last
invitation stimulated her to send him two books by the assassin and Lon-
don refugee Sergius Stepniak, which Pearson forthwith praised in reviews.
Stepniak’s account provoked him to set aside his customary nonviolent
gradualism and to defend the need for political, if not social, revolution in
that terrible Russian police state.40

Cultural Historian • 109
Women’s Club (discussed in chapter 6) in November 1886; see Maria Sharpe, “Autobio-
graphical History of the Men and Women’s Club,” Pearson Papers 10/1. Pearson wrote two
essays on Russia in the Cambridge Review, 7 (1885–86), and condoned political revolution
in both, on account of police measures that made gradual progress impossible. Pearson, “The
Coming Factor in European Progress,” 21 Oct. 1885, 26–28; “The Russian Storm Cloud,”
23 June 1886, 406–407. Stepniak’s terrorism was not generally known in England, where he
moved in 1883.
41 J. L. Joynes (a friend of Bradshaw and of Morris) to KP, 29 Nov. 1883, Pearson Papers
731/2; John Henry Middleton to KP, 26 June 1888 and 27 October 1888, Pearson Papers
762/9. Middleton, who met Morris on his way to Iceland in 1873, lectured on domestic life
and houses in medieval England as Slade Professor of Fine Art in Cambridge and then be-
came director of the South Kensington Museum. He complained of the “ﬁlthy commercial
pigs” who had “turned Rome into a hideous wilderness of stuccoed abominations, in com-
parison with which Gower Street is picturesque and even beautiful.”
42 Pearson, Positive Creed of Freethought, 3; Desmond, Huxley, 501. On The Freethinker,
see Smith, London Heretics, 61–69, and, especially, Marsh, Word Crimes, chap. 3. On the Ag-
nostic Journal, see Charles Albert Watts to Thomas Henry Huxley, 23 May 1892, Huxley
Papers 28.199–200, Imperial College Archives, and Lightman, “Huxley and Scientiﬁc Ag-
nosticism,” 271–289.
43 William Henry Domville to KP, Pearson Papers 864/8.
Pearson’s participation in the Social Democratic Federation was limited
to his publication of a popular lecture on women and socialism in its mag-
azine, To-Day, which he was urged to write by the editor J. L. Joynes, a
Cambridge acquaintance. He never even met Morris, whom he admired,
though he had the opportunity.41 Despite frequent appeals and invita-
tions, he was too strong-willed and idiosyncratic to join anyone else’s
movement. Instead he deﬁned his own, which he called “freethought,” as
the intellectual and moral basis for the future. It had, as he conceded (or
perhaps boasted) in 1888, about one member. He had to compete for the
label with the shockingly sarcastic Freethinker, whose editor, G. W. Foote,
was imprisoned in 1883 for such “blasphemies” as his cartoon of the
“Carnivorous God” who rejected Cain’s sacriﬁce. Pearson and most other
middle-class reformers were unwilling to offend conventional opinion to
such an extent, and they generally managed to stand above what was called
lower-class vulgarity, sold for a penny. But it was no easy matter to redeem
freethought from its associations with free love and other unsavory ten-
dencies. Even the editor of the Agnostic Journal, which Pearson thought
of doubtful propriety, identiﬁed freethought with scurrility and tried to
keep his distance from it. Pearson believed the term to be worth salvaging
as an alternative to “agnosticism” because he thought the latter term too
pessimistic about the ultimate possibilities of knowledge.42
In addition to his extension classes, Pearson lectured to workingmen’s as-
sociations and to such groups as the Sunday Lecture Society. That particular
organization paid him £5.5 for a talk in 1885, which he then returned, de-
spite a degree of impecuniousness, as a contribution.43 The Sunday lecture

110 • Chapter Five
44 Webb, My Apprenticeship (note 35), 48. She refers to Henry Parry Liddon, Charles
Haddon Spurgeon, Charles Voysey, James Martineau, and Frederic Harrison.
45 Most of this paragraph is from Ratcliffe, Story of South Place. The verse is quoted in
Smith, London Heretics, 111. On the Congress, see Smith, London Heretics, 115, and Light-
man, Origins of Agnosticism, 95.
was by the late nineteenth century a well-established alternative to religious
services, aiming to elevate the listener without appealing to the Christian
God, or often to supplant Christian belief with a faith in science, philosophy,
pantheism, Eastern religions, reverence for humanity, social service, or some
other expression of moral seriousness in that New Age of expiring Victorian-
ism. The experience of Beatrice Webb is revealing. Although raised as a Uni-
tarian, she experienced religion as something immensely heterogeneous:
“During the London season my father, accompanied by a bevy of daughters,
would start out on a Sunday morning to discover the most exciting speaker
on religious or metaphysical issues, and we would listen with equal zest to
Monsignor Capel or Cannon Liddon, Spurgeon or Voysey, James Martineau
or Frederic Harrison.”44 These preachers were, respectively, a Catholic, a lib-
eral High Church Anglican, a Baptist, the founder of the church of theism, a
Unitarian, and the English leader of Comtean positivism. Pearson sought out
a similarly diverse experience of religion in early adulthood. He delivered his
most inspirational and moralistic lectures at one of the outstanding sites of re-
ligious heterodoxy, the South Place Chapel in Finsbury, home of the South
Place Religious Society, renamed in 1890 the South Place Ethical Society.
South Place was built in 1823 as a Unitarian chapel and remained so to
the 1860s. Its ﬁrst three preachers, beginning with William Johnson Fox,
were rebels against hell-ﬁre Calvinist upbringings. The third, Moncure
Conway, was an Episcopalian from a slaveholding Virginia family who
turned Methodist and then Unitarian preacher, afterwards leaving his
Cincinnati congregation to edit an abolitionist paper in Boston. He en-
countered South Place while on an abolitionist speaking tour in England,
and in 1864 was recruited to become its minister. Soon he began to sub-
stitute new kinds of inspirational readings, such as Eastern religious texts
selected by Friedrich Max Müller, for passages from Scripture, and to de-
scribe his sermons as anthropological rather than theological. As some
contemporary doggerel had it: “Religion, pious Carr rejoined, / in Mon-
cure Conway’s view / Is not devoid of interest / although it be not true.”
In 1878, Conway joined William Kingdon Clifford in organizing a “Con-
gress of Liberal Thinkers” at South Place to bring together people from all
over the world who shared the goal of liberating humanity from dogma.45
Conway was able to entice most of his congregation to follow him on this
journey away from Christianity, and to increase it by attracting families that
had lost faith in the traditional churches. There also were occasional visitors,

Cultural Historian • 111
46 I was able to read thirty-ﬁve of these lectures from 1883 to 1892 in a bound volume
held by UCLA under the title South Place Lectures, of which Pearson’s “Ethic of
Freethought” is the ﬁrst. Fanny P to KP, 30 Oct. and 31 Oct. 1873.
47 Ratcliffe, Story of South Place; letter from Smith, London Heretics, 118–119.
48 Pearson, “The Ethic of Freethought,” lecture at South Place Institute, 6 March 1883
(London: E. W. Allen, 1883), reprinted in Ethic of Freethought, 13–32. On Buddhism he re-
ferred to a lecture by his friend from King’s, Rhys David, who became a Victorian authority
on the subject.
such as Fanny Pearson, who was attracted by his lecture in late 1873 on John
Stuart Mill. By the time of Karl Pearson’s association with South Place, how-
ever, Conway was becoming restless. He took a nine-month world tour be-
ginning June 1883, returned for a year, and then formally retired in 1885.
For seven years the church was unable to ﬁnd an acceptable replacement,
until he decided to return in 1892. During the interregnum the pulpit was
occupied by visitors, many of them scholars or men of science, who lectured
on education, biology, emotions, materialism, toleration, literature, and cul-
ture.46 However distinguished their ideas may have been, this arrangement
was not entirely satisfactory, and the frustration of the members at being
without a regular minister led to the consideration of some surprising candi-
dates. Andrew Wilson, who often presided in these years, was too dry, and
the congregation could not tolerate heresy from an unfamiliar voice, ex-
plained Annie Besant in a letter to Conway’s wife in December 1885. “Mr.
Pearson has been spoken of a good deal, but nothing seems to get settled.”47
It is intriguing to imagine Pearson making a career preaching freethought at
the South Place Ethical Society.
He spoke three times at South Place, explicating there his secular reli-
gion of freethought in an effort to outline a new philosophy of science
that might satisfy the yearnings of the age. In his ﬁrst discourse, he deﬁned
religion as “the relation of the ﬁnite to the inﬁnite,” which, according to
his exemplary South Place theology, is a “necessary logical category,” even
if God has at best a contingent reality. The “Eternal Why” may haunt the
mind of man, and in frustration at his failure to ﬁnd a method of solution
he “may be driven to despair, to pessimism, to absolute spiritual misery.”
Pearson aﬁcionados will ﬁnd this abstract being, “man,” somehow familiar.
Our man was able to obtain partial relief from spiritual misery in Bud-
dhism, whose great merit is to concern itself with individual self-cultivation
rather than with the gods. The favorite occupation of freethought, how-
ever, was science, which, following Pearson’s aggressive idealism of 1883,
promised someday to “unite all ﬁnite things of the universe” through a
working out of the logic of mind. Meanwhile, however, it was among the
great virtues of science to admit modestly its ignorance where ignorance
remained, and to pursue knowledge with that enthusiasm—Schwärmgeist—
described by “the greatest living German poet,” Hamerling.48

112 • Chapter Five
49 Pearson, “The Enthusiasm of the Market-Place and the Study,” Sunday, 29 Nov. 1885
(South Place Discourses, No. 5), reprinted in Ethic of Freethought, 115–134.
50 Mark Pattison, “Antecedents of the Reformation” (from Fraser’s Review, 1859),
reprinted in Pattison, Essays, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1889), vol. 1, 53–66, on 55,
quoted by Pearson without attribution in a review of Charles Beard, Martin Luther and the
Reformation in Germany in Athenaeum, July–Dec. 1889, 664–666.
51 Moore, “Theodicy and Society,” 177, and Lightman, “Robert Elsmere and the Agnos-
tic Crises of Faith,” 302; Thomas Henry Huxley, “On Species and Races, and Their Origin”
In a subsequent lecture at South Place, on “The Enthusiasm of the 
Market-Place and of the Study,” his emphasis shifted away from the meta-
physical to the practical and moral signiﬁcance of science. Morality is a
question of knowledge, not of the emotions; the moral is simply what is
social, and the immoral is antisocial. He declared bluntly that “the igno-
rant and the uneducated cannot be moral.” Political issues such as vacci-
nation should be answered by “general laws and particular statistics,” not
by those slogans of the marketplace, “human right” and “individual lib-
erty.” Yet this faith of the study, this cool intellection, required enthusi-
asm. Its missionary ambition was: “To convert the market-place into the
study!” The dangers of failure were apparent from history, from the mis-
ery and destruction brought forth by ignorant fanaticism in the German
(Protestant) and French Revolutions. Pearson thus preached of Luther as
the paradigm of dangerous irrationality, inviting the ignorant to act before
they think.49
OBJECTIVITY, FAITH, AND HISTORY
His emphasis on the similarities of his own time with that of the German
Reformation had a precedent. The Oxford essayist Mark Pattison, whom
he invoked as “one who was more capable than any other of scholarly crit-
icism in this ﬁeld,” had commented that “thoughtful men, who can read
the signs of our times, are becoming aware of the close analogy which
the existing conﬂict of opinion bears to that which was going on in the
times just before Luther.”50 Pattison referred to the upwelling of pre-
Reformation reform efforts, as by Johannes Reuchlin in Cologne, which
were thwarted by encrusted institutions. For English scientists and ratio-
nalists, it was customary to view Luther’s revolt as a model for a progressive
age, a spiritual challenge to entrenched orthodoxy. Huxley, for example,
wrote in anticipation of Darwin’s Origin of Species of “living on the eve of
a new Reformation,” which might in thirty years allow him to “see the foot
of science on the necks of her Enemies.” A decade later he announced the
need for a “wider and deeper change” than that of the sixteenth century, a
reformation of science that must be accompanied by political and social
turmoil.51 Pearson called for a deeper analysis and reinterpretation of this

Cultural Historian • 113
(1860), in Michael Foster and E. Ray Lankester, eds., The Scientiﬁc Memoirs of Thomas
Henry Huxley, vol. 2 (London: Macmillan, 1899), 388–394; T. H. Huxley letter, 1859,
quoted in Desmond, Huxley, 253; Huxley letter, 1871, in L. Huxley, Life and Letters of
Thomas Henry Huxley, vol. 1, 427–428.
historical era, rejecting the Protestant biases that had distorted the scholar-
ship, so that the evils of the enthusiasm of the marketplace might appear
more clearly. Although he still held religiously to a doctrine of progress, by
1884 he was no longer so clear in accenting individualism or even freedom
as the positive outcome of these historical processes. Now he saw the slow
ripening of science, rather more than the demand for human freedom, as
the force whose growth had required an end to the hegemony of Catholic
theology. Luther’s movement, however, set science back; it was no clarion
call for intellectual freedom, but a retreat into deeper and more violent su-
perstition. If Lutheranism brought greater intellectual toleration, it was
only because these relentless schismatics could not agree on which heresies
to suppress. And in the end Luther sided with the oppressors rather than
the downtrodden in the battle for human dignity.
The historical lesson for the present in the German Reformation was
brought out most clearly in Pearson’s essay on the Anabaptists of Münster,
originally published in 1884 in the Modern Review. In some respects he
followed Hamerling’s epic portrait of that historical event, perhaps above
all in his depiction of what he called the “opposite poles of Anabaptist
thought,” namely, “spiritual and sensual fanaticism.” When Jan van Ley-
den sacriﬁced his principles to the allure of the beautiful gypsy Divara and
took her as his second wife, “sensuous pleasure” won a victory over “self-
renunciation.” This “plague-spot” of sensuality led soon to “sexual anar-
chy,” and then to the ﬁnal destruction of the Anabaptists from within.
Pearson, of course, did not imagine that they had ever had any possibility
of success, for real social advance is always gradual. Yet he sympathized
with the plight of the common people. In view of the misery brought by
the destruction of the old socialism, of the communal rights of a free peas-
antry and of independent handicraftsmen, the appeal of millennial change
was understandable. Luther, promising a new gospel and a return to
“brotherly love, mutual charity, and an apostolic simplicity of life,” had in-
stead only conﬁrmed the “rampant . . . spirit of selﬁshness” of this grasp-
ing, materialistic age. No wonder that his erstwhile followers looked to
create the new Zion on their own, drawing inspiration, as had so many
radicals before them, from the book of Revelation. Their behavior was
sometimes quite mad, as when Jan Mathys rushed out of the gates of the
city to attack his enemies singlehandedly. He was a fanatic, his shining
morals wrecked by ignorance. Still, his principles were right, for at least
“he fought and died for a spiritual notion.” The chief enemy of this revo-
lution, the loathsome bishop, “fought and triumphed for himself.” If such

114 • Chapter Five
52 Pearson, “The Kingdom of God in Münster,” in Ethic of Freethought, 314, 294–296,
263, 310.
53 Carl Adolf Cornelius, Geschichte des Münsterischen Aufruhrs, 2 vols. (Leipzig: T. D.
Weigel, 1855–1860).
54 Pearson, “German Translations of the Bible before Luther,” Academy, 28 (26 Sept.
1885), 199; Pearson review of Froude, Life and Letters of Erasmus, Academy, 46 (3 Nov.
1894), 343–344.
55 Pearson, “The Luther Exhibition in the Grenville Library,” Athenaeum, July–Dec.
1883, 368, 464–465; Henry Bradshaw to KP, 25 Oct. 1883, Pearson Papers 642. He al-
lowed the letter to be published in Prothero, Bradshaw, 293–295; see also E. S. Pearson,
Karl Pearson, 7.
56 Pearson, “Luther Exhibition,” 530–531; Pearson review of Bonet-Maury, Early
Sources, Academy, 26 (13 Sept. 1884), 162–163.
disorderly episodes, repeated most recently in the Paris commune, were to
be avoided in the future, the world must take responsibility to educate and
“redeem from serfdom” the modern proletariat.52
Pearson’s essay on the Anabaptists relied heavily on a study by Carl
Adolf Cornelius, never completed, which Hamerling also had praised in
the notes to his verse epic.53 On the Reformation generally, Pearson
pointed to German work as the standard of serious scholarship, against
which most English historical writing stood condemned as slipshod. En-
gland needed research and teaching positions in medieval history, he ar-
gued, if it was to be rescued from antiquarian dilettantism. The nation
could ill afford the appointment of a “brilliant but inaccurate littéra-
teur”—he meant James Anthony Froude—to a distinguished chair in his-
tory.54 Pearson was particularly ﬁerce in 1883 when he condemned a
Luther exhibition sponsored by the British Museum for its incompetent
translations and the distortions implied by its selection of images. His as-
perity brought reproof from Bradshaw, who wrote to him of the “extraor-
dinary absence of wisdom” of this review.55
The alternative to such amateurism, a really scientiﬁc history, would be
based on an intimate familiarity with original and secondary sources, a
competence that was far more widespread in Germany than in Britain.
Pearson also insisted on the need for freedom from bias in historical re-
search. He saw Protestant complacency in much of the scholarship, and he
later admitted with respect to the British Museum that he had been even
more vexed by the Protestant bias of the Luther exhibition than by its
technical shortcomings. In this respect, however, the Germans were
scarcely if at all superior to the English. “Although the entire method of
historical research has in the last decade undergone a most marked revo-
lution, we are still very distant from that glorious era when the emotional-
ist and the sectarian shall be prohibited from writing on historical
subjects.”56 He tried to be evenhanded, and on occasion he condemned in
general terms the biases of Catholic historians, or lamented that virtually
all scholarship on his favorite topic could be readily divided by booksellers

Cultural Historian • 115
57 Pearson, “Luther in the Archives of the Vatican,” Academy, 24 (8 Dec. 1883),
373–374. On booksellers, see Pearson review of Konrad Lange, Der Papstesel, Academy, 40
(8 Aug. 1891), 109–110.
58 E.g., Vincenz Hasak, Die christliche Glaube des deutschen Volkes beim Schlusse des Mittel-
alters (Regensburg: Georg Joseph Manz, 1865), iii–ix.
59 Athenaeum: July–Dec. 1883: 368, 464-465, 530-531, 630-631, 809-810; Jan.–June
1884: 694-695; July–Dec. 1884: 400; Jan.–June 1885: 631; July–Dec. 1885: 140–141;
July–Dec. 1887: 431–432; Academy, 28, 1885: 199, 292–293; 30, 1886: 84–85; 47, 1895:
238–239. The point about Luther expressing his biases in errors of translation was made by
Döllinger, and then by Acton, “Döllinger” (see note 24), 349. The leading British authority
on Luther, T. M. Lindsay of Glasgow, held that Luther’s translation of the New Testament
was “almost entirely his own work.” See Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed., vol. 15 (1883),
s.v. “Luther,” 71–86.
into Protestant and Catholic. (He also listed the references this way in one
of his own essays.) His sympathies, however, were clearly on the Catholic
side, and it was the teleological arrogance of Protestant history that in-
ﬂamed his wrath. Catholics, having beneﬁted less from the propagation of
legends about the Protestant split, could better afford to be honest, he
thought. As he wrote in one of his earliest reviews, “The recognition that
more fact and less myth will do it at least no harm is not improbably the
source of the Vatican’s appeal to history.”57
Many of Pearson’s historical reviews, including a series of unsigned ones
in The Athenaeum, concerned the question of Bible translations. He con-
demned as pure bias the Protestant argument that vernacular Bibles were
scarcely available before Luther. He inspected as many early Bibles as he
could and became an erudite commentator on this subject, though his
ﬁndings were expressed mostly as refutations. Far from being actively sup-
pressed by the Church, vernacular translations had long ﬂourished, begin-
ning with the search for an alternative to papal authority during the
“Babylonian captivity” in Avignon. Luther’s translation was, for Pearson,
no pioneering work, but the culmination of a process that already was on
course to produce a standard “German vulgate.” He denied that the pre-
Lutheran translations were linked to heresies, insisting that the Church
had countenanced them. Against much criticism from Protestants, and fol-
lowing the broad lines of Catholic scholarship,58 Pearson held that Luther
had neither time nor sufﬁcient familiarity with Greek to have produced an
independent translation of the New Testament. He supplied detailed tex-
tual comparisons as evidence that Luther translated with a vulgate before
him. Indeed, Luther had introduced more errors than he corrected, often
displaying thereby his theological biases. Pearson’s chief concession was to
recognize the vigor and ﬂuency of Luther’s prose. In all, he attacked
Protestant doctrine on biblical translations in at least a dozen reviews.59
In other reviews and essays, and following the argument in his extension
lectures, he worked out a negative view of the whole Reformation move-
ment. Of course he did not defend his interpretation in the name of faith,

116 • Chapter Five
60 Vincenz Hasak, Dr. M. Luther und die religiöse Literatur seiner Zeit bis zum Jahre 1520
(Regensburg: Verlag Georg Joseph Manz, 1881), v–vii, “Schlusswort”; Wilhelm Mauren-
brecher, Studien und Skizzen zur Geschichte der Reformationszeit (Leipzig: Fr. Wilh. Grunow,
1874), 224–228; also Maurenbrecher, Geschichte der katholischen Reformation, vol. 1
(Nördlingen: C. H. Beck, 1880), vi. Pearson praises Maurenbrecher in his review of Boney-
Maury, Early Sources, in Academy, 26 (13 Sept. 1884), 162–163.
61 Pearson, “Luther Exhibition,” Athenaeum, July–Dec. 1883, letter by Henry Jenner,
496–498, and reply by Pearson, 530–531.
but of truth, and his own seeming partisanship no doubt made it all the
more urgent to reiterate that his commitment was to science and objectivity.
Such, indeed, was the tenor of these debates throughout the German
scholarship on the Reformation, and such discussions provided the con-
text for Pearson’s initial emphasis on the disinterestedness of science. The
preacher Vincenz Hasak, who decried the Reformation as a “great catas-
trophe” and prophesied that the near-heathenism of nineteenth-century
“Enlightenment” would lead to social catastrophe, was particularly insis-
tent: “God is my witness, that I have always wanted to give pure, objective
truth.” Wilhelm Maurenbrecher, praised by Pearson for his freedom from
partisanship, revered the spirit of objectivity. “In this sense we promote
objectivity for the Reformation period; in this sense we cast away all theo-
logically partisan studies of Reformation history as a sin against the Holy
Ghost of our historical science!” Maurenbrecher attributed the objective
turn in historical scholarship to Leopold von Ranke (a Protestant), and
credited this new ethic with a more judicious outlook on these historical
conﬂicts, as opposed to the fanaticism on both sides a few decades
earlier.60
Pearson was not impressed by the progress of objectivity in historical
scholarship thus far, but he prescribed the same remedy. The British Mu-
seum Luther exposition, commemorating the four-hundredth anniversary
of the reformer’s birth, was defended by one Henry Jenner, who refused
“to pander to the modern cant of unsectarian impartiality by vilifying as
well as glorifying the hero of the centenary.” Pearson held up a very dif-
ferent ideal. “The duty of the historian is neither to vilify nor to glorify;
they must be no hero-worshippers, but endeavour to represent the man
precisely as he was, and trace the effect of his conduct on the progress of
the human race with ‘unsectarian impartiality.”61 It would be difﬁcult to
say that Pearson always lived up to his own standard. He was sometimes
more Catholic than the papists, as in a letter to the Pall Mall Gazette pro-
voked by Matthew Arnold’s praise of Luther. “Surely, does not Mr. Arnold
know enough of history to be convinced that Luther and his movement
destroyed all art, all literature, all commerce (if that be of importance),
and all true religiosity?” Yet the principle retained all its validity. “Those
who wish in our day to rank as historical investigators must renounce once
and for all any party platform, whether it be Evangelical, Catholic, or Anti-

Cultural Historian • 117
62 “K. P.” letter to Pall Mall Gazette, October 1882, transcript in Hacker Papers, Box 10;
Pearson review of Bonet-Maury, Early Sources, Academy, 26 (13 Sept. 1884), 162–163;
Pearson unsigned review of J. Verres, Luther, Athenaeum (6 Dec. 1884), 729–730.
63 Karl Pearson, “Humanism in Germany,” from Westminster Review, April 1883, and
“Martin Luther,” from Westminster Review, Jan. 1884; on the absence of leaps, “Socialism:
In Theory and Practice,” a February1884 lecture, all published or reprinted in Pearson, Ethic
of Freethought. For the invocation of Goethe, see Louie H. Scaber (one of the students in his
Blackheath lectures) to KP, 2 Dec. 1882, Pearson Papers 838/7.
trinitarian.” An “impartial” history, he summed up, will “paint Luther as
the reverse of an apostle, but it will not defend the Papacy.”62
In Pearson’s interpretive essays on the Reformation period from 1883
and 1884, he drew heavily on German cultural historians, especially
Janssen, refashioning their materials and their arguments along the lines of
his own emerging perspective on history. Given the ubiquity of the forces
of progress, any great institution requires adaptation and reform, and the
late medieval Catholic Church was responsible for many abuses. Yet it also
had had great virtues. Above all, “it produced a unity of feeling between
all men, . . . it stood between workman and master, between peasant and
lord, dealing out equity and hindering oppression.” In any case, so vast an
institution could not be overturned suddenly without terrible destruction.
Gradual, enlightened reform, not dogmatism, had been needed to accom-
modate the incipient forces of individualism and science. Indeed, a power-
ful movement for reform had grown up in Germanic Europe in the last
decades of the ﬁfteenth century. This was the “rational humanism” of
Erasmus and Reuchlin, Pearsonians avant la lettre, who worked from
within the Church and refused to pander to popular prejudice. They were
true enthusiasts of the study. Had they succeeded, a great and worthy in-
stitution would have been preserved. Perhaps in time it would have been
capacious enough to embrace views ranging from Arnold to Huxley.
Alas, their reasonableness was defeated by fanatical appeals to an igno-
rant population by “new humanists” who could criticize but could not build,
“strolling scholars,” satirists, and bohemians. Their allegiance was crucial
to the success of Luther, who had ﬁrst attracted the support of peasants
and handicraftsmen by his opposition to the selﬁsh materialism of abso-
lutist monarchs and capitalist traders, but then sacriﬁced the folk to the ad-
vantage of the princes. Unlike Erasmus, who pursued renewal through
education, Luther put reason at war with faith. His perilous irrationality
was revealed by his obsession with the devil, his imprecations against Jews,
and his reduction of marriage to gratiﬁcation of the male sexual impulse.
His social revolution led to terrible hardship and set back European prog-
ress by centuries. The moral of this sad episode came straight out of Pear-
son’s “Ethic of Freethought.” Social evolution never proceeds by leaps.
Laborers of the head understand this. Progress must be achieved through
science and education, and never by political demagoguery. Goethe had
already recognized Luther’s shortcomings.63

118 • Chapter Five
FAITH AND RITUAL: MEDIEVAL PASSION PLAYS
But it would be a mistake to understand Pearson’s historical studies as
strictly subordinated to scientiﬁc rationalism. In the early 1880s, he was at
least as committed to history as to mathematics, and he was trying to de-
ﬁne an aesthetic and a philosophy to make it all whole. If he wanted to ac-
count for religion in scientiﬁc terms, and to identify religious values that
could be sustained at the bar of science, he also was searching for a scien-
tiﬁc perspective that could be reconciled with the human need, his own
need, for meaning and purpose. He was drawn to medieval culture because
he thought the old Germans had achieved a kind of integration of faith,
sensuality, community, and knowledge that was lost in the modern world.
The study of history was the most essential part of the effort to recover it.
And the cultural form that most powerfully expressed this outstanding fea-
ture of the integrated life was the passion play. Having failed, as it seemed,
to adapt this genre to the demands of a modern sensibility in his own up-
dated version, he undertook to examine its role in the culture of late-
medieval Germany. The result was his most remarkable historical essay, one
that cannot possibly be read as an expression of scientiﬁc monomania.
He published this study in 1897 in a collection of his popular and his-
torical writings. There he explained that he had extracted it from his notes
“for a course of lectures on mediaeval German literature delivered in
1883.” There is no surviving record that would indicate where or to
whom he gave these lectures, if he delivered them at all. But a manuscript
on passion plays dated 27 May 1883, a continuous text rather than a series
of lectures, survives among the Pearson Papers. What he published in
1897 had been conceptualized and largely written in this quite different
epoch of his life. Yet he revised very little, even preserving ruminations on
the contemporary relevance of the study that he could not possibly have
written or even endorsed in the 1890s.
He was immensely busy at this time with the most exciting mathemati-
cal work of his life and so had little time to revisit these historical topics.
The decision to print his older work almost unaltered, however, reﬂects
also on the autobiographical sensibility of the author. He was presenting
to the world not only his research, but himself, not naked but clothed as
an interpreter of history. To credit this work to a person under the same
name who wrote it fourteen years earlier was not, for Pearson, to disclaim
responsibility (except on the point of up-to-date references). Quite the
contrary, it was to assert the continuity of a self across what would seem to
be a radical divide, from youthful polymath to mature scientist, romantic
Schwärmer to hardheaded statistician. In the same way, a decade earlier he
had preserved in his Ethic of Freethought almost everything from the orig-
inal lectures and pamphlets, even the epigraphs from Hegel. In the preface

Cultural Historian • 119
64 Pearson, Ethic of Freethought, 2 ed. (1901), vii.
65 KP to Parker, 6 Sept. 1883, from Augsburg, Hacker Papers, Box 10. I take this letter
to be the best evidence for dating his viewing of this passion play, though the sources are con-
tradictory. In his ﬁnished essay he referred to the Brixlegg passion play of 1882: Karl Pear-
son, “The German Passion-Play: A Study in the Evolution of Western Christianity,” in
Pearson, Chances of Death, 246–432, on 262. It does not appear, however, that he even trav-
eled to the Continent in 1882.
66 John Murray, pub., A Handbook for Travelers in South Germany and Austria, 14th ed.
(London: John Murray, 1881), 290, 387. Under “Ober-Ammergau,” p. 254, it spoke of the
1880 passion play as “elaborately prepared and creditably executed.”
to his second edition, in 1901, he explained that he had left his texts al-
most wholly intact so that readers could comprehend the circumstances,
“partly historical and partly personal, under which these lectures and es-
says were written.”64 To print his old essay on passion plays with its origi-
nal arguments was in no way false or dishonest, for his heart still resonated
in quiet moments to the passions and yearnings of this earlier era, even if
he had new ways of intellectualizing them. In 1897 he believed that his
youthful understanding of passion plays was still full of truth.
His attraction to the genre, in fact, was lifelong. Despite his bemused
response to his ﬁrst passion play in the Black Forest in 1879, he read many
manuscripts of old passion plays before publishing his modern one in
1882. On Sunday, 2 September 1883, during that rapturous Tyrolean
summer of male comradeship and intimacy with nature discussed above in
chapter 3, he attended another. His immediate response, in a letter to
Parker, was comparatively subdued. “The Brixlegg Passion Play which we
saw on Sunday was rather long, lasting nearly all day, and somewhat weari-
some, but quite worth seeing. More of it and much else anon.”65
Brixlegg lies in the valley of the Inn, northeast of Innsbruck. John Murray’s
handbook for 1881 mentioned only the “noble and romantic mountain
scenery” for this town, but explained elsewhere that “Bauernkomödien
(peasants’ comedies), a species of dramatic performance, rendered famous
by the more pretentious Passionsspiel of the Ammergau, until the last few
years have been witnessed in the villages around Innsbruck and in this
part of the Tyrol.”66 Pearson witnessed something less touristic than an
Oberammergau production. If the impression it made on him was at
ﬁrst modest, it grew rapidly. In his published study he cited it, mainly in
footnotes, for its execution of symbolism and for peasant women who
“worked vigorously with soup-ladle and carving knife” serving up lunch at
each table during the noon intermission. He explained that for medieval
audiences, the great drama was
the story of the world, . . . rich in interest and signiﬁcant in meaning for each
one of them. They might see one of their fellow-citizens personify God the Fa-

120 • Chapter Five
67 Pearson, “The German Passion-Play,” 262, 278–279.
ther, they might laugh at the repeated discomﬁture of the Devil, and smile at the
mode in which Judas’ soul was carried off to Hell; yet none the less God, Devil,
and Hell were intensely real to them, and became rather more so than less when
the earnestness of their religion was softened by touches of humour in its state
representation. The realism of life itself ever brings the ridiculous into closest
contact with the sublime.
A footnote recalled that at Brixlegg, God the Father “came onto the stage
with, and claimed an owner for, an umbrella found after the morning per-
formance; nor did the element of the grotesque in this incident at all strike
the peasant majority in the audience.”67
He recalled with particular vividness this last event many years later
when he wrote to his daughter Helga in Munich about his experience of
this passion play. His guide had told him of the performance while they
were descending the Gross Venediger and then joined him in the journey
to Brixlegg:
Next day the Passionsspiel began, I think at 7:30 & we sat till 12, a temporary
theatre crammed with peasants. In the morning we had the creation of the
world & everything up to the birth of Christ. Then we went out at 12 and had
dinner sitting at long tables down the village street. A peasant woman served at
the top of each table, ladled out soup & carved the meat. I hardly think there
was another outsider—it would be in the ’80s—beside myself. At 1 o’clock we
returned to the theatre, and the ﬁrst thing that happened was that God
Almighty came on to the stage with an enormous umbrella, which he said some
member of the audience had left in the morning. . . . Nobody smiled or saw
anything incongruous, and the Deity proceeded to recite his part. We then had
the whole New Testament History, ﬂogging, cruciﬁxion and all precisely as you
saw it in the woodcutters’ work of the 15th & 16th century. Everything even
the words were fully 400 years old, and the spirit of the audience was as fully
mediaeval. Christ descended to Hell and brought Adam & the Patriarchs out,
while the devils resisted & the whole wound up with the day of Judgment about
7:30. It was a wonderful experience, and when I reached Munich next day, I did
not want to stay there; it was all too modern and impossible, so I went to Nürn-
berg. That was my experience of Brixlegg. I had several times been in Munich,
ﬁrst with Oscar Browning in 1875, & enjoyed its galleries & opera etc. But af-
ter Brixlegg’s acting it was simply impossible. Actors & audience were simply
performing a great religious ceremony, absolutely real to all of them, and so I
understood how wonderfully the simple folk can portray what they undoubt-
edly believe. Not even the devils were grotesque, it was simply what they
thought life was and ought to be. I think it was Brixlegg which made me write

Cultural Historian • 121
68 KP to Helga Sharpe Pearson [later Hacker], 25 Oct. 1925, Pearson Papers 916/2. His
wistful sense that passion plays revealed the lost reality of the divine was not unique; see
Lears, No Place of Grace, 150, 214-215.
69 Annie L. Eastty to KP, 25 Jan. 1885, Pearson Papers 10/37.
70 KP to Parker, 6 Sept. 1883, Hacker Papers, Box 10.
71 Pearson, “A Study in Mediaevalism” (draft manuscript of his essay on passion plays,
dated 27 May 1883, Pearson Papers 92), repeated in “The German Passion-Play,” 249.
my paper on the German Passionplay, at any rate it gave a reality to mediaeval
phases of thought which they hardly possessed before.68
What most captivated him was the blurring of everyday reality with deep
religious truth and of past with present. In Brixlegg, at least on this occa-
sion, the medieval still lived, and Pearson envied those peasants their in-
nocence and simplicity. He associated it with a lack of individuality, or at
least with the possibility of socialism, judging from a letter in early 1885
from Annie Eastty, one of the women he was then cultivating, who, with
her sister had “spent some ingenuity in trying to discover an occult con-
nection between Socialism and the returning of an umbrella.”69 No doubt
he romanticized the event in retrospect, and possibly even at the time.
There are discrepancies between his memory and the documentary
record, beginning with the Gross Venediger, which he did not climb until
the next year, 1884. His draft essay on passion plays was complete several
months before he witnessed this one. And, far from ﬂeeing Munich that
year, he drank it up. In the same letter to Parker that contained his laconic
mention of the passion play, he told of two or three glorious days viewing
medieval art there. “Talk of Greece?” he concluded. “It is hard to grasp
the perfection of these old Christian socialists! There is something which
is so much fuller of practical life and active lesson than the ideal beauty of
Hellenism.”70
With time, however, Germany did in a way become “impossible” for
him. The collective performance of Austrian peasants in Brixlegg achieved
gradually, in his memory, a perfection that exacerbated his feelings of alien-
ation from urban, industrial Germany. The passion play was his utopia, a
harmonious scene located in a past that could still be glimpsed in a few re-
mote places of Catholic Europe but was quite out of reach in England.
The Brixlegg peasant mind ascribed the most concrete reality to the divine
and the mythical, placing God on the same plane of reality as an umbrella.
It would be childish, he explained in his essay, “to introduce mediaevalism
into modern life; we cannot bring back the religious guilds or monks or
passion plays. . . . There are other calls to action, other opportunities of
self-renunciation, other ideals for which to battle.” Still, it was important
to “prove to the Present that for a thousand years the Past did not toil in
vain. . . . There is much, inﬁnitely much directly bearing on our great ma-
chine age to be learnt from the old religious socialism.”71

122 • Chapter Five
72 Pearson, “The German Passion-Play,” 338, 350.
73 Ibid., 334–335, 364, 369. Pearson and Parker had discussed Wagner’s “theories of a
combination of arts in the theatre of the future,” as a cure for the desiccation and alienation
of modern life: Parker to KP, 17 Sept. 1879, Pearson Papers 780.
Pearson based his study on twenty-six old religious plays, all of them
published in modern German editions. He traced the origin of the passion
play to pagan dances for the fertility goddess: “A robust primitive people
ﬁnds its supreme bliss in rhythmic motion.” The Church had co-opted
these dances to gain converts, but the transition to modern Christianity was
inﬁnitely gradual, and many traces of polytheism, with “all its good and bad
qualities,” long survived. In particular, the symbolism of childbirth and fer-
tility of the mother-goddess was attached to the virgin, who became “a cen-
tre of sex-emotion and a symbol of archaic race feeling.”72 What is called
the Christianization of Germany ought to be understood as the assimilation
of Catholicism into the beliefs and rituals of the German folk.
The plays had no real characterization, in the modern sense, because the
medieval mentality “left no place for individual thought or individual con-
duct.” “It had not dawned on the mind of mediaeval man” that personal-
ity and character could be distinguished from action. “His morality was
like his religion, one of works and formal observances.” The production,
too, was collective through and through. It was organized by the guilds,
those incomparable medieval institutions, out of a sense of responsibility
to provide entertainment and instruction for the community as well as for
themselves. The acting was strictly amateur, involving often hundreds of
characters—an “authentic folk ritual,” with actors indistinguishable from
audience. It could be brutally realistic, as with the insertion of the spear
into Christ’s side, which Pearson recalled from Brixlegg. Some of the
“more solemn parts” were governed by “arid routine.” Yet the play was
something quite wonderful, a collective ritual of social solidarity and reli-
gious meaning, combining theater, art, dance, and song in a kind of
Gesamtkunstwerk, reﬂecting a communal order and uniﬁed world view
that makes Wagner’s ambitions, by comparison, appear modest.73
Pearson admired it particularly as a folk production. Though Christian in
content, it retained many elements that the Church could scarcely tolerate,
and that Protestantism would not. Due to a strict repression after Luther,
“folk-symbolism and folk-art, municipal fête and the old religious socialism
would be destroyed”; and “the withering grasp of a dogmatic religion of
the schools—without symbolism, without art, without pageantry—would
again be laid on the Teutonic folk-spirit.” But this already had been tried
once, by the ﬁrst missionaries of Catholicism, who failed. The folk spirit at
that time was not to be suppressed; it “danced into the churches; it took
Christianity out of the hands of the priests; it moulded it to its own ideas,
and shaped it to that wonderful artistic polytheism of which the nominal

Cultural Historian • 123
74 Pearson, “The German Passion-Play,” 369, 401, 399, 406.
75 Lamprecht, born in 1856, was almost precisely Pearson’s contemporary. On his devel-
oping research interests, see Chickering, Karl Lamprecht, esp. 54, 123–128.
founder never dreamed.” Perhaps that potentiality was not utterly lost, for
this same folk-instinct had survived, as he claimed, as an attribute of an allied
race, his own. Although the old guild system could not be restored, a
greater public role for labor organizations remained desirable and possible.
A more uniﬁed culture could be achieved through better education and a
fairer distribution of wealth. Passion plays, impossible under the repressive
order of capitalism, might be revived with a new collectivism. Only then
“will anything worthy of the name of a folk-religion be possible, then and
not till then can a great religious festival be again a reality.”74
THE FATE OF A RENEGADE CULTURAL HISTORIAN
Pearson was a consummate professional as well as a vigorous enthusiast.
Although largely self-trained in history, he did not play the autodidact but
mastered the relevant scholarship and worked in primary documents. Had
he found employment as a historian, one can imagine a career something
like Karl Lamprecht’s in Germany, working against the grain of the estab-
lished school of political historians, seeking a synthetic account of law, 
society, economy, education, art, ideas, and religion, and looking to inte-
grate this broader evolution of society with contemporary science. Indeed,
Lamprecht’s teachers, including Maurenbrecher and Cornelius, were
among Pearson’s favorite historians. It attests to Pearson’s familiarity with
German cultural history that he unwittingly followed Lamprecht in taking
up, as a research topic, Luther and the birth of individuality, and preceded
him in his histories of primitive communism and of matrilineal families in
early Germany.75
As it actually happened, Pearson’s historical work on Germany was not
much noticed in his own time and is now forgotten. The failure of the
emerging historical profession to take him seriously was due in part to his
untimely originality, his dissent from the overwhelmingly political—
and factual rather than explanatory—orientation of the ﬁeld. No more in
history than in physics or statistics was Pearson willing to regard facts as
sufﬁcient to make a science, and so he dissented from the prevailing neo-
Rankeanism. His isolation from professional history reﬂected also his pre-
ferred medium of publication, the essay in a highbrow review rather than
a survey or monograph, and his ﬁeld of interest, Germany rather than
Britain. Also, his polymathy worked against him. Around 1880, for the
ﬁrst time in Britain, it had become possible, and therefore in a way neces-

124 • Chapter Five
76 On professional history in Britain, see Collini, Public Moralists, 205, 217–218; Ross,
Origins of American Social Science, 66–69; Goldstein, “Professionalization of History.”
sary, to make a career as a research historian, and Pearson deviated from
the emerging pattern of the profession in too many ways for his work to
be incorporated fully into it.76 It would go against the grain, too, for a
man who subsequently became famous as a mathematical statistician and
eugenicist to be taken seriously a century later for his historical writing,
though Pearson’s work is in better accord with modern tastes than that of
most of his contemporaries.
After 1884, when he accepted his appointment as professor of applied
mathematics at University College and decided not to pursue a post in
German history and culture at Cambridge, his historical researches were
no longer quite so central to his intellectual life. Not for ﬁve or six years
more, however, would they become merely avocational, and he never
abandoned them. His inability to reconcile a career of unwavering quan-
tiﬁcation with the appreciation for art, ritual, polytheism, and bacchana-
lian dance of his essay on passion plays remained for him a source of
personal dissatisfaction. It reﬂected perhaps the impossibility of being a
participant rather than a scholarly observer of these surviving folk rituals,
of acting without reﬂecting, and of comprehending God as a part of
everyday life, as real as an umbrella. Peasant life, like nature, was tantaliz-
ing but alien.
His historical studies, however, were certainly important as a phase in
his own development. They framed and sharpened for him the problem of
objectivity, which soon took its place at the center of his conception of sci-
ence and scientiﬁc method. His vision of statistics as the indispensable tool
of a strong central state reﬂected his preference for the economics of the
old religious socialism over Protestant individualism and capitalistic com-
petition. More even than that, he wanted scientiﬁc method to become
part of shared wisdom and a shared ethic, so that science could help to re-
build that sense of cultural unity whose loss was the tragic outcome of the
Protestant Reformation.

1 Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics, chap. 2.
C H A P T E R  S I X
Intellectual Love and the Woman Question
(K.P. “Dear me! Dear me! This is very, very sad! Emotions,
unmixed, unmitigated emotions! I must write to my respected
friend O.S. at once. I, K.P., sworn enemy of the emotions,
Professor of Applied Mathematics, to have my name appended
to so emotional an effusion, no I must write at once. It’s not
the morals I object to, but it’s the emotions!!!”)
—Olive Schreiner to Pearson, 9 July 1886, 
imagining his reaction to the still-unwritten
book she proposes to dedicate to him 
(From Man to Man), Pearson papers 840/4.
A GROWING INTEREST in women’s issues and curiosity about women’s feelings
and perceptions led Pearson in 1885 to take the initiative in establishing a
“Men and Women’s Club,” devoted to research and frank discussion on is-
sues concerning women and relations between the sexes. Although he was by
this time a professor of applied mathematics, with a heavy load of teaching
obligations, he had begun working intensely on historical issues involving the
changing status of women, structures of family and child rearing, prostitu-
tion, and sexual desire and activity. As late as 1890, on the threshold of his
conversion to statistics, he continued to tell correspondents that the history
and status of women formed his single most important topic of research. On
these matters, as on religion, he was boldly historicist, arguing that the insti-
tutions of family and reproduction had varied immensely over written and
unwritten history, from a primeval age of “mother-right” whose survivals
were still visible at the onset of the Reformation. While he insisted, as ever,
that each successive stage in the sexual organization of society had repre-
sented progress, he also viewed the matrilineal order sympathetically. He held
it up as evidence that the subordination of women was in no way natural, but
could and should be ended in a coming socialist era. This work was well
known in the women’s movements of Britain and America in its time, and the
fascinating episode of the Men and Women’s Club has been rediscovered in
ours. The sexual explicitness, if not exactly radicalism, of Pearson’s milieu
helped to make it possible for even the English to talk about eugenics, which
after all meant public and scientiﬁc intrusion into reproductive choices.1

126 • Chapter Six
The woman question deﬁned also a compelling set of problems in
which, at least for Pearson, scholarly or scientiﬁc considerations were in-
terwoven with personal ones. This took various forms, including his tor-
tuously intellectualized proposal of marriage to the secretary of the club,
Maria Sharpe, soon after it disbanded. Such questions as the reciprocity of
sexual desire between men and women were often on the agenda of this
late-Victorian group, and Pearson was the most outspoken of all its mem-
bers. Since nature was for him also an object of desire, and since questions
of intimacy and separation were so central to his philosophy of science, his
writings about and relations to women are relevant to any study of his
evolving scientiﬁc sensibility. In his analysis of sexuality, Pearson was quite
explicit about the agony of detachment. The positivism of his Grammar
of Science, his denial that we can ever acquire knowledge of nature itself,
appears from this standpoint as another expression of his ethics of renun-
ciation. At the same time, impersonal knowledge had an undoubted value
as a basis for intellectual exchange between men and women that, in the
ideal case, would rise above the passions of sex. In practice this proved im-
possible, as intellectual and personal love became intermingled, and yet it
was celebrated by the women of the club even more than by the men.
Pearson’s ideal of impersonality emerged from these experiences as a
blend, combining fear of uncontrollable passion with exaltation of intel-
lectual inquiry.
His involvement with women’s issues was pertinent also to his develop-
ing views on the ethics of science. He worried, with many socialist men in
his time, that the women’s movement tended to individualism, while the
maternal role offered a contrasting exemplar of unparalleled selﬂessness.
But the subordination of women promoted selﬁshness of another kind:
the egoism of men. This was no abstract concern, but a cause of great per-
sonal anxiety, which emerged as a crucial issue in relation to his own mar-
riage. In this sense, his socialism and his advocacy of greater independence
for women were allied to his emerging philosophy of science as a means to
control an egoism that he hated in contemporary economic institutions,
and dreaded in himself.
SENSUALITY AND PROSTITUTION
Pearson grew up in a culture that offered very limited opportunities for
friendship or serious conversation between young men and women of the
middle classes. While one must allow for the silences of the written record,
he appears not to have been acutely conscious of sexual desire until about
the time he traveled to Germany in 1879. This not uncommon impulsion
was one element in his subsequent cultivation of a more general and even

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 127
2 Walkowitz, Prostitution and Victorian Society.
3 KP to Maria Sharpe, 13 March 1888, Pearson Papers 793.
4 KP to Conway, 22 Oct. 1881.
scholarly interest in the condition of women. From the beginning, it was
mixed up with the discomﬁting circumstances of his parents’ unhappy
marriage, which he did not wish to replicate. He was also, as we have seen,
personally concerned about the loss of independence for a man implied by
marriage, and with it, the creation of a possibly fatal obstacle to close male
friendship. Perhaps, however, friendships of the same sort could be formed
between men and women, within or outside of marriage, and they might
even satisfy the not wholly prurient curiosity that Pearson felt rising within
him about the feelings, perceptions, and beliefs of this familiar but elusive
form of humanity. Increasingly in the early 1880s he extended his socialist
sympathy for the powerless and the downtrodden, especially wage labor-
ers, also to women.
There was also the question of prostitution, which by 1880 was a lively
public issue in England. The Contagious Diseases Acts, enacted by Parlia-
ment in a series of bills between 1864 and 1869, called for medical in-
spection of prostitutes in ports and garrison towns to contain the spread
of venereal disease among soldiers and sailors. Opposition to these mea-
sures, which were applied exclusively to women and involved what was 
often described as “medical rape” with the instruments of inspection, was
an important source of the Victorian women’s movement.2 Pearson would
argue that public health concerns clearly outweighed such reservations,
and indeed he was among those socialist men who saw the repeal move-
ment as evidence of lingering individualism among women. Evenhand-
edly, he favored medical inspections for prostitutes and their clients alike.3
But he was greatly troubled by prostitution, thinking in then-conventional
terms of prostitutes as helpless victims of capitalist inequity and the lust of
powerful men. In late 1881 he “went street-walking . . . and counted 800
saleable pieces of ﬂesh” between his rooms near Lincoln’s Inn and Oxford
Circus. “On return I varied the statistical method and tried to come to
some conclusion as to age,” determining that many were between four-
teen and seventeen, mere girls. “I believe the only remedy is to pass
through anarchy, i.e. dynamite the present social-arrangements and soci-
ety generally.”4
A celebrated exposé in the Pall Mall Gazette in July 1885 by W. T. Stead,
“The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon,” stressed the exploitation of
young girls by wealthy men, and particularly the gruesome marketing of
virgins. Stead even entered the white slave market himself, and reported in
vivid detail on his purchase of a young innocent. For this he was prosecuted
in a sensational trial and sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. The

128 • Chapter Six
5 Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, chap. 3; Schults, Crusader in Babylon. On prosti-
tution as coercive, see DuBois and Gordon, “Seeking Ecstasy on the Battleﬁeld.”
6 On Shelley and British sexual radicalism, see Taylor, Eve and the New Jerusalem, 44. 
W. M. Rossetti’s entry on Shelley in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th ed., vol. 21 (1886),
789–794, emphasized his belief in marriage as a “voluntary relation between a man and a
woman” (790).
7 “K. P.,” The Woman’s Question. Being a Paper Read at the Preliminary Meeting of the
Wollstonecraft (?) Club, July 11th 1885 (London: Privately printed by W. King and Sell,
1885), Pearson Papers 10/2, 17; on women and shopping in 1880s London, cf. Walkowitz,
City of Dreadful Delight, chap. 1.
brouhaha surrounding these events stimulated interest in the Men and
Women’s Club, for which Pearson was then recruiting members.5
The germ of the club may be found in a thought Pearson communi-
cated to Robert Parker from Germany in 1879, already quoted, where he
told of his wish to push aside the “ﬁg leaf ” that obstructed honest relations
between men and women. Troubled, as it appears, by his own sexual im-
pulses, he looked back to a more innocent time when Greek youths and
maidens disported together in truthful nakedness. Prostitution signiﬁed
for him the worst aspects of the fall from this idealized natural state, the
degradation of a vital human bond by the power relations of a capitalistic
economy. He viewed this corruption as no mere abstraction, but as a mat-
ter of intense personal signiﬁcance. His youthful admiration for Shelley
may already have reﬂected a dislike of the dependence and coercion im-
plied by bourgeois marriage, and by the early 1880s he favored free mari-
tal unions over constrained legal ones.6 He wrote with acid disdain of
middle-class housewives, living off the labor of their husbands. What
meets our eyes on “any fashionable London street” in midafternoon is
“hundreds of women—mere dolls—gazing intently into shop windows at
various bits of colored ribbon.” It was reminiscent of scenes of women on
other streets at other hours.7
From 1885, he argued strenuously that all women should work, and he
soon began to preach that they deserved to receive independent compen-
sation for that work, whether they were employed outside the home or oc-
cupied with the all-important social function of childbearing and child
rearing. This state support would assure the ﬁnancial independence of
women from men, guaranteeing that marriage should always be voluntary
and never reduce to prostitution. What, he asked Maria Sharpe in Decem-
ber 1886 (he was already falling in love with her), are the home services
that middle-class women provide for men in return for their support? “[I]f
they include the services of friendship, possibly those of sex, are you not
dangerously near making the fairest human relation a matter of pecuniary
arrangement? I want both man & woman to be absolutely independent in
matters of economy, so that sex-selection shall be based solely & purely

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 129
8 KP to MS, 14 Dec. 1886, written just one day after he ﬁrst proposed the socialization of
motherhood in an essay on “Socialism and Sex” read to the Men and Women’s Club, later
published in To-Day (Feb. 1887) and reprinted in Ethic of Freethought.
9 Pearson, “Woman’s Question,” 13; KP to Maria Sharpe, 6 July 1885 (where he admit-
ted the attraction of these doll ﬁgures to men, even to himself); Pearson, “Wie steht’s mit der
deutschen Cultur,” 34.
upon common sympathy and the tie of friendship.”8 His scheme of state-
endowed motherhood, discussed below, was among other things an an-
swer to the moral dilemma occasioned by the ﬁnancial dependence of
middle-class wives on their husbands.
By 1890, Pearson was much more likely to discuss marital and sexual re-
lations in the cold-blooded terms of efﬁciency and racial progress, but he
could never suppress his anxiety that legal coercion and economic de-
pendence might cause love to be feigned—appearance without substance.
Already in 1885, his new idealization of strong, independent women had
led him to a less appreciative view of Goethe, who portrayed the ideal
woman as wholly unintellectual, after the fashion of Gretchen, “the per-
fection of dolldom.” In 1914, in a mood of profound opposition to war
and of renewed skepticism about contemporary German culture, he no-
ticed a lack of complex and subtle emotions even in this classical period of
German literature. How, he wondered, could “the seething intellect of a
Faust” be “attracted by the simple-mindedness of Gretchen? . . . Goethe
could not have understood the type of woman who should stand as peer
and comrade of modern man.”9 Of the modern German poets, only 
one could with proﬁt be read and reread, and he was not German, but
Austrian.
That poet was of course Robert Hamerling, whose prose epic Aspasia
Pearson ﬁrst read in the summer of 1881, and who provided a literary re-
demption of the feminine. Aspasia was inspired by the life of the famous
concubine of Pericles, depicted as an irresistibly sensuous Milesian among
the severely virtuous Athenian men and their dour wives. She was too in-
dependent for the customary life of sexual slavery, having been given in
marriage to a Persian king, whom she deﬁantly ﬂed. But she was in no way
reluctant to deploy her charms to sweeten the life of men and women
alike. Socrates, calling her a practitioner of “the most philanthropic of pro-
fessions,” admonished that beauty is transitory. His was a misapprehen-
sion, however, for while Aspasia rejected slavery in love, she also refused to
enter the “career” of “nymph.” Pearson was not quite comfortable with
such overpowering sensuality in Hamerling’s ﬁction. There is a warning in
his hand to unspeciﬁed others—presumably the women of the Men and
Women’s Club among whom his copy circulated—to pass by the chapter
concerning the pleasure garden wherein Aspasia and Pericles drink of the

130 • Chapter Six
10 Robert Hamerling, Aspasia: A Romance of Art and Love in Ancient Hellas, trans. Mary
J. Safford (New York: William S. Gottsberger, 1885). Pearson’s markings on his German
copy are recorded in Hacker Papers, Box 8.
11 The notes for his lecture on Hamerling, 30 April 1882, are in Pearson Papers 47/2.
12 KP to Parker, 25 Dec. 1880.
delights of love, if these readers “would not penetrate to the baser nature
of this poet Hamerling.”10
But Aspasia is far from base. Her love for Pericles is soon consecrated in
a free marital union. Her sensuality becomes the inspiration for public
beauty, as with her wiles she induces the Athenian leaders to raise artistic
over martial values by constructing the Parthenon. That is, she brings
pleasure to men even as she elevates them to a higher moral plain. This,
the distinctive contribution of the feminine, depends on her assertion of
an ideal of greater independence for women. In his 1882 lecture on
Hamerling, Pearson worried that the “Gospel of Beauty” might be de-
graded to a “Gospel of Sense.” But he condemned philosophical antisen-
sualism, dismissing “Puritan morality” as tantamount to immorality. The
great problem of the day, intimately linked to the circumstances of
women, was to ﬁnd a “union of soul & sense,” a “Christian Hellenism.”
Women had their own special duty in this passage to a higher stage of cul-
ture, one that required activity rather than passivity. “What man may read,
woman must read.”11
His worries about women were always turned partly inward. The late
marriages required by modern civilization, he told Parker on Christmas
Day 1880, “are either bad for a man’s physical health or else his morality,
where by morality I do not mean the ordinary cant, but the acting towards
every woman as if she had at least some fraction of the abstract ideal we
have formed of the class, resident somewhere in her.” His painful ambiva-
lence about sex surfaced in his speculation that it might even give evidence
against evolution by revealing “the creative will of a God (? Devil) who
saw in family and relationship a means of binding mankind together (? or
of reducing them to the level of brutes).”12 These anxieties, and his ap-
preciation of Hamerling’s female characters, are evident also in his 1882
passion play. The Jesus of the play, tempted by the demon of lust, devel-
oped an intense suspicion of the sensual and declared his mother’s affec-
tion to be the only authentic love. Mary Magdalene, who, as Pearson
imagined her, had formerly been impressed into concubinage in an an-
tique Babylon, was in many ways his opposite. Although she eventually
took ﬂight from the evil prince in Magdala who held her captive, she
thereafter became a slave of the sensual, “drowning all care in joyousness.”
Each recognized in the other something needful. Jesus introduced the dis-

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 131
13 Pearson, Passion Play, 22, 24, 65–66, 96.
14 In 1885 he asked her to burn his letters, rather a rare thing for him, giving some indi-
cation of how much he had confessed to her. “You must not ask me to do that,” she re-
sponded, calling them “landmarks” for her and links to her past. The letters have been lost,
however. Elisabeth Cobb to KP, 3 June 1885.
appointed and cynical Mary to the possibility of a higher love, involving
service to great causes. At the same time, she convinced him that physical
love, when free of constraint, could be virtuous, and that stony denial of
sensual need may cause the soul to be consumed by ungratiﬁed desire.
Pearson’s Passion Play thus followed its religious prototype in bringing a
message of redemption. The prostitute can rediscover the commitment of
a deep human bond, and the man of heavy conscience can love purely
without forsaking the body.13
FRIENDS NOT LOVERS
Pearson talked and corresponded rather intimately with a sequence of
women in the 1880s, including Elisabeth Cobb, Olive Schreiner, and ﬁ-
nally Maria Sharpe, whom he married in 1890. Pearson met Cobb,
Sharpe’s older sister, on 8 November 1881, an “anniversary” that she 
often recalled to him in subsequent years. She wrote him over three hun-
dred letters in the next half century, many of them from 1882 to 1885.
Schreiner supplanted her as Pearson’s favored female correspondent in
1886, and for a time before her breakdown in mid-December of that year,
she was writing him several times per week. By then his correspondence
with Sharpe was becoming more intense. For several years, however, it re-
mained careful and polite, all the more so because they wrote in their ca-
pacities as organizer and secretary of the Men and Women’s Club, often
about such club discussion topics as marriage, desire, prostitution, and
sexual health.
Schreiner destroyed Pearson’s letters, and Cobb’s from Pearson have
also disappeared.14 Pearson, by contrast, kept almost everything, and the
history of the Men and Women’s Club has been reconstructed primarily
from his and Maria Pearson’s collections. Cobb and Schreiner were both,
as we might say, feminists, of a generation that emphasized the differences
between men and women. They often reﬂected on his words, sometimes
even quoting them back to him, but their interpretations of the man are
certainly not to be taken at face value. They liked to depict him, as in Olive
Schreiner’s joke quoted above in the chapter epigraph, as cold and emo-
tionless, a reasoning machine of the quintessentially masculine type. They

132 • Chapter Six
15 Cobb to KP, 7 Nov. 1884.
16 Cobb to KP, 27 Nov. 1881, 18 Dec. 1881, 28 Dec. 1881, (undated) Sept. 1884.
17 Cobb to Brian Donkin, 14 Dec. 1886, Pearson Papers 840/6.
were not altogether wrong. Pearson felt himself so severely buffeted by his
emotions that in the years of the Men and Women’s Club he strove self-
consciously to subdue them with icy reason. He also was troubled that the
ideal of dispassionate intellectual relationships between men and women
proved so difﬁcult to sustain, not least because of a certain irrepressible
tendency of its members to fall in love with one another.
Cobb was Pearson’s senior by well over a decade, married to a radical
member of Parliament of resolutely practical bent. She yearned to move in
a world of ideas, one that was not readily accessible to a mother of four
and stepmother of four more, out beyond London’s northwestern sub-
urbs near Harrow. “I have told you before how you have been to me a
window opening on to wider, loftier views. I need not tell you again,” she
wrote him on their third anniversary.15 No doubt she would have liked to
receive more signs of personal warmth from Pearson, but she valued him
as a fount of ideas and critiques and as a bridge to the intellectual life of
the metropolis. She was also interested in Germany, and even read the lan-
guage, so he very early lent her his copy of Hamerling’s König von Sion.
For his part, he was able to conﬁde to women, and ﬁrst of all to her, cer-
tain thoughts and feelings about which he was more reserved with his fam-
ily and with male friends such as Parker. Within weeks of their ﬁrst
meeting, he trusted her enough to send a copy of The New Werther as ev-
idence of his irresolution and despair. She thought it “morbid and un-
healthy,” though not unnatural as a phase in the development of “young
minds,” and offered the Carlylean remedy of “work for others.” She was
unsure whether to read the book as ﬁction and tried to reassure him on the
basis of one of his early reviews on socialism that any person who was able
to write with such commitment could not be “like the little book, as you
wanted to make out to me you were.” Three years later, she responded to
news of Raphael Wertheimer’s prospective arrival in Saig as if Lotte had
come to Weimar. “I thought all the characters in that book were ﬁctitious,
except the hero in a shadowy way. Were they not? & did he come?”16
Cobb was also uncertain—as Schreiner would be later—about the na-
ture of the emotional bond between herself and Pearson. At one particu-
larly traumatic juncture in December 1886, she called him “more
impersonal than any one I know, he looks at things from an outside stand-
point, and in the abstract, and seems as a rule absolutely without personal
feeling.”17 When she wrote him that feeling and sensitivity deﬁned what
was distinctively human, he countered by afﬁrming the preeminence of
reason. What she offered to him in long, free-ﬂowing letters as expressions

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 133
18 Cobb to KP, 19 May 1884, 21 Oct. 1884.
19 Cobb to KP, (undated) Sept. 1884, 27 March 1886, 4 Feb. 1886; this last letter quotes
back to him the line he wrote in December, by which time he was already smitten by Cobb’s
sister, Maria.
of her personal views and commitments, he took the liberty of criticizing
for illogic. Yet she appreciated the opening he provided to a world of rea-
soned argument and understood well enough his need for reassurance and
support.
She wanted to be the one to provide it. “Don’t you think it is a splen-
did thing for a man to dig in his garden, among other things; it always
seems to me direct contact with old Mother Earth is so intensely whole-
some. I know when I talk of nature you always tell me mind is what we
need, but it always seems to me our minds get crumpled & warped &
crooked without the personal contact from time to time.” The “personal
contact” in this suggestive passage referred also to her wish, frequently re-
iterated in less allusive language, that he would visit her more often, rather
than merely writing. When he sent her a joke about advertising for a wife,
with all the qualiﬁcations speciﬁed, she responded with a cautious defense
of passion, which she hoped might sometimes be the outcome rather than
the cause of sympathy and friendship. For him, however, she envisioned a
more detached existence. “I have sometimes thought, I might even have
said hoped, you might be one of those people . . . who did not need the
married life, but could live with the larger love, the wider emotion.”18
If she generally deferred to him on matters of science and reason, he was
the more vulnerable emotionally, and her role as counselor and conﬁdante
undergirded her evident hope that she might be without rival for his asex-
ual affections. Although she reported feeling especially nice after his visits,
he never found their relationship quite satisfying. They agreed on the
virtues of Entsagung, renunciation, not just abstractly but as a vital ele-
ment in their own lives. He complained, however, that visiting her occa-
sioned a painful excess of introspection. She was delighted, she wrote on
another occasion, to learn that he had been laughing for a change. “But
why do you make of me a species of avenging deity, saying the thought of
me upbraided you for frivolity!” In December 1885, he explained to her
in a detached voice that was yet unmistakably personal, of “the fact & a
very terrible fact it sometimes is, that a man or woman’s life may be crip-
pled, rendered almost unendurable by not exercising the function.” It de-
pends, she replied, on “how much the mind is allowed to dwell on this
special function.”19
Pearson’s dwelled on it quite a lot in the years of the Men and Women’s
Club. The club, as established in 1885, was largely his idea, a product of
his curiosity about the other sex and his growing interest in the condition

Figure 6. Elisabeth Cobb. She wished for Pearson the larger love, the 
wider emotion. (Courtesy of UCL)

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 135
20 Most notably, Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, chap. 5; also Bland, Banishing the
Beast, esp. chap. 1; Brandon, New Women and Old Men, esp. chap. 2. Walkowitz’s chapter is
based on a paper ﬁrst published in 1986, Bland’s on one that appeared in 1990.
21 From Coleridge’s Table Talk, 23 July 1827: “The man’s desire is for the woman, but
the woman’s desire is rarely other than for the desire of the man.” KP to Parker, 24 Oct.
1881.
22 Pearson, “Woman’s Question” (1885), 5. In the published essay in The Ethic of
Freethought, 374, he was more tentative, beginning the statement about women and children
with an “If” and omitting the clause about men’s desire.
of women, past and future. Its history has been told in several recent pub-
lications.20 Cobb was his most important ally in recruiting members, who
were to consist of men and women in equal numbers. Such clubs, often
linked to political or social causes, proliferated in London at this time.
Pearson had links with several, including Fabians, anarchists, theosophists,
Goethe admirers, and would-be reformers of Russia. If this one was to
succeed, it had to cultivate trust that participants could discuss the most
delicate subjects in conﬁdence. It was thus limited to a select group, about
twenty, who met in each other’s houses, most often that of Robert Parker.
The delicate question of sexual desire rose to the surface almost at the out-
set, the partly inadvertent consequence of Pearson’s inaugural paper for
the club in June 1885.
Kegan Paul had insisted to Pearson in reaction to his passion play that
his Mary Magdalene was impossible because real sexual desire was distinc-
tively male. “Desire of the man for the woman, but desire of the woman
for the desire of the man,” he intoned, invoking Coleridge.21 Pearson,
who wavered on this vital question, took the view in his essay that women
were not sexual beings but reproductive beings, possessed by an overpow-
ering biological drive. He cited an unnamed female author on “the stiﬂed
cry of unmarried women: Give us children or we die.” The fulﬁllment of
this, Rachel’s plea, depended not on God but lustful man. Pearson’s bio-
logical restatement of Coleridge’s line ran: “Race-evolution has implanted
in woman a desire for children, as it has implanted in man a desire
for woman.”22 He wondered if the health of single (childless) women
was harmed by their deﬁance of nature, just as that of men could be 
damaged—a commonplace of contemporary medicine—by suppression of
the sexual instinct. At the same time, he believed that barriers between
men and women and enforced silence about sex had given it an undue
prominence. He hoped that coeducation of boys and girls would lead men
to understand that “sexual attraction” (he revised this in the published es-
say to “sex-friendship”) had “other and more worthy elements than mere
sexual passion.” “A full knowledge of the laws of sex would do something,
I think, to reduce the sexual relation to its true subordinate position, and

136 • Chapter Six
23 Pearson, “Woman’s Question” (1885), 9; cf. Ethic of Freethought, 378–379; KP to MS,
14 June 1887.
24 Oppenheim, “Shattered Nerves,” 202.
might enable men and women to understand each other’s nature better,
and so meet on equal terms.” His assertion of the similarities between sex
and mountain climbing (“physical pleasure taken in the society of a
friend”), which the women including Sharpe thought trivializing, was part
of his effort to convince them and himself that “the mere act in itself ” was
inconsequential by comparison to “the sympathy & friendship between
correlative human beings which may precede it.” The pleasure of coition
is like that of eating a strawberry, though likely to be enhanced by the as-
sociated pleasure of being with a friend.23
“The Other Side of the Question” was the woman’s side, and in Octo-
ber Henrietta Müller read a paper under this title to the Men and Women’s
Club. A journalist educated at Girton College, Cambridge, she of all the
members had the least use for men. She afﬁrmed Pearson’s point about
woman’s relative lack of sexual drive, from which she reasoned to an afﬁr-
mation of woman’s inherited moral superiority over the predatory male.
But others were not so sure, and even Müller’s supporters emphasized
women’s self-control as well as their more moderate sexual passion. Olive
Schreiner and Horatio Brian Donkin—known to history as Karl Marx’s
physician—dissented from all such arguments about deﬁcient female sexu-
ality, and, notwithstanding some much-cited exceptions, theirs was the
usual view in Victorian medical writings. Schreiner was always well supplied
with curious examples based on conversations with prostitutes and woman
friends, and sometimes even on her own experience. This was the kind of
personal evidence that the men of the club could not well dispute.24
A particularly detailed refutation of Pearson’s essay was communicated
to him privately by Emma Brooke, also one of the ﬁrst woman students at
Cambridge and an early Fabian, who earned her living writing triple-
decker novels. She had attended one of his extension courses, and she
started their correspondence by writing to enlist his support on behalf of
some striking miners. The ﬁles contain thirty-six letters from Brooke to
Pearson, including an account of her mistreatment as a girl by the author
James Hinton, whose faith in an all-encompassing sexuality was admired
by some members. Hinton’s advocacy of free sexual unions was itself, in
effect, on trial in late 1886 when his son Charles Howard Hinton was
placed in the dock for bigamy. Pearson, after reacting initially with cau-
tious favor for this man who would draw back the veil around human sex-
uality, came quickly to loathe the Hinton doctrines, based in part on
Brooke’s disturbing personal experiences of the self-styled philanthropist
as sexual predator, which she described to him in December 1885. Al-

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 137
25 Emma Brooke to KP, 5 July 1885, 4 Dec. 1885, 24 Feb. 1886. In Pearson, “Woman’s
Question” (1885), 11, he referred respectfully to Hinton’s “earnestness,” but in the 1888
version in Ethic of Freethought, 383, Hinton was merely “illogical.”
26 Emma Brooke, “Notes on a Man’s View of the Woman’s Question,” Pearson Papers
10/2. The Victorian theory of the “passionless woman” has been emphasized in much schol-
arship on women, as in Kent, Sex and Suffrage in Britain, 50, who argues for a sea change in
the 1880s. Oppenheim, “Shattered Nerves”, 202, shows that female sexual desire was widely
recognized and even approved in Victorian medical writings.
though she was never asked to join the club, Pearson sent her a copy of his
“woman’s paper” in February 1886, and when she replied that its consid-
erable merits were compromised by its “lack of real insight” about
women, he invited her to rebut it.25
Brooke’s “Notes on a Man’s View of the Woman’s Question,” ran to
thirty-nine handwritten pages. Although Schreiner saw Brooke’s com-
ments, they were never circulated to the club. Brooke instructed Pearson
not to associate her name with these opinions, and later asked him more
than once to destroy this text and related letters. Her reasons for seeking
to guard her anonymity can be imagined. It is, she wrote, a “cherished il-
lusion . . . in man to suppose that a pure Woman ﬂoats half-asleep on a
smooth pool of Chastity all her life—unless he awaken her passion.” In
fact, the desire of men and of women is “for all practical purposes precisely
on a par.” “Possibly a woman’s passion is never so explicit, so nakedly
physical as a man’s; it is more delicate, but therefore more tenacious, more
piercing & painful. It should be remembered that her whole being is more
attuned to the emotions, is predisposed to affection,—that tenderness &
love in women are imperial impulses driving her irresistibly, often mani-
festly against her own interest, towards the man.”
Brooke rebuked Pearson for his opposition to “preventive checks,” call-
ing these “the only moral basis of marriage” because they could free
woman from having to bear children against her will. His stance, she per-
ceived, was rooted in a conviction that nonreproductive sexual relations
must be purely exploitative, since they isolated sex from what women most
urgently wanted and needed, namely children. Brooke called this the
“Madonna image,” the ascription to women of an occult desire for chil-
dren driving them independently of their conscious will, and she thought
it absurd. “The barbaric tendency to credit the unknown with occult qual-
ities is not lost—even in this paper.” Pearson’s bold talk of the maternal
tendencies instilled by “race-evolution,” recorded as if a conclusive state-
ment of “proven scientiﬁc fact,” was, she thought, commonplace dogma,
“the writer’s leap into conventionality.”26
The question of woman’s sexual desire was debated at the club in the
fall of 1885. It was a kind of trial by ﬁre for these Victorians, not only on
account of the inevitable awkwardness of such discussions, but also the

138 • Chapter Six
Figure 7. Karl Pearson. Das Innere, he told Sharpe, is an unreasonable bag of
emotions. (Courtesy of UCL)
asymmetry of participation, with men positioned as inquirers and women
often as objects of investigation. Pearson, for whom no subject was out-
side the bounds of legitimate rational inquiry, wrote for the club a “note
on the sexual feeling,” which manifestly gave expression to his own pas-
sions and uncertainties, although the authorial voice was strictly imper-
sonal. He offered case histories of various sexual types, male as well as

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 139
27 Karl Pearson, “Note on the Sexual Feeling” (1885), Pearson Papers 10/3; KP to
Parker, 13 Sept. 1885; MS to KP, 15 Nov. 1885; Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight,
152–153. As an old man, he recalled these debates and wondered if he hadn’t been right to
begin with after his new wife Margaret burst into tears because it seemed she could not have
a child of her own; KP to Sigrid Pearson, 11 Sept. 1930, Pearson Papers 926.
28 Pearson, “Thoughts Suggested by the Papers & Discussion of the Meeting of the Club
on May 9th [1887],” Pearson Papers 10/11.
female, all premised on a conservation principle that sexual energy, while
convertible into intellectual or physical energy, must ﬁnd its outlet some-
where. By this time he had been persuaded to give up the radical distinc-
tion between male and female desire. Prostitution was now reduced to
intercourse where desire by the woman was absent, while reciprocal desire
constituted “the only rational ground for the act . . . , the scientiﬁc and
only safe basis for the act.” Schreiner dissuaded him from presenting his
note to the club because of his doubts about the possibility of true friend-
ship between men and women, uncorrupted by sexual attraction. Maria
Sharpe, who had hitherto moved mainly in the company of her sisters and
other female friends, viewed the paper more favorably, applauding it for
recognizing the need of women for contact with men’s minds. She found
other aspects of maleness less appealing, for most women enter marriage
with no desire for children and with repulsion for the “sexual function.”
Pearson, by contrast, now supposed that while men might be more pow-
erfully driven than women by an indiscriminately physiological “sexual im-
pulse,” natural selection had made them equal in the more directed and
personal “sexual attraction.”27
Two years later he resurrected some of these arguments as a response to
another paper and presented them to the club. He still feared that sexual
desire might overshadow friendship, although he also argued that the dif-
ferent perspectives of men and women made possible still “ﬁner intellec-
tual sympathies” in friendships of man to woman than of man to man or
woman to woman. Sex, he supposed, was not among these ﬁner sympa-
thies, but neither need it destroy them, and it might even enhance them.
He reafﬁrmed the analogy between sexual intercourse and mountain
climbing, defending sex in moderation as one dimension of the proper ex-
ercise of all human faculties, and denouncing “cramped” asceticism, espe-
cially as imposed on women. Preventive checks could place men and
women on an equal footing with regard to sex, far preferable to “the old
male tyranny which attempted to dictate the mode & the amount of sex-
ual exercise which was ﬁtting for a woman.”28
If Pearson was no longer ashamed of sexuality as such, he certainly wor-
ried about the reduction of women to sex objects. In March 1886, he had
explained to Brooke that the struggle for existence could only strengthen
male sexual desire in subsequent generations and must similarly tend to
weed out the lines of women who are disinclined to bear children. He

140 • Chapter Six
29 Emma Brooke to KP, 14 March 1886, Pearson Papers 10/28.
30 Pearson, “The Woman’s Question” (1885), 11, 8; Brooke, “Notes on a Man’s View”
(note 26); KP to Maria Sharpe, 6 July 1885.
31 Mason, Making of Victorian Sexual Attitudes, 3, 63; Luftig, Seeing Together, 26.
seems to have written regretfully of this inveterate male tendency, because
Brooke responded with a defense of the sex impulse in men as often at-
tended by a “warm physical nature. . . . I do not like you the better for
speaking as if you found it hateful in yourself or others.”29 The line of
communication leading to this exchange can be surmised. He had sug-
gested in his original printed pamphlet that if prostitution were really a
cultural universal, then prostitutes should not be despised but com-
mended for their sacriﬁce of self, in pursuit of a “nobler calling than that
of wife.” Brooke’s riposte condemned the view that women deserve plau-
dits in proportion to their sacriﬁces in the service of man. This reply was
on the mark, and yet Pearson’s ostensible praise of prostitution had been
purely counterfactual. In the current condition of society, “friendship be-
tween single men and women” may be “almost impossible,” but he con-
ceived the club as an experimental effort to see whether it might be
achieved after all. Most men, he told Sharpe, are innocent of the “reﬁned
brutality” portrayed by Stead in the Pall Mall.30 If curiosity about what
women hid from men had in part impelled him to organize the club, his
more exalted mission was to raise the moral character of his sex—not ne-
glecting that particular instantiation of it, himself.
The ideal of friendship “from man to man” expressed one of Pearson’s
visions. This separation of friendship between the sexes from sexual love
was a utopian project, deriving from the radicalism of the 1790s, and
taken up later by Benthamite utilitarians and chartists. There was a pos-
sible model in John Stuart Mill’s early attachment to Harriet Taylor, an
unconsummated relationship that some, including Carlyle, thought un-
natural, and blamed for Mill’s poor health.31 Perhaps Pearson was already
conscious of the fragility of this ideal of friendship when he proposed
it as a condition of his relations with Olive Schreiner. She, however, wel-
comed it most heartily, as did several women in Pearson’s circle of ac-
quaintances during those years. The independence of friendship from
sexual attraction meant easier access for women to the world of formal in-
tellectual inquiry, and Schreiner, like Cobb, was effusively grateful for the
opening he provided her. Pearson’s passionate intellectualism, so capa-
cious as to embrace questions of faith, love, and sex, was surely an element
in his attractiveness to these women, even if they sometimes turned it
against him by calling him cold and impersonal. Indeed, impersonality be-
came a fundamental aspect of his persona, but this was in part a conse-
quence of the contradictory emotions and tangled relationships that grew
up within the club.

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 141
32 First and Scott, Olive Schreiner, 312, 141; Grosskurth, Havelock Ellis, 80–87. Oppen-
heim, “Shattered Nerves,” 220, doubts that drugs were responsible for Schreiner’s depression
and breakdown.
33 See undated note by Sharpe ﬁled with letters of Annie L. Eastty to KP, Pearson Papers
10/37; also Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, 140, and Brandon, New Women and Old
Men, 49. Marx knew of this reaction when she declined an invitation to join the club, and
Sharpe was offended at the implication that her objections owed to “unreasoning and sense-
less propriety.” Pearson wanted to offer membership to “Mrs. Aveling,” but not to her mate
(KP to MS, 10 Feb. 1886). On Marx and Aveling, see Tsuzuki, Life of Eleanor Marx.
LOVE’S CONTRADICTIONS? PEARSON AND OLIVE SCHREINER
The principal nodes of these entanglements were Pearson and Schreiner.
She had come to England from South Africa in 1881, and in 1883 she
published with Chapman and Hall her Story of an African Farm, which
gained her a certain celebrity. She quickly found her way into the London
network of radical intellectuals in which Pearson also moved. She was par-
ticularly close, in the years 1884–1885 and subsequently, to Havelock 
Ellis, then a Hintonian sexual radical, later to achieve fame as a pioneering
sexologist. She loved him for his gentleness and evidently shared with him
a sexual relationship that, as was usual for him, did not extend to coition.
Previously, she had had two disturbing sexual affairs and suffered what 
Ellis plausibly diagnosed as an element of masochism (“I would like him
to tread on me and stamp me into ﬁne powder,” she wrote of one of these
lovers). At the same time she was ashamed of her desires, which made her
feel like a prostitute, and she was trying in these years to “crush and kill
[the sexual] side of my nature.” The bromides she took to diminish her
sexual urges may have contributed to her mental instability.32
Pearson thought highly of African Farm, and Schreiner became an ad-
mirer of his writings before she knew him personally. They met after Cobb
suggested her for the Men and Women’s Club, remarking bemusedly that
Schreiner perhaps didn’t even believe in marriage. Several women in the
club were nervous about sexual irregularities, and they had vetoed Pear-
son’s proposal to call it the Wollstonecraft Club on account of Mary Woll-
stonecraft’s unsanctioned relationship with William Godwin. They also
opposed on similar grounds the plan, backed by Pearson, to recruit
Schreiner’s friend (and Karl Marx’s daughter) Eleanor Marx (Aveling) to
the club. Maria Sharpe objected to her for putting into practice “her the-
ory” of free love, even though Eleanor called her union with the (sepa-
rated but undivorced) Edward Aveling a marriage in all but name.33
Schreiner subscribed neither to the theory nor the practice of free love,
but she met men alone in their rooms, consorted with prostitutes and re-
ported on their conversations, talked freely about sexual matters, and was
conspicuously unconventional in her speech and behavior. She seems to

142 • Chapter Six
34 Showalter, A Literature of Their Own, 195.
35 KP to MS, 8 Sept. 1889; Schreiner to KP, 29 June 1886, Pearson Papers 840/4.
Schreiner wrote in a very difﬁcult hand, and I have relied on transcriptions in the Hacker Pa-
pers. On their friendship, see Fradkin, “Olive Schreiner and Karl Pearson.”
36 Schreiner to KP, 13 July 1886, Pearson Papers 840/4.
37 Olive Schreiner to KP, 30 Jan. 1887 and 7 August 1886, printed in Rive, ed., Olive
Schreiner Letters, 101, 121.
have preferred the company of men to that of women,34 and she did not
defer to the opinions of male members, who seemingly tolerated or even
welcomed her outspokenness. She was drawn particularly to Pearson, and
in July 1885 she began an increasingly intense correspondence with him
about club discussions and other matters. Her letters imply that he had
laid down as a condition of their friendship that it be as “from man to
man.” She welcomed this stipulation as the removal of an obstacle to in-
tellectual closeness. “(K.P. ‘Idiots these women are’),” she imagined him
responding to one of her letters, and answered him: “but I’m not a
woman, I’m a man, and you are to regard me as such.”35 They corre-
sponded as Karl and Olive, a notable liberty in London in 1885.
Olive insisted throughout that she valued him above all for intellectual
stimulation and companionship, and her letters lend ample support to her
claim. One of them began: “Your paper is deliciously, tantalizing, excit-
ingly suggestive.”36 It is necessary to reconcile this truth with another,
equally compelling: she fell in love with him. After he declined what he
later described as an urgent sexual appeal in December 1886, she tried to
explain that since he had enjoyed many intellectual friendships, he might
not appreciate how much such a friendship could mean to a woman like
her. “Our brief intellectual relations and our few conversations have been
common-place enough to you, to me they have been absolutely unique. I
have known nothing like it in my life.” They corresponded particularly
about issues involving women and sexuality. She looked to him to write a
deﬁnitive treatise on the sex question and, like Cobb, was somewhat jeal-
ous of his mathematical activities. In August 1886, when he called New-
ton’s mind superior to that of Goethe and of Shakespeare, she objected
that Newton was narrow, while the literary men were, like Karl himself,
wide-ranging and balanced.37
Still, she thought him badly misinformed on many issues involving sex
and women and took it as her charge to set him straight. “It is monstrous
of the Hintonians to say that a woman’s desire for children corresponds to
a man’s desire for sexual love,” she wrote in May 1886, possibly forgetting
that he had reiterated this argument. Later, she ridiculed his idea that
primitive couples practiced sexual abstinence for years after every birth.
Medical men may now recognize sexual intercourse with a nursing mother
as harmful to the child, she conceded, “but it is hardly likely that the 

Figure 8. Olive Schreiner in 1884. Pearson died to her personally, she said later,
but lived and worked on impersonally. (From S. C. Cronwright-Schreiner, The
Life of Olive Schreiner, 1924)

144 • Chapter Six
38 Schreiner to KP, 12 May 1886 and 6 June 1886. He must not have been convinced. In
“A Sketch of the Sex-Relations in Primitive and Mediaeval Germany,” Ethic of Freethought,
400, he declared that during the whole period of nursing, for three years in mother-age so-
ciety, “the woman must, by a well-known physiological law, abstain from intercourse with the
man.”
39 Schreiner to KP, 2 July 1886 and 3 July 1886.
40 Grosskurth, Havelock Ellis, 101; Schreiner to Havelock Ellis in Draznin, ed., My Other
Self, letter 364 (25 June 1885).
savage man cared anything about that; and you speak as though a suckling
woman could not be an object of desire to man!”38 She also defended the
aesthetic and indeed intellectual worth of sexual relations. “I don’t quite
understand the view you meant to express with regard to man’s sexual de-
generation,” she wrote. The senses are central to our being, and sexual
feeling is “a mingling of all the other senses.” Yet she would leave it to
others to enjoy “sexual pleasures . . . in their simply sensuous form; for me
it would be death. What is all the joy that the touch of a man’s hand would
give, compared to the touch of brain on brain?”39
Olive was acutely conscious of her emotionality, for which Karl must
have reproved her, and she tried to rein it in. Karl, seemingly unable to
learn the lesson that his Magdalene has taught Jesus, was ashamed of his
sexual urges. He conﬁded in Olive on such matters, telling her in 1886,
for example, that he “had never had any sex relationship even of the Hin-
tonian type in his life, never kissed a woman passionately.” He must have
explained also what he expressed more impersonally to the club, how
much this made him suffer. She declared to Ellis that she was no longer a
sexual being, that she loved Karl all the more because he was physically
weak and felt closest to him when she was far away, exchanging letters
rather than glances and spoken words. But this intellectual love, she in-
sisted, was a much deeper and more powerful love than the physical. It was
a form of love that Pearson also shared with Elisabeth Cobb. Cobb had
not been disloyal sexually to her husband, Schreiner declared angrily in re-
sponse to Ellis’s suspicions, but her intellectual love was “a much more
deadly one from a husband’s point of view than any sex-feeling!”
This must have brought little consolation to Ellis, who by 1886 was bit-
terly jealous of Pearson on account of Olive. She openly complained that
Ellis always asked her about her feelings, as if the life of her mind should
reduce to an account of her “internal state,” whereas Karl demanded the
cultivation of her intellectual faculties.40 She considered Pearson a thinker
of the ﬁrst rank, a “great man of genius,” but one who suffered and so
needed her support. She recited to Ellis a characterization by Lucy Clif-
ford, widow of the mathematician William Kingdon Clifford and another
of Pearson’s close correspondents: “I can’t understand any woman’s see-
ing him without loving him & wanting to fall down at his feet & I can’t

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 145
41 Schreiner to Ellis in Draznin, “My Other Self,” letter 499, 12 Feb. 1887; also letter 498,
31 Jan. 1887. This discussion of Pearson’s physical weakness is perplexing, since he was ro-
bust and athletic throughout his adulthood and took pride, for example, in his long treks
through the Tyrol.
42 See also Brandon, New Women and Old Men, 56.
43 Schreiner to KP, 3 July 1886.
44 Schreiner to Ellis, 31 Jan. 1887, in Draznin, “My Other Self,” letter 498.
understand any woman’s thinking he’s a man.” The love he inspired in
women was like that of Dante for Beatrice.41
Schreiner was not lying, but it is very difﬁcult to believe that she knew
her own mind, and none of the scholars who have written on this episode
have thought so. Several have implied that Pearson forced on her this
alienating conception that would disbar a union of intellectual and sensual
love. To me, the ideal of purely intellectual friendship appears to have been
Schreiner’s ideal as much as Pearson’s, and she was often more eloquent
and forceful in articulating it. Although she made fun of his obsession with
impersonality, this was in many ways a shared strategy for intellectual love
across the dangerous divide of sex.42 Yet it is correct to see him as the more
militant rationalist, and in many ways the more anxious about maintaining
a divide between intellectual friendship and sexual attraction.
Pearson evidently became aware quite early of an asymmetry in their re-
lationship. However impressed he may have been by her intelligence and
vitality, he was not in love with her, and he feared increasingly that this lack
of feeling might not be reciprocated. He thus invoked the demands of rea-
son to keep their relationship in check. Quite possibly he was thinking of
her when he wrote, some months before their friendship came to a crisis,
that (as she recalled his words to him) “the greatest tragedy in life was to
be loved by a perfectly beautiful, tender, sensitive single-minded nature
and not to be able to return that love.” She added, without indicating
recognition of any personal bearing in these words: “I thought you
showed great ignorance then, but now I think you were right.”43 She
never admitted to anyone that she had loved him except intellectually.
When, on 13 December 1886, she was in disarray and wrote to express
what he and others interpreted as passionate desire, she construed it quite
differently, complaining that she had been badly misunderstood. How
could Karl, the one man with whom she had seemed to share “love and
friendship without any sex element,” misinterpret her so? “All that my sex-
ual nature had to give I gave years ago, and it is agony now when men call
on me for what my nature has not to give. . . . I’ve loved Karl better than
anyone else in the world ever since I was at Portsea Place, but it’s just the
absence of sex feeling that has drawn me. I can’t bear sexual relationships
any more even shown in a kiss.”44

146 • Chapter Six
45 Schreiner to KP, 6 July 1886 and undated.
46 Schreiner to Ellis, 12 Feb. 1887, in Draznin, “My Other Self,” letter 499. I have silently
substituted “even” for “ever” and “of” for “o[f],” because these are the only words that
make sense, but have left out the imputed plural in “life’s problem[s].”
47 Schreiner to Ellis, 13 Feb. 1887 in ibid., letter 500.
These disavowals, whose sincerity is unmistakable, are not quite incon-
sistent with a sexual passion on her part. He had told her of his suffering,
and she remained, as she had told him, under the sway of a “Hintonian
feeling (not idea!)” that she ought to sacriﬁce herself sexually for a man in
need. This was the rationalization, if not the reason, for offering herself to
Pearson. She believed his health to be delicate, and that the unbearable
suffering brought on by sexual abstinence, which he had discussed at the
club, might be a danger to him. In July 1886 she had told him that her
keenest sexual delight would not be to absorb the whole attention of a
man, but to give him the strength to be alone for months and to concen-
trate on his work. There is a scrawled, undated postcard in Pearson’s ﬁle of
Schreiner letters, probably from November or December 1886, contain-
ing just these words: “Karl Pearson is there nothing I can do to help you?
Are you suffering physically?”45 Two months after her breakdown, and 
his refusal, she declared once again to Ellis her own antipathy to sex, and
explained, against all the evidence, that Pearson was similarly an asexual 
being. “If I thought him capable of even the same amount of animality
that is beautiful in other men, something would be gone from my life that
would never come back to it. If a sex relationship were useful for his health
or happiness of course I should enter on it, but I should feel that a great
beauty had gone from my life.” She added that his letters to Lucy Clifford
seemed to express “great agony & depression, but he must work out life’s
problem for himself. I shall not help him.”46 The next day she concluded,
quite inscrutably:
When I say I haven’t sex feeling for Karl, & that he thinks I have, I’m not talk-
ing of physical passion at all. Karl would never misunderstand me on that point.
But that much more brutal selﬁsh kind of feeling that wants to take a person’s
soul up & say “this is mine.” I suppose we all have to love with that kind of sex
love before we love with the other. If I were a frail person whom you thought
dying of consumption, & with a horror of ALL physical relationships, then your
love for me would be like mine for Karl.47
This “horror” of physical relationships, and possibly also the tuberculo-
sis, would seem to be pure fantasy, elements perhaps of an unwritten novel
of friendship and despair starring a reconstructed Karl Pearson. In subse-
quent letters she offered other versions of their personal or impersonal at-
tachment. “I don’t love him but we divide one drop of blood between
us,” she declared in April 1887. Karl “will love me when all of you have

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 147
48 Ibid., letters 503, 505, 512, 561. I have omitted a few editorial markings.
49 Donkin to KP, 13–15 Dec. 1886, Pearson Papers 840/6.
50 KP to MSP, on the occasion of Schreiner’s death, 2 Jan. 1921. From KP to MS, 14 Dec.
1886, we learn that Pearson attended a meeting of the Men and Women’s Club on the
evening of 13 December in a condition of great distress. Schreiner was certainly not there.
forgotten me,” she said a few weeks later. In January 1888 she told Ellis of
“the peculiarity of Pearson’s mind that he stimulates almost to agony.” Fi-
nally, after Pearson told her of his marriage in 1890, she summed up her
feelings for him: “Friendship may be increased by absence. Whenever I
didn’t see Karl Pearson & thought only of his work & . . . the terrible dis-
ease he had told me he was dying of, I loved him with a strange intensity,
but the moment I saw him or came near him, a kind of constitutional an-
tipathy seemed to put him far from me.”48
However interpreted, the episode created complications for the Men
and Women’s Club. One crucial ﬁgure in these exchanges was Brian
Donkin, also a member and Schreiner’s physician as well as her would-be
lover or husband. On 13 December 1886, as he explained to Pearson in a
letter that same day, he had found her “in a state of complete temporary
madness—and being without her normal control, I gathered from her
words for the ﬁrst time what I have known of myself for long, that she
loves you.” He admitted frankly that he was in love with Schreiner, then
begged Pearson to go to her immediately if he reciprocated her love at all.
From Pearson’s standpoint, this breakdown followed an increasingly des-
perate sequence of letters from Schreiner, who ﬁnally, on 12 December,
had implored him as her “man-friend” for help in her current distress.
“Find fault with me, please, if I am doing wrong; oh, my soul is so little,
so little. Can’t your larger one for a moment put out a hand to me?”49
Pearson much later recalled “that night when I found her ‘with tresses
sweeping the ground,’” but the contemporary evidence does not suggest
any personal contact on this occasion.50 Instead he sent a letter, in which
he probably reminded her that their friendship was strictly as man to man,
and told her they could not be lovers. In response she thanked him for his
directness, and denied that “sex-love” was in any way involved. She knew
all about Donkin’s role in perpetuating what she called a misunderstand-
ing. If Pearson indeed told her, as she would later claim, that friendship
between them had become impossible, then he did not act on his words,
but continued to correspond with her, and to worry about her health and
happiness. She, on the other hand, began to deny that they had ever been
more than fellow inquirers:
From the beginning of our brief acquaintance, when at Portsea Place you
treated me with something like brutality because the paper I was labouring 
under had gone beyond my grasp, you have dealt with me with hard truthful-
ness, which I liked. There has been no time when you have suggested to me that

148 • Chapter Six
51 Schreiner to KP, 30 Jan. 1887, in Rive, ed., Olive Schreiner Letters, 121. One example
of his continued concern: early in his provisional engagement to Sharpe, Pearson asked per-
mission to inform Schreiner as soon as the marriage plans were settled, in hopes that this
might provide a kind of closure for her. KP to MS, 10 Aug. 1889.
52 Donkin to KP, 15 Dec. 1886 and undated, Pearson Papers 840/6.
53 See KP to MS, 8 Sept. 1889, and especially KP to MSP, 2 Jan. 1921; Helga Hacker to
Betty Fradkin, 15 June 1975, Hacker Papers, Box 7. I do not know if Hacker’s comments
are based on other sources beyond these letters.
you valued my friendship in any personal sense. You are charging yourself en-
tirely without cause when you suggest such a thing. . . . I have never imagined
that our friendship was of a personal kind such as might have existed between
yourself and Parker, for instance.51
One other party to this turmoil was Elisabeth Cobb. Although
Schreiner, as we have seen, did not think Pearson and Cobb were lovers in
a sexual sense, she and Cobb recognized each other as competing for Pear-
son’s intellectual love. He must have known something of this from their
letters to him, though his insight into such matters was very limited.
Donkin tried to explain how they could be rivals: Cobb, he said, may have
“what is called popularly a sentimental friendship for you, such even as
hardly Mrs. Grundy would object to,” and so may have slighted Schreiner.
Pearson must have responded with anger, for Donkin felt compelled
to “accept your rebuke without reserve, and fully and heartily apologize to
you for the letter.” But he could not change his mind. “There is a side
to the question which you on your part do not see.”52 Or at least there was
a side Pearson was unwilling to admit. He wanted to believe that the noble
ideal of intellectual friendship between the sexes had at least proven possi-
ble with Mrs. Cobb, if not with Miss Schreiner. Otherwise, it seemed to be
threatened by infatuation and jealousy on every side. He had been
strongly tempted to give way to Schreiner’s passion, he later recalled—
perhaps now rationalizing to himself the fear that kept him from coming
to her in her hour of need—but had recognized that she could not be his
“ﬁtting mate,” because a woman given to such violent passions would
soon fall in love with someone else. From the experience he professed to
have learned (and probably did) that platonic relationships between men
and women were dangerous, and must be kept within limits.53 It was an
awkward time for such a lesson, since he was by then conscious of his own
love for Maria Sharpe, secretary of the club.
The personal entanglements created by Pearson’s friendship with
Schreiner, as well as his more general reﬂections on women, strongly en-
couraged the commitment to the impersonal and the objective that he had
ﬁrst articulated in response to historical debates about the German Refor-
mation. It was by no means simply a position taken against women or in

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 149
54 Schreiner to KP, 26 Oct. 1886.
55 Schreiner to KP, 4 April 1886 and 5 Oct. 1887, in Rive, ed., Olive Schreiner Letters, 75,
130.
56 Schreiner to KP, 24 May 1890; to Havelock Ellis, 8 Jan. 1889, both in ibid., 174, 146.
opposition to Schreiner, even if she did sometimes assume the role of de-
fender of the emotions. She idealized him as intensely as he ever idealized
the women in his life, imagining him innocent of worldly corruptions.
“Look deep into your heart,” she once enjoined him, and ask if “your bit-
terness against Hinton” is wholly free of resentment against having been
called Hintonian. “It would be such a terrible thing if while you seemed
to be ﬁghting only for abstract truth and right there was an element of self
in it. I can’t bear to think of this. You must be so absolutely pure and ﬂeck-
less. My life is so broken and ﬂawed it is always far from the ideal but you
must keep close to it.”54
Whatever may have drawn Schreiner to Pearson, it took her years to get
over him. Her marvelous caricatures during the time of her disappoint-
ment, while they contain a clear element of truth, are anything but disin-
terested descriptions. Eight months before her crisis, she had written him
that the “most ideally perfect friendship between a man and a woman that
I know of is one where the man in addition to sympathy with the woman’s
intellectual nature, feels that she is to him also sexually perfect.” After the
trauma of 13 December, she idealized her relationship to him for its ab-
solute aloofness from personal matters, its freedom from every hint of gen-
tleness or affection. About a year after the crisis, she asked him to lend her
£30—which he did—but not to include a letter of any kind. “I have many
friends from whom I might ask this, but in all cases there would be an ele-
ment of personal feeling and friendship which would make it painful to me.
In your case I obviate this; and only in your case can I feel in absolute trust
that the matter will not be mentioned.”55 After his marriage in 1890, she
thought she could at last write him without being misunderstood. “It was
exactly that cold, hard, intellectual element in your nature which was of
service to me. If you had required any emotional return from me, if you
had turned the emotional side of your nature, noble and beautiful as it
doubtless is, to me, you would not have been to me what you are.”
What she saw as his hardness, indeed, now inspired in her a kind of rev-
erence. In January 1889 she spent “all the last days waiting in the rain be-
fore University College hoping to catch a glimpse of him as he passed, but I
didn’t. I felt so when my father died.”56 And from Edward Carpenter, arts-
and-crafts radical whose rebellion “against the intellect and conscious rea-
son” was to her the precise opposite of Pearson’s “blaspheming against the
emotions and the instinctive reason,” she begged for a tangible reminder
of Pearson:

150 • Chapter Six
57Schreiner to Edward Carpenter, 12 April 1888 and 21 Jan. 1889, in ibid., 139, 147.
58 Cobb to KP, 6 July 1885, quoted in Bland, Banishing the Beast, 40.
If you ever should go to Mr. Pearson’s again, would you send me something out
of his garden; pick it for yourself. You know my heart lives always in that little
study in Hampstead; it is like a little chapel to me; it is all so beautiful to me.
Now I know that he never wanted my friendship I can rest. It’s to me as if he
was buried personally but so beautiful to know he’s alive and working imper-
sonally.
I’m writing something very lovely, Edward, it isn’t really the intellect and na-
ture that are at war, it’s the PERSONAL AND IMPERSONAL.57
In fact, this relationship of personal to impersonal was far more compli-
cated than warfare. For Schreiner and Pearson alike, the impersonal world
of inquiry was not cold and detached, but permeated by powerful emo-
tions of hope and yearning. Schreiner wrote passionately of the attractions
of knowing. As a young man, so did Pearson, as in his praise of Spinoza’s
amor dei intellectualis and his ecstatic depictions of nature. Increasingly,
however, he looked to reason to master these overpowering emotions, cul-
tivating a detached, rationalistic understanding of the natural world, and
indeed of passion as well. Having been drawn irresistibly to a sexualized
nature, he proceeded to intellectualize sex.
HISTORICAL RESEARCH ON WOMEN
This tension of the personal and the impersonal, so pervasive in the lives
of Pearson and Schreiner in this period, had also an integral role in the 
dynamic of the Men and Women’s Club. Although their discussions of
marriage and sexual feeling during the ﬁrst eight months of the club’s 
existence generally assumed a universal “woman” and “man” and rarely
appealed explicitly to anybody’s experience, revelations of the most deli-
cate nature, never fully separable from the personal, were still inevitable. It
was the women who were most often put under the microscope; Cobb
complained to Pearson in July 1885 that the club behaved “as if man were
the only human being and woman only another species of monkey.”58
Schreiner was insistent enough on occasion to reverse the relations of in-
quirer and subject, extracting from Pearson, for example, an estimated
proportion of his male friends who remained chaste before marriage. Also,
Pearson could not but reveal much about his own inner life with his rumi-
nations, clunky in their detachment, on sexual feeling. This recourse to the
universal became for him a characteristic mode of public self-revelation 
after he gave up writing ﬁction.

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 151
59 See Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, 154–155; also Sharpe, “Autobiographical
History,” and “Minute Book of the Men and Women’s Club, 1885–1889,” Pearson Papers
10/1.
60 Bebel’s immensely successful book has a confusing publication history. It appeared
originally in 1879 as Die Frau und der Sozialismus. In 1883 a new edition appeared under a
different title, which was translated into English in an undated edition in 1885 as Women in
the Past, Present, and Future. Two decades later a version was translated as Woman under So-
cialism, and many reprints have appeared under both titles in German and English. Hunt,
Equivocal Feminists, 31.
Still, most members were probably relieved, as Maria Sharpe explained
in her autobiographical history of the club, when in early 1886 they
turned from emotional to historical questions. Pearson had from the 
beginning wanted the club to provide a scholarly forum on issues involv-
ing women and sex. Although the scientiﬁc mode, which on the whole
was more familiar to the men than to the women, created its own ten-
sions, the opportunity to converse on this level was welcomed particularly
by the women of the Club. Over the next three years, the members wrote
and discussed papers on marriage, prostitution, and relations between
the sexes in many times and places, from prehistory to ancient Greece and
Rome to medieval Germany and Russia to contemporary society. Pearson,
as organizer and as a bold and tireless scholar, tended to set the agenda for
these discussions. As with the trajectory he deﬁned for economy and reli-
gion, which had passed from an appealing but defective “Catholic social-
ism” through a lamentable but necessary phase of Protestant individualism
to the threshold of socialist freedom, he developed also for the history of
women and of reproduction a broad vision of what may be called dialecti-
cal progress, with unmistakable relevance to his own day. This involved a
passage from a primeval “mother age” through an era of Protestant patri-
archy to a collective order that would restore dignity and independence to
women while subordinating reproductive choice to the urgent needs of
the state.59
Pearson’s introduction to social and historical writing on women may
well have come from a book by the leader of German social democracy,
August Bebel’s Woman under Socialism (or Woman in the Past, Present
and Future).60 Bebel set out from a depiction of the distant past, when
woman was the equal of man in size, strength, and brain weight, as in
some African tribes, he wrote, of his own day. This proved, to him as to
Pearson, her capacity to be the equal of man. Historically, however, she
had eventually been forced to look to man for assistance during periods of
pregnancy, birth, and lactation, and in this dependent condition she de-
generated biologically. In recorded history, he observed, her position had
always been a subordinate one. The Greeks kept wives strictly for procre-
ation while allowing displays of sensuality and intellectual reﬁnement only

152 • Chapter Six
61 Bebel, Woman in the Past, Present and Future, trans. (1885?) H. B. Adams Walther
(reprinted, London: Zwang, 1988).
62 Gossman, Basel in the Age of Burckhardt, 177; also Schorske, “History as Vocation in
Burckhardt’s Basel.” For the English reception see papers by Edward B. Tylor and C. Stani-
land Wake in Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 9 (1880)
3–9 and 235–248.
63 Johann Jakob Bachofen, Das Mutterrecht (1861), Gesammelte Werke, vols. 2–3 (Basel:
Benne Schwabe, 1948), 54, 55. On theories of matriarchy, see Coward, Patriarchal Prece-
dents.
among courtesans (hetaerae), such as Aspasia. The Christian doctrine of
mortiﬁcation of the ﬂesh was profoundly hostile to women, although it
never succeeded in wholly suppressing the “healthy sensualism” of the
German Middle Ages, which was reasserted by Luther. But the Protestants
punished sex outside marriage with inexorable severity, and the life of
woman within bourgeois industrialism had come to involve great hard-
ships.61 Bebel looked to the teachings of Darwin, Marx, and Henry
Thomas Buckle to support a brighter future.
Pearson cited Bebel appreciatively in 1885, and this book was actively
circulated within the Men and Woman’s Club, but he soon came to a
more negative view. Whereas Bebel identiﬁed the origins of society every-
where with the patriarchal family, Pearson was soon converted to belief in
the ancient matriarchy. This was the teaching of Johann Jakob Bachofen,
whom Bebel had invoked for an argument—later adopted by Pearson—
that ancient prostitution was a religious act, deriving from primeval promis-
cuity. Bachofen’s Mutterrecht or “Mother Law,” published in 1861,
credited women with the founding of civilization. By Pearson’s time, these
ideas were discussed internationally within the women’s movement. Ba-
chofen was a Swiss patrician and a colleague of the great cultural historian
Jakob Burckhardt at the University of Basel. As a student in Germany, Ba-
chofen began to oppose the strict political history that had become so in-
ﬂuential there. He regretted Theodor Mommsen’s dismissal of mythology
and religion in his works on classical civilization, and he was repelled by
the modern, militaristic Prussian state. In a moment of epiphany, looking
down from a hill over Mycenae, he came to comprehend the bloody,
vengeful savagery of the Trojan War, which stood in stark contrast to a ma-
ternal “world of inﬁnite sweetness and gentle ways, a world so vigorously
blooming in all the joy and beauty of youthful strength.”62 He found the
traces of a feminine order in ancient mythology, passed on in Homeric epic
from a preliterate age. Women were the inventors of agriculture, and
mother-law characterized an earthly, corporeal ethos, which men were al-
ways wanting to abandon for the ethereal cosmos. He summed up the
contrast: “There [among the women] material bonds, here [with men]
spiritual development; there unconscious regularity, here individualism;
there devotion to nature, here rising above it.”63

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 153
64 Pearson, “Sketch of the Sex-Relations in Germany,” in Ethic of Freethought, 396.
65 Pearson, “Socialism and Sex” (1887), in Ethic of Freethought, 430.
66 Friedrich Engels, The Origins of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) (New
York: Pathﬁnder Press, 1972), 68, identiﬁed the “overthrow of mother right” as “the world-
historic defeat of the female sex,” and drew on Bachofen as well as Morgan. Although this Ger-
man book was then little known in England, it was discussed at the Club, and Donkin asked
Engels to present a paper there. See Engels to Donkin, 25 March 1886, Pearson Papers 10/
36; MS to KP, 12 May 1886.
Although Bachofen’s book was a theory of human development, which
deﬁned the mother-age as a phase in the evolution of society, his materials
and even his explanations were drawn from the world of mythology. Pear-
son, too, believed that the evidence of myths and of folklore gave the most
conclusive indication of the mother-age, but he aimed to go still further to
a “rational” history of society, one that would move beyond the charac-
terization of particular ages and identify the “axioms of historic growth.”64
By about 1885, this for him meant historical explanations linked to biol-
ogy and to property relations, and his biological turn provided further 
incentive as well as rationale for his continued attention to sex and 
reproduction.65 While he modestly foreswore any claim to be the Newton
or Darwin of history, he thought of himself as providing the materials for
a genuine historical science. For the long premodern period, this meant a
history of material factors, of economic and sexual transformations. He
drew on Darwin, who imagined unconstrained sexual promiscuity among
early humans, and on anthropological studies of kinship and marriage by
such authors as John F. McLennan and the American, Lewis Henry Mor-
gan. The decisive argument for matrilineal inheritance in Pearson’s time,
reiterated by Friedrich Engels, was biological. Before a certain stage of civ-
ilization, with its more settled sexual relationships, was attained, paternity
would remain untraceable.66
Pearson’s work on the history of women and of sex dealt mainly with
Germanic languages and peoples and was thus continuous with his studies
of religion and folk culture. Attention to folklore, he declared, must de-
stroy the philologists’ assumption that language had formed under patri-
archy. Hence the time “is an opportune one for a raid” on philology. He
found matriarchal and transitional residues in many fairy tales, as in
the common device of ascending to kingship by marrying the king’s
daughter, and he proposed strategies for recognizing when stories had
been reoriented by switching the sex of the protagonist, as in the conver-
sion of Ash-Hans to Cinderella. For the philologists, he presented an accu-
mulation of some thousands of word linkages in languages stretching
across Europe and southern Asia to show that a modern folkloric under-
standing of matrilineal society provided the only way to make sense of 

154 • Chapter Six
67 Pearson, The Chances of Death: “Ashiepattle: Or Hans Seeks His Luck,” vol. 2, 51–91
and “Kindred Group-Marriage,” vol. 2, 92–245, on 98, and 112–238.
68 Pearson, “Kindred Group-Marriage,” 93–95, 241–245; Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient
Society (1877; Cleveland and New York: Meridian Books, 1963), part 3. A different sort of
sea festival, scripted by men, was described as a basis; for Australian aboriginal societies by 
A. W. Howitt and L. Fison, “From Mother-Right to Father-Right,” Journal of the Anthro-
pological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 12 (1883), 30–46.
current expressions for sex, kinship, and relationship.67 These were his
“fossils,” keys to the recovery of a world that lacked a written language.
Pearson was very much drawn to Bachofen’s project, which in a way had
already been his own before he learned of Bachofen, to reason from the
scattered and fragmented clues of language and mythology back to a so-
cial world that must otherwise be concealed in the mists of time.
He aspired, however, more than Bachofen to use his understanding of
the deep past to reinterpret modern society, and indeed the possibilities
of the future. There was no distinct “prehistoric” for Pearson. He saw cer-
tain polarities—such as individualism and socialism, “brute-appetite” and
renunciation—as fundamental cultural elements in a dynamic of human
progress. Pearson’s long-term histories of family and reproduction over-
lapped with, and to a degree subsumed, his studies of religion and econ-
omy in medieval and Reformation Germany. Society and morality, he
argued, ﬁrst arose when primitive individual appetites began to be con-
trolled in the interest of the group. Civilization was created by women,
who were able to stabilize social groupings in part by maximizing the
“sexual tie between individual members” as well as the “kindred tie be-
tween successive generations.” This they achieved through what he called,
following a discussion by Morgan, “kindred group-marriage.” In Pear-
son’s version, this meant in practice that fertilization occurred through
great annual “sex-festivals” involving bands of women and of men. Out of
the base instincts of sex grew higher moral values of peace, trust, faith,
charity, and freedom, which, however, were applied only within the
group. A language of foreignness deﬁned outsiders as alien and ignoble.68
Within these tight female bands, it was possible to create the settled life of
agriculture, a distinctively feminine achievement, still disdained even in
his own day in the more primitive regions of Europe by lazy, “barbarian”
men. Women also were responsible for the beginnings of medicine, the
domestication of animals, and the invention of spinning. They created
a distinctive set of religious beliefs, involving goddesses of fertility and
ceremonies of the hearth as well as wild sex rituals, all of them morally
valid in their time and place. Even the morals of modern times “have their
origin in what some are pleased to term base and loathsome animal pas-
sions.” Such sources did not degrade the higher morals, but exempliﬁed
what for Pearson was in effect a sexual theodicy (or historiodicy), by which

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 155
69 Pearson, “Woman as Witch,” in Chances of Death, vol. 2, on 4, 27, and the newspaper re-
port of his lecture at the Somerville Club on “Evidences of Mother-right in Mediaeval Witch-
craft” (dated 20 Dec. 1890 in the catalog of Pearson Papers, but 1891 by Pearson in the printed
version, “Women as Witch”), Pearson Papers 47/4; “Kindred Group Marriage,” 244–245.
70 KP to MS, 14 June 1887. Sharpe may already have been convinced; see “Autobio-
graphical History,” 54.
71 KP to MS, 8 Sept. 1889, referring to her earlier relationship to Sidney Courtauld. Two
years later, Thomas Hardy told of Tess’s terrible rejection by her otherwise gentle and un-
derstanding new husband after she revealed her prior sexual victimization.
72 MS to KP, 12 Oct. 1887, and KP to MS, 13 Oct. 1887.
animal desires have been transmuted into worthy and digniﬁed social
emotions.69
The arguments of Schreiner and Brooke had convinced him that the
sexual drive of women was as strong as that of men, and potentially still
more disorderly. In an extensive and painfully academic correspondence
with Maria Sharpe prior to his declaration of love, he explained to her that
“the inequality of desire” was limited to a few women “in our middle
classes.” This new belief in intense female sexuality stimulated him to the
deepest reﬂection. It inspired his arguments for the orgiastic rituals of the
era of mother-right. Continuing in this anthropological vein, he aban-
doned his former understanding of contemporary prostitution, which
might not after all be a consequence of capitalistic manhood running
roughshod over the sentiments of innocent and vulnerable women.
Maybe the brothel was “a survival of the matriarchate,” an institution
made by women and not merely by lustful men.70
There was unmistakable alarm in his reaction to the possibility of ag-
gressive female sexuality, and for this he has been caricatured. In fact,
whatever his instinctual views, his arguments on this subject were deeply
considered and rather complicated. He argued consistently that women
had as much right to sexual gratiﬁcation as did men, and that none should
be condemned for their personal sexual choices. In the course of confess-
ing to Sharpe, at the time of their initial engagement, his own shortcom-
ings of personality and character, he signaled unmistakably his acceptance
of the possibility that she might have sexual experiences in her past, even
though he did not. He hoped that she could someday share this and other
aspects of her background, and offered reassurance that nothing in this
line would be held against her. “Someday, perhaps, if you wish it, you shall
tell me the story of your earlier friendship. It may mean something gone,
which you cannot give again and which I have no right to expect.”71 In re-
sponse to her suggestion that men enjoy highly sensual women as com-
panions, but prefer the colder, safer variety as marriage partners, he denied
it vehemently.72 Notwithstanding all this, he became strikingly sensitive to
female sexual aggression, complaining, for example, of how often women
in their twenties, for money or merely for gratiﬁcation, seduce much

156 • Chapter Six
73 KP to MS, 11 Oct. 1887 and 15 June 1888. The only rationale I have found for his
linking of free love to social decay he enunciated much later, when he argued that rampant
promiscuity would destroy the variation on which natural selection operated. See KP to MSP,
28 Dec. 1895; also his letter to The Spectator, 19 May 1894, 686.
74 Pearson, “Kindred Group-Marriage,” 96.
75 Pearson, “Woman as Witch,” 19–20, 25, 40, 47.
younger boys. He also worried that the emancipation of women might
mean a return to the “swamp age,” to a promiscuous sexuality that would
destroy stability. Although he provided no mechanism for the dissolution
of social order through rampant sexuality, he warned repeatedly of the
danger. “It would be the death of human society were it to become mor-
bidly sexual, even more so than it is.”73 For him, as for several women in
the club, salvation was to be sought not in perpetuation of a sexual asym-
metry, but in higher moral standards for men.
The triumph of patriarchy had meant an advance in efﬁciency, evi-
denced by its success in outcompeting mother-right all over Europe. The
dark side of the mother age—its “human sacriﬁces, its periodic sexual li-
cense, its want of strong incentives to individual energy”—then gradually
disappeared.74 If, however, much was gained in the transition to a new
phase, something fundamental was also lost with the disappearance of the
autonomous, communitarian societies of women. Pearson was fascinated
by what he interpreted as the survivals in Germany of mother-age customs
and treated them very favorably. He argued that the late-medieval witch,
for example, was “the degraded form of the old priestess” who had
presided at an altar where men were not allowed. Witch gatherings re-
called old religious rites, with “women dancing at night round the sacred
trees and wells, torch or candle in hand,” and their licentiousness pointed
back to the mother-age sex festivals. Recognizing Walpurgis as a fertility
goddess helped to make sense of Walpurgisnacht in Heidelberg, which he
had described as ﬁction in his New Werther, and now recalled as experi-
ence: “Groups of maidens and students went up singing through the
woods, there was dancing at the top, and waiting to see the sun rise.”75
From this standpoint, the Church’s campaign against pagan customs
appeared as a corollary of patriarchal efforts to efface all remnants of the
mother age. Under Catholicism, there had always been compromise, with
the Virgin Mary taking the place of the old mother-goddess and providing
a focus for the wildest expressions of sexual excitement, the ultimate
source, he explained, of religious enthusiasm. Eventually, Protestants
would take the lead in hunting down witches because of their hatred of the
sensuality for which these women stood. Protestant men displaced onto
others the responsibility for their own lustful passions, linking everything
associated distinctively with woman to temptation, and hence anxiety. The
woman’s hearth, for example, became the witch’s cauldron and was asso-
ciated with the devil. Even now, Pearson remarked, many Protestants look

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 157
76 Pearson, “Sketch of the Sex Relations in Germany,” 411, 414–417; also KP to MS, 6
July 1885.
77 KP to MS, 19 March 1888.
on worship of the Virgin also as “the mark of the devil.” By the later
1880s, Pearson could insist on the positive value of this religious sensual-
ity: “To me it seems the great triumph of mediaeval Christianity.” It meant
the adaptation of a Hebraic and Hellenic religion to the needs of Ger-
many. It supported, through sublimated expression, the highest ﬂourish-
ing of architecture, music, literature, and painting, a cultural efﬂorescence
that did not suffer, he argued, by comparison to the glories of ancient
Greece. If the cult of the Virgin, that infatuation of rootless “strolling
scholars,” nearly brought about a return to the “swamp morality” of the
mother age, its sensuousness was vindicated through idealization in “the
highest forms of art.”76
The new reign of individualism was a disaster for women and workers,
and especially for wives and mothers, who became dependent on their
husbands. By freeing the individual, the Reformation had created the con-
ditions for the ﬂourishing of science, but at immense cost to the poor and
oppressed. The convents, which had provided opportunities for women to
pursue education and learning, were suppressed. The idealized, chivalric
view of women gave way to a widespread belief in her degradation, and the
reimposition of sexual restraint on the married woman led inevitably to an
“Age of Prostitution,” the modern age. For marriage by capture, at the
birth of patriarchy, it substituted marriage by purchase, which only quite
recently had begun to be seriously questioned.
Pearson saw historical investigation as a vital tool of social reform and
the emancipation of women. The historical spirit implied recognition that
the modern order was contingent, that attitudes and institutions had been
radically different in the past and could be transformed fundamentally in
the future. The subordination of women, in particular, was not natural or
inevitable but a consequence of a particular form of social organization.
Women had once been strong and independent and would again become
so in the next phase of historical progress. He did not look to an expan-
sion of individual rights for the vindication of women. He dismissed the
language of abstract rights as empty metaphysics, at bottom individualis-
tic, and hoped to erect a “new Zeitgeist” of the social on the ruins of “the
Bentham-Spencer view.”77 For this reason, he thought badly of John Stu-
art Mill’s essay on women, and he believed its high standing among
women must soon fade. Improved conditions for women would come
about through the triumph of a new socialism, a system that would allow
them to make choices and would be particularly beneﬁcial for mothers.
In 1880, when Pearson converted to socialism, the woman question
had had no signiﬁcance for him, apart from the crucial point that he

158 • Chapter Six
78 Pearson, “Socialism: In Theory and Practice,” in Ethic of Freethought, 362, 365–367.
79 Pearson, “The Moral Basis of Socialism” (1887), in Ethic of Freethought, 324, 332; 
H. S. Foxwell to KP, 5 Aug. 1887, Pearson Papers 694/7.
80 KP to MS, 4 Feb. 1889; Pearson, “Moral Basis of Socialism,” 344, 326.
81 KP to MS, 21 Oct. 1888.
blamed prostitution on the capitalist system. Neither did it ﬁgure in a so-
cialist lecture he delivered to a Deptford working-men’s club in February
1884. There he had called upon “labourers of the head” to join Ruskin
and Morris in teaching capitalists a “higher morality” and proposed to re-
store the long-lost power of labor by giving guilds a role in municipal gov-
ernment as well as by broadening the franchise. He also offered a
gradualist alternative to Henry George’s “revolutionary” call for the na-
tionalization of land—he would simply convert all freeholds to hundred-
year leaseholds.78 During the years of the Men and Women’s Club he
became increasingly contemptuous of utopian moralizing and appealed
more and more to Darwinian struggle and the crushing force of historical
development. In a line much quoted by his opponents, he urged socialists
to “inculcate that spirit which would give offenders against the state short
shrift and the nearest lamp-post.” His faith in the efﬁciency and justice of
the state—in its abstract, idealized form, as opposed to any really-existing
state—was almost unbounded and invited mockery. The political econo-
mist Herbert Foxwell, commenting on one of his more memorable exam-
ples, said in a letter that he had “acquired that independence of facts . . .
which is the hall-mark of the genuine Socialist. The idea of an English rail-
way manager as a ‘private capitalist struggling to ﬁll his own pockets,’ in
contrast to a state ofﬁcial ‘liable to instant dismissal if failing in his duties’
will be both new and entertaining to most of those interested either in
railway enterprise or the Civil Service.”79 Pearson, however, had little re-
spect for the dismal science, arguing that political economy should be “in-
telligible to the average human mind,” and that the struggle for existence
rather than laws of rent and interest was what mattered for human society.
Ever more the quantiﬁer, he now proposed the determination of wages
and of prices with a measure of “useful labour” or “social value.” Living
from capital was to be despised. “The socialist toe tingles” to eject those
“endowed idlers.”80
Worse even than the capitalists, however, were their wives, the shopping
dolls, living, it seemed, from services that ought to be wholly outside the
economic system and contributing nothing to society. “Fitzjohn” the
businessman may be a brutal Philistine, but at least he goes to the City
daily and does some work, whereas his wife “Fitzjoan” and her daughter
“think life is busy when they arrange dinner parties, & go shopping. The
male is nothing, but the sexual male for them. Fitzjoan is even more anti-
social than Fitzjohn. She is inert.”81 Pearson, third wrangler, applied the

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 159
82 Pearson, “Socialism and Sex” (1887), in Ethic of Freethought. Among the critics, 
J. Ellis Barker, British Socialism (London: John Murray, 1908), 339, 347, cited Pearson’s
opinions on family and eugenics as the reductio ad absurdum of socialism.
83 Dyhouse, Feminism and the Family; Beals, Fabian Feminism, 95; DuBois, Harriet
Stanton Blatch, 76. Both [Emma Brooke], “The Position of Women: Its Origin and His-
tory,” The Woman’s Signal, I, 8 March 1894, 155, and Mona Caird, The Morality of Mar-
riage (London: George Redway, 1897), 63, situate their work on the matriarchate in relation
to Pearson.
views of meritocratic Cambridge even more acidly to women than to men,
linking idleness to prostitution. Paradoxically, if women refused to take
part in the man’s world of work and ideas, this reduced the man also to a
sexual being, at least in marriage, so that the degradation was reciprocal.
He had a scheme to restore some of the feminine self-sufﬁciency of the
matriarchal age within the coming socialism. No more than men would
women live as parasites or exploiters. They would provide an important
service to the state and be compensated for it. This would allow them
to work, if they wished, in traditionally male occupations, but he empha-
sized another possible form of worthwhile female labor. The indispensable
contribution of women to the life of the state was bearing and rearing chil-
dren, which would now be made independent of any ﬁnancial contribu-
tion on the part of the man. The availability of “preventive checks” would
allow women to make sexual choices without necessarily assuming the
burden of maternity. Indeed, for the latter they would need to seek au-
thorization. State support should be conditional on social sanction in ad-
vance of the pregnancy, and so Pearson introduced broadly eugenic
conditions from the beginning into his scheme of socialized reproduction.
Critics attacked his program as destructive of the family, reducing women
to prostitutes of the state. He argued, however, that it would make mar-
riage a pure matter of affection, excluding economic considerations and
thus putting the accent on friendship and love. Sexual monogamy would
become more common than today, he predicted, and having regained
their independence, women would become once again, as in the era be-
fore patriarchy, physically and mentally strong.82
In 1889, when the Men and Women’s Club dissolved, Pearson was best
known not for his mathematics, which divided into highly speculative
ether models and a dull compilation of mathematical theories of elasticity,
but for his historical and social writings on women. In the late 1880s and
1890s, he was seen as a leading authority on the woman question. His
writings were invoked in America as well as Britain in support of protec-
tive legislation on behalf of female workers and were cited respectfully by
women, especially by Fabian socialists such as Brooke, Mona Caird, and
Harriet Stanton Blatch, who became intellectual leaders of the women’s
movement.83 It deserves to be noted that while the Men and Women’s
Club, and his correspondence with such women as Emma Brooke and

160 • Chapter Six
84 Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, 156; Emma Brooke to KP, Pearson Papers 10/28.
(His letters to her do not survive, and their content must be inferred from hers to him.)
Maria Sharpe records in her “Autobiographical History of ‘Men and Women’s Club,’” 42
and 47 (Pearson Papers 10/1), that on 10 Feb. 1887 he told the club he had secured an
anonymous paper on “Women’s Sphere in Modern Society” for their March meeting. A bit
later he expressed surprise at the similarity of the ideas it contained to his own.
85 Pearson, “Woman’s Question” (1885), 19; Burdett, Olive Schreiner and the Progress of
Feminism, 51.
Charlotte Wilson, provided stimulation as well as a forum for these ideas,
his was a powerful, original voice. While limited proposals to support
women in the immediate aftermath of childbirth were discussed at the
time in Germany and elsewhere, his scheme of state-endowed mother-
hood was a distinctively radical one, which continued for some time to be
associated with his name.
Brooke proposed a similar idea at about the same time, and her letters
to him show how this came about. She wrote him on 14 November 1886,
soliciting his help with an essay she had promised to read for the Fabians
on “The Economic Position of Women.” His reply asserted the insepara-
bility of the economic from the sexual, and she told him in her next (un-
dated) letter that she intended to make his proposals the skeleton of her
theme. On 13 December, probably following the logic of his response to
her query, he read a paper on the topic to the Men and Women’s Club,
outlining for the ﬁrst time a plan for the socialization of motherhood.
Brooke ﬁnally sent the syllabus of her paper a few days later, February 18,
and he replied with a printed version of his essay, which in the meantime
had been published in the journal of the Social Democratic Federation,
To-Day. She responded ﬁnally in February, avowing that she was “much
pleased to ﬁnd you have anticipated me in the idea of State Support of
Motherhood. Then it is not a wild notion.” A bit later, when she sent him
the text of her paper, he attacked it so severely that she lost heart and tried
to withdraw from her commitment to present it to the Fabians. They in-
sisted, however, and she repeatedly begged Pearson for a detailed critique,
which at last he seems to have sent. When, with much trepidation, she at
last read her paper to the generally unfeminist Fabians, they surprised her
by receiving it enthusiastically.84
Pearson continued to take a special interest in women’s issues through-
out his life and favored, for example, the opening of universities and ca-
reers, and the gradual extension of suffrage, to women. He thought these
developments inevitable. Increasingly, though, his interest in women’s is-
sues was subordinated to his advocacy of a new socialism. Sometimes he
expressed hope that the habit of subjection had at least accustomed
“woman . . . to think of others rather than herself.”85 At other times he
worried that women, having for so long been stiﬂed by patriarchy, would

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 161
86 See Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, 163–164; KP to MS, 21 Oct. 1888; MS to KP,
24 Oct. and 8 Nov. 1888; KP to MS, 4 Nov. and 9 Nov. 1888; Sharpe, “Autobiographical
History,” 78–80.
naturally favor for a time the expansion of individual rights, and he hoped
this might be balanced by the element of maternal selﬂessness. But such
values would be dangerous if, by deferring to man, the woman helped
perpetuate his tendency to egoism.
MARRIAGE, EGOISM, AND THE DOLL’S HOUSE
In October 1888, in the midst of an intense but resolutely impersonal cor-
respondence with Pearson on desire, sex, and the circumstances of
women, Maria Sharpe asked him to suggest a project that could make her
life useful, and that might be suited to her interests and capabilities. Pear-
son had provoked her with a tirade on the idleness of the childless middle-
class woman, which she was unable to read as merely abstract. Believing,
as he did, that women could and should make their own choices, he was
loath to take charge of her research, but he suggested an immense project
on medieval peasant wars. Although she had already, with some guidance,
investigated European laws on prostitution from 800 to 1500 and was at-
tracted by the possibility of writing a scholarly work on some topic other
than women, this new proposal was too daunting. Drawing inspiration
from another suggestion of Pearson’s, she prepared a study of the charac-
ters of men and women in Henrik Ibsen’s plays. After that she determined
to prepare a translation of Ibsen’s Brand into English.86 In the summer of
1889, a few months after the Men and Women’s Club held its last meet-
ing to hear a report by Pearson on Francis Galton’s Natural Inheritance,
she journeyed with her sister Loetitia and her inseparable companion Lina
Eckenstein to Norway to see the country, work on her Norwegian, and
possibly to communicate with Ibsen himself.
Ibsen and Norway were becoming fashionable among the politically ad-
vanced in England in the later 1880s. On matters Nordic they were some-
what behind the Germans. Ibsen had lived as an expatriate in Dresden and
Munich as well as Rome from about 1864 to 1891, and his ﬁrst big success
outside of Norway involved Berlin productions of The Pillars of Society, the
pioneering work of his new “social realism,” in 1877. In the wake of Bis-
marck’s antisocialist laws, the left’s appreciation of Ibsen rose as its reverence
for Goethe’s classicism declined. A still greater sensation was created in the
fall of 1880 by productions of The Doll’s House, although some theaters per-
formed a bowdlerized version in which Nora’s stunning abandonment of
her insensitive, condescending husband and their children to develop her

162 • Chapter Six
Figure 9. A world of women: Loetitia, Julia, and Maria Sharpe. (Courtesy of
UCL)
87 Bernhardt, Ibsen und die Deutschen; Meyer, Ibsen: A Biography.
88 Ackerman, Ibsen and the English Stage; Britain, “A Transplanted Doll’s House.”
individuality was reversed by a negotiated return to hearth and family. No-
body knew how to soften the impact of his Ghosts (1881), in which the
tragedy follows precisely from the refusal of the upright Pastor Manders to
accept the love of Mrs. Helena Alving; he counsels her instead, in the name
of patriarchy and in deﬁance of his own emotions, to return to her cruel,
philandering, syphilitic husband. Conservative opinion in Norway and Ger-
many was scandalized by this play, as it would be a decade later in England.87
But Ibsen had admirers in England before he acquired opponents. These
were generally men and women of the left, such as Eleanor Marx and Ed-
ward Aveling, who had discovered Ibsen by the early 1880s. William Archer,
among Ibsen’s most important early advocates and translators, was also an
acquaintance of Pearson. Although Pearson must have known very early on
of Ibsen’s German reputation and this emerging English one, it was only in
the period of the Men and Women’s Club that he evinced any interest in the
Norwegian playwright.88
The opening of a full production of The Doll’s House at the Novelty
Theater on 7 June 1889, with Janet Achurch as Nora, is the outstanding

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 163
89 Pearson asked a publisher in 1891 about the translation of Brand and was told of the
need for haste since everyone seemed to be translating this work. T. Fisher Unwin to KP, 7
March 1891, Pearson Papers 866/6.
90 George Bernard Shaw, The Quintessence of Ibsenism (1891; 3d ed., 1922), in Major
Critical Essays (London: Constable, n.d.), 44. Shaw read his Ibsen paper to Karl and Maria
Pearson before presenting it to the Fabians; see Stanley Weintraub, ed., Bernard Shaw: The
Diaries 2 vols. (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1986), vol. 1, 678, from
Shaw’s diary, 17 Dec. 1890.
91 Henrik Ibsen, Brand (1866), trans. with introduction by G. M. Gathorne-Hardy (Seat-
tle: University of Washington Press, 1966), introduction; KP to Parker, 5 Sept. 1888; also
KP to MS, 23 Aug. 1888.
event in the reception of Ibsen into Britain. Pearson was there, having
arranged a block of seats for the men and women (formerly) of the club.
Brand, a very long play, written in verse and, like Peer Gynt, full of magi-
cal changes of scene, could scarcely be performed on stage. While it had
little role in the transformation of the British theater, its reputation among
Ibsen’s admirers was at least on a level with that of Doll’s House, and there
were many efforts to translate it during the 1890s.89 Bernard Shaw, an in-
ﬂuential Ibsen interpreter before he achieved success as a social dramatist
in his own right, described the eponymous character Brand as a dangerous
fanatic, and the play as a satire. “Brand dies a saint, having caused more
suffering by his saintliness than the most talented sinner could possibly
have done with twice his opportunities.”90 It is difﬁcult now to read the
play otherwise, but the young author who wrote it in 1865, having re-
cently arrived in Rome and been transported into an almost apocalyptic
fury by the refusal of Norway and Sweden to support Denmark against
German aggression, found much to admire in the noble idealist he cre-
ated. A more earnest Victorian than Shaw, a noted Schwärmer himself,
studying it in the late 1880s, had to agree. “As for my ‘geistige Entwick-
elung’” [spiritual development], Pearson wrote Parker from Saig in 1888,
“it is summed up in one word ‘Ibsen.’ I am more & more impressed with
him & Brand as I gradually wade through it in the original with diction-
ary & grammar grows bigger & bigger. It outgrows,—nay it has outgrown
Faust and the giant of the north marks really a new age, as Goethe did.”91
How much did Pearson recognize himself, by now an unstinting cham-
pion of self-sacriﬁce for the sake of the State, in the character of that re-
lentless and yet murky idealist, Brand?
I hardly know if I’m a Christian;
But that I am a man—I know quite well:
And I am sure that I can see the ﬂaw
Which saps our nation’s marrow everywhere.
Agnes, Brand’s idealized wife, follows him with the greatest reluctance,
sometimes pleading, sometimes rebuking:

164 • Chapter Six
92 Ibsen, Brand, 45, 94, 105; KP to MS, 24 March 1889 and 31 Oct. 1888.
93 See KP card to MS, undated Jan. 1887. The name Sigrid is also to be found in one of Ib-
sen’s historical dramas, as Pearson pointed out when he informed his mother of her birth: “I
hope to send you in a few days Ibsen’s play of the Vikings with its character of Sigrid, I think
you will be interested in it.” KP to Fanny P, 2 May 1892. The play in question is The Pretenders,
already available by then in translation. The character of Sigrid is distinguished by her great
piety. Egon and Sigrid Zöller’s letters to Pearson are in Pearson Papers 906/4 and 906/5.
And to a race so helpless in its fall
You cry your awful slogan—Nought or all.
Brand, unmoved, is merciless to Agnes, to his mother, and to the beloved
son whom he, godlike, sacriﬁces:
Humane!—Ah yes that limp and feeble word
Is made the universal slogan now!
It is used by every shirker to disguise
His cowardice and lack of enterprise.
Above all, Brand allows himself no respite from the most rigorous ideals,
but chooses the cause for which he will ﬁght, never giving an inch of
ground until ﬁnally, in a reckless ascent, he is consumed by an Ibsenian av-
alanche. Pearson identiﬁed Ibsen’s genius with his “power of seeing two
sides” of such characters as Brand and Peer Gynt, “and putting them both
equally strongly.”92
Pearson’s ﬁrst references to Ibsen date to early 1887. In the summer of
1888, he spent much of his stay in Saig learning Norwegian from Sigrid
Zöller, the Swedish wife of a German land inspector and philosophical au-
thor. Mainly because of a shared admiration for Ibsen, the Zöllers and Pear-
son became very close. The Pearsons would later name their ﬁrst two
children after them, a choice that reﬂected also their attachment to Norway
and to the sagas.93 Maria Sharpe had for some time been working to learn
Norwegian, and her journey to Norway in 1889 was above all for literary
purposes. Pearson also had scholarly reasons for the voyage: to improve his
Norwegian, and to learn about the folklore and peasant culture of an inter-
esting Germanic people, as well as to escape the London routines and take
in some glorious scenery. He also had another purpose. Having recently
learned that his father would not, after all, forsake his London life and his
wife for the ancestral lands in Yorkshire, Pearson was now freed from a pos-
sible obligation to share the small house in Hampstead he had recently
rented with his mother. That, and the dissolution of the Men and Women’s
Club, allowed him to contemplate new living arrangements.
In late July, he and his traveling companion Ralph Thicknesse, accom-
panied as ever by Baedeker, met up with the Sharpe party in Opheim,
where he felt encouraged by her warmth. It is difﬁcult to imagine that she

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 165
94 Fanny P to KP, 26 July and 6 Aug. 1885.
95 KP to MS, 10 Aug. 1889 and 30 July 1889.
could have been entirely unprepared for his declaration of love, in view of
their extensive correspondence and frequent meetings over the previous
ﬁve years—its ritual impersonality not quite concealing various indications
of friendship and affection. In the summer of 1888 he had invited her to
visit him at Saig. Nevertheless, the marriage proposal, delivered on a sce-
nic bridge by an intensely anxious suitor on Sunday morning, 28 July
1889, came to her as a shock. Pearson subsequently explained her failure
to ponder in advance the possibility of marriage as a natural consequence
of the passivity that was cruelly demanded of women in such matters. She
should now be given time to reﬂect, he resolved, and so, as a man of prin-
ciple, he declined to ask for a quick reply, but left her in peace. She would
then have the opportunity to consider her future without pressure from
him, and also to continue the language study that now framed her schol-
arly ambitions and that had brought her to Norway in the ﬁrst place. So
weighty a decision, he argued, should not be made on impulse, but as a
settled conviction, based on the fullest possible knowledge of its implica-
tions. Having felt his own love for her grow over a period of at least three
years (his mother’s suspicions were aroused by his visits to the Sharpe
household in Stanmore, and depression afterwards, as early as July 1885),
he no longer felt any doubts of his own commitment.94
Only with the greatest struggle had he maintained the appearance of de-
tachment for so long, and now the prospect of a favorable outcome took
away his habitual reserve. His need to tell his own story, the irrepressible
New Werther, surfaced once more, in the guise of warnings of what it
would mean to be married to such a man as Karl Pearson. “One wants to
make a confession of all one’s weaknesses, prejudices, and pettinesses and it
is so impossible. They cannot be recorded by the self, only seen and learnt
by very long & intimate acquaintance.” Still, it was too much to hold in his
emotions and self-doubts, and his unveiling was more easily undertaken on
paper than in person. Karl’s outpouring of confessions, concerning his
character and “inherited tendencies,” commenced just two days after his
marriage proposal, in a letter posted in Ulvik, on the Hardanger Fjord, at
the beginning of his southward ﬂight to his summer retreat in Saig:
My Father comes of a sturdy peasantry, strong and passionate to almost ruthless
selﬁshness. I have inherited some of his strong physical nature, much of his self-
ish & passionate tendencies, and a life of study & too much loneliness has only
enabled one to repress them by an almost equally vicious tendency to periods of
depression & moroseness. Add to this a hypersensitiveness and self-consciousness
derived from my mother and you will have a picture which may look black—too
black when it is seen all at once.95

166 • Chapter Six
96 KP to MS, 4 Aug. and 27 Aug. 1889.
The face he normally presented to the world, he explained, was mere
sham. He had imagined for a time that he “had acquired a perfect power
of crushing all emotions at will,” but this proved illusory. He often played
the Spötter (the mocker) as his German friends called him, a role that de-
rived from the “joke-philosophy” of his Cambridge days, and it had with
the years become increasingly habitual. Yet he was all too conscious that it
was only a mask, which at times fell irresistibly away. If he was often blunt
and cynical, inside he felt weak and vulnerable, even feminine. “I always
attribute the two inconsistent elements to the divergent characters of my
Father & Mother. To keep the latter [the delicate, sensitive aspect] alive
as das Innere, and to convert the former into das Äussere, the mask only,
has been the only possible mood of getting through life. To let the blunt
element satisfy itself in ridicule of the sham emotional, the outward ex-
pression of feeling,” while taking satisfaction in studying this irrational 
domain, these hidden springs of action: this was his way. In his public life,
the inward essence and superﬁcial exterior were reversed, with reason sim-
ulating solidity and pretending to mock an exterior façade of passions that
it knew to be deep and powerful. “It has been an inconsistency, but an in-
born one, to take reason as the sole guide of conduct in theory and most
often in practice, but under it all to be about as unreasonable a bag of
emotions as can well be found outside pure hysteria.”96
These dark revelations were of course also proofs of his humanity. Karl
emphasized his vulnerability to show that he was no pillar of impersonal
reason, to be respected and admired, but a fallible man in need of sympa-
thy and affection. He was in no way insincere, neither in his confessions
nor in his avowal of love. His life story was also, however, for him a little
drama, a passion play, with the last acts remaining to be performed, in
which Maria had been scripted into a deﬁnite role. She was not the Mag-
dalene, but a more earnest character whose warmth required to be re-
leased. He supposed that her mask of dispassion, like his own, “must
sometimes be maintained at real cost of physical health.” This stiﬂed emo-
tionality was perhaps what he called, in the same letter, the “‘Brandian’
spirit,” so at odds with that “ideal of the union of sensuous and intellec-
tual pleasure” for which he longed. Her ostensible detachment, which in-
deed she cultivated all the more assiduously to avoid the weaknesses of
women, had, as he explained, sometimes vexed him, and he was delighted
on those rare occasions when he could detect a hint of personal interest
beneath.
These were perceptive observations; her personality was perhaps even
more guarded than his. One indication is her reaction to his letter from
Bergen, just before she and her companions set sail. Ever the romantic en-

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 167
97 KP to MS, 27 Aug. 1889; Sharpe, “Autobiographical History,” 58, 61; MS to Parker,
9 July 1889, Pearson Papers 10/1; on Unitarianism, see KP-MS letters, late March 1889;
also the anonymous letter by Maria Sharpe to The Inquirer, 1 June 1884, in Hacker Papers,
Box 7.
98 Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, 164; KP to MS, 4 Aug., 14 Aug., 22 Aug. 1889;
Harris, Private Lives, Public Spirit.
thusiast, he had not yet found in Norway the exotic locale of untouched
nature and uncorrupted peasants he was seeking, but only another city on
the English tourist circuit. “He has, I think, a larger capacity for disap-
pointment than anyone I know,” she commented in a letter to Parker. Her
announced policy was never to let her expectations rise. She was also, in
her way, as suspicious of sentimentality as he was. Indeed, she made no ex-
ception for religion. One of their tenser moments prior to his proposal of
marriage followed from his condemnation of Unitarianism, the faith in
which she was raised, for seeking to base religion on rationality rather than
sentiment and tradition. She had, in fact, strongly criticized the Church in
1884, before she knew Pearson at all well, in response to a Unitarian ap-
peal to “the shining oriental imagery coined in the heart of Jesus.” This
she condemned as “an indulgence of the emotions, where clear-sighted re-
alization of facts is the ﬁrst and all important necessity.97
He wrote to her often of service to more exalted ends and of moral
ideals rather than of pleasures. One crucial question to be settled, if she
consented to his proposal, was what form their union should take. He had
long preached that marriage should be free of legal constraint, arguing
that this very freedom would promote lifelong commitment. In March
1889, Maria had declared her belief in the same view. Immediately he began
to ﬁnd reasons why she should avoid avowing her principle openly, and a
few months later when the issue could no longer be treated as hypotheti-
cal, he argued in favor of legal marriage. Particularly crucial was the prob-
lem of impersonality: if they argued for free unions while living as an
unmarried couple, their reasons might be dismissed as self-interested. And
mere forms, perhaps, were not really so important, for “what we want
now-a-days is an ideal of the inner relation of the sexes, quite as much if
not more than the external.” This was the ideal of marriage as intimate
friendship, a harmonious union of personal warmth and impersonal rea-
son, in place of the unfortunate division of labor that deﬁned the wife as
angel by the hearth.98
He feared above all the hereditary egoism of Pearson men, of his father.
In the fall of 1889, a few months after the ﬁrst theatrical performance of
Ibsen’s Doll’s House, Karl and Maria retained vivid images of the “doll”
Nora and of the overwhelming self-centeredness that her husband Hjal-
mar had developed as the natural counterpart to her utter dependency. In

168 • Chapter Six
99 MS to KP, 11 June 1889; KP to MS, 10 Aug., 22 Aug., 30 July 1889.
100 KP to MS, 15 June 1888.
June, Maria had commented on this in a letter. Karl, seemingly born 
under the sign of egoism, was deeply anxious that it should not take over
his own life, and so he was effusive in his letters about his desperate need
for her help. And yet the rational man’s egoism came in through the chim-
ney when pushed out the door. His own family background, he explained,
was at the root of his special concern for the condition of women, and
he would do anything to avoid replicating his parents’ marital situation.
His mother, in her maternal role, stood for an ideal of unselﬁsh love—
“such a great, unlimited social force if it could only be directed into the
right channels”—but if not, the cost to herself and to the moral position
of her husband was monstrous. When the woman lets her life sink into
routine, forgetting the possibility of unending self-development, marriage
becomes “anti-social in its inﬂuence.” “I do not fear the occasional fric-
tion,” he told Maria in his ﬁrst letter after Opheim, “but I do fear a self-
surrender on your part, which would gradually develop in me just those
characteristics which have made my early childhood so painful a memory.”99
His letters were in many ways tender and personal, yet behind them
stood always a moral ideal, whose Brandian severity was rarely lightened
even in the most intimate private space. His affection had taken a particu-
larly odd form in the years leading up to his proposal of marriage, as in this
bit of displaced lovemaking from June of 1888: “I hope that the freedom
of sex, which seems a probable concomitant of the complete emancipation
of women will be tempered by the general recognition of the life-long
union as the richest form of sexual union, and the one which tends of all
others to preserve social stability & increase social efﬁciency.”100
For Maria, the charge to live up to the expectations of this extraordi-
narily energetic, versatile, and rigorously idealistic suitor was daunting.
For some time she did not know how to respond to his outpouring, and
when after eleven days she ﬁnally wrote him, she was oppressed by doubts,
not of his love or sincerity, but of her own worthiness, her capacity to ﬁll
the role he had deﬁned for her. Perhaps she was too old for him, being six
years his senior; perhaps her work, which was unlikely ever to earn an 
income, was insufﬁcient to raise her above dependency and dolldom. He
reassured her that in a capitalistic order, much work, including her 
translation, could be of real social utility even though it was unpaid, and
that the difference of age mattered not at all. The self-possession and in-
dependence he was looking for in a partner was impossible without a de-
gree of maturity and experience. Symbiosis, he had told her in Opheim,
means each destroying the other’s life, and Maria was indeed far from
docile. She had, more than any other woman of the club except Olive

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 169
101 KP to MS, 14 Aug. 1889. Most of her letters from this period, including this one of 8
Aug., have disappeared. On symbiosis, see Loetitia Sharpe to KP, 26 Aug. 1889, Pearson Pa-
pers 848. Maria Sharpe, “Henrick Ibsen and His Men and Women,” Westminster Review,
131 (June 1889), 626–649.
102 KP to MS, 21 Sept. 1889.
103 MS to KP, 4 Oct., 11 Oct., 19 Oct., 22 Oct. 1889; Lina Eckenstein to KP, 11 Oct.
1889, Pearson Papers 680/3; KP to MS, 22 Oct. 1889.
Schreiner, stuck by her own views when challenged by him, and the paper
she published at about this time on Ibsen’s men and women is full of in-
sight and intelligence. He was not drawn to her as a passive bride. Still, she
did not look to make a career of resistance to an overpowering husband,
and the impersonal terms with which he reiterated his need of her were
precisely the wrong ones: “But I see [he wrote her] that only by close life
with another will it be possible to hold in check the more selﬁsh side & de-
velop the more social side of my [written over ‘one’s’] nature.”101
Although some letters from this period of crisis have disappeared, the
causes of the difﬁculty emerge clearly enough. He had to convince her that
he could love and respect her as she actually was. He told her again and
again, though in language she must have found alarming, that all consci-
entious labor was honorable, “and only the want of any work the height of
anti-socialism.” In response to her worries that her inability to follow his
scientiﬁc ideas would interfere with a perfect partnership, he said that she
need only follow the spirit and not the substance of it. “Everything that
helps us to understand physical nature better is really a stage in human
freedom & in the higher stage which regards the mind without differenti-
ation of sex.” Besides, he went on, he had no great scientiﬁc talent, and his
highest commitment was to his work on the woman question. This was
not, he explained with irrepressible frankness, on account of “an enthusi-
asm for the emancipation of women in itself,” but because “the socialist
ideal must halt till woman sees further and more freely than she does
today.”102
Rather than calming her, Karl’s letters and, after both returned to En-
gland in early September, conversations only aggravated the crisis. She ex-
pressed her feelings of inadequacy in a sequence of letters in October,
concluding ﬁnally that she could help him best by leaving him alone, and
that he should not visit or write her for a time. Her regular companion of
those years, Lina Eckenstein, reported to Karl that Maria, blaming herself,
had told her that “the love she can give you is evidently not of the kind you
want.” Can it be, Eckenstein added, “that you have not cared for what is
really herself but for a creature of your dreams?” Finally in late October he
seems to have understood how his preaching had frightened her and
pleaded to her that his love was deep and personal.103 And he respected her
request for some time of solitude, promising to wait for her until she was

170 • Chapter Six
104 Alice Enﬁeld (a friend of the Sharpes) to KP, 8 Dec. and 14 Dec. 1889, Pearson Papers
684/3.
105 Loetitia Sharpe, to KP, 17 March 1890, Pearson Papers 848. He told Maria of reading
the play in Norwegian in a single sitting, unable to put it down; see KP to MS, 9 Jan. 1889.
106 Henrik Ibsen, The Lady from the Sea (1888), trans. Peter Watts, in A Doll’s House and
Other Plays (London: Penguin, 1965), quote on 306; MS to KP, 23 March 1890.
ready, and asking for her friendship again if he could not have her love. For
the next ﬁve months, he was as traumatized as she. He evidently attributed
the reluctance to marry of his “puritan maiden” to fear of sex, and told one
female conﬁdante he met during this period, Alice Enﬁeld, of a “triangular
solution,” to take away the threat by marrying a woman he did not love, in
order to regain the friendship of the one he did. Enﬁeld admired his gen-
erosity in refusing to cramp Maria’s freedom, yet advised him: “Women
cannot help liking to be compelled by the man they love.”104
He refused this last solution, but acted instead through the mobiliza-
tion of literature. On 17 March the silence was at last broken by a letter
from Loetitia Sharpe: “Maria wants me to ask you if you wrote the article
in ‘Freedom’ on ‘The Lady of the Sea’ and if you sent it to her, as she
thinks you did.”105 This Ibsen play, which Karl and Maria had discussed
the previous summer, is about a young woman, Ellida, who is obsessed
with the sea and feels alienated from her much older husband, Wangel.
The sea means freedom to her and is associated also with a mysterious sea-
man, who, like freedom itself (and like death?), frightens and yet fascinates
her. His arrival in port, and his demand that Ellida sail away with him, sets
up a series of crucial choices. Ellida demands of her husband “that you and
I release each other of our own free wills,” and when, after tortured inde-
cision, he lovingly grants what she has asked, she is ﬁnally freed from her
obsession, refuses the seaman, and begins at last to live happily with her
husband.106 Possibly the anonymous review in Freedom was indeed by
Pearson, although the ideas and style of writing leave doubts. The mes-
sage, in any case, was strikingly apropos. Wangel, the reviewer explained,
had been drawn to Ellida after the death of his ﬁrst wife by “the emotional
excitement of a strong attraction of the senses,” but her suffering and need
had “gradually changed his selﬁsh passion into a devoted love.” Although
reluctant to release her, since her emotional struggle had manifestly
clouded her judgment, he determined in the end that he had no choice
but to put aside his hopes, barely allowing himself to imagine that she
would let him continue as her “friend and helper.” For this deed he was re-
warded. His “generous and unselﬁsh conduct in the crisis of her fate
rouses her admiration, her gratitude, her enthusiasm; to his boundless sur-
prise and joy he sees that her heart is opening to him . . . as never before,

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 171
107 Anonymous review of Eleanor Marx’s translation of The Lady from the Sea in Freedom:
A Journal of Anarchist Communism, 4, no. 40 (March 1890), 10–11. I suspect that Char-
lotte Wilson had a role in this paper, founded in Oct. 1886, which was devoted to the cause
of women, celebrated Kropotkin, and kept abreast of matters Norwegian. Earlier issues in-
clude anonymous appreciative reviews of Pearson’s essays on socialism and the woman ques-
tion in April 1887 and Oct. 1888 (the latter refers to his “luminous and thought-provoking
originality”), and by S. O. (Sidney Olivier) in Nov. 1888.
108 KP to MS, 24 March and 31 March 1890.
that it is himself whom she will love, his life that she will choose to
share.”107
A few days after making contact through her sister, Maria wrote to Karl
directly, explaining how her nervousness had turned to terror, and ex-
plaining that she had at last learned to appreciate the kindness of his words
during her crisis. Karl felt too much guilt to allow her to take the blame,
and replied immediately to try to set things right. Yet the philosophical
lover was soon trapped once more in that inﬁnite regress of egoism. He
had no right, he told her, to place such responsibilities on her for the sake
of his needs, and he begged her to “mould” him “into something which
would not pain or distress you.” He wanted to send her his diary, which has
not been preserved for the archives, but which must have revealed a tor-
tured, self-doubting, and sometimes angry diarist. This was a terrible mis-
take, as he recognized within a week. “The sending it to you and the writing
the letter which accompanied it were only part and parcel of the old ruth-
less egoism. The hideous thing is that I don’t at all see this at the time I do
these things, but imagine that I am doing them out of true affection for
you.” It made him wish he were no longer himself, and that he could be rid
of these terrible recent memories. “I have no right to throw the responsi-
bility of making myself upon you, however little my own power to alter
myself.”108
These remarks inspired once again her admiration for his generosity, ac-
companied by a profound feeling of unworthiness, which in turn fed his
own despair at the egoism that somehow had led him to “make my ideal
appear true to give itself something to feed upon.” His language resem-
bled increasingly a prayer to the blessed virgin, that feminine idol whose
historical role he so admired, as he begged, in a letter written on Good
Friday, for Maria’s trust and faith, while declaring himself “wholly unwor-
thy of it. I am at times hopelessly weak and blind.” Or, in a darker mood,
he imagined her as a Protestant God, and he among the reprobate. “I saw
that the only possible salvation for me,” he wrote on Easter Monday, after
she had again turned away from him, was to install her permanently in his
life and thoughts. “You might have saved me from myself, from marked
introspection and selﬁshness.” Yet renunciation was too hard. “I am not

172 • Chapter Six
109 KP to MS, 2 April, 4 April, 7 April 1890.
110 George Meredith, The Egoist (1879; London: Penguin Books, 1968), 359, 376, 594.
See Beer, Meredith: A Change of Masks.
111 KP to Parker, 6 April 1890; Parker to KP, 7 April 1890.
strong enough to be true to my ideal that would not whisper a bitter thing
of you. . . . Oh pardon my sending you such a last letter as this, pardon my
love being so hopelessly selﬁsh.”109
In his anguish, he sought refuge in literature. Writing to Parker on
Easter Day about the terrible vicissitudes of his relations with Maria (“I do
not and never shall understand women”), he professed to change the sub-
ject: “That is more than enough of the personal.” Parker “& others” had
so often talked of the virtues of George Meredith that he had resolved to
put aside his negative reaction to Richard Feverel and to try once again to
read him. Meredith happened to be one of Maria’s favorite authors, one
whom Pearson too would praise lavishly in later life. But at this moment,
Meredith only added to his torment. Sir Willoughby, who was given the 
title role in The Egoist, must have appeared a disagreeable caricature of
Pearson himself. “I know this, that my aim in life is to be generous,”
Willoughby declares, with characteristic sanctimoniousness. He explains
how he had forsaken classics for science: “Science is modest; it masters
men; of necessity, not with a stupid, loud-mouthed arrogance.” Yet he re-
fuses to give back to his betrothed her freedom when she realizes her mis-
take and thereby compels her to ﬂee him if she will not marry. In his ﬁnal
humiliation, as he is about to be rejected by the last of the women he has
tried to string along, he begs her: “I believe I do now know myself. Any-
thing you will, only give me your hand; give it; trust to me; you shall 
direct me. If I have faults, help me to obliterate them.”110 Pearson 
complained that Meredith’s characters were pure individualists, incapable
of growth or development, and that they were concerned only with their
own happiness and oblivious to all social questions. For them, love re-
duced to “the sex-passion.” Parker responded that he had at ﬁrst felt just
the same on reading The Egoist. “I imagine most men would detect some-
thing of themselves in Sir Willoughby.” He had not presumed on lending
Pearson the book that it had “any particular bearing on your personal 
experience.”111
On Easter Monday, the evening after he wrote to Parker and within
hours of his bitter parting letter to Maria, Karl addressed her again, now
apologetically, hoping to relieve the pressure. In a much calmer and more
conciliatory exchange over the next week, they discussed love, fear, and re-
nunciation. She explained how she had come to understand his weak-
nesses, but also his “undoubting love,” and tried to take responsibility for

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 173
112 KP to MS, 7 April 1890, MS to KP, 8 April and 15 April 1890, KP to MS, 23 June
1890, and intervening letters; KP to Macaulay, 30 Aug. 1890.
the crisis: “I am the disgraced woman & you only the injured man.” He
reiterated, quite unaffectedly, that he loved her personally, not for some
ideal, offering his resumed friendship and time to consider whether mar-
riage or renunciation was the right course. On 13 April, the next Sunday,
they met to discuss matters calmly, with happy results. “I understand you
better,” she wrote him on Tuesday, “when you are trying in a broken way
to express your innermost feelings than when more as an artist or a writer
you have worked out some well-rounded story of what our relation should
be.” And thus he at last won her on the basis of the very personal contact,
not of brain to brain, but of heart to heart. In June they were married. For
their honeymoon they traveled to Norway, where they worked at their
Norwegian, contemplating its bearing on “primitive Aryan” habits, stud-
ied Germanic folklore, and—at least he proposed this—read James G.
Frazer’s just-issued Golden Bough to each other.112
The problem of ideals was not easily put aside. He was an irrepressible in-
tellectual and ideologue, and within days of the restoration of their en-
gagement he was lecturing her against pity. “We have to remember that our
society is engaged in the hardest of all struggles against surrounding soci-
eties & against natural forces, and individual selﬁshness inside that society
is likely to make it rotten to the core. It is the social instinct one wants to
strengthen.” It might be said that he celebrated her in an impersonal way
with his last writings on the woman question, even if they largely followed
in the direction he had mapped out during the period of the Men and
Women’s Club. He opposed individualism for independent women, as he
opposed male individualism, favoring instead an “Independent Woman’s
Party” along with the “Independent Labour Party” to pursue new arrange-
ments of property and ownership for the sake of a more efﬁcient society.
Once the woman’s movement reached beyond the middle classes, he ar-
gued, it would recognize the need for protective legislation, especially for
mothers, under the broader rubric of socialism. He continued to support
equality of opportunity for women, but assumed that marriage and moth-
erhood were not generally compatible with full-time careers outside the
home. “Women who abstain from marriage and have not the sex-impulses
strongly developed,” he declared, cannot be the model for society. The
woman’s movement, he wrote a few years after his marriage, is changing
“from the cry of the unmarried for equality of opportunity to the cry of
the married for the reconciliation of maternity with the power of self-
determination.” In reply he offered his earlier solution of regulation and
state support of childbearing and child rearing, “national insurance against

174 • Chapter Six
113 KP to MS, 18 April 1887; Pearson, “Woman and Labour,” in Chances of Death, vol. 1,
226–255, on 238, 255; ﬁrst published in the Fortnightly Review, 1894. In a letter to Sharpe
on 21 March 1887, he had argued that the woman question was more urgent for married
than for single women.
114 KP to MS, 23 June 1890; MS to KP 2 Jan. 1898 and 28 Dec. 1917. For her activities
outside the home, see Pearson Papers 9/7, including a review of Hedda Gabler from The
Woman’s Herald, 31 Jan. 1891, 227, and an article, “Henrik Ibsen’s Heroines—a Defense,”
The Woman’s Signal, 16 Aug. 1894, 100; also Fabian Women’s Group, Three Years’ Work,
1908–1911 (London: G. Standring, n.d. 1911).
motherhood,” allied to an increasingly severe program of selective breed-
ing for the sake of that most urgent need, national efﬁciency.113
One imagines that such lectures may have endeared him less to Maria
than his letter a few days before the wedding, telling her how much his
Aunt Lizzie had liked her. “I expect she had got it into her head that I was
going to marry a peripatetic suffrage-platform & moral-reform phono-
graph, and the reaction at ﬁnding there was blood & ﬂesh in you has
brought tears to her eyes.” He became, to all appearances, an affectionate
husband and attentive if demanding father of the three children she bore,
even if he was soon more obsessed than ever with his work. It would seem,
however, that Maria was always troubled by her inability to live up to his
ideals. She published, in later years, a few reviews and participated in a
desultory way in such organizations as the Fabian Women’s Group. Later
she helped him to organize social occasions involving his biometric and
eugenic laboratories and prepared artwork for his public lectures. But
both recognized that this was nothing like an independent career. With his
decisive turn to statistics and applied mathematics soon after their mar-
riage, she found it impossible to understand his work and greatly regret-
ted her incapacity.
There is an apologetic letter from her in the ﬁles, written almost twenty
years later, explaining how the work of raising children had rendered “full
partnership” with him impossible.114 Indeed, there is little evidence of
continued intellectual comradeship in the correspondence they exchanged
after their marriage. In 1927, after her health had broken, he wrote to her
sister Elisabeth Cobb explaining how he had failed as a husband by devot-
ing so much of his time and energy to his work rather than to wife and
children. In view of the troubled circumstances of their engagement, he
said, he should have realized “that I had still to win her. . . . I blame my-
self for never having really won her conﬁdence.” This letter, which has too
often been taken at face value, was among other things a highly pertinent
literary idealization. “So all the time we’ve been together, I’ve never really
won you,” declared Dr. Wangel to his wife in that crucial document from
Karl and Maria’s traumatic engagement, Ibsen’s Lady from the Sea. The
letter, or (since it was never sent) confession to posterity, expressed his

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 175
115 KP to Elisabeth Cobb, 2 April 1927, “Never sent” (see discussion of this letter in chap-
ter 1), Pearson Papers 9/6; Ibsen, Lady from the Sea, 306; KP to MSP, 10 April 1927.
116 KP to Margaret Child, Pearson Papers 925. They did in fact marry.
117 Pearson, “Woman’s Question” (1885), 14–15.
black depression during her illness as well as a recurring fear of not de-
serving to be loved and is no reliable account of their life together. Within
a week of this unsent letter she had convinced him that his provocation for
this outburst, her seeming distrust of him in relation to her will, was pure
misunderstanding, and that her affection was undiminished.115 Yet there is
something tragic, after all, in the gap between an idealized vision of mari-
tal partnership and the actual possibilities of their life together. Disap-
pointment was almost inevitable, given how much he had invested in the
transformation of marriage, of woman, and of himself.
He was ever the intellectual visionary, ever identifying the personal with
a higher purpose and a purer life. Seven months after Maria Pearson’s
death, in 1928, he became engaged once again to be married, now to one
of the workers in his laboratory. A week after that, his new ﬁancée was in
doubt. “I cannot analyze my affection for you,” he tried to reassure her,
“and if you say, as you did, that it is not to yourself but to an ideal, I would
reply that every man who loves raises the woman he loves to an ideal, and
it is good for both of them that he does.”116
CONCLUSION: WOMEN AND THE CONQUEST OF SELF
As an intellectual matter, Pearson refused absolutely to reduce the dignity
and worth of women to the interests and needs of men. “The possibility
of woman’s individual development,” he wrote, is vital. There can be no
baser argument for woman’s education than the one that it makes her a
better companion for her husband, for this “denies her individuality.”117
In some ways, his deep commitment to the equality of women shaped
or at least reinforced his moral vision of science. The “intellectual love”
that he ﬁrst associated with Spinoza resurfaced in the 1880s as a rubric 
under which men and women could share, perhaps equally, the life of
philosophical friendship that he had discovered at King’s College. His
strengthened commitment to impersonality was not only a retreat from
the failure of this ideal, as friendship “from man to man” degenerated to
“sex-passion.” It was also an afﬁrmation of what Schreiner had called the
“touch of brain on brain,” valued no less by the women he knew than by
the men. For Pearson, impersonality was an alternative to an excessive 
preoccupation with the baser instincts which, when ascendant, reduced
woman to prostitute.

176 • Chapter Six
Figure 10. The happy family. Karl and Maria Pearson, with son Egon and
daughter Sigrid. (Courtesy of UCL)
At the same time, his faith in individual self-development, for women
and men alike, was about male morality as well as female dignity. Woman,
as mother, stood for something higher than self-interest. In the age of
waning patriarchy, woman faced the temptation to confuse individuality
with individualism, but a still greater threat to social progress came from
the selﬁshness and complacency of men. Much of his career was shaped by
a struggle against what he saw as the male Pearson egoism. His opposition
to individualism was expressed through his admiration for passion plays
and folk rituals, as well as through his ideological commitment to social-
ism. He looked to a transformation in the status of women, and speciﬁcally
of the woman he loved, for a more intimate and personal check on his own
egoistic tendencies. It was incumbent on woman not only to overcome
her own individualism for the sake of socialist morality, but also, through
rigorous adherence to an ideal of self-development, to control the indi-
vidualism of man. He was thinking of one man in particular. What might
be called Pearson’s feminism was, like his scientism, part of a bold moral
quest to realize the ideal of a socialist self.
In the crucible of personal anguish caused by his broken engagement,
he came to recognize, if only episodically, the contradiction of placing re-
sponsibility for his own moral improvement on his beloved. He could not
admit the still more fateful contradiction in his grand program of social re-

Intellectual Love and the Woman Question • 177
construction based on the supremacy of scientiﬁc method. Rather, he pur-
sued with selﬂess enthusiasm a vision of the modern State, to be organized
around the knowledge and impersonality of the rational scientist, the per-
sona of the Pater, that he increasingly recognized as the core, and not only
the shell, of himself. This was the form of impersonality that, after 1890,
gave meaning and purpose to his career.

1 Pearson, Grammar of Science (1892), 20–21, 474. See Hollinger, “Justiﬁcation by Ver-
iﬁcation”; Hollinger, “James, Clifford, and the Scientiﬁc Conscience.”
C H A P T E R  S E V E N
Ether Squirts and the Inaccessibility of Nature
Your words reveal to me what makes a man of learning!
What you can’t touch, for you is leagues away,
What you can’t grasp does not exist at all,
What you can’t count, you don’t believe is true,
What you can’t weigh is of no weight to you,
And what you do not coin, you think of no account.
—Mephistopheles to the chancellor in Goethe, Faust II
PEARSON MAY HAVE been the ﬁrst to call metaphysics a species of poetry, and as
philosopher of science he is generally remembered as a follower of Ernst
Mach’s doctrine that we can never get at any underlying reality. In truth his
views were far more interesting and contradictory, an unstable combination of
positivism that owed only a little to Mach with radical idealism. Metaphysics
he found tantalizing, sometimes irresistible, and he longed to turn metaphys-
ical intuitions into objects of sensory experience. Unlike Mach, Pearson took
seriously the “thing in itself” as something inﬁnitely remote, rather like Spi-
noza’s God, who could never be asked to return our love. Valid knowledge,
efﬁcient summaries of experience, might, as he argued, be favored by natural
selection, but untutored humans were ever being led astray by a desire for
what science could never give. The inaccessibility of nature, this alienated hu-
man condition, required that science be formulated as a self-denying method.
At the same time, this doctrine deﬁned a positive ideal for Pearson, as it had
for Huxley, Clifford, and other Victorian advocates of science. In place of the
certainties of dogmatic religion, they would install the scientiﬁc ethic of
doubt and of evidence. Scientiﬁc method meant renunciation, a demand that
we keep to the “hard and stony path of classifying facts and reasoning upon
them,” and never imagine “that we can enter the stronghold of truth by the
burrow of superstition, or scale its walls by the ladder of metaphysics.” To re-
sist these temptations was not easy. “We must accomplish a task more difﬁcult
to many minds than daring to know. We must dare to be ignorant.” But the
rewards were great. Despite his ostensible positivism, Pearson rejected every
doctrine that would wall off some aspect of the world as unknowable.1

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 179
2 Klein, “Mechanical Explanation”; Hunt, The Maxwellians, 73–107; Pierre Duhem, The
Aim and Structure of Physical Theory (1904), trans. P. P. Wiener (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1954), 70–71.
His major philosophical work, The Grammar of Science (1892), had ten-
sions such as these at its core. It was ﬁrst of all about the ethics of knowledge,
about the spirit of self-denial that overcomes personal interest and prejudice
and defers to the possibility of empirical evidence. Society has need of con-
sensus, and each citizen should accept as true only what is valid for everyone.
His “scientiﬁc method” was almost universal, applying as readily to practical
and political questions as to astronomy or chemistry. Yet without access to
external nature, such agreement could be grounded in nothing deeper than
the distinctive characteristics of the “normal” human brain.
In practice, Pearson the scientist was boldness incarnate, and he rarely if
ever consigned a topic of possible interest to the inaccessible domain of
metaphysics. Philosophy in his hands was, on the whole, scientiﬁc argu-
ment by other means, and in the years leading up to his Grammar, the sci-
ence he most often addressed this way was physics. As mathematical
physicist, Pearson wavered between exhilaration and despondency, the lat-
ter on account of his seeming incapacities, and the former when he thought
he might have discovered a new basis for the comprehension of physical re-
ality. No positivist restrictions would keep him from pursuing the reduction
of matter to ether vibrations and of mechanics to hydrodynamics. In all
three editions of the Grammar, from 1892 to 1911, he presented his the-
ory of the most elementary atom as an “ether squirt,” pouring into our fa-
miliar space from a fourth dimension. At the foundation of it all would he
something entirely immaterial such as geometry, an attribute of mind,
whose capacity to generate a world would someday be comprehended by
science. Whether this geometry was a mere logic of description or itself the
underlying reality remained ambiguous. Pearson longed through physical
discovery to escape that conﬁnement of self in a prison of appearances. His
more positivistic utterances expressed skepticism about these ambitions,
without quite dismissing them as futile. Pearson’s physics, a branch of ap-
plied mathematics, wavered between metaphysics and renunciation.
ETHEREAL PHYSICS
Pearson practiced physics during what has been called the “High Baroque
phase of the mechanical world view.” The critique of this tradition by
Pierre Duhem, Catholic philosopher and physicist, is well known: the
British had construed physics, ideally the quiet abode of reason, as the
clanking and whirring of gears, wheels, and pulleys—in short, as a factory.2

180 • Chapter Seven
3 Pearson, review of Oliver Lodge, Modern Views of Electricity (new ed.), in The Academy,
43 (11 Feb. 1893), 132–134. On Thomson’s use of models, see Smith and Wise, Energy and
Empire, 464 and passim.
4 Hunt, Maxwellians, 12–13; Siegel, “Thomson, Maxwell, and the Universal Ether.”
Pearson, though not quite innocent of such modeling tendencies, ex-
pressed a similar disapproval of the clamorous ether machinery. Reviewing
the same book that subsequently provoked Duhem, an introduction to
electricity by the Birmingham physicist Oliver Lodge, he criticized Lodge
for seeking to “‘explain’ the ether by mechanism.” It would be difﬁcult,
he conceded, to check such tendencies, so long as “our chief physicist
[William Thomson] is discontented, if he cannot rig up a battery of spin-
ning tops to represent the ether, or develop a spring mattress by aid of
bell-cranks and wires into a model molecule.” Such mechanisms had never
been satisfactory, not even in the hands, or rather heads, of the Greeks.
“The amount of grease necessary to keep the crystal spheres moving
would have destroyed their harmony for any less recondite philosopher
than Pythagoras.”3
Both extremes, industrial-scale modeling and austere analysis, were rep-
resented in the British tradition of mathematical physics. Maxwell’s bril-
liantly original paper of 1856 on electrical ﬁeld theory, for example, set out
from an explicit mechanical analogy. In 1861 he illustrated his conception
of electromagnetism with an image of molecular ether vortices, depicted
as a lattice of hexagons separated by “idle wheels” whose ﬂow represented
the electrical current. Above and beyond the instrumental function of
these analogies, their contribution to the derivation of new mathematical
relations, Maxwell believed that electricity and magnetism were properties
of a mechanical ether. Still, the particular representation was a ﬁction, and
he later rederived the mathematics using a Lagrangian form of analysis
that was independent of these ether contrivances. In this more abstract,
analytical expression, Maxwell’s mathematics was incorporated into the
Cambridge Tripos, and in that form Pearson had lived with it as an un-
dergraduate.4
Pearson’s disapproval of the aloofness of this mathematics from practi-
cal physics, what he called “the old type of Cambridge teaching,” matched
or surpassed his dislike for the proliferation of springs and pulleys in the
mechanical models. He spoke with ironic nostalgia of those “good old
days when we used to solve complex problems in magnetism and light by
the aid of bookwork deﬁnitions of physical quantities.” The best that
could be said for this Tripos mathematics was that it provided “an excel-
lent discipline for the mind.” If mathematical physics was to be science,
however, it could not proceed from abstraction to abstraction, but must
set out from physical facts. Even Lodge’s “cogs and racks,” wheels and

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 181
5 Pearson, unsigned reviews of Lodge, Modern Views of Electricity (1st ed.), and of W. H.
Watson and S. H. Burbury, The Mathematical Theories of Electricity and Magnetism, The
Academy, 36 (1889), 322–324.
6 Pearson review of E. J. Routh, A Treatise on Analytical Statics, Academy, 40 (1 July
1891), 38–39.
7 For the interweaving of engineering and physics, see Isaac Todhunter, “edited and com-
pleted . . . by Karl Pearson,” A History of the Theory of Elasticity and of the Strength of Mate-
rials from Galilei to Lord Kelvin, vol. 1 (1886, New York: Dovec, 1960), 696.
elastic-band molecules, might be defended as providing a check to the
mathematician, “paddling in an ocean of superﬂuous analytics.” The
Cambridge mathematical physicist, under the current regime, was “a
strange being who may be described as an applied mathematician without
physical touch.”5
Pearson feared that he was himself an instance of this odd genus, just as
he worried at other moments about the luxuriance of his own physical
modeling. As the next chapter shows, he took up the new methods of
graphical geometry in order to combat these tendencies. Even as a student
at King’s, he had had his doubts about the forms of mathematics that pre-
vailed at Cambridge, and by 1890 he was thoroughly disaffected. He even
criticized a book by his mathematical coach E. J. Routh, whose testi-
monials had helped him to secure a mathematical post, in just such terms.
“So long as the Cambridge mathematical school remains theoretical and
analytical, Dr. Routh’s problems must be almost indispensable to the
would-be wrangler. But there are signs that Cambridge is at length
aroused to the need of some touch with the practical and geometrical side
of Mechanics.”6
Pearson’s interest in mathematical physics, which dated back to his stu-
dent days, was never merely perfunctory. Despite his intense commitment
during the early 1880s to the history of medieval Germany, he thought
physics a more plausible career than history. His growing impatience with
the bar, as well perhaps as the positive stimulus of new ideas about the
ether, encouraged him to resume his mathematical studies in earnest
toward the end of 1882. In December, he initiated a correspondence with
an old King’s College friend, William Herrick Macaulay, and their letters
follow the trajectory of Pearson’s mathematical work. Macaulay, who
spent his career as a tutor, bursar, and vice-provost at King’s, was a com-
petent applied mathematician who kept up with the literature, but he was
not really an original scientist. At ﬁrst Pearson’s letters focused on the the-
ory of elasticity, a topic that grew out of engineering studies and that still
lent itself to such investigations as of “the ﬂexure of heavy beams,” but
that had taken on great scientiﬁc interest as the mathematics of the ether.7
From time to time, Pearson revealed to the cautious Macaulay how he
might be nearing a breakthrough on the relation of matter to ether, the

182 • Chapter Seven
8 Haldane, “Karl Pearson,” 303–313.
9 Friedman, Appropriating the Weather, 11–13; Kragh, Quantum Generations, 5.
10 Pearson, “On the Motion of Spherical and Ellipsoidal Bodies in Fluid Media,” Quar-
terly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 20 (1885), part 1, 60–80.
11 Ibid., part 2, 184–211, on 204, 211.
great problem of late Victorian physics. He dreamed of such achievements
as the outcome of his own distinctive research program, without main-
taining close ties to the leading physicists of his day.
J.B.S. Haldane would later characterize Pearson’s statistical mathemat-
ics as “heaping Ossa on Pelion,”8 one Greek mountain on another, and his
mathematical physics was no less cumbersome. He swung a very large
hammer to crack the inﬁnitesimal elements of the ethereal continuum and
yet failed to crack them. A single equation sometimes ﬁlled a whole page,
and much of the art reduced to keeping track of the proliferating terms.
He was inclined at ﬁrst to the hypothesis pursued by William Thomson for
decades, that an atom must be an ether vortex. Inertia, following this line,
was like the resistance of a top to being overturned, and the forces of
physics derived from interactions involving disturbances of these whirling
atoms, propagating through the ether rather than as action at a distance.
He was in many ways a follower of Maxwell in his analytical methods. But
the inspiration for his ﬁrst major scientiﬁc publications came from a Nor-
wegian, Carl Anton Bjerknes. What excited him were some analogies be-
tween the hydrodynamics of the ether and the phenomena of electricity
and magnetism. Perhaps the properties of matter could be derived in these
terms; it seemed promising that two ether spheres pulsating harmoniously
should behave as Newtonian gravitating particles.9 He concluded the ﬁrst
part of his ﬁrst paper with the thought that one might substitute for
Thomson’s “vortex sponge” a system of pulsating spheres, producing ether
waves that generated the forces of attraction and repulsion.10
He wrote this paper in the manner of a serial novel, dating the ﬁrst in-
stallment January 1883, evidently before the second part was ﬁnished.
Alas, the continuation, dated February, didn’t work out. He was unable, it
seems, to carry out his intended application of “these hydro-magnetic
forces to the theory of atoms,” and he deferred that task to a promised
third part. His customary boldness failed him, as he ﬁshed for some de-
fensible results with which to conclude part two, and thereby to redeem
this wild venture. It was not his brightest moment. “With certain assump-
tions, whose legitimacy may be perhaps contested, results bearing upon
the collision of ships may be deduced.” It seems that to shut off or reverse
the engines of ships on a collision course may actually increase the danger.
“These results are of course only of a most general character, and depend
upon certain not entirely satisfactory assumptions.”11

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 183
12 Pearson, “Note on Twists in an Inﬁnite Elastic Solid,” Messenger of Mathematics, 13
(1883–84), 79–95, on 90.
13 Macaulay to KP, 27 July 1883, 17 Sept. 1883, 8 Oct. 1883, 16 Oct. 1883; KP to
Macaulay, 27 Oct. 1883.
14 Stokes to KP, 2 April 1884, Pearson Papers 862/6; Pearson, “On a Certain Atomic Hy-
pothesis,” Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 14 (1887), 71–120.
Part three never appeared. In March 1883 he sent off to a different
journal a “Note on Twists in an Inﬁnite Elastic Solid,” where he specu-
lated that “sets of plane twist rings may be propagated through an elastic
medium without losing their individuality.”12 But the grail he was now
pursuing involved a vision of the atom as a pulsating sphere immersed in
the ether. By July he had a draft manuscript on the subject to send to
Macaulay, who asked for clariﬁcation of his purposes, then responded that
while he had found no fundamental ﬂaws, there were various errors of de-
tail. Pearson was discouraged by his lack of enthusiasm, or perhaps by the
inelegance of it all: “I . . . expect atoms will be shelved again for who
knows when?”13 “Who knows when?” was not so far into the future for
the restless mathematician. Six months later he sent a draft on pulsating
ether atoms to George Gabriel Stokes at Cambridge, one of Pearson’s for-
mer teachers and a respected senior ﬁgure, who endeavored, with equivo-
cal success, to be encouraging. His evaluation of the paper, as he reported
diplomatically, “would be rather intermediate between the two extreme
opinions you mentioned in your letter.” Extreme alternatives, either a
stunning discovery or utter trash, were characteristic of Pearsonian self-
assessment, as with his passion play. He must have been discouraged, be-
cause ten months passed before he next presented his paper to a scientiﬁc
gathering. When it ﬁnally appeared in print, two years after that, it bore
multiple dates to provide a biographical record of his scientiﬁc achieve-
ment: 11 March 1883 for an appendix, 2 February1885 for the reading of
the body of the paper to the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and ﬁnally
an explanatory “note” dated April 1885. This publication initiated his last
and most ambitious series of papers in mathematical physics. So far, no-
body had shown much sign of being impressed.14
He did, however, ﬁnd gainful employment. In 1884 he was appointed
professor of applied mathematics at University College, London. He had
failed in previous applications to Manchester and Liverpool, and also for
the chair of pure mathematics at University College. The committee for
this last had been impressed by the range as well as the intensity of Pear-
son’s intellect, yet was worried that his great mental powers might not be
devoted permanently to mathematics. His candidacy in applied mathe-
matics, backed up by three new recommendations endorsing his suitabil-
ity for this post as well as the printed application for pure mathematics
with nine more testimonials, was successful against such stiff competition

184 • Chapter Seven
15 See College Correspondence AM/C/141 and AM/C/148; also Applications: Mathe-
matics, Applied, 1884, both in University College London, Library Manuscripts Room.
16 Kegan Paul & Co. to KP, 24 Sept. 1884, Pearson Papers 732/7; Clifford, Common
Sense of the Exact Sciences, ed. Karl Pearson (1885), 185–186, 242–243.
17 KP to Macaulay, undated May 1885. His correspondence with Macaulay and with
Charles Chree (Pearson Papers 658) document richly the technical problems of this work.
as the senior wrangler Joseph Larmor, because Pearson was judged the
better professor, even if Larmor was for the moment the more accom-
plished mathematician. It helped that Pearson had taught successfully as
R. C. Rowe’s deputy during the latter’s illness.15
He also was invited, at almost the same time, to complete two books
from the literary remains of deceased authors. One was William Kingdon
Clifford’s Common Sense of the Exact Sciences; the other was Isaac Tod-
hunter’s History of the Theory of Elasticity and the Strength of Materials.
Clifford’s book was elegant and concise, and the “editing” provided occa-
sion for Pearson to develop his own philosophical ideas on physics. The
sections he added to this unﬁnished text emphasized the element of hu-
man conventions in the mathematical laws of physics and rebuked those
who relied on that “indescribable something termed matter.” Mass could
only be known as a ratio of accelerations, and force was no more accessi-
ble. He insisted that we cannot comprehend the reasons for mechanical
laws, but can only describe them. The book stimulated him to build on
Clifford’s bold mathematical restatement of physical questions, including
an interpretation of gravity as the curvature of four-dimensional space.16
Todhunter’s History, by contrast, was scarcely more than a compilation.
Pearson was asked to take it on because in the Smith’s Prize competition
at Cambridge in 1879, he had given a new and better solution to one of
the examination problems on elasticity, and Todhunter’s note to this effect
was subsequently found by his literary executors. The invitation, which he
found ﬂattering, soon weighed him down. Although there was no pres-
sure to introduce much new material, and even some resistance by Tod-
hunter’s friends, Pearson could do nothing halfway. Within a year of
taking the project up, he wrote Macaulay that “if the ﬁrst volume ever gets
done, then I shall excuse myself from the rest on the plea of pressure of
work, that between ourselves, and gratify myself by recommending my
worst enemy as a suitable editor.”17 In 1886 he ﬁnished that ﬁrst volume,
an ample 908 pages of analyses of papers and books, covering the whole
period from the seventeenth century to about 1850. Far from abandoning
the work, he pursued it with such determination that Cambridge Univer-
sity Press began fearing for its stocks of paper and ink. At one point he of-
fered to give up his honorarium so the press would not cut his manuscript.
The second part, covering the period 1850–70, was ﬁnally issued in 1893,

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 185
18 James Porter to KP, 9 June 1891 and 2 Nov. 1893, Pearson Papers 819/6. For the sec-
ond volume he received payment of £200.
19 Todhunter, History of Elasticity, vol. 1, 872.
20 Pearson, unsigned review of Lodge, Modern Views of Electricity, Academy, 36 (1889),
322–323.
21 Thus he complained in a review of Oliver Lodge, Pioneers of Science, that the “born his-
torian” would have seized on the trial of Kepler’s mother as a dramatic meeting of old and
new, providing “a mirror of the age in which he lived.” See Academy, 43 (11 Feb. 1893),
133–134. In History of Elasticity, vol. 1, 34, Pearson remarked brieﬂy on the theological as-
pect of Maupertuis’ theory of least action, a point he presented more vigorously and ex-
tended to nineteenth-century theories of energy conservation, in his “Obituary of James
Prescott Joule,” Academy, 36 (1889), 272–273. His point was that theological assumptions,
however obscure, could sometimes be productive for science.
in two volumes of 762 and 546 pages. It was almost all by Pearson, who
complained of the quality and reliability of his deceased coauthor’s work,
but it bore Todhunter’s name as author, “edited and completed by Karl
Pearson.” The press did not take advantage of his offer to give up his
compensation.18
We should not suppose that the dreariness of this task was absolute.
Elasticity was a topic rich in engineering applications. It demanded, as
Pearson said of one of its heroes, Barré de Saint-Venant, “a keen appreci-
ation of practical needs, combined with a wide theoretical grasp.”19 Elas-
ticity was also central to the theory of the ether, which was like an
extremely stiff solid in its capacity to bear transverse waves and to transmit
them at the speed of light while allowing the passage of the planets with-
out detectable resistance. Pearson was not reticent about the signiﬁcance
of his topic, and in 1889 he responded to Oliver Lodge’s claim for elec-
tricity as the “imperial science,” by declaring that elasticity was more de-
serving of the title, unless both should prove merely branches of
hydrodynamics.20 In the History of Elasticity, however, his scientiﬁc com-
mitments were occluded. He cut short all discussion of papers on the pas-
sage of waves through the ether on the ground that this belonged instead
to the theory of light. He scarcely even hinted at his developing views on
scientiﬁc method, or on the iniquity of reifying such scientiﬁc concepts as
“force.” Neither did this “history” open up into the larger domains of cul-
tural history that, for him, were as relevant to science as to religion or
economy.21 The spirit of excess that he displayed in almost everything else
was here reduced to an extravagantly dutiful and workmanlike effort,
strangely selﬂess.
Nowhere did he explain why he devoted so much time and effort to this
endeavor. It seems to point to serious doubts about his capacity to per-
form really original scientiﬁc work of enduring value. There are other in-
dications of this, such as his open (but anonymous) lament in reading
Maxwell and William Thomson that “we can only watch the feats of the

186 • Chapter Seven
22 Pearson, “Recent Works on Physical Science,” Academy, 38 (1 Nov. 1890), 394–395;
KP to Fanny P, 29 March 1885, Pearson Papers 924; KP to MS, 5 May 1890.
23 KP to MS, 23 Aug. 1888.
Titans, and scarce recognize in ourselves, as we read, even the veriest re-
ﬂection of their strength.” After an evening of “metaphysical discussion”
in the rooms of the young J. J. Thomson, recently appointed as successor
to Rayleigh and Maxwell in the Cavendish chair at Cambridge, Pearson re-
ferred to him with no detectable irony as a “young genius.” On the eve of
his wedding in 1890, he explained to Maria Sharpe that he was regarded
in Cambridge as “a second-rate mathematician who indulges in extreme
views & dabbles in journalism. . . . I look back & round on all the odds &
ends of careless & superﬁcial work, which mark my life & make me shud-
der sometimes at the energy & time frittered away attempting what was
not within my powers, or within them without the needful education &
training.”22
He experienced, however, episodes of attenuated humility, moments
when answers to the great questions seemed almost within reach. In late
August 1888, as he basked in the wet 6° C weather, he wrote to Sharpe
from Saig of the immense joy of being alive. Not Ibsen’s Brand, which he
had just begun reading, but physics was responsible for his elation this
time. “It’s all the result of a close examination of the tremendous pace we
are going forward in some directions that makes it so extremely delightful
to be alive just now!” A “sudden resurrection” of his atomic theories of
1883 in two chemical journals explained his triumphant mood:
I have been chuckling and crowing in private over my very superior under-
standing of ﬁve years ago and how much more universe can be solved in the
same method now. I don’t know how many memoirs I haven’t planned but not
begun! Joking apart, however, we do seem very, very close to some gigantic dis-
covery like that of Newton—which in one sweeping ﬂash will lay bare all the rid-
dles & dark mysteries which are yet at the bottom of what we term magnetism,
electricity & light.23
The resuscitated theory, which a few years earlier had left Stokes luke-
warm, now evoked the ecstasy of the ﬂash. His series of three papers of
1887 to 1891 “On a Certain Atomic Hypothesis,” for all the density of
their mathematics, expressed a bold and speculative understanding of the
universe that went far beyond the available evidence, a confession of his
metaphysical convictions that in its way was as personal as his passion play.
To be sure, it was the heyday of ether theories, and Pearson was far from
solitary. “That view of the physical universe which regards it as an ab-
solutely continuous medium seems to be rapidly replacing the old molec-
ular hypothesis,” he announced at the outset of the ﬁrst of these papers.

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 187
24 Pearson, “A Certain Atomic Hypothesis” (1887), 71–72; Pearson, Grammar of Sci-
ence, 309n.
“Let us note the difference, and it is a fundamental one, between the old
and the new view of the universe, the old view endowed its atoms with cer-
tain inherent forces, and having done so, more or less completely ignored
the existence of the medium; the new view endows its atoms with no in-
herent forces, but with motion. . . . The old view saw everywhere in the
universe force, the new view ﬁnds everywhere motion.” Citing Bjerknes,
he proclaimed that the “whole problem of physics is reduced to one of hy-
drodynamics,” and he aspired through a suitable conception of the atom
to derive all the basic phenomena of physics and chemistry.24
His own discovery or invention was an alternative conception of atoms
as spherical “portions” of ether with “natural pulsations” of ﬁxed period.
Due to the proximity of other atoms and the propagation of waves
through the ether, there would be “forced pulsations” as well. Possibly the
atoms were spaces of perfect vacuum, empty even of ether, with potential
energy supported “in some manner” at the boundary. His modest project
was to rederive the principal phenomena of chemistry and physics—to
ﬁnd an “analogy between the results of some motions of the atoms and
phenomena which are usually classed as gravitation, cohesion, chemical
combination, etc.” He spoke not of causation but of analogy, indeed
“analogies . . . of the vaguest description,” and in the context of this 
paper, his doubts about the human capacity to get at real objects or real
causes functioned as a license to invent. Positivistic doubt reﬂected his
conviction that mass, force, electricity, light, and so on were merely what
the human sensory apparatus could pick up of something more funda-
mental. But since his ether model so far had strange, almost inconceivable
properties, he discarded physical plausibility as a criterion of a good theory
and argued for the legitimacy of any hypothesis about the motions of the
invisible ether if it appeared consistent with observation. For example,
gravitation, as an attractive force, required the spheres to vibrate in har-
mony, and since it is universal, it followed that all atoms must share at least
one pulsation of common period and phase. The implication deserved em-
phasis: “All atoms in the universe of whatever kind appear to have begun
pulsating at the same instant.” This he ascribed to “some not yet fully
grasped physical cause.” A physicist of a different temper might have
found here a vestige of creation.
He also calculated spectra for polyatomic molecules. Stokes had cau-
tioned him in 1884 that a correspondence of his deductions to “results of
actual observation in spectral analysis” would not prove any genuine re-
semblance between the systems he imagined and those “actually existing.”
Pearson took the view here that correspondence was good enough. He

188 • Chapter Seven
25 Pearson, “A Certain Atomic Hypothesis” (1887), 72–73, 79–80, 111, 114; Stokes to
KP, 2 April 1884, Pearson Papers 862/6; Pearson, Grammar of Science, 329.
26 F. Lindemann, “Über Molekularphysik: Versuch einter einheitlichen dynamischen Be-
handlung der physikalischen und chemischen Kräfte,” a lecture delivered 5 April 1888, in
Schriften der Physikalisch-Ökonomischen Gesellschaft zu Königsberg in Preussen, Neu-
nundzwanzigster Jahrgang, 1888 (Königsberg, 1889), 31–81; Hunt, Maxwellians, chap. 7.
may have supposed, as he would argue in 1892 in The Grammar of Science,
that science can achieve nothing more. There is no explanation for why
the ether moves, he wrote. “We cannot proceed for ever ‘explaining’
mechanism by mechanism.”25
This ﬁrst paper was ﬁnally published in 1887 after many delays, and by
then he had long since given up hope of a favorable reception by physi-
cists. Indeed, it fell ﬂat, as he told Macaulay. During the last two years be-
fore it appeared in print, and then for one more afterward, he seems to
have conﬁned his more speculative urges to the theory of matriarchy. But
the next year a paper by the German chemist F. Lindemann came to him
as vindication of his earlier work. Lindemann, who shared Pearson’s admi-
ration for Thomson’s 1884 Baltimore lectures, used the Thomson atom of
shell and springs to understand refraction, light spectra, heat phenomena,
chemical combinations, electricity, and magnetism. He was not a prominent
researcher, and his paper in the proceedings of the Königsberg Physical-
Economical Society would scarcely have forced itself on the attention of an
English physicist. Pearson read this work in Saig, months before its ofﬁcial
publication date, and someone there must have shown him Lindemann’s
original lecture. He was as thrilled by it as were other British physicists by
Heinrich Hertz’s experimental support for Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory
of light, which appeared at almost the same moment.26
The triumphalism of his letter to Maria Sharpe that August reﬂected his
belief that Lindemann’s results could be derived just as easily and naturally
from his pulsing ether atom as from Thomson’s mechanical one. Within
weeks he sent a new paper off to the Cambridge Philosophical Society,
whose referee reported negatively, and on 8 November he presented it to
the London Mathematical Society. “It is obvious that Thomson’s mecha-
nism is only one of many which will furnish his fundamental equation, and,
in choosing any one of these to represent the molecule we must be guided
by the width of the range of phenomena which the individual mechanism
will explain, as well as its inherent physical possibility.” In the exuberance of
seeming discovery he forgot his positivist irrealism, and claimed for his pul-
sating spheres a higher degree of physical plausibility than the atom of
“springs and shells” that Thomson deployed in his Baltimore lectures. “A
pulsating atom as basis of the most complex molecule seems per se more
probable than an indivisible spring mechanism, if it is capable of giving as
wide a range of results.” If he sought a uniﬁed basis of physical under-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 189
27 Joseph Larmor (for the Cambridge Philosophical Society) to KP, letters from18 Sept.
1888 to 28 Jan. 1890, Pearson Papers 739; KP to Macaulay, 23 Sept. 1888; Pearson, “On a
Certain Atomic Hypothesis” (his second paper under this title), Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society, 20 (1888–89), 38–63, on 45, 39.
28 Pearson, “On the Generalised Equations of Elasticity, and Their Application to the
Wave Theory of Light,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 20 (1888–89),
297–350.
29 KP to Macaulay, 23 Nov. 1888.
standing, he did not expect or demand simplicity. He seriously doubted
“that the mere translational and vibrational motions of the atoms in the
ether itself are sufﬁcient to explain all so-called chemical and physical
forces.” A complex molecular structure was surely required to account for
the multifarious phenomena of the physical world. For the moment, Pear-
son was in possession of what seemed a real physical theory, and there was
no need to conﬁne himself to vague analogies or ﬁctional models.27
He promised, in his conclusion, to continue with a third installment
that would take up questions of elasticity and cohesion, and he duly pre-
sented a mathematical paper on elasticity and the wave theory of light to
the London Mathematical Society in April 1889.28 But it was not quite a
continuation. Two weeks after reading his second paper on atoms as pul-
sating spheres, he experienced another revelation. He dispatched an ex-
cited note to Macaulay:
I have just seen that nearly all the results of my atom papers still hold & the
equ[ation]s are enormously simpliﬁed, if the atom be treated as an “ether
squirt.” Matter would thus be simply a point at which ether ﬂows into space &
mass the rate of ﬂow. Our planetary system (unless we go perhaps to Saturn’s
ring) would have only positive matter, but periodic negative & positive ﬂows
would account for electricity & enforced variations in ﬂow for cohesive & chem-
ical forces.29
Working quickly, as was his habit, he soon had another paper, in which he
invested great expectations. Indeed, through the summer of 1889, at
least, he experienced moments of real ebullience, despite discouraging re-
sponses from reviewers. Was it ether squirts, or his hopes of a favorable 
reply from Maria, that account for his comments on the “suppressed 
feeling” of physicists that had “found vent” in the celebration of Hertz?
“It is because the scientiﬁc world knows itself to be on the very verge of
discoveries as to the nature of the ether, more far-reaching possibly than
the discovery of the mode of gravitation, that it lives in a state of sup-
pressed excitement, which hinders it sometimes from further progress or
from recognition of the relative importance of recent work.”
One might hazard a conjecture as to whose recent work had been un-
justly neglected. Pearson was not impressed by Hertz’s theory of electric

190 • Chapter Seven
30 Pearson, unsigned review of Lodge, Modern Views of Electricity, in Academy, 36 (1889),
322–324; Larmor to KP, 28 Jan. 1890, Pearson Papers 739. On Hertz, KP to Oliver Lodge,
18 July 1894, in Lodge Papers, MS Add 89/81. Later, however, in Nature, 54 (17 Sept.
1896), 461, Pearson argued that statistics could do for evolution what Hertz did for
Maxwell. The ether squirt hypothesis was picked up by at least one scientist, W. H. Julius in
the Netherlands; see Smith and Wise, Energy and Empire, 489.
31 Pearson, “Ether Squirts,” American Journal of Mathematics, 13, no. 4 (July 1891),
309–362, on 310. Even Thomson’s “horrible” spring-mattress atoms, he told Lodge, have
at least the virtue that molecular action becomes complicated rather than a mere summing of
inverse-square forces between pairs of atoms: KP to Lodge, 18 Nov. l889, Lodge Papers MS
Add 89/81.
oscillations, probably because it bypassed the crucial question of ether me-
chanics (Pearson called it too narrow), and he said that the inadequacy of
theory made Hertz’s mathematics idle. Such views left him increasingly mar-
ginalized. As his marriage plans went into crisis, his troubles with the jour-
nals deepened too. Since he stubbornly insisted that his paper be printed in
full or not at all, he was obliged in the end to consign it to the American
Journal of Mathematics, scarcely a prestigious venue in 1891. From there it
passed into one of the ether sinks in or beyond the rings of Saturn.30
The author of this paper presented himself less as the triumphant dis-
coverer than as the self-protective ironist, almost an echo of the New
Werther’s Loki. He began by quoting G. F. Fitzgerald’s well-known lec-
ture to the physicists of the British Association at Bath in 1888, a meeting
animated by Hertz’s electromagnetic discoveries. “It has become the fash-
ion to indulge in quaint cosmical theories and to dilate upon them before
learned societies and in learned journals.” The quotation continued with
Fitzgerald’s confession that he had at times been “bogged in the quag-
mire” and so could appreciate the splendid “opportunities for piquant
criticism” it furnished. Pearson added, in his own voice: “The pleasure of
‘bogging oneself in this quagmire’ is so great that even piquant criticism
cannot restrain me from adding another quaint cosmical theory to the
many that already exist.” This was the theory “that an atom or the ultimate
element of ponderable matter is an ether squirt.”31
His idea was to reduce the atom almost to a geometrical point, and to
represent it as a source or vent from which ether, a perfect ﬂuid, ﬂowed
into space. Since the theory depended on construing the universe as a
plenum, the ether being incompressible, there had to be corresponding
ether sinks somewhere. Such “negative matter,” however, was nowhere
apparent in the vicinity of earth. He analogized the universe of ether
squirts to a collection of electrodes moving freely on a perfectly smooth
metal plate: they would push one another about as electricity ﬂowed in
and out from above and below. The average rate of ether ﬂow, in Pearson’s
model, corresponded to gravitational mass, while characteristic variations

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 191
32 Pearson, “Ether Squirts,” 361, 321, 339.
or vibrations in the rate of ﬂow accounted for emission and absorption of
light. He went on to derive chemical afﬁnities and to show that some of
the most important interactions, including cohesion, involved the vaguely
anthropological notion of “kin-atoms,” resonating harmoniously. The basic
mathematical laws of nature, such as the inverse-square law of gravitation,
became, in Pearson’s theory, mere approximations of intricate interactions
of the ether squirts, a complex hydrodynamics.
These efforts to understand forces in terms of continuum mechanics fol-
lowed the broad lines of William Thomson’s work. In an ether ﬁeld, even
two-atom interactions could never be simple. Wrote Pearson: “The intro-
duction of a third atom into a ﬁeld containing two others not only intro-
duces new forces between these two atoms, but profoundly modiﬁes the
force existing between the two ﬁrst atoms.” Complexity was no basis for re-
jection, however, since any good physical theory must offer some account
of the “nigh inﬁnite range of chemical and physical properties in each indi-
vidual substance.” The ether squirt was structurally simple yet capable of
generating great variety. Pearson envisioned that every substance of known
atomic structure might require a special mathematical dissertation.32
The mathematical pliability of his model, if such it was, came at some
cost in the currency of physical plausibility. He acknowledged this imme-
diately, adding only that many of his contemporary etherealists had already
made an equal or still greater sacriﬁce. The inadequacies of Thomson’s
vortex atom had, as Pearson pointed out, driven him to organize his Bal-
timore lectures around mechanical molecules—shells and springs. These
models, whatever their value for the mathematical treatment of light, elec-
tricity, and magnetism, had grave defects in regard to chemical phenom-
ena. Worse, from Pearson’s standpoint here, was the inelegance of the
ontology, which even Thomson regarded as a helpful model and not as re-
ality. Since the mechanical molecules could in no way be derived as prop-
erties of a ﬂuid ether, Pearson argued, they raised “the not unnatural
repugnance of the philosophical mind to a dualistic theory of the uni-
verse.” His theory was monistic, a representation that reduced atoms and
molecules to ether, and matter to motion, and in which there was no ac-
tion at a distance.
But was the world really like this? He did not defend his rather strange
physical picture, but invoked the sufﬁciency of sensory perceptions and
the mathematical fertility of his model to justify it. “It is, some may think,
unlikely that the molecule is really a group of ether squirts, but the mole-
cule is a dynamical system, and any model of a molecule which does not
contradict obvious physical facts, but goes a long way to explain those
facts, cannot but be suggestive as to the nature of the laws governing real

192 • Chapter Seven
33 Ibid., 362, 317.
34 G. Udny Yule to KP, 6 March 1891, and KP to Yule, 20 April 1891, Pearson Papers
905 and 931. KP to Oliver Lodge, Lodge papers MS Add 89/81. On Thomson’s vortex
atom, see Smith and Wise, Energy and Empire, 419–424. In KP to Parker, 6 April 1885, he
remarked that Thomson (in his Baltimore Lectures) “has been writing about the weight of
the ether, as if empty space could weigh anything!—I am going to weigh a twist!—That
might mean something.”
molecular systems.” The real structure of nature must remain unknowable
in any case: “But we do not know why it [the ether] ﬂows, much less the
reason why only a limited variation is permissible in its rate of ﬂow. That
depends on the state of affairs outside the space, which is alone sensible to
us and with which we can deal. We can, as it were, only guess at the ‘po-
tential energy’ of our atom, which lies outside our space. On the ether
squirt hypothesis, the mechanism of the Ding-an-sich is beyond our con-
trol or inspection.”33
Pearson’s radical rejection of metaphysics, his denial that we can ever
know the nature of things, now signiﬁed no abandonment of ether mod-
els, but a defense. He praised Thomson’s vortex atom as “an extremely
beautiful hypotheses,” objecting only to its ponderous corporeality. He
thought Thomson retrograde for ascribing gravitational mass to the ether,
rather than deriving the properties of mass from pure motion. In 1891,
when G. Udny Yule asked whether Pearson’s own ether structures weren’t
mechanical, he replied that mechanical explanation meant setting out
from ordinary ideas of force and mass. The ether squirt or wrinkle in space
represented the ﬁrst stage in tracing such mechanism back to geometry.
The older ideas, by contrast, gave support to materialist and even spiritu-
alist ideas. He complained to Lodge: “It is the use of words without
proper signiﬁcation which is the sin against the Holy Ghost today!”34
TEMPTATION, RENUNCIATION, POSITIVISM
It might, from this standpoint, be impossible to speak scientiﬁcally of
things in themselves, but Pearson was not compelled to be silent. In his pa-
per he indulged the speculation that the ether squirt “may be an argument
for the existence of a space of higher dimensions than our own, but of that
we can know nothing.” Perhaps the ether ﬂows into our space out of an in-
visible fourth dimension. This thought crossed his mind almost at the mo-
ment of discovery and drew him with the allure of the taboo. The ether
squirt, he told Macaulay, “offers a beautiful chance to four-dimensional
space men & theologians as the ether must be squirted from somewhere.”
In his Grammar of Science he graciously offered some crumbs to his more

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 193
35 Pearson, “Ether Squirts,” 313; KP to Macaulay, 23 Nov. 1888; Pearson, Grammar of
Science, 322.
36 See reports on the trial in The Times (London), 15 Oct. 1886, 3e, and 16 Oct. 1886, 4c.
speculative readers. Invoking Edwin Abbot’s tale of Flatland to evoke
what an invisible added dimension might mean, he announced its special
relevance “for those minds which, strive as they will, cannot wholly repress
their metaphysical tendencies, which must project their conceptions into
realities beyond perception.” The ether squirt might provide a cosmic
loophole, a passage into what these metaphysicians would dogmatically
call the supersensuous: “Out from our space through the ether-squirt, out
through matter we in conception pass, like the ﬂounder, to another di-
mensioned space. . . . Here in this new playroom, entered, perhaps, by the
doorway of matter, metaphysician and theologian can for the present
safely spin beyond the sensible the cobwebs, which have been swept away
by the scientiﬁc broom whenever they encumbered the habitable apart-
ments of knowledge.”35
Who might these irrepressible metaphysicians and theologians be? He
liked to complain of such persons in general, but the idea of the atom or
ether as a gateway into a higher reality had a very particular source. This
was Charles Howard Hinton, a Balliol man and author of some works
uniting pedagogy and allegory about the fourth dimension. Hinton’s
prosecution for bigamy in October 1886, mentioned in the last chapter,
gave Pearson new grounds to condemn the radical sexual doctrines of
Howard’s father James Hinton, who still had some admirers within the
Men and Women’s Club. The son had, under the name of John Weldon,
recently married one Maude Florence in order to legitimize the twins she
bore him. His proper wife, Mary, daughter of George Boole and mother
already of three more Hinton children, did not wish to prosecute him,
even though he confessed to continued relations of an “intimate charac-
ter” with Maude.36
Pearson loathed the man, or at least his deeds, and never cited him, yet
he was always well-informed about scientiﬁc work, and there is evidence
that Hinton’s Scientiﬁc Romances were known in his circles. In the imme-
diate aftermath of the trial, Olive Schreiner corresponded with Maria
Sharpe about the fascination of four-dimensional space. Was Hinton work-
ing out a geometry of bigamy? Using, as Pearson would also, the severely
constricted perspective of idealized ﬂounders and other two-dimensional
beings to illustrate what inhabitants of three dimensions might be missing,
he explained how one of these ﬂatlanders, conﬁned by a square, could es-
cape by rising into the third dimension. So also, a four-dimensional being
in three-dimensional space “would come and go at pleasure; he would be

194 • Chapter Seven
37 Olive Schreiner to Maria Sharpe, 24 Nov. 1877, Pearson Papers 840/5; C. H. Hinton,
“What Is the Fourth Dimension?” University Magazine, 96 (1880), 15–34, on 33, 16. In the
reprinted version in Hinton’s Scientiﬁc Romances (London: Swan Sonnenschein, Lowrey,
1886), 3–32, he argued that a three-dimensional being in four-dimensional space has a
merely abstract mathematical existence, just as a two-dimensional plane has for us, and de-
fended a philosophical idealism based on Spinoza. On his trial for bigamy, see Brandon, New
Women and Old Men, 62–63, and Pearson Papers 10/61/7; on his career, but with the sex-
ual conﬂicts omitted, see Rudolf B. Rucker, introduction to Hinton, Speculations on the
Fourth Dimension, ed. Rucker (New York: Dover, 1980).
38 Hinton, in “Casting Out the Self,” Scientiﬁc Romances, 205–229.
39 Hinton, “A Picture of Our Universe,” in ibid., 161–204, on 194. On Hinton’s work
and signiﬁcance, see Henderson, Fourth Dimension, esp. chap. 1; on his allegories as prede-
cessor to science ﬁction, see Clarke, Energy Forms, 111–121. The copy I used of Scientiﬁc
Romances, held in the UCLA libraries, was owned originally by H. G. Wells. The text is un-
marked.
able to perform feats of the most surprising kind.” He might travel to a dif-
ferent three-dimensional space, otherwise isolated from our familiar one.
His “state of being” would involve powers “far transcending our own.”37
Among the compelling reasons for belief in the fourth dimension was the
illusion, as Hinton thought, of nonidentity implied by mirror-image sym-
metry. The stubborn difference of object and reﬂected image, as of the di-
rectional markers left and right, must be merely a matter of perspective. In a
fourth dimension, however, the reﬂection could be pulled through itself and
reversed. To recognize this is to elude the constraints of three-dimensional
thought. Hinton called it “Casting Out the Self” because it got beyond the
limitations of the human senses. It was one example of the release that
could be attained through the recognition of higher dimensionality.38
Hinton supposed that the fourth dimension was very thin, a mere bub-
ble of ether. For it to be inﬁnitely thin, or nonexistent, would require an
absolute precision that is never found in the world, but only in the ab-
stractions of geometry. Since it was minute, it could most promisingly be
sought out at the level of atoms and molecules. “We conceive,” he ex-
plained, “that from every particle of matter there is a new direction not
connected with any of those which we know, but . . . at right angles to
them all.” As with Pearson’s ether squirts, every atom in Hinton’s space
opened up into a new dimension, a world of enhanced possibility for the
man who could conceive it. “From all shapes would fall that limitation of
thought which makes us see them differently to what they are; and in large-
ness and liberty of possible movement his mind would travel where ours
but creeps, and soar where ours journeys and diverges.” Four-dimensional
existence would give “a sense of largeness and liberty penetrating even
through the profoundness of our ignorance.”39
Hinton was preeminent among the metaphysicians derided by Pearson,
men longing to slip out of this world of shadows and to project their fan-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 195
40 Pearson, “Some Books on Electricity,” Academy, 37 (1889), 208; KP to MS, 23 Aug.
1888; Grammar of Science, 322–323.
tasies into another dimension of the cosmos. There was, however, another
such being, still closer to home. The mocker or Spötter who castigated
such speculations was far from immune to the attractions of a higher
physics, even if he thought them unsuitable for the common herd. He
was, to be sure, grateful that the mathematical demands of the fourth di-
mension would disallow “lighthearted expeditions,” as by that “young
gentleman from Balliol who assumed the higher mathematics in order to
pass at once to their applications to supernatural religion.” Yet he held out
the prospect that, through the efforts of mathematicians, this speculative
conception of an ethereal atom in four dimensions might some day be-
come a “perceptual fact.” This explorer was sometimes vexed, as he had
explained to Maria Sharpe in his excitement after reading the Lindemann
paper, that “the puzzle should last so long—if only the giants could strike
a little bit harder & let a little more light in! But it must come soon and
then we shall be able to appreciate and understand so much more of the
world, or of our sensations of it, whichever may be the right term. That is
the great advantage of being at last one of the initiated—of the small joys
of science—one can hug oneself with joy and say: ‘It can’t be long now,
and when it does come you will understand it!’”
It seems that Pearson, more than a decade after the ﬁctional suicide of
“Ralph Hewitt,” still longed to escape the conﬁned space of this terrestrial
orb, where so much is concealed, and through recondite investigations to
gain privileged access to a higher reality. The despised Howard Hinton,
whose “scientiﬁc romances” were published the same year as his bigamy
trial took place, in 1886, was not yet forgotten on the occasion of Pear-
son’s discovery, two years later, of the ether squirt. The thrilling sense of
dimensional release was evidently something the two men shared. My
more speculative readers may be stimulated by this circumstance to imag-
ine a somewhat diffuse element of eroticism in Pearson’s ethereal fantasies.
Or the holistic complications of the three-atom problem might seem to
recall the tangled relations at just the same time of himself, his intended,
and her friend Lina Eckenstein. “But we have romanced enough for the
sake of the metaphysically-minded,” we are enjoined by the Grammar of
Science. “Returning to the solid ground of fact. . . .”40
Pearson had been fascinated by the possibility of geometrical explanations
of physical phenomena, involving the curvature of a higher-dimensional
space, since at least 1884, when he undertook to complete Common Sense
of the Exact Sciences. Clifford, following the German mathematician Bern-
hard Riemann, had explored such possibilities in other writings, and Pear-
son drew from them to write the remaining sections of this posthumous

196 • Chapter Seven
41 Clifford, Common Sense of Exact Sciences, preface and 203. Everything discussed in this
paragraph is from the sections written by Pearson. On these non-Euclidean geometries, see
Richards, Mathematical Visions, esp. 109–113. Pearson repeated these arguments in the
Grammar of Science.
42 KP to Parker, 28 July 1879.
volume. He also tried out here some arguments of his subsequent Gram-
mar of Science, including the ﬂounder that resides in two dimensions and
cannot even picture a third. He explored the experience of limited dimen-
sionality in a more encompassing space through the image of a worm con-
ﬁned to a perfectly circular tube, imagined ﬁrst by Clifford. Since the
curvature was uniform, the worm would not know to associate it with the
external world rather than its own internal state. Its belief in the Euclidean
“sameness” of all space, Pearson argued, would be better justiﬁed than
ours, since it would have visited every part of its one-dimensional world.
The limits of the worm’s knowledge were in some ways analogous to our
own. Such illustrations reveal once more that Pearson’s arguments against
such concepts as “matter” and “force”—his effort “to reduce, in fact, all
dynamic to kinematic,” a pure science of motion—were not merely a pos-
itivistic effort to purge science of metaphysics. He was seeking a new way
of framing the laws of physics, something more geometrical and less ma-
terialistic. “The hypothesis that space is not homaloidal [ﬂat or uncurved],
and again, that its geometrical character may change with time, may or
may not be destined to play a great part in the physics of the future.”41
These arguments for the geometrical constitution of reality, in turn,
point back to his idealist metaphysics, the obverse of his enduring skepti-
cism about knowledge of an external world. Back in 1879, in his report to
Parker from Heidelberg of his ecstatic moments of harmony with nature
and of his wish to recover the world of Greek “maidens and youths run-
ning naked together,” he had also argued that each mind constructs its
own universe.42 From the beginning he was thinking in radical Kantian
terms, of the ego imposing its categories of thought on an indeﬁnite or il-
lusory world. Space was for Kant, and for Pearson, paradigmatic. It was
not a characteristic of the world, but a necessary frame for us in order to
conceive the world, and thus a property of mind rather than of external re-
ality. In his ﬁrst lecture at the South Place Institute in 1883, he came for-
ward as a full-blown idealist in the Fichtean mould. He marveled there at
the capacity of mathematics, a pure creation of mind, to determine how
the planets must behave, far out in space. In the end, though, he con-
cluded that there was no miracle, since the invariable order of nature fol-
lowed necessarily from the orderliness of thought. A chaotic world was
impossible “for the very simple reason that no man can conceive it.”
Events in the world must appear to us in the only way thought can think

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 197
43 Pearson, “The Ethic of Freethought” (1883), in Ethic of Freethought, 27–28, 31.
44 Pearson, “The Prostitution of Science” (1888), in Ethic of Freethought, 36; “The Phi-
losophy of Natural Science,” Nature, 55 (5 Nov. 1896), 1–4, on 4; “Matter and Soul”
(1885), in Ethic of Freethought, 56, 76, 57.
them, and thus the presumed properties of that world are in fact given
wholly by mind. In this sense, the curves, surfaces, and correlations of
Pearson’s descriptionist science implied not simply a denial that the mind
has access to any exterior reality, but entailed also a visionary claim for
geometry as the deepest reality of all.
Pearson’s antimetaphysics was never hostile in principle to reliance on
entities outside the bounds of sense. Indeed, he had already in 1883 of-
fered, as an exemplary instance of a suitable explanatory concept, the pul-
sating atom in a ﬂuid medium, embodying his own grand ambition to
revolutionize physics. By its fruits it might be validated, and it had already
been shown to imply “something very akin to the so-called law of gravita-
tion.” But if our concepts allow us to predict or determine the phenom-
ena of nature, it follows that the universe must be “one vast intellectual
process. . . . It is the mind of man which rules the universe.”43 What Balliol
man could beat that?
Pearson’s scheme exposed materialism as baseless and misguided, a need-
less provocation to traditionalists that distracted science from its proper
ﬁeld. Any reasoning from creation to a Creator, however, was equally illog-
ical, since the universe as we know it was constructed by the human mind.
Pearson thus rejected, with one and the same argument, matter and God.
This did not quite squeeze out all possibility of religion. Instead, it diffused
divinity throughout nature—that is, through all human perceptions. As he
explained to the Sunday Lecture Society in December 1885, faith in science
would allow us to return to a single religion, a Church universal, because
“one Reason existeth in all men.” His ostensible positivism appears here in
a different light, as an aspect of the resolution of his youthful religious cri-
sis, in which the rejection of things in themselves merely overlaid his antic-
ipation that science was about to overcome the old Cartesian dualism. We
must, he argued, be content (for now?) with descriptions of phenomena,
but were they merely phenomena? If it was impossible to know the causes
acting in nature, this was because causes act rather in the world of mind.
Whoever can answer the question of why “will have probably discovered the
relation between matter and mind.”44
He did not quite abandon that quest, to comprehend the connection of
matter and mind, for several more years, if ever. His spirited “metaphysical”
discussions with J. J. Thomson point to a desire to get at the nature of
things, as do the various expressions of his continuing frustration with sur-
face and sham. It may be signiﬁcant that his last work of German religious

198 • Chapter Seven
45 Karl Pearson, Die Fronica, 17.
46 See the advance notes for these lectures in Pearson Papers 48. Probably he failed to give
the fourth lecture, on the classiﬁcation of the sciences, in March, since the syllabus for it was
repeated in the notes for April.
history, carried out in honor of the deceased Henry Bradshaw, was a study
of medieval images of Veronica. According to legend, she offered Jesus her
veil to wipe his face as he carried the cross to Golgotha, then found his 
image miraculously imprinted on it. Pearson quoted from a late ﬁfteenth
century passion play Veronica’s plea to Christ as she offered him her veil:
O Jhesus liebster herre min,
muss ich von dir gescheiden sin,
so bit ich dich doch umb ein gab,
da mit ich din gedechtniss hab,
die bildung von diner angesicht,
das ich din herre vergesse nicht.
(Oh Jesus my dearest lord, if I must be separated from you, then I ask you
for a gift, so I will have a remembrance of you, the image of your face, that
I forget not your lordship).45 A likeness was no substitute for the real thing
but offered comfort at a sad time of separation and death. Could purely
descriptive knowledge provide consolation if nature was to remain forever
beyond the range of the senses? Or was the scientist, unable to acquire
even simulacra of nature, irredeemably alienated from it?
THE UNIVERSE AS MENTAL CONSTRUCT
In 1891, after a probationary lecture in January, Pearson was selected as
Gresham Professor of Geometry. The position, which entailed giving a se-
ries of lectures at Gresham College in the City of London, offered a use-
ful supplement to the income of the now-married mathematician and an
opportunity to air his views on scientiﬁc questions of broad signiﬁcance
before a general audience. The ﬁrst year he spoke on “The Scope and
Concepts of Modern Science” in two series, each consisting of four con-
secutive lectures, during the ﬁrst week in March and then the ﬁrst week in
April, at 6:00 in the evening. In these few months he sketched out the ar-
gument for eight of the ten chapters of The Grammar of Science. Another
nine months of spare-time work sufﬁced for him to complete it. He had
long been meditating on these questions.46
“There are periods in the growth of science when it is well to turn our
attention from its imposing superstructure to carefully examine its foun-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 199
47 Pearson, Grammar of Science, vii and 140–142; untitled, undated Pearson ms., Pearson
Papers 104. He bore a particular animus against Tait for his review of Common Sense of the
Exact Sciences (see chap. 3, note 43, above). He sent this review with marginalia (“This is
what I expect from P. G. T.”) to Lucy Clifford; see Pearson Papers 661.
48 G. F. Fitzgerald, “Foundations of Physical Theories: Function of Models” (written no
later than 1888 but unpublished until 1902); and “Address to the Mathematical and Physi-
cal Section of the British Association” (1888) in Joseph Larmor, ed., The Scientiﬁc Writings
of the late George Francis Fitzgerald (Dublin: Hodges, Figgis; also London: Longmans,
Green, 1902), 169, 239.
dations.” He did not question the “great results” of science, at least not of
physics, but their illogical expression could easily lead astray the newer sci-
ences of life and mind, and indeed had confused his fellow physicists who
ventured into other domains. He regarded their susceptibility to natural
theology and to spiritualism as of a piece with their naïve scientiﬁc materi-
alism, and equally misguided. Materialism, in the strict sense, was in fact
uncommon among the British physicists whose supposed confusion had
provoked his philosophical housecleaning. Although Thomson, Maxwell,
and their followers (including Pearson, at least in his physical writings)
earnestly sought an adequate ether theory, they made increasing use of
“models” that they readily acknowledged as ﬁctions. Thomson and Peter
Guthrie Tait’s standard Victorian treatise of natural philosophy was too
mechanical for Pearson’s taste, assigning the ether many properties of or-
dinary matter rather than deriving them from motion or from the geome-
try of space. Tait in particular was a thorn in his ﬂesh, and Pearson
condemned him for treating matter as “the plaything of force.” Such
ideas, Pearson thought, gave an “uncanny & spiritualistic aspect to the
phenomena of the universe.”47
British antimaterialism developed into an increasingly positivistic ap-
proach to ether physics toward the end of the century. “A model of the
ether,” wrote Fitzgerald in 1888, can support mathematical analogies that
represent the laws of a physical object, but they may be wholly unlike that
object. “To suppose that the ether is at all like the model I am about to de-
scribe” would be like confusing a sphere with its formula, and then claim-
ing that in consequence it must be like the paper and ink. It seemed
increasingly that causal relationships in ether physics could only be as-
serted. After all, there were no structures of reality more basic than the
ether from which they could be derived. Or even the ether might in its
turn give way to something at bottom massless, as the seeming materiality
of the world was reinterpreted as a mere consequence of motion.48 This
causeless physics, with its proliferation of models in place of causal ac-
counts, could be interpreted as authorizing a religious dimension in the
science of the ether. “The hypothesis that the ether is like a thin jelly in no

200 • Chapter Seven
49 G. F. Fitzgerald, “On a Model Illustrating Some Properties of the Ether” (1885), in
Larmor, ed., Scientiﬁc Writings, 154; on Berkeley, see his “Helmholtz Memorial Lecture”
(1896) in ibid., 376; both cited in Hunt, Maxwellians, 97–99.
50 Pearson, The Trinity, 201.
51 Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 45 (see chap. 1, n. 7, above); Pearson,
Grammar of Science, 109–111.
way explains this property,” wrote Fitzgerald, referring to its capacity to
bear electromagnetic waves, “as it is the possession of properties analo-
gous to rigidity that requires explanation.” He later proposed to account
for these phenomena as thoughts of God, after the fashion of his country-
man George Berkeley.49
Pearson would have none of that. Keeping clear of theistic religion, he
interpreted natural phenomena instead as the thoughts of man. Lenin, who
dismissed positivism as reactionary, commended Pearson for his consis-
tency, revealing the pure idealism that underlay this form of thinking. He
was, in a way, right, but Pearson’s philosophy was scarcely a prop for the old
theocratic order. The Grammar of Science was rather continuous with the
humanist religion of Pearson’s passion play: “Oh men! The god in him ye
crucify! / Your sons the man in him shall deify.”50 Antimaterialism was, for
Pearson, a reason to dismiss God as a purely superﬂuous concept, begotten
through the alienation of man from the elements of his own divinity. “As
[man] projects his sense-impressions outside himself, and forgets that they
are essentially conditioned by his own perceptive faculty, so he uncon-
sciously severs himself from the products of his own reason, projects them
into the phenomena, only to reﬁnd them again and wonder what reason
put them there.” There is reason in the laws of science, but the so-called
reason of nature is purely anthropomorphic. Men may ﬁnd reason in the
universe, but a dog would, with equal legitimacy, ﬁnd instinct. “Our won-
der ought not to be excited by the idea that so vast a range of phenomena
are ruled (sic!) by so simple a law as that of gravitation, but we ought to ex-
press our astonishment that the human mind is able to express by so simple
a description such wide sequences of sense-impressions.”51
The sic! in Pearson’s sentence declared his skepticism of any imputation
of causality to the external world. Newton’s universal gravitation, like
Kepler’s ellipses, offered nothing more than description, albeit of greater
generality. In arguing this way, Pearson was simultaneously calling atten-
tion to the limits in principle of any assertion of natural law and register-
ing his expectation that Newton’s law would soon be shown, on the basis
of a still more general ether theory, to be valid only as an approximation.
Among other things, Pearson defended his philosophical position as
“helping to clear away the jungle of metaphysical notions which impedes
the progress of physical science.” He was working toward a revolutionary

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 201
52 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 118, 386.
53 Ernst Mach, “The Economical Nature of Physical Inquiry” (1882), in Popular Scien-
tiﬁc Lectures, 3d ed. of English trans. by Thomas J. McCormack (La Salle, IL: Open Court,
reprinted 1986), 186–213; Mach, History and Root of the Principle of the Conservation of En-
ergy (1872), trans. Philip E. B. Jourdain (Chicago: Open Court, 1911), 49; Mach, The
Analysis of Sensations (1886), trans. of 5th German ed. (1906) by S. M. Williams, rev. by Sid-
ney Waterlow (New York: Dover, 1959), 30. On Mach’s career and philosophy see Black-
more, Ernst Mach. I develop the argument of this paragraph more fully in Porter, “Death of
the Object.”
54 Ernst Mach, The Science of Mechanics (1883), 6th ed. of English trans. by Thomas J.
McCormack (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1960), 599; Pearson, Grammar of Science, 115,
333. By 1890, the doctrine of protyles rested mainly on spectroscopic evidence; see Brock,
From Protyle to Proton.
transformation of physics, which indeed his writing helped to advance,
though not quite the one he was looking for.52
Like Mach, whom he did follow on a few points, Pearson held up
“economy of thought” as the ultimate touchstone of science. The phrase
pointed at a Darwinian function for science—to enhance human efﬁ-
ciency. Mach wielded his principle in opposition to atomism and the whole
“mechanical conception of physics,” which, he thought, set up an unfor-
tunate dualism of matter and thought, physics and psychology, when all of
experience attests to their unity.53 He declared without further argument
that mechanical reductions can never provide a true economy, but merely
substitute for known facts “an equally large number of hypotheses.” Pear-
son opposed him on this point, defending the value of nonsensory and
even mechanical conceptions as strategies for describing phenomena with
greater economy and generality. That is, Pearson was more indulgent of
models of the invisible, submicroscopic world than was Mach, and he did
not deploy his philosophy to reject in principle, or at all, such conceptions
as the molecule or the gene. Rather, he offered a luxuriance of hypotheti-
cal entities, beginning with the ether as the most fundamental of all. Out
of it he assembled a hierarchy of building blocks, including the physicist’s
“prime atom” or “protyle” that he, following William Crookes, regarded
as more fundamental than the chemical atom.54
Probably no positivist has ever been altogether steadfast in applying the
principle of economy. Pearson’s translations of physical and biological as-
sertions into mentalistic language sometimes made them almost ludi-
crously cumbersome rather than spare and economical. Thus on the
ground that “a year now” may not “represent the same amount of con-
sciousness as it did a few million years back,” Pearson disallowed the as-
sertion that “such and such changes occurred ‘between one and two
hundred million years ago.’ What we really mean is this: that in order
to resume and classify our perceptual experience of the earth, we form a

202 • Chapter Seven
Figure 11. The hierarchy of matter, in The Grammar of Science (all editions; this
ﬁgure from second edition).
55 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 226, 417, 311–312; Porter, “Death of the Object,” 140.
56 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 98, 104, 63.
conceptual model of it, and such a model we conceive to have passed
through certain changes one or two hundred million years ago in absolute
time.” Often the grammarian’s perspective simply incorporated a language
of distancing from physical reality, a philosophical idealism, without
adding information. The point was to avoid projecting our “conceptions”
into the world of “perceptual experience.”55
Perceptions and conceptions were, for Pearson, the basic elements of
science. Perceptions, given by experience, provided raw material to human
reason and formed the basis for all legitimate conceptions. Conceptions,
achieved through the progress of science, were purely mental and could be
radically historicized. Scientiﬁc law, he argued, does not exist before man
gives expression to it, and, for example, Newton’s inverse-square formula
“was not so much the discovery as the creation of the law of gravitation.”
He explicated this claim by invoking the necessary “creative power of the
intellect,” Newton’s intellect, to identify and conceptualize such regulari-
ties. He went on, however, to argue still more radically that perceptions,
too, were constituted mentally. Science “is in reality a classiﬁcation and
analysis of the contents of the mind.”56 This idealism, descended from the
doctrines of a youthful Fichtean Schwärmer, was not easily reconciled to
Pearson’s aggressive scientism of 1892. But his declaration of freedom
from oppressive materialist reductions implied also the refutation of all
faith in a rational order of the cosmos, or natural theology. A proper deiﬁ-
cation of the human mind would leave no room for an antique God.
Modern technology offered promising analogies for the determination of
the world by mind. The mind may accept “only particular classes of sense-
impressions—being like automatic sweetmeat boxes which if well con-
structed refuse to act for any coin but a penny—and having received their
material they arrange and analyze it, provided they are in working order, in
practically the same manner.” “We are all familiar,” proclaimed Chambers’s

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 203
57 Ibid., 121–128, 220; Anon., “A Penny in the Slot,” Chambers’s Journal of Popular Lit-
erature, Science, and Arts, 9 (30 July 1892), 486–487.
58 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 57, 121, 151, 164–165, 195.
Journal the same year, with the bewildering development of automatic
machines in railway stations and other public places, “which, if set agoing
by the deposit of the essential coin, will show your height or weight, test
your pulling strength, give you an electric shock, tell your fortune, or sup-
ply you on demand with a box of matches, packets of chocolate, confec-
tionery, cigarettes, cigars, sheets of note paper, postcards, postage stamps,
or other articles of more or less utility.” Pearson supposed that the per-
ceptive faculty may similarly have been molded to register only certain
kinds of sense impressions. Like a sorting machine for stones—he pro-
posed in a related metaphor—it rejects some and sorts the rest, ordering
them on grids of its own construction, such as space and time.57
Form and matter were at odds in this analogy, which likened the mind
to a machine so as to explain why the order of the universe must be men-
tal and not mechanical. And there were other incongruities, arising from
the new demands he placed on scientiﬁc method. He now identiﬁed sci-
ence as a system for achieving consensus, which might not be expected if
the phenomena of nature are produced separately by each individual
mind. Pearson got over this obstacle by deriving uniformity from the pre-
sumption of “normal” human faculties. These would be embodied in or-
ganic structures of brain, which would be driven to normality through the
evolutionary process. Natural selection must be very hard, he thought, on
those who cannot establish routines of perception and of action. In mod-
ern times, such deviants would be the incompetents and criminals, whom
society increasingly recognizes as insane.58 Thus the pure idealism of his
metaphysics was made to rest on brain physiology and natural history,
themselves having no real existence except in the minds that conceive
them. Mental necessity was rooted in laws of biology.
In practice, this supposedly ineluctable evolutionary tendency to normal
perception was not self-sufﬁcient, since superstition remained rife in the
world. In practice, it required to be bolstered by scientiﬁc preaching, that
is, by Pearson’s own Grammar. “The abnormal perceptive faculty, whether
that of the madman or that of the mystic, must ever be a danger to human
society, for it undermines the efﬁciency of the reason as a guide to conduct.
Conviction, therefore, of the uniform order of phenomena is essential to
social welfare.” He called for a kind of renunciation in the face of the dan-
gers of emotionality. “Every ecstatic and mystical state weakens the whole
intellectual character of those who experience it, for it impairs their belief in
the normal routine of perceptions.” Those who know Pearson only from

204 • Chapter Seven
59 Ibid., 165, 11.
60 Ibid., 323–324.
61 Ibid., 386, 215, 22.
his publications cannot appreciate how fully he knew whereof he spoke.
One of the principal claims of science was to reduce the power of “blind
emotional excitement.”59 Science longed, with Spinoza, to be purely intel-
lectual being, free of emotion and desire.
THE ALIENATED MIND
Pearson was no admirer of paradoxical philosophy, yet the Grammar of Sci-
ence was founded on paradox. Nature, whose characteristics were strictly
created by the human mind, was yet inaccessible to mind. Even the phe-
nomenal world, the world of perceptions, could not be comprehended
spontaneously but required to be framed and classiﬁed by scientiﬁc method.
In the deepest sense, by this logic, reliable knowledge was an act of self-
overcoming. The progress of science presupposed that mind, and with
it the world, must be historical. Pearson looked with patient anticipation
to the prospect that some of his mental inferences might be made real.
In particular, the “happy conception” of the ether squirt, with its four-
dimensioned space, might someday be “discovered to be a perceptual fact.”
Unfortunately, since that moment had not yet arrived, a certain disquiet
was part of man’s lot. “[W]hen we project the ether into the phenomenal
world, it is at once recognized as a conceptual limit unparalleled in percep-
tual experience, and we do not feel at home with it.”60
Formulations of this kind suggest that, even as a mature scientist, he was
not quite free of what he was pleased to regard as Hegelian cobwebs. The
Pearsonian mind spins out a world, but ﬁnds it is not at home with the
concepts it has created. It hopes that the further working out of knowl-
edge, following scientiﬁc method, might lead to a more tangible, percep-
tual familiarity with these conceptions. The ether, with all its vagueness,
was an ill-explored continent, a challenge to the imperial scientist, which
some Galileo or Newton of the future might someday “annex” through
clearer deﬁnitions. But then they would be off on new adventures, on the
track of some other quarry that might forever elude them. And whatever
the prospects for science in the future, it was obliged for the moment to
reject what vain metaphysics longs for, a world fashioned out of matter,
ether, or will. The scientist does not project “behind sense-impression, if
indeed there can ‘be’ anything.” Science, allowing no rest and only the
most provisional contentment, meant struggle unceasing, along a stony
path with no shortcuts and no proper destination. Pearson explicitly re-
jected every prospect of a ﬁnal theory.61

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 205
62 Ibid., 53–55, 74–76; italics in original.
63 J. H. Beatty, “The Ego and the External World,” The Agnostic Journal, 27 Aug. 1892,
139–141, on 140.
The rapturous merger of self with world that might end this striving was
also prohibited by his formulation of scientiﬁc method. The world created
by mind was yet inaccessible to mind, and even the abundant data of per-
ceptual experience could not lead the observer any closer to reality. He of-
fered another technological metaphor to illustrate the relation of mind to
world. A brain is like the central ofﬁce of a telephone exchange, connected
by wires (sensory and motor nerves) to its many subscribers. If customer
A, wishing only to talk to W, arranged for their wires to be joined, the
transmission of their messages independently of consciousness would cor-
respond to a reﬂex action. Or if B invariably corresponded with X, the
clerk could make the connection strictly by habit whenever B rang. In
other cases, his originality would reduce to following the instructions of
the subscribers. Our knowledge of nature is like what the clerk knows of
the world, supposing him “never to have been outside the telephone ex-
change, never to have seen a customer or any one like a customer—in short,
never, except through the telephone wire, to have come in contact with the out-
side universe.” We are, like him, conﬁned to a windowless ofﬁce, receiving
and processing messages with no unmediated knowledge of the “things in
themselves” from which they may arise. That we have other senses—touch
and sight as well as hearing—merely signiﬁes that we can use one wire to
gain information about a second. For science, and for us, reality is just
these sense impressions. “We are cribbed and conﬁned in this world of
sense-impressions like the exchange clerk in this world of sounds, and not
a step beyond can we get.”62
A shrewd reviewer for the Agnostic Journal interpreted these words as a
counsel of despair. Pearson seemed to yearn for some mystical gnosis. The
reviewer paraphrased: “Now we see as through a glass darkly; but then we
shall see face to face.” The senses, he thought, were for Pearson a kind of
prison, getting in the way of unmediated experience. “Could the unfortu-
nate ego only ﬁnd its way out through the cranium, and, perched on a hair,
survey the world face to face as it really is, and not as it merely appears
when distorted by optic, auditory, olfactory, and other nerve bundles,
what a look of surprise and ineffable wonder would light up the face of the
liberated and delighted ego.”63
Although the regret ascribed by this review was real, Pearson also drew
positive, reassuring conclusions from the inaccessibility of external nature.
His philosophy allowed no “crude metaphysical materialism,” no “me-
chanical determinism” of nature. While he certainly did not advocate any
traditional religious doctrines of free will, he refused to make the self a play-
thing of external forces. Rather, our education, experience, inheritance,

206 • Chapter Seven
64 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 368, 278, 150.
65 Ibid., 37–38, 41–43; White, Thomas Huxley, chap. 3; Joseph Larmor to KP, 1 March
1891, Pearson Papers 739, responding to the syllabus for Pearson’s Gresham lectures.
physique, and disease, associated with class, race, and other great forces of
evolution, produce in each person a distinctive character. In his analogy of
the mind as telephone clerk, he explained human freedom as the possibility
of actions that draw from memory and from the experiences that mould
character, rather than being determined by the sense impressions of the
moment. Individuality, then, functioned as an intermediate link in the
chain of causation. None of this followed with rigorous logic from his ide-
alist epistemology, but it was consistent in tone and feeling with his anti-
materialist principles.64
He was very much concerned to preserve an element of human dignity.
In a system that understood laws of nature as the outcome of scientiﬁc in-
genuity working on the products of normal human perception, the human
mind was necessarily active and creative. Facts and laws were created by the
mind and never forced on it. Science, in Pearson’s formulation, depended
crucially on human imagination, which for him, as for Huxley, betokened a
connection to the creativity of art and literature. Yet he insisted on a degree
of austerity, “disciplined imagination.” “I suppose when one has ﬁnally be-
come the good citizen, you could not object to a little riotous & childlike
use of the imagination for its own sake,” countered Joseph Larmor.65
Pearson’s philosophy even provided, in certain contexts, a basis for con-
ceiving the mind as comfortable in the world. We are not lost in an inﬁn-
ity of space, which reduces our petty selves to cosmic insigniﬁcance. Since
the most distant star is no less sense impression than a page of this book,
it is “hopelessly misleading” to suppose “that the vastness of space con-
tains more than our ﬁnite capacity can imagine.” He developed this point
in explicitly psychological terms in one of the few unmistakably Machian
passages from the Grammar. He reproduced there Mach’s drawing of the
ﬁeld of vision of the professor lying on his couch with one eye closed.
Moustache, nose, and eye socket frame the image, giving way to waistcoat,
shoes, arm rests, ﬂoor, walls, and windows. It was all made up of sense im-
pressions, and the point at which self leaves off and outside world begins
appeared as a matter of convenience and not of truth. The very existence
of self was warranted by nothing more than a continuity of sensations, a
continuity that did not persist over indeﬁnite time. Pearson’s self was rec-
ognizable by certain features and functions, as is a blackboard, but the
blackboard might subsequently be pulled apart by a carpenter and recon-
structed as a four-legged table, its surface now coated with a thick red
layer of Aspinall’s enamel. So also, the mind and body of a boy are so thor-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 207
Figure 12. Mach takes in self and ofﬁce. From The Grammar of Science (all
editions; this ﬁgure from second edition).
66 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 189, 78–79, 84–86.
oughly transformed with age “that the man would probably feel the boy a
perfect stranger if he were brought into his presence.”66
This dissolved self of Mach’s drawing and of the parable of the black-
board combined Pearson’s enduring anxiety about the dissolution of in-
dividuality with a utopia of connectedness with the world, of egoism
annulled. In the end, Pearson’s enshrinement of self-denying method did
not allow the deep afﬁnity with nature for which he longed, and which in

208 • Chapter Seven
67 KP to his daughter Sigrid, 15 Feb. 1913, Pearson Papers 926, about his reactions “30
years ago”; Pearson also discussed Newman with Parker: Parker to KP, 22 June 1879.
68 John Henry Newman, An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent (1870), ed. I. T. Ker
(reprint of 8th ed., 1889; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985), 119; Newman, The Idea of a
University (1873; New York: Chelsea House, 1983), 134. This discussion is based on Porter,
“Reason, Faith, and Alienation.”
a way was allowed by Mach’s philosophy. This point is clariﬁed by the re-
vealing contrast between Pearson’s scientiﬁc ethos and that of a different
Victorian “grammar.”
THE GRAMMAR OF ASSENT AND THE GRAMMAR OF SCIENCE
This other grammar was by John Henry Newman, later a cardinal, who
developed a fascinating perspective on the relations of religious to scien-
tiﬁc belief. Pearson, as a youthful philo-Catholic, had thought Newman
“splendid” in his 1864 Apologia pro vita sua, a book written in response to
the Protestant sniping of Charles Kingsley, “who [wrote Pearson] was ig-
norant of history & the Fathers.” There is no record of his reaction to the
Grammar of Assent, and he certainly rejected the idea that truth is only
possible through acceptance of Christ’s divinity. Still, the resonances of
Pearson’s book with Newman’s 1870 Grammar suggest elements of a
shared sensibility, lingering elements of Pearson’s philo-Catholicism,
which spoke, however, to experiences that he by 1892 had determined to
renounce in the name of science.67
As a young man Newman had written on probability, in an essay against
Hume’s refutation of miracles, but his gradual move to Catholicism was
attended by a growing disinclination to ground faith on the rational
weighing of evidence. In modern times, he thought, formal reasoning was
most often an obstacle to faith, though needlessly. He explained in his
Idea of a University that “the intellect in its present state . . . does not dis-
cern truth intuitively, not at a glance, but, as it were, by piecemeal and ac-
cumulation, by a mental process.” His philosophical arguments were
intended not to provide the rational grounds of faith, for faith should rest
on something more spontaneous and intuitive. He aimed rather to lighten
the anxiety and self-doubt brought by intellectual objections, the abstrac-
tions that so often lead people astray.68
Newman considered that abstract propositions, mere “intellectual
ideas,” can never be so “vivid and forcible” as “the experience of concrete
facts.” Assent is more easily granted to things than to notions, and living
contact with the world makes a far greater impression on the mind than
does logical argument. He wrote his Grammar to vindicate the results of
this engaged and informal reasoning, reasoning that provides a basis for

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 209
69 Newman, Grammar of Assent, 14, 66.
70 Ibid., 42–43.
action. Logic, by contrast, was often the mere spinning of wheels. More
attentive to form than to content, it too often ignored the issues that really
matter. “Logicians are more set upon concluding rightly than on right
conclusions.”69
True assent, implying far more than rational conviction, was for New-
man a form of imagination and a manner of living. Not desiccated theol-
ogy, but living religion, was his principal concern. Following the Catholic
tradition that appealed also to Pearson, Newman condemned the confu-
sion of religion with reason, preferring tradition and ritual as a basis
of faith. Real assent was implicit, like a reﬂex action. Once subject to ra-
tional investigation, weighed and measured, it was no longer real, but
mere opinion. There was, to be sure, a legitimate role for dogmatics. In
Catholic countries, its burden was assumed by the Church, thereby en-
abling the people to live with the joy of implicit faith. “As to Catholic
populations, such as those of medieval Europe, or the Spain of this day, or
quasi-Catholic, such as those of Russia, among them assent to religious
objects is real, not notional. To them the Supreme Being, our Lord, the
Blessed Virgin, Angels and Saints, heaven and hell, are as present as if they
were objects of sight.”70
Pearson made just the same point in his story about the passion play at
Brixlegg, where the peasants experienced God, Devil, and Hell as “in-
tensely real,” as real as the umbrella that God had restored to its owner.
As an old man, Pearson still looked to that peasant realism with nostal-
gia, even if he dismissed it as groundless from the standpoint of reason. In
the same way, he described nature with evident longing. His scientiﬁc sen-
sibility was consonant with his religious doubt. Real experience of objects
of faith remained inaccessible to him in both domains, and science de-
manded renunciation. Newman regarded this skeptical outlook as a con-
sequence of alienation from the true church. A preoccupation with reason
had delayed his own accession to the Roman Church. His scientiﬁc faith
had suffered analogously: without the beneﬁt of the Catholic faith he had
been unable to believe in the central categories of experience, such as
space, “except as a subjective idea of our minds.” Newman would have
seen resemblances between Pearson’s Grammar and his own youthful
philosophical attitudes. His conversion, as he explained, enabled him to
establish a new harmony of scientiﬁc and religious understandings, one
that no longer tried to overcome the instinctual sense of nature. The nat-
ural human receptivity to concrete experience was, for him, healthy and le-
gitimate. Newman wrote in 1864 of “a rising school of philosophy now,
which considers phenomena to constitute the whole of our knowledge in

210 • Chapter Seven
71 John Henry Newman, Apologia pro Vita Sua (1864; reprint, New York: Chelsea
House, 1983), 96, 137, 238.
72 Newman, Grammar of Assent, 47. In his tract 73 in 1836 he had insisted on faith to
reach beyond what is in the mind; see Richards, “The Probable and the Possible,” 56–57.
physics. The Catholic doctrine leaves phenomena alone. . . . It deals with
what no one on earth knows anything about, the material substances
themselves.”71
Newman offered this last passage, encompassing a vision of science, in
support of transubstantiation. He took the same view of other religious
doctrines, such as the Trinity. Conscience, innate and universal, was for
him the fundamental basis of religious conviction. It is experienced as a
moral sense, which seeks its grounding in God. Newman conceded that
such reasoning is not ironclad, but who could dispute it when natural sci-
ence proceeds in the same way? The visual sense, for example, is at ﬁrst
“mere images on the retina,” and yet it provides “the means of our per-
ceiving something beyond them.” As sense information leads us to the
world, so conscience leads us to God. By inductions from the experience
of conscience we may “have as good a warrant for concluding the Ubiqui-
tous Presence of One Supreme Master, as we have, from parallel experi-
ence of sense, for assenting to the fact of a multiform and vast world,
material and mental.”72
Newman endorsed the results of spontaneous, uncritical human thought
in a way that Pearson found enticingly alien, and that he could not coun-
tenance. In practical life, Newman argued, we often know as if by instinct,
an instinct that is not innate but formed through practice. Just as a peas-
ant learns to predict the weather or a physician to diagnose ailments,
though neither could explain his reasons, so are we led to faith in the di-
vine. Newman called the ability to reason correctly but without rigor the
“illative faculty.” It could be developed to the point of genius, as with
Newton, who had been able to perceive mathematical and physical truths
where proof was absent. For the grammarian of assent, science stood for
the intuitions that led to truth from limited sensory knowledge. The
grammarian of science, by contrast, was walled off in his telephone ex-
change, receiving and sending out nerve impulses but never knowing who
or what was at the other end of the wires. A few years after completing his
Grammar, Pearson included in his mocking review of Arthur Balfour’s
Foundations of Belief a strikingly personal rejection of the attempt to rea-
son from sensations of phenomena to real objects. Speaking of his youth-
ful loss of faith, he recalled “ﬁve years of life struggling with much
bitterness out of the mazes of metaphysic and theology, only to ﬁnd in ag-
nosticism the peace which arises from understanding.” He conceded in
this passage the justness of the equation between the passage from experi-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 211
73 Newman, Grammar of Assent, 214–215; Pearson, “Reaction! A Critique of Mr. Bal-
four’s Attack on Rationalism” (1895), in Chances of Death, vol. 1, 173–225, on 194–195,
192.
74 Ernst Mach, Erkenntnis und Irrtum: Skizzen zur Psychologie der Forschung, 5th ed.
(Leipzig: Johann Ambrosius Barth, 1926), 193, 426 (my translation). See my “Reason,
Faith, and Alienation,” and “Death of the Object.”
ence to knowledge of a material world and the passage to faith in God. But
he scorned both lines of reasoning, the one as metaphysics and the other
as theology. The utter remoteness of the world had its prototype in the in-
accessibility of God.73
Pearson’s arguments for the detachment of man from nature, his alien-
ation from the world that his own mind had produced, placed him also in
opposition to Mach. Here perhaps is his most fundamental difference
from the Austrian, of whom he has often been called a follower. Mach, an
admirer and practitioner of G. T. Fechner’s psychophysics, refused to
countenance belief in an external world mainly because he held that the
world could never be external. Every particle and every experience mixes
mind and matter together. We do not confront the world as something ex-
ternal, but swim in it and are dissolved into it. For Pearson, in contrast, the
world (though created by mind) could never be comprehended by mind,
and it permitted reliable regularities to be described only by the assistance
of a self-denying method.
Mach, like Newman, insisted on the continuity of scientiﬁc knowledge
with everyday experience, and even with the mental life of animals. Mach
wrote: “The designed quantitative experiment yields many rich particu-
lars, but the quantitative representations derived from it are supported
with the greatest certainty when we can connect them to our raw experi-
ences.” He argued that we know the world because we participate in it,
and share its dynamic, that otherwise science would be impossible. “If the
self is not a monad isolated from the world, but a part of the world im-
mersed in its ﬂow, from which it has come and into which it is ready to be
poured again, then we will no longer be inclined to regard the world as an
unknowable something. We are then near enough to ourselves and related
enough to the other parts of the world to hope for real knowledge.”74 But
the world of the Grammar of Science was always at a distance.
THE STATISTICAL GRAMMAR
The denial by Mach and Pearson that science can gain access to a world of
objects has sometimes been read as the harbinger of a new skepticism, the
onset of our modern intellectual crisis. In no way, however, did Pearson’s

212 • Chapter Seven
75 Mach, Analysis of Sensations, 310–312; Porter, “Death of the Object,” 138; Pearson,
Grammar of Science, 15.
76 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 140, 144, 212; last quote from notes for lectures on sta-
tistics, dated 1907 by the archivist, Pearson Papers 69.
positivism imply doubts about the validity of science. On the contrary,
the denial of an independently existing material world permitted science to
be universalized and made into the basis of a new morality. Even if he de-
spaired of the possibility of unmediated experience of nature, he was deeply
committed to an all-embracing science. Because science was grounded in
method and not in any distinctive properties of some domain of nature, the
scientiﬁc attitude could be applied to any investigation whatsoever, to
practical as well as theoretical questions. “The unity of science consists
alone in its method, not in its material.”75
However attractive the prospect of merging with nature or of slipping
out into the fourth dimension by way of an ether squirt, Pearson endorsed
in his Grammar the stony path of self-denial. Mathematical probability ac-
corded nicely with this vision of science, and although it was not a topic in
his Gresham lectures of early 1891 on the “Scope and Concepts of Mod-
ern Science,” he was able to incorporate a chapter on cause and effect al-
most seamlessly into the volume. There he denied that nature could have
any inherent necessity, since its laws were “essentially an intellectual prod-
uct.” “Force as a cause of motion is exactly on the same footing as a tree-
god as a cause of growth.” Mathematics, as a mental product, admitted no
more precision than other human perceptions. There is no absolute same-
ness in the world, he explained, but always variability. “Geometry might
almost be termed a branch of statistics, and the deﬁnition of the circle has
much the same character as that of Quetelet’s l’homme moyen.” A defensi-
ble comprehension of physics, he explained later in some statistical lec-
tures, must follow the lead of the sciences of life. Since you can never
repeat all the causes, not even in a physics experiment, the effects are never
the same, except approximately. “This conception has been long realized
by the biologist, and his colleague the sociologist. It is only the physicist
who has stated a rigid law of cause and effect, as if it were something in
Nature itself and not in his own way of looking at nature.”76
Probability also supported his antimaterialism. “It is not a question of
reducing the universe to a ‘dead mechanism,’ but of measuring the
amount of probability” that a complex description of change could be re-
placed by a simpler one. For this purpose he invoked a very traditional lan-
guage of subjective probability, deriving from Laplace and Augustus De
Morgan, whose works he had studied as a King’s College undergraduate.
More recently he had investigated the writings on probability of William
Stanley Jevons and Francis Ysidro Edgeworth. Pearson, framing his prob-

The Inaccessibility of Nature • 213
77 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 137, 139; see also ﬁle labeled “Theory of Probability”
and signed “Carl Pearson, King’s Coll.,” in Pearson Papers 46. On science as description, see
Heilbron, “Fin-de-Siècle Physics,” though Pearson does not ﬁt Heilbron’s characterization
of “descriptionism” as a retreat from confrontation with traditional elites. On subjective
probability, see Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking, chap. 3.
78 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 6–8.
79 Pearson, Positive Creed of Freethought, 9.
lem in terms of the probability that a “routine of perception” will continue
into the future, was able to dispense with mechanical necessity, while
demonstrating at the same time the irrationality of belief in miracles.77
This union of philosophical idealism or positivism and probability
seemed a natural one, and The Grammar of Science easily accommodated
his new materials on evolution and correlation in the second edition of
1900. By then, his statistics and his philosophy of science appeared as part
of a single package, a statistical scheme of scientiﬁc description. But the
philosophy preceded the statistics in his intellectual development. The
probability chapter of the Grammar of Science shows how Pearson was
gradually being drawn to the program of quantitative research that would
soon capture his interest and hold it for more than forty years.
There were other elements of continuity with statistics. His preoccupa-
tion with the social function of science was one of these. He framed the
Grammar of Science in terms of a desperate social need for consensus. In
the Darwinian struggle of society against society, those nations that could
not unite individuals into a coherent social whole must fail. Yet the social
and economic changes of his own era were, he thought, so dramatic, that
every question, from religion to economy, provoked fundamental conﬂicts
of opinion. The individual needed a way “to form a judgment apart from
his own feelings and emotions,” one “free from personal bias.” The great-
est duty of the “scientiﬁc man” was “to aim at self-elimination in his judg-
ments, to provide an argument which is as true for each individual mind as
for his own.”78 As he explained in redolent religious imagery, the free-
thinker, “to be reborn, must cut away all the old delusions” and build up
a positive creed from “the disconnected laws and half-solved problems of
modern research.”79 The Grammar of Science deﬁned the method of sci-
ence in general terms, the classiﬁcation of facts and search for generaliza-
tions. It was really a moral ideal, of respect for facts and suppression of self,
rather than a technical one, and Pearson never limited scientiﬁc method to
statistics. Yet statistics became for him, and for many admirers, a model of
impersonal and rigorous reasoning, applicable to almost every domain,
and therefore of particular value in modern society.
One ﬁnal element from the Grammar of Science that points in the di-
rection of Pearson’s imminent conversion to statistics is the historical un-
derstanding within which he situated it. His grand vision of cultural

214 • Chapter Seven
80 Ibid., 12.
progress drew more heavily on Darwin by 1892 than it had a decade ear-
lier, yet he remained a historical socialist, seeking social rather than indi-
vidualistic explanation. Although the unappealing ﬁgure of Luther might
be made to stand for the unfortunate religious movement he led, Pearson
always believed that Luther had been made possible by historical condi-
tions and that the Reformation was rooted in a much broader process of
social and economic evolution. So also in his own day, he had long held
that the moral and intellectual condition of the population gave the mea-
sure of a culture and deﬁned the possibilities for its future. This historical
picture supplied the background for some of Pearson’s earliest use of sta-
tistical language. “We have been too apt to measure an age by its Darwins,
its Goethes, and its Ibsens, by its individual geniuses rather than by its av-
erage type,” he proclaimed in a Sunday lecture at South Place in 1888.80
Historicism, not mathematics or eugenics, was the ground from which this
collectivist insight initially grew. His scientiﬁc philosophy set out from a
social vision of history as made by the masses and, concomitantly, of the
moral obligation of individuals to serve the larger society. If the chaos of ego-
istic capitalism was the great problem of the day, scientiﬁc education could
provide a solution by deﬁning impersonal standards of knowledge. When
the Grammar of Science went to press in January 1892, Pearson did not
yet see his way to mathematical methods by which the problems of society
could be comprehended and managed. But in the new century it could
easily be read as the philosophical background to Pearsonian statistics.

1 Karl Pearson, “On the Laws of Inheritance According to Galton,” read 11 March 1889,
Pearson Papers 10/19. On mathematics and statistics, see Porter, “Rigor and Practicality.”
C H A P T E R  E I G H T
Scientiﬁc Education and Graphical Statistics
“What we still refer to as personal destiny,” Ulrich said, “is
being displaced by collective processes that can ﬁnally be ex-
pressed in statistical terms.”
Agathe thought this over and had to laugh. “I don’t under-
stand if, of course, but wouldn’t it be lovely to be dissolved by
statistics?” she said. “It’s been such a long time since love
could do it.”
—Robert Musil, The Man without Qualities,
trans. Sophie Wilkes, p. 785
AT THE FINAL meeting of the Men and Women’s Club, on 11 March 1889,
Pearson reported on Francis Galton’s new book, Natural Inheritance. He
thought it important but saw “considerable danger in applying the meth-
ods of exact science to problems in descriptive science, whether they be
problems of heredity or political economy.” Pearson feared that mathemat-
ics might seduce sociologists with its “logical accuracy,” and distract them
from the wide-ranging complexity of real human life. Galton’s quantitative
analogies of genetic processes to cookery books and political elections
seemed odd and proﬁtless. But at least he kept clear of the “metaphysical
regions of germ plasm,” devoting himself instead to an empirical, “En-
glish” effort to measure “the great unwashed.” In 1889, then, Pearson’s
view of human science was like that of many historical economists: he ap-
proved of measurement and descriptive statistics but was suspicious of
mathematical zealotry.1
Within a few years, his mathematical doubts gave way to a new enthusi-
asm and a new scientiﬁc direction. Pearson saw that statistics could be
made mathematical and might infuse the practices of the “descriptive sci-
entist” with some of its logical accuracy. This could be especially valuable
in regard to the great social and economic questions, where interested
opinion so often held sway. As an applied mathematician, he was in a way
well equipped for this new ﬁeld of activity, and there were mathematical
continuities between his earlier and later careers. Yet Pearson’s conversion

216 • Chapter Eight
to statistics was no natural expansion of technicality in science. It involved,
rather, a new vision, one that he acquired not through a single Eureka ex-
perience but episodically, over about three years. Toward the end of that
transition, in 1893, he would acquire a passionate commitment to the sta-
tistical study of biological evolution, Galton’s favorite ﬁeld. Initially, his
new interest in statistics grew out of an ideal of education, the cultivation
of a more effective citizenry. This was the mission of his Grammar of Sci-
ence. It was expressed also in an intensive campaign of university reform,
which came to a climax, and then largely failed, in 1892.
The cramped utilitarianism of students is a not unfamiliar source of pro-
fessorial dissatisfaction. Pearson wanted to teach the scientiﬁc attitude, an
imaginative and yet critical outlook that would promote enlarged under-
standing rather than unthinking routine and would maintain its validity even
as the content of knowledge evolved. During the late 1880s he ﬁxed on
graphical methods as his central contribution to the formation of the bud-
ding engineers who populated his classrooms. He began to investigate
graphical statistics as a corollary to the “graphical statics” he taught at Uni-
versity College, which he modestly envisioned as the core of a revolution in
mathematical problem solving. As a newly appointed professor at Gresham
College, an institution associated with commercial and ﬁnancial activities, he
thought statistics a ﬁtting topic of instruction. Unexpectedly, he found that
the graphs of trade and population he presented on lantern slides during his
evening lectures in the City could be adapted to address the evolutionary
questions he had begun discussing with his new biologist colleague at Uni-
versity College, W.F.R. Weldon. The biometric problems that ﬁred his en-
thusiasm for statistics as a vocation were structured by a geometrical sense
that evolutionary processes could be detected from the shape of the graphs.
Graphical statics had the virtue of holding the scientiﬁc question before
the eye as something comprehensible rather than submerging it in a sea of
algebraic symbols. In his initial exuberance, Pearson thought he could
read the effects of natural selection directly from frequency curves. A geo-
metrical intuition and a commitment to curve ﬁtting underlay his resolute
statistical campaign to overthrow the tyranny of the normal law in favor of
a less restrictive family of frequency distributions. Pearson sought a form
of mathematics general enough to comprehend and summarize the com-
plex processes of nature, and eventually to solve some of the pressing
problems of social life. 
FORMING THE EFFICIENT CITIZEN
The Grammar of Science was dated January 1892. On 3 February, Pearson
sent off to press a collection of his university writings, some of which had

Scientiﬁc Education • 217
appeared in The Academy over the previous eight years, completed by a se-
ries of articles for the ﬁrst three February numbers of the Pall Mall
Gazette. Its hurried publication reﬂected the urgency of the moment, since
the “Albert Charter” for a reconﬁgured University of London was about
to be taken up in the House of Commons. The author of the Grammar
had deﬁnite views on education, particularly concerning the relations of
research and teaching at the university level. He nurtured several levels of
discontent with his own academic situation and looked to proper univer-
sity reform to enable him to contribute more effectively to a needed sci-
entiﬁc reformation.
Pearson’s appointment as professor of applied mathematics, in June
1884, coincided with a period of ferment concerning higher education in
the British metropolis. In May, an Association for Promoting a Teaching
University for London had begun campaigning to reorganize the London
colleges. The range of alternatives under consideration appeared unac-
ceptably narrow to Pearson, who thought the proposed remedies worse
than the current defects. He objected especially to the preoccupation with
tests as the proper instrument of reform. The heterogeneous collection of
colleges that formed the University of London had little in common but
shared subjection to a regime of degree examinations. The nerve-center of
the examination-university was at Burlington House, and the chief pro-
posals would merely strengthen its hold on the system. Their advocates
saw testing as a way to infuse higher education with a new element of 
discipline, paired with opportunity. The reconﬁgured university, as they
imagined it, would reach from the relatively elite University College and
King’s College London to trade schools, women’s colleges, and London
Extension. All who chose to pursue a given course of study would have the
opportunity to prove themselves according to the same standard.
Pearson loathed this proposed system of uniformity, complaining that it
would corrupt teaching rather than improve it by eliminating everything
distinctive offered by the stronger institutions. It would enable “every sec-
ondrate teacher” to “appeal to the democracy” for equality with the bet-
ter institutions, “which will simply mean that universities are to cease to be
outside Oxford & Cambridge.” He thought it difﬁcult enough already to
interest students in the more abstract and scientiﬁc forms of knowledge,
the new methods and discoveries that, in the end, would most beneﬁt
them and their society. But if this kind of education was not available at the
weakest institutions in the “university,” it would be politically impossible
to include such topics on the examinations. Students, in that case, would
resent being compelled to learn such material, and teachers at the more
academic colleges, many of them dependent on student fees for their
livelihood, would inevitably be pulled down to the level of the lowest.
Pearson referred to the reform scheme as an “omnium gatherum,” an 

218 • Chapter Eight
2 KP to Oliver Lodge, 23 March 1892, Lodge Papers MS Add. 89/81; Karl Pearson,
“The Royal Commission,” from The Academy, 22 June 1889, in Pearson, The New Univer-
sity for London (1892), 52; also Pearson, “Sir George Young’s Defence . . .” (Academy, 16
Jan. 1892), in New University, 102.
3 Pearson, “Walter Frank Raphael Weldon,” Biometrika, 5 (1906), 1–52, on 20–21; also
see Pearson Papers 17 and 19 on the “professorial university in London.”
indiscriminate collection, when the thing most needed was to merge the
“better and more efﬁcient of the colleges into a real university.”
He based this recommendation on his own experience at Cambridge,
whose great advances, along with Oxford, since the University Test Acts of
1871 he attributed to the abolition of religious constraints and above all
to the subordination of colleges to university. This move to greater unity
had permitted real university teaching to supplant the work of coaches and
“crammers.” But it was only possible because of the shared traditions and
close physical proximity of the constituent units. He proposed a thought
experiment: What would happen if Oxford students were compelled to
prove themselves by taking Cambridge examinations? A circle of Cam-
bridge crammers would form itself around Oxford, and draw the students
away from their recognized teachers. To subject students from one insti-
tution to the testing regime of another would undermine its whole educa-
tional mission. “Every university that is worthy of the name has its
idiosyncrasies, its peculiar lines of strength and weakness; and its examina-
tions will be moulded on these lines.”2
Pearson’s answer to the campaign for a London teaching university was
an “Association for Promoting a Professorial University for London,” es-
tablished in 1891. His allies included men of science such as Weldon, Sir
W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, Edwin Ray Lankester, and G. Carey-Foster, who
drew up a plan and enlisted the support of some notable individuals from
literature and scholarship, including Thomas Hardy and George Mere-
dith. While they were able to defeat the proposal for an Albert University,
their more positive ambitions proved unattainable. Huxley, who was per-
suaded to assume the presidency of the organization, proved in the end
unwilling to support the ideal of professorial self-governance, preferring,
as Pearson complained, to negotiate a compromise among the interests.
He acted with the support of some on the executive committee, including
Weldon.3
Pearson, feeling betrayed, resigned as secretary and published an open
letter to Huxley in the Times on 3 December 1892. He was compelled to
withdraw, he explained, because his list of “distinguished names” had
signed on to a different cause from the one now put forward. Weldon crit-
icized him sharply in a private letter, and Huxley responded in print that
while all professors should be “good specialists,” only some are good ad-

Scientiﬁc Education • 219
4 See the exchange of letters in the Times: KP to Huxley, 3 Dec. 1892, 4; Huxley to KP, 6
Dec. 1892, 11; KP to Huxley, 8 Dec. 1892, 10; also Weldon to KP, 3 Dec. 1892, Pearson
Papers 891, and Pearson, “The Present Aspect of the University Problem,” Academy, 42 (24
Dec. 1892), 589–590.
5 Pearson, “The OMNIUM GATHERUM. Lord Justice Fry’s Scheme and Sir George Young’s
First Scheme” (Academy, 5 Sept. 1885), in New University, 18, and “The Second Scheme of
the London University Senate” (Academy, 2 May 1891), in New University, 61, 58.
ministrators, and that there is unfortunately also “a fair sprinkling of one-
idead fanatics” within the professoriate. The inmates could scarcely be al-
lowed to govern themselves, it seems, without a counterweight of sound
practicality. This language was a red ﬂag to Pearson, who recognized him-
self in Huxley’s epithet and whose mission in life it was to obliterate this
typically English divide between scientiﬁc reason and practical good sense.
Is the idea of a great university now to be dismissed as “the plaything of
“one-idead fanatics?” he asked. “I am quite willing to accept Professor
Huxley’s description of myself as a ‘one-idead fanatic,’ it being the usual
name for those who attempt to carry out in practice what they preach in
theory. I am content to leave vague statements and ill-deﬁned compro-
mises to ‘practical’ men and ‘administrators.’”4
These reform debates at home reawakened Pearson’s old love of Ger-
man science and culture, and he was mocked for advocating a Berlin 
University on the Thames. While he also mentioned Edinburgh, it was in-
deed the German capital that ﬁgured for him as the proper model for a
London university, with scientists such as Helmholtz, Du Bois-Reymond,
and Virchow whom he held up as exemplars of a professoriate combining
scientiﬁc excellence with broad learning. He also looked to history for a
deeper perspective, and his university views involved a distinctive com-
pound of medievalism and modernist urgency. He pictured the university
as a “guild of learning,” guiding the apprentice from “receptivity to self-
production . . . and the full freedom of the guild,” and yet also as a pur-
veyor of modernist efﬁciency. Efﬁciency was to be grounded not on
narrowly utilitarian training, and certainly not on cramming for examina-
tions, but on the slow maturation, under the direction of a master, of the
student’s critical reasoning faculties. The object of a university, he ex-
plained in 1885, “is to develop the intellectual life, in the broadest sense,
the theoretical and scientiﬁc knowledge of its students and members.” Or,
in another idiom, he spoke of “the promotion of a wider and more efﬁ-
cient learning.” Only a university of teachers and students, living and
working together in pursuit of higher learning, could provide an “educa-
tion and training of those citizens whose knowledge and thought are to
leaven the community, for . . . that staff of scientists, specialists, leaders of
industry, and representatives of culture in and outside the learned profes-
sions upon whom the welfare of the nation so largely depends.”5

220 • Chapter Eight
6 KP to Alice Lee, 19 Feb. 1892, Pearson Papers 919/3; Pearson, National Life from the
Standpoint of Science (1905), 14.
Pearson’s defense of science in terms of “national efﬁciency” found,
later, a kind of home in an organized movement led by the Earl of Rose-
bery, which, as usual, he did not join. It is easy, more than a century later,
to misunderstand him. “Efﬁciency” was not, for him, a deﬂating word, im-
plying the reduction of all activities to some bottom line of output divided
by input. Efﬁcient here meant something like efﬁcacious, the capacity to get
things done and contribute to society. This would require a high level of
theoretical and cultural awareness. Not ratios of energetic or economic
quantities, but well-considered decisions based on deep understanding ex-
empliﬁed his conception of efﬁciency. He believed, to be sure, in specialist
expertise, and he argued, for example, that Bedford College, a college
for women, could not pretend to the dignity of a major teaching body be-
cause geology and botany were taught there by the same woman, and
Greek philosophy and political economy by the same man (Francis Ysidro
Edgeworth, in fact). The need for specialized knowledge, however, had
somehow to be made compatible with a balanced intellectual formation,
supporting what he would in 1905 characterize as “that classiﬁed experi-
ence which we term wisdom.” This, and not easy, narrow, or automatic an-
swers, was for him the proper goal of an education in science.6
A GRAMMAR FOR THE MODERN AGE
Pearson’s vision of education, in some ways a quite traditional one, em-
phasized the development of the powers of mind over the transmission of
factual material. On educational questions, he particularly admired Mark
Pattison of Lincoln College, Oxford, who campaigned to integrate classi-
cal ideals with modern content. This meant the acquisition of liberal cul-
ture, which, as Pattison explained, “is not the knowledge of facts, but
intellectual grasp—not a collective acquaintance with many sciences, but a
harmonious survey of knowledge, in all its aspects, as a whole.” By such
means were intelligence and character to be formed: “No one will dispute
that the aim of education is less to inform the mind, than to exercise and
call out the faculties.” Classical learning, representing the best of human
knowledge, had been the indispensable instrument of cultivation in the
Renaissance. The intervening centuries, however, had brought forth a
great intellectual transformation, and now this exalted position belonged
by right to science and scholarship. Huxley later, in his exchanges with
Matthew Arnold on “science and culture,” repeated this argument for sci-
entiﬁc education. Arnold did not exactly disagree and even anticipated a

Scientiﬁc Education • 221
7 Mark Pattison, “Oxford Studies” (1855), in Essays, ed. Henry Nettleship (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1889), 415–494, quotes on 435, 424; T. H. Huxley, “Science and Cul-
ture” (1880), in Science and Education: Essays (1893; reprint, New York: Greenwood Press,
1968), 134–159, on 152; Matthew Arnold to Huxley, 29 Aug. 1875, Huxley Papers 10.155,
Imperial College Archives; Newman, Idea of a University, 94, 128, 135. See also White,
Thomas Huxley, chap. 3.
8 Pattison, “Oxford Studies,” 433–434, 423.
change in religion as great as the Reformation. But to many champions of
classical learning, such as John Henry Newman, natural science meant
merely utilitarian studies, the sacriﬁce of intellect to the purposes of the
moment.7
Pattison, who for some years had moved in Newman’s orbit, might,
with Pearson, have found too much of mere practicality in Huxley’s posi-
tion. He complained that scientiﬁc education was too often merely tech-
nical, conveying the facts of a specialty rather than a spirit of philosophic
inquiry. Advocates of science allowed an “easy victory to the classicists”
when they “lost sight of the truth, that for the purposes of education
knowledge is only a means,—a means to intellectual development.” The
guardians of classical education were correct to reject this narrow view of
science, and to insist that students be presented with “intellectual culture”
rather than heaps of factual nuggets. But the intellectual culture of the
mid-nineteenth century could no longer be conveyed in the form of an-
cient literature. It had to take account of modern science.
Fearing the “disabling effects” of excessive specialization, Pattison
called on the schools to vivify scientiﬁc content by cultivating philosophi-
cal awareness. Grammar would remain in the curriculum, but as means
rather than end. It was a propaedeutic, providing access to the “higher
scholarship.” He added: “Just so it is with logic. The logic of the schools,
a certain more or less arbitrary collection of formal laws of reasoning, is
the grammar of the higher moral or physical sciences. But the whole util-
ity of this grammar is annihilated, if it be not followed up by an advance
into those sciences.”8
Pearson’s Grammar of Science was also at bottom a tract in support of
educational reform and was continuous with Pattison’s vision. The choice
between wide-ranging inquiry and tightly focused research was for him a
pressingly personal one. Statistics would soon cut through the knot, since
this was a methodological specialization that bore on a whole world of sci-
entiﬁc problems. But few ﬁelds could claim this kind of generality, and
even statistics was more consequence than cause of the Grammar’s cele-
bration of scientiﬁc method. Method was the antithesis of narrowness, a
third way between self-indulgent dilettantism and the idiocy of discipli-
nary conﬁnement. Pearson pronounced it fundamentally the same in every
domain of knowledge. “The unity of all science consists alone in its

222 • Chapter Eight
9 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 7–15. See Yeo, “Scientiﬁc Method and the Image of Sci-
ence”; Yeo, “Scientiﬁc Method and the Rhetoric of Science”; Hollinger, “Inquiry and Up-
lift”; and Haskell, “Professionalism versus Capitalism.”
method, and not in its material.” Scientiﬁc method applies “to social as
well as to physical investigations,” and, as a “scientiﬁc frame of mind,” is
by no means the preserve of the “professional scientist.” It is rather “the
method of all logically trained minds” and “an essential of good citizen-
ship,” for it is simply “the habit of dispassionate investigation. . . . The sci-
entiﬁc habit of mind is one which may be acquired by all. . . . Modern
science, as training the mind to an exact and impartial analysis of facts is an
education specially ﬁtted to promote sound citizenship.”
If these claims for science were about truth, they bore no less on moral-
ity. Science was distinctly social because it inculcated standards of knowl-
edge that went beyond personal interest and blind prejudice. Pearson was
still a socialist, after a fashion, calling on science to supplant the regrettable
selﬁsh competition of capitalism. Such an idealization of science or profes-
sionalism was becoming increasingly common across Europe and America
in the late nineteenth century. But Pearson put less emphasis on the scien-
tiﬁc community than, for example, Charles Sanders Peirce, calling instead
for the education to scientiﬁc morality of every citizen. This was not only
for the good of humanity, but rather, and more directly, for that of the race
or the state. In the modern Darwinian struggle of society against society,
impersonal standards of knowledge and action were indispensable. “The
importance of a just appreciation of scientiﬁc method is so great, that I
think the state may be reasonably called upon to place instruction in pure
science within the reach of all its citizens.”9
In this introductory chapter to his Grammar, Pearson identiﬁed three
vital “claims of science.” The second and third announced its applicability
to social problems and to technology. In emphasizing its essential practical
role in the modern age, Pearson was at one with a generation of British re-
formers. But for him, scientiﬁc study was as much about the cultivation of
self as about the needs of society. The ﬁrst and most essential claim of sci-
ence was its role in forming the citizen, for whom the scientiﬁc habit of ra-
tional thought was always, and simultaneously, a moral virtue, because it
raised the individual above self. This was consonant with the classical ideal
of education that Pattison had praised. Pearson the scientist was no less ap-
preciative of the educational value of the grammar of dead languages than
the more literary and philological Pattison. He explained in a footnote
the beneﬁts of such study for his own mental development. Although he
had forgotten most of the facts he learned in school, “the notion of
method which I derived from my instructor in Greek grammar . . . remained

Scientiﬁc Education • 223
10 Turner, “Public Science in Britain: 1880–1919,” 8n. Compare Hermann von Helmholtz,
“On the Relation of Natural Science to Science in General” (1862), in Helmholtz, Science 
and Culture: Popular and Philosophical Essays, ed. David Cahan (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1995), 86–87, on the educational beneﬁts of Greek or Latin grammar, which,
because they were more fully governed by rules than modern English or German, inculcated 
an upliﬁting faith in regularities. Science, however, prepared the mind still more effectively, 
surpassing even the deadest of dead languages, because its laws admitted no exceptions what-
soever.
11 Havelock Ellis to KP, 24 March 1891, Pearson Papers 683/3, and KP to Parker, 9 April
1891. He already intended the lectures as a book for Ellis’s “Contemporary Science Series”;
see KP to Macaulay, 21 Jan. 1891.
12 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 8, 14.
in my mind as the really valuable part of my school equipment for
life.”10 His choice of “Grammar” over “The Creed of Science,” or “The
Spirit of Science,” both of which titles he had earlier contemplated, em-
phasized the continuities with a more traditional form of education. His
object was to meet Pattison’s challenge, to present science as the basis of in-
tellectual culture, and thereby as deserving a central place in the university
curriculum.11
Indeed, not only philosophical science but every honest discipline was
vindicated by Pearson’s perspective on education. “To decry specialization
in education is to misinterpret the purpose of education.” For method
could not be mastered fully in the abstract, but had to be confronted in
practice. The Grammar of Science, reﬂecting perhaps its origin as popular
lectures at Gresham College, even held out the prospect of acquiring some
of these methodical virtues through self-study. Perusing scientiﬁc text-
books would give only loose hints of the scientiﬁc spirit, but the intensive
study of a single discipline could work wonders. “Those who can devote
persistently some four or ﬁve hours a week to the conscientious study of
any one limited branch of science will achieve in the space of a year or two
much more than this.” And it doesn’t matter what science our “busy lay-
man” chooses, be it geology, biology, geometry, mechanics, or even his-
tory or folklore. The only requirement was to concentrate the attention,
and to learn some particular ﬁeld well. In this way, Pearson reconciled dis-
ciplinary focus with breadth of vision, deﬁning the accomplished specialist
alone as qualiﬁed to be an effective generalist. The narrow passage
through the eye of this needle would give access to the wide-open spaces
of the scientiﬁc spirit.12
Any area of scientiﬁc inquiry could provide guidance on method, but
narrowly practical study would not. Pearson strongly discouraged his
readers from selecting a ﬁeld of investigation in order to glean useful facts
for their profession. Mere facts do not an education make; the point was

224 • Chapter Eight
13 Ibid., 14; Pearson, National Life, 38.
14 Pearson reviews in Academy, 30 (1886), 330–331; 34 (1888), 421–422; 36 (1889),
272–273; 41 (23 April 1892), 400–401.
to open the mind to a deeper understanding, and to nurture the freedom
from bias that follows from it. Science makes its greatest contribution to
society when it transcends the requirement of immediate practicality. In
this way, Pearson’s Grammar of Science was made to endorse the cause of
a real London university in place of a collection of trade schools. “I believe
that more will be achieved by placing instruction in pure science within
the reach of all our citizens, than by any number of polytechnics devoting
themselves to technical education, which does not rise above the level of
manual instruction.” The proper outcome of such an education was not
necessarily recondite or even unfamiliar. “There is a very excellent little
book which many of you may have read recently, Baden Powell’s ‘Aids to
Scouting’; it is a capital introduction to the true scientiﬁc method.” To
sum it up: “Keep your eyes open and apply commonsense.”13
Despite his extravagant optimism about the mental and moral improve-
ment to be achieved through a moderately serious exposure to real sci-
ence, he took a dim view of almost all the introductory works on science,
and particularly of those in physics. For example, the “dogmatism” of
Grant Allen’s scientiﬁc books for working men was “a danger to genuine
science.” Evidently he thought them socially dangerous as well, on ac-
count of their radical materialism. He compared Allen to Luther, who
should have been checked before he had Europe in ﬂames, and he joked
of longing for the days when misinformed heretics such as Allen were
burned. Such defects of reasoning were not conﬁned to popular authors.
The materialism of the standard textbooks was almost as bad, if not im-
mediately incendiary. While ﬁrst-rate physicists were mostly agreed that
matter would someday be reduced to a motion or strain in the ether, the
textbook writers still spoke of force as inherent in matter. As his Grammar
of Science was making its way through the press, he complained in The
Academy that almost all the elementary books he received to review were
bad. “If the critic reads these works honestly through, he can only be
forced to the conclusions that the whole system of our elementary science
teaching urgently needs remodeling, for all notions of clear deﬁnition and
logical statement seem to have disappeared from it.”14
Even some of the best scientists showed grave defects of interpretation.
He was compelled to forgive the luxuriance of mechanical images in the
work of a “giant” like William Thomson. As historian, he even conceded
that for such men as Maupertuis and James Joule, theological conceptions
had contributed to the advance of physics. To Macaulay he conﬁded that
George Gabriel Stokes, misguided purveyor of natural theology, was the

Scientiﬁc Education • 225
15 KP to Macaulay, undated (but ﬁled with 1911 letters); Pearson, “Reaction” (1895), in
Chances of Death, 214.
16 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 9, and preface, vii–viii.
only really powerful teacher he had known at Cambridge, and that his sci-
entiﬁc papers provided a particularly ﬁne model of “ideals of good
method.”15 Having proclaimed the incomparable value of genuine scien-
tiﬁc study, he had to retreat in the face of the undoubted failure of so many
distinguished scientists to see the world as he did. “It by no means follows
that, because a man has won a name for himself in the ﬁeld of natural 
science, his judgments on such problems as Socialism, Home Rule, or Bib-
lical Theology will necessarily be sound. They will be sound or not ac-
cording as he has carried his scientiﬁc method into these ﬁelds.”
Among physicists this was particularly unlikely, because they miscon-
strued so completely the import and meaning of their research results.
Hence the need for this grammar was not limited to working men misled
by materialism, for the prevailing view of physics among its most renowned
experts was also badly confused. Pearson hated the reiﬁcation of “force” as
much as he disliked materialism. Those who look to science for more than
reliable descriptions will be susceptible to all kinds of errors. “One result
of this obscurity we probably ﬁnd in the ease with which the physicist, as
compared with either the pure mathematician or the historian, is entan-
gled in the meshes of such pseudosciences as natural theology and spiritu-
alism.”16 The scientiﬁc method as intellectual panacea could not quite be
sustained. Yet it was Pearson’s mission to make these ideals work, to clar-
ify the scientiﬁc conceptions of the scientists and to present them as a
model for everyone else.
MATHEMATICS FOR ENGINEERS
Pearson appreciated being in London because of the platform it provided
to speak on important issues, as well as for the potential greatness of its
universities. But his professorship of applied mathematics at University
College London was not altogether compatible with his high scientiﬁc
ideals. The institution had been founded by utilitarians in 1826 and con-
tinues to this day to display the dressed-up skeleton of Jeremy Bentham.
Its strong tradition of secularism distinguished it from King’s College,
London, its only peer among London institutions of higher education,
and from Oxford and Cambridge. Still, it was principally a teaching col-
lege and lacked the means of Oxbridge to endow idleness and research.
Engineering education began to be developed there in 1841, the ﬁrst such
program in England. The success of this practical curriculum was mirrored

226 • Chapter Eight
17 KP to Oliver Lodge, 9 Dec. 1885, Lodge Papers MS Add 89/81; Bellot, University
College, London, 51–52, 135–136, 323.
18 Bellot, University College, London, 308–310; Kennedy report (with G. Carey Foster
and Olaus Henrici), 17 Nov. 1874, UCL College Correspondence, ﬁled under “Kennedy,
Alexander B.” See also Carlyle, “Kennedy.” On student use of the laboratory, see reports in
College Correspondence AM/C/59. One of these reports, L. F. Vernon Harcourt’s (28
June 1889) proposal to hire Thomas Hudson Beare as Kennedy’s replacement, noted that an
effective professor would be crucial for maintaining student numbers in several science
courses, but especially in applied mathematics. On fees and enrollments, see Beare to KP, 18
Dec. 1890 and 2 March 1896, Pearson Papers 631/9.
by declining enrollments in mathematics, rather a serious matter since the
professor’s earnings depended on student fees. Clifford’s appointment in
1871 as professor of applied mathematics and mechanics was made possi-
ble by a gift from Sir Francis Goldsmid, which guaranteed a modest salary
for the chair.17
The minimum, however, was not sufﬁcient. Pearson showed no signs of
discontent with his customer base of students for his ﬁrst ﬁve years at Uni-
versity College, but in 1889 his friend and mentor Alexander B. W.
Kennedy resigned his engineering professorship. Kennedy had set up in
1879 a teaching laboratory, where students could construct mechanisms
illustrating their class work, including “geometrical models” and appara-
tus “for the mechanical description of curves.” His laboratory initiated a
form of engineering instruction that provided an exemplar for others in
England and the United States, and also in a way for Pearson’s own bio-
metric laboratory more than a decade later. Kennedy’s departure and
prospective replacement by a “young, untried man” was a blow to Pear-
son’s teaching aspirations as well as his emoluments. Without a celebrated
engineering professor, there would not be sufﬁcient demand for two
mathematicians, and Pearson was “not the one who teaches the much 
required conic sections and trigonometry.” Indeed, his fees diminished
worryingly in 1890, and engineering enrollments continued to decline
through at least 1896.18
These ﬁnancial difﬁculties persisted for many years. He complained of
them in a letter to Macaulay in August 1889, on the eve of his departure
for a tour of Norway, where was planning to meet up with Maria Sharpe.
The next January, in deep personal despair over his broken engagement,
he began scheming to forsake London and stand for a professorship at
Cambridge. He had already announced the need for a technical laboratory
there in 1886, in opposition to the strange English prejudice that a new
ﬁeld is best established by creating an examination. The engineering Tri-
pos, he complained, was like the mathematical one, made up of purely
speculative problems: “Impossible bodies traverse impossible curves; im-
possible ﬂuids ﬂow in impossible receptacles; and impossible loads are im-

Scientiﬁc Education • 227
19 Pearson, “A Plea for the Establishment of a Technical Laboratory at Cambridge,”
Cambridge University Magazine, 7 Dec. 1886, 173–174.
20 KP to Macaulay, 3 Jan. 1890 and 20 April 1890; Pearson, “On the Flexure of Heavy
Beams Subjected to Continuous Systems of Load, Part I,” Quarterly Journal of Pure and Ap-
plied Mathematics, 24 (1890), 63–110 (part II appeared in vol. 31, 1899, 66–109); KP to
Macaulay, 30 Oct. 1890; Pearson, review of E. J. Routh, A Treatise on Analytical Statics,
Academy, 40 (1 July 1891), 38. On technical and professional education, see Pearson, The
Scope and Importance to the State of the Science of National Eugenics (1907), 6–7.
posed on the impossible surfaces of bodies whose elastic characters are
without the range of practical experience.” High-level mathematics was
needed, and in this respect Cambridge had, potentially, the advantage over
London, but why not emphasize real technical problems? Otherwise,
the superiority of German engineers, trained now at technical institutes
on a par with universities, “will not fail to tell in the race-struggle for 
existence.”19
Early in 1890, while discussing an open position in engineering, he let
it be known that he would like to found a “great engineering school” at
Cambridge. At the same time he published a long memoir on the ﬂexure
of heavy beams, and although it scarcely stands among his outstanding re-
search achievements, his ambitions for engineering in these years were ﬁrst
of all scientiﬁc, and only secondarily ﬁnancial. Toward the end of the year,
his love life now in order but his salary and program-building opportuni-
ties still unsatisfactory, he wrote of “the possibility of creating an all-round
technical school at Cambridge. I believe in the possibility of directing a
good deal of the dormant mathematical force into that ﬁeld,” a far more
attractive prospect than the current disrepair at University College. Such
technical education was not to be confused with mere “professional in-
struction.” Its purpose was to provide training for the mind rather than to
convey directly practical skills. Techniques of the trade were best passed on
through apprenticeship, and there was no reason it should be at the ex-
pense of public institutions. As professor of engineering, Pearson hoped to
teach “drawing graphics” and the more theoretical aspects of engineering
such as bridge structure and the strength of materials. After learning from
Macaulay that the appointment was likely to go to James Alfred Ewing, he
withdrew his candidacy, seemingly without bitterness. There are signs, he
wrote hopefully, “that Cambridge is at length aroused to the need of some
touch with the practical and geometrical side of Mechanics.”20
Under other circumstances, Pearson might have made his career in en-
gineering mathematics. Years later, he imagined a life as engineer for his
young son Egon, and told him of its rewards and demands. The engineer-
ing persona he envisioned was quite different from those young men who
passed through his mathematics classes. “But you would have to work very
hard now-a-days to do well in engineering and you must not think like

228 • Chapter Eight
21 KP to Egon P, 25 March 1905, Pearson Papers 923/2.
22 From a letter, date not given, in E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson, 16, 31–32.
23 KP to Weldon, 3 Aug. 1898 and 13 July 1900; KP to Simon Newcomb, 26 June 1903,
Newcomb Papers at Library of Congress (I thank David Grier for referring me to these let-
ters); on his frustrated plans to give the 1901 Lowell lectures at Harvard, canceled when his
colleague Hudson Beare accepted a chair in Edinburgh, see B. O. Peirce to KP, 28 June
1902, Pearson Papers 813/5; KP to Charles Davenport, 1 March and 23 June 1901, Dav-
enport Papers, American Philosophical Society; KP to Galton, 22 Oct. 1901, Galton Papers
293/E.
24 Thomas Hudson Beare to KP, 18 Dec. 1890, Pearson Papers 631/9; Magnello, “Non-
Correlation of Biometrics and Eugenics,” 87.
some boys do that it means turning nuts & playing with screws.”21 Even
in 1905, this was a prescription and not simply description. As with other
aspects of his life, this dissatisfaction was suppressed from his recollections.
When Egon was about to begin his own academic career, his father told
him of “the sense of power and inspiration in holding a class of 80 or 100
highspirited young men, by the interest of your subject and your way of
exposing it—when the failure would mean riot.”22
But these potentially riotous youth, whatever the joys of commanding
them, were scarcely paragons of scientiﬁc apprenticeship in Pearson’s 
idealized university. There were too many “blockheads” who want noth-
ing more than to turn iron on a lathe, as his new engineering colleague
Thomas Hudson Beare put it. Pearson was often frustrated by the burden
of teaching basic mathematics at University College, as well as by the
salary pressures, for he remained dependent on fees for his living into the
twentieth century. The demands on his time were often crushing, espe-
cially since annual bouts of ﬂu in the 1890s left him debilitated for
months. He explained to Weldon his application in 1898 for a post at Ox-
ford in terms of his need to escape “inﬂuenza and engineering students!”
Think of my lot, he lamented two years later, “having to teach 60 lads
what they don’t want to know! . . . I have to struggle & struggle with lads
who take the ﬁrst opportunity to cut my classes for good on the ground
that they are of no ‘use’ to their profession, while I know that what they
want is a thorough birching, and a demonstration that the glove-stretcher
applied to their atrophied brains will be worth more to them in the future
than any ‘practical’ facts.” It was essential, however, to keep his student
numbers up, and on this account he declined at least two opportunities to
deliver prestigious lectures in the United States.23
He felt greatly relieved when a grant from the Worshipful Company of
Drapers in 1903, and later a bequest from Francis Galton, enabled him
gradually to unload this burden. It was not only the demands on his time,
eleven hours of weekly lecturing when he ﬁrst assumed the Goldsmid chair
in 1884, increasing to sixteen hours by 1897, plus the job of coordinating
the work of his demonstrators.24 What vexed him most was the indiffer-

Scientiﬁc Education • 229
25 Egon Zöller, Die Universitäten und technischen Hochschulen: ihre geschichtliche En-
twickelung und ihre Bedeutung in der Kultur, ihre gegenseitige Stellung und weitere Ausbil-
dung (Berlin: Verlag von Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, 1891). Most of his published work was
about Swedish theistic philosophy, particularly that of Christopher Jacob Boström, and he
praised the strong but balanced sense of individuality in Sweden, by contrast to the excessive
subjectivism, going over to Schwärmerei, in Germany. Among his books are Schweden, Land
und Volk. Schilderungen aus seiner Natur, seinem geistigen und wirthschaftlichen Leben (Lin-
dau and Leipzig: Verlag von Wilh. Ludwig’s Buchhandlung, 1882) and Der Gottesbegriff in
der neueren schwedischen Philosophie (Halle: C.E.M. Pfeffer, 1887).
ence of so many students to the scientiﬁc spirit, their rudimentary com-
mand of mathematics and lack of desire for more.
Although few articulated their ideals so clearly or took them so seri-
ously, Pearson’s dilemma as a teacher was a familiar one in the late nine-
teenth century. At his summer retreat in Saig, he found sympathy from
his friend Egon Zöller, who was able to satisfy Pearson’s renewed interest
in German university developments. A disciple of Swedish theistic neo-
idealism, Zöller imported some of his philosophical concern about the
wholeness and continuity of the self into his work on universities and tech-
nical institutes (technische Hochschulen). The division between academic
and technical institutions was unfortunate, he felt, both because it sepa-
rated engineering from the sciences that nurtured its progress and because
it deprived technical students of the Bildung that could form them into
cultivated and moral beings. At a time when the standing of the technical
colleges was under discussion in Germany, he favored their conversion
into universities, so that the specialized knowledge of technical disciplines
could be united to liberal education (allgemeine Bildung).25
The very possibility of turning technical colleges to universities, though
hotly contested in the Germany of the academic mandarins, reveals how
much they had changed from the mostly vocational schools of the early
nineteenth century. “School culture” in engineering, hitherto linked more
closely to the military and to state bureaucracy than to private industry,
had spread widely on the European continent by about 1860. English in-
dustrialists and engineers, who had long been receptive to instruction on
engines, measurement, and other directly practical subjects, tended more
strongly to resist formal schooling in theoretical science.
Kennedy and Pearson were at the forefront of a gradual transformation
of the engineering curriculum, partly on Continental models, and the lab-
oratory was not such an alien space for their students as was advanced
mathematics. The abstract forms of analysis adapted by Cambridge math-
ematicians from mainly French sources, which Kennedy regarded as out-
side his own competence, had little promise for teaching students such as
these. Even on the Continent, serious mathematics was hard to sell to the
sons of workers and artisans who looked to move up in the world by be-
coming engineers, or to the industrialists who would employ them. The

230 • Chapter Eight
26 Ringer, Decline of the German Mandarins; Lundgreen, “Engineering Education in Eu-
rope and the U.S.A., 1750-1930”; Kennedy to KP, 27 Nov. 1911, Pearson Papers 11/10;
Brock, “Building England’s First Technical College”; Alter, Reluctant Patron, 169.
27 Gooday, “Teaching Telegraphy and Electrotechnics”; MacLeod, “Education: Scientiﬁc
and Technical”; Alter, Reluctant Patron, 119–126, 151; Olaus Henrici to KP, 25 Feb. and
27 Feb. 1896, Pearson Papers 717/4.
mathematical textbook written by John Perry for students at the ﬁrst tech-
nical college in England, at Finsbury, taught decimals, approximations,
log tables, slide rules, and the representation of simple mathematical func-
tions on squared graph paper.26
The teachers at these English colleges prided themselves on the instruc-
tion in engineering, not physics, that they provided their students, and
even boasted of its greater practicality than was customary in France or
Germany. The administrators who presided over them were still less likely
to endorse a demanding mathematical curriculum. For decades, British
scientists had complained of employers who expected schools and colleges
to shoulder the expense of inculcating techniques of the trades. They con-
trasted the English situation with that in Germany and America, where 
industrialists appreciated the value of a science-based technical education.
It was a difﬁcult battle when most public rhetoric on behalf of science in
England stressed its directly utilitarian rather than its broad educational
function. Pearson and others argued that even for its practical value, sci-
ence depended on a base of theoretical understanding and pure research.
But who was listening? In 1896, when he put out feelers about a mathe-
matical post at the Royal College of Science, Olaus Henrici told him his
chances were poor, “given the peculiar circumstances” of the institution.
“Mathematics has been sadly neglected and ‘practical’ men have had
everything in their hands.” Probably the school would choose Perry,
Henrici continued, and even this appointment would be a step forward for
engineering mathematics.27
Pearson wanted nothing to do with a program of mathematical instruc-
tion limited to arithmetic procedures. Fortunately, mathematicians on the
Continent had already confronted more or less the same problem and had
explored some solutions. The most promising, at least to Pearson, was
known as graphical calculation or, in its most digniﬁed and mathematical
form, graphical statics. More than a mode of representation, it was a geo-
metrical means of solving problems. For a directly practical question, as in
construction, one might sketch a bridge or building, representing forces
by vectors, and calculate geometrically the stresses and strains. This is just
what the most celebrated treatises on the subject, those in particular that
Pearson admired, declined to emphasize. Instead, they proceeded system-
atically and mathematically. They began with demonstrations of how to

Scientiﬁc Education • 231
28 Scholz, “Graphical Statics”; Maurer, Karl Culmann; Tournès, “Pour une histoire du
calcul graphique”; Carl Culmann, Die graphische Statik (1866), 2 vols., 2d ed. (Zurich:
Meyer & Zeller, 1875), preface to 2d ed., v, xi.
perform the basic arithmetic operations with vectors, including division
and the extraction of roots, and proceeded to graphical methods for solv-
ing numerical equations. Sometimes they included applications to physics,
particularly to Pearson’s own specialty, the theory of elasticity. Calcula-
tions of speciﬁcally engineering quantities, such as stress and torque,
might be put off to the end or to a second volume, and issues associated
with particular kinds of structures were commonly omitted entirely.
The origins of graphical statics can be traced to the work of French en-
gineers after the Revolution, particularly to J. V. Poncelet. In France, how-
ever, the gulf between the extremely elite Ecole Polytechnique, which
dealt mainly in higher analysis, and other schools of engineering was too
wide to nurture this form of mathematics, and from mid-century it was
practiced principally in German and Italian states. The pioneering text in
what promised for a time to be the triumphant career of this mathematical
science was published in 1866 by a Swiss railway engineer, Carl Culmann,
who had taken a position at the new Eidgenössiche Polytechnikum (sub-
sequently the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule) in Zurich. He em-
phasized above all the value of his subject for the formation (Bildung) of
engineers. It is not enough, he explained, to supply the Techniker with
rules and formulas he will apply as recipes for construction. Instead, the
technical instructor aspires to form thinking persons, who will grasp their
projects spatially and mathematically. In terms of the values of education,
it was important that these geometrical methods represented the problem
clearly to the mind, and held it there through the operations of its solu-
tion. Culmann argued that the most modern analytic methods shared with
this graphical geometry the advantage of unmediated directness, but that
algebra demanded mathematical preparation beyond what the students
possessed.28
The educational philosophy of graphical statics was defended more
forcefully in the preface to a textbook by Antonio Favaro, professor at the
University of Padua. First published in 1877, it then appeared in 1879 in
a French translation that the author called superior to the Italian original.
Analysis and geometry, he explained, had been in competition as ap-
proaches to mathematics since at least the time of Viète and Descartes.
While he did not expect a deﬁnitive resolution, there was no doubt that
geometry was gaining favor among those most devoted to the “culture of
mathematics.” The very power of analysis as a means to solve problems
compromises its effectiveness “as an instrument of intellectual culture.” Its
procedures are almost mechanical, and in this labyrinth of formulas the

232 • Chapter Eight
29 Antonio Favaro, Leçons de statique graphique. Première partie. Géométrie de position,
trans. from Italian by Paul Terrier (Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1879), preface, v–vi.
30 William Whewell, Of a Liberal Education (London, 1845); see Richards, Mathematical
Visions, 18–29; Smith and Wise, Energy and Empire, 58–65.
31 Favaro, Leçons de statique graphique, vii, xii, xxxii.
mind quickly loses sight of the magnitudes with which it is dealing.
Geometry, by contrast, advances with complete clarity, the problem always
before the eye, and the solution it eventually discovers will appear in the
simplest and most attractive form.29
Such praise of clear demonstration had been familiar in England in mid-
century, prior to the triumph of the analytical style of which Pearson in-
creasingly complained. The great champion of classical geometry was
William Whewell, master of Trinity College, who defended it as a “perma-
nent” study akin to Greek and Latin, one ideally suited to “educe” the
higher faculties of reason and language. Algebra, by contrast, was “pro-
gressive,” and if it was indispensable for the professional education of
mathematicians, it was much less suited to forming the mind. Engineering
could be part of a liberal education, and Whewell pushed to incorporate it
into the curriculum in the form of Poncelet’s projective geometry.30
Favaro, too, looked to Poncelet as a predecessor, but with reservations,
since Poncelet’s methods were not yet graphical. If some opposed this new
geometry as “too exclusively manual,” Favaro argued, they had simply
failed to comprehend its virtues as mathematics. Here at last was the “royal
road” to mathematical competence that Euclid had denied the monarch
Ptolemy. Although graphical statics was a happy result of the reciprocal in-
ﬂuences of geometrical theory and practical demands, the pursuit of im-
mediate applications would be contrary to the spirit of mathematics. “To
separate graphical statics from its loftiest rational origins would be to close
every path of progress for this new branch of applied science, and to mis-
understand the essential principles of higher education.”31
The brief efﬂorescence of graphical statics in England was part of an ef-
fort to raise the mathematical level of engineering education. For more
than a decade it was Pearson’s central contribution to the curriculum at
University College. With Favaro and Culmann, he valued it for the math-
ematical virtues of power and generality, and he refused to reduce it to a
miscellany of techniques for solving practical problems. He had no pa-
tience for such textbooks as that of Robert Smith, professor at Mason Col-
lege, Birmingham, and author of such works as Cutting Tools Worked by
Hand and Machine, whose authorial role it had been to adapt the mathe-
matics “to the needs of the engineering student who wishes to ﬁt himself
for the use of the method in business practice.” Pearson complained that
Smith lacked sufﬁcient familiarity with the Continental literature to avoid

Scientiﬁc Education • 233
32 Robert H. Smith, Graphics or the Art of Calculation by Drawing Lines (London: Long-
mans, Green, 1889), 1; Pearson, unsigned review of Smith’s book in The Academy, 35
(1889), 397–398.
33 Luigi Cremona, Graphical Statics: Two Treatises on the Graphical Calculus, trans.
Thomas Hudson Beare (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1890).
34 See reports of the committee on “the Development of Graphic Methods in Mechanical
Science,” in British Association Reports, 59th meeting (1889; published 1890), 322–327;
60th meeting (1890), 373–531; 61st meeting (1891), 573–613, quotes on 609, 423, 385.
clumsy and inelegant formulations.32 In 1890, the year after Smith’s book,
there appeared an English translation of two short treatises by Luigi Cre-
mona, one introducing the methods of graphical calculation, and the
other explicating the only important English contribution to the topic,
which derived from a paper by Maxwell on reciprocal ﬁgures. The transla-
tor, Thomas Hudson Beare, had been asked to undertake the work by his
colleagues Kennedy and Pearson.33
By this time, graphical methods were on the agenda of scientiﬁc
and technical education. The British Association formed a committee in
1889 to report “on the development of graphic methods in mechanical
science.” Some disagreement on the relative merits of general mathe-
matics and handy quantitative techniques can be discerned in the report,
though the committee held that “this difference of opinion is apparent,
and not real.” Even tasks that seemed quite untheoretical, such as inter-
polation, cannot be automatic but require instruction. Some members
considered that Cremona was too much preoccupied with “purely geo-
metrical methods.” The committee was concerned, in an era of rising
fear of German research and German industry, that Britain had fallen be-
hind in this important technical ﬁeld. Its importance in Continental engi-
neering schools, the committee thought, owes much “to the fact that it
affords a high mental training in geometry, which has at the same time di-
rect practical value.” It recommended that every English engineering
school should offer a course of about ten one-hour lectures on graphical
methods.34
Pearson’s ambitions went much further than this recommendation. In
practical terms—and he was not indifferent to these—a skilled draftsman
could solve problems with errors of only 1 or 2 percent, better accuracy
than most measures of physical properties that concerned engineering.
Graphical statics provided the basis for a powerful and ﬂexible mathemat-
ical training, since there “are very few processes of Pure Mathematics
which have not their analogies in Pure Graphics,” and indeed “much can
be done that is beyond the reach of analysis.” He thought it a historic mo-
ment in the progress of mathematics. A quarter of a millennium earlier,
Descartes had developed analytic methods that could subsume geometry,
so that Newton had in a way been the last great geometer. Graphical

234 • Chapter Eight
35 Pearson, unsigned review of Smith, Graphics (1889); Pearson manuscript, Gresham lec-
tures on “The Geometry of Statistics” (1891–92), Pearson Papers 49, folder 1.
36 Pearson, “The Applications of Geometry to Practical Life,” Nature, 43 (22 Jan. 1891),
273–276, on 273; Pearson’s testimonials for Gresham professorship, Nov. 1890, Pearson Pa-
pers 11/9; Olaus Henrici to KP, 9 Oct. and 14 Oct. 1895, Pearson Papers 717/4.
methods were about to restore the priority of geometry. Not only could
numbers and functions now be represented on paper, but one could per-
form operations on them and ﬁnd solutions. New forms of visual repre-
sentation were joined to a powerful set of mathematical tools that
promised to make the manipulation of clouds of symbols increasingly
otiose.35
Such a transformation was of particularly great signiﬁcance for mathe-
matical education, since “form and ﬁgure are more easily realizable by the
average mind than symbol and numeric quantity.” Graphical geometry
could even, perhaps, reunite theory and practice, Pearson’s great desider-
atum, and make plain the practical signiﬁcance of mathematics. Let the
motto of technical education, he proposed in his ﬁrst Gresham lecture, be:
“Practice enlightened by theory, theory guided by practical needs.” Alas,
it was instead the sad plight of teachers of geometry to be caught between
rival ideals. On the one side were recondite research papers, lying unread;
on the other, “the listless student, bent on struggling through life with the
least expenditure of intellectual energy,” always wanting immediate uses
and caring nothing for real understanding. “The introduction of theory
into engineering practice has been largely due to the progress of modern
geometry and the geometrical methods of calculation.” Here was a suit-
able mission for Karl Pearson. As late as 1895, when in retrospect he seems
to have been fully immersed in his pioneering statistical efforts, he was still
planning to incorporate the statistics into a general work on “the whole
ﬁeld of graphics.”36
This graphical vision, for engineering and simultaneously for statistics,
was not exclusively a response to the needs of engineering students.
Arthur in The New Werther had yearned to see and feel nature directly; the
Grammar of Science was torn between positivist detachment and a longing
to make science consistent with feeling at home in the world. Graphical
geometry was comfortably intuitive and visual, making it more accessible
to learners, but also permitting the mind of the scientist to maintain con-
tact with his objects of study. As it happened, the moment of graphical
geometry in engineering was a brief one; graphical calculation did not
achieve a success parallel to that of graphical representation. But at the
moment Pearson took up statistics as a topic of investigation, he was en-
tranced by the power of graphs, and under their sign his statistical pro-
gram was conceived. In June of 1893, when he hired Udny Yule as

Scientiﬁc Education • 235
37 KP to Yule, 5 June 1893, 20 Oct. 1893, 8 June 1894; Yule to KP, 7 Jan. 1894 and
other letters from 1894, Pearson Papers 931 and 905.
38 Pearson, “Applications of Geometry”; on French graphs, see Palsky, Des Chiffres et des
cartes.
39 The syllabi for these lectures are printed in E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson, 142–153; see
also Magnello, “Pearson’s Gresham Lectures.” Quotes from KP to MSP, 17 Oct. and 19
Oct. 1891.
assistant for his drawing class, he asked him also to help with “the prepara-
tion of specimen drawings for a treatise on graphics, which I have in the
stocks.” Immediately he began giving Yule frequency distributions to cal-
culate and statistical data to plot. Soon Yule was ordering machines for the
job and then inventing his own. For the ﬁrst few years, Pearson’s statisti-
cal ambitions were encompassed within his program for graphical statics.37
THE GEOMETRY OF STATISTICS
Already in his ﬁrst Gresham lecture, his job talk, he had proposed statistics
as an important ﬁeld for the practice of graphical method. Gresham Col-
lege, after all, was located in the City, the ﬁnancial center of London and
the world. Referring, most likely, to Alfred Marshall’s Principles of Eco-
nomics (1890), he reﬂected that “the theory of prices has become almost
a branch of applied geometry,” and he was properly impressed by the lux-
uriant graphical albums of trade statistics then issued annually by the
French government.38 His ﬁrst regular Gresham lectures made up The
Grammar of Science, but in the fall of 1891 he began three years of courses
on chance and statistics, delivering a total of thirty lectures, all but the last
two given in runs of four lectures on consecutive days in November, Jan-
uary or February, and April or May. With a few apparent exceptions, he
did not repeat himself, and every lecture involved original work, or at least
an original synthesis, which yet had to be accessible to a general audience.
The focus on the visual, supported by a collection of lantern slides, helped
to make the lectures work, as did bold pedagogical stunts such as dispers-
ing thousands of pennies to be sorted and tallied. Given the ambition of
his lectures, he was remarkably successful, at the cost of much labor that
had to be squeezed into evenings or completed during vacations. A month
before his ﬁrst lecture series, in October 1891, he told his wife that he was
“simply a machine this week & till you come back again,—getting Statis-
tics on the brain now instead of consciousness.” “What one feels is what
one sleeps & dreams changes from consciousness to statistics only too
readily.”39
The crucial stimulation to Pearson’s statistical program provided by in-
teractions with Weldon has been properly stressed in the scholarship, but

236 • Chapter Eight
40 Alfred Marshall, “On the Graphic Method of Statistics,” in Jubilee Volume of the Royal
Statistical Society (London: Edward Stanford, 1885), 251–260; Morgan, “Searching for
Causal Relations.”
we should note that his ﬁrst serious involvement with statistics had little or
nothing to do with Weldon or Galton. Instead, it ﬂowed from his role as
a teacher of engineers and his deep commitment to the integration of
mathematics and science into practical and public life. His sources in-
cluded the basic literature of mathematical probability, but above all ofﬁ-
cial statistical albums and other sources on graphical method. He was also
familiar with the growing use of graphs, usually time series, in English em-
pirical economics to assess, for example, whether changes in the marriage
rate might be driven by levels of trade or of general prosperity. The most
prominent source in English for such methods was a jubilee conference
celebrating the ﬁftieth anniversary of the (soon to be “Royal”) Statistical
Society in 1885. The afternoon of 23 June had been largely devoted to
statistical graphics. Although Pearson was not in attendance, he studied
the resulting volume. One paper, by Marshall, proposed an internationally
standardized graphical format for all kinds of economic and social data.
With years arrayed in a ﬁxed position along one axis, proportional rather
than absolute units on the other, and bar graphs ﬁve millimeters wide con-
veying the data, statisticians and economists could survey comparative
data systematically and uncover potential causal relationships by eye.40
A survey of modes of graphical representation by Emile Levasseur in the
same volume may well have guided the initial investigations for Pearson’s
ﬁrst series of statistical lectures in 1891–1892 on “the geometry of statis-
tics.” He there surveyed and introduced a typology of the various modes
of representing data visually, whether by points, lines, areas, or volumes,
using rectangles, circles, or contour intervals. Their names, including
some neologisms, were based on Greek roots: stigmograms, euthygrams,
epipedograms, histograms, diagrams, radiograms, hormograms, chart-
ograms, topograms, and stereograms. Mostly he seemed to be concerned
with accurate and graspable presentation, though he did discuss the “dis-
covery of laws from curved diagrams.” Against the German statistician
Georg von Mayr, who thought graphs were mere instruments for popu-
larizing statistics, he sided with a mostly French tradition represented by
Emile Cheysson and Etienne-Jules Marey. They held that statistical graphs
involved a special language of powerful intuitive clarity, which could be
made into an instrument of research. Pearson praised them effusively, in-
voking both men in support of an argument that embodied his own am-
bitions for graphical statics. “Geometry is not merely a mode or
representing research, but it is essentially a mode of statistical research. . . .
Most statistical conclusions which can be obtained by arithmetic, can be ob-

Scientiﬁc Education • 237
tained also by geometry, and many conclusions can be formed which it would
be difﬁcult to reach except by geometry.”41
Following the logic of his own developing interests, he took “laws of
chance” as the overarching theme of his lectures in the following year. As
in The Grammar of Science, he there characterized chance as the expres-
sion of human ignorance rather than of any “free-will” in nature, a dis-
tinction that did not obviously make sense within the terms of this
idealistic metaphysics. His focus, nevertheless, was highly empirical, and
he introduced the basic concepts and mathematics of the subject using
various forms of experience and “experiment” such as coin tosses and 
tables of roulette numbers from Monte Carlo. The latter inspired him 
to carry out a statistical test, framed by a concept for which Pearson had
recently coined a name, “standard deviation,” measure of the width of a
distribution.42
The third year of lectures, delivered in 1893 and 1894 during the pe-
riod of his increasingly intense evolutionary discussions with Weldon, re-
veal concretely the crystallization of his statistical vision. He continued to
emphasize the graphical, visual aspect of statistics. The connection to bi-
ology depended on a quite traditional assumption of the “normal curve
of frequency,” on which Adolphe Quetelet and then Francis Galton had
relied.43 By 1893, however, Pearson was most interested in departures
from normality, and he imagined in his lectures how the bell-shaped dis-
tribution of a ﬁshmonger’s wares might be transformed by evening into a
double-humped curve, if his customers strongly preferred ﬁsh close to the
average size. Here he was taking a leaf from Darwin, using artiﬁcial selec-
tion to help imagine the effects of natural selection, and he was already
thinking of Weldon’s conjecture that measurements of some crabs he had
been studying showed incipient speciation.
As the lectures proceeded, Pearson became more and more convinced
of the importance of irregularities in the curves. His lecture notes convey
a sense of excitement and discovery, stimulating thoughts that went well
beyond what was adumbrated in the syllabi. “I have endeavoured to give
you something fresh & new,” he told his audience by way of summing up,
41 Emile Levasseur, “La Statistique graphique,” in Jubilee Volume, 218-250; E. J. Marey,
La Méthode graphique dans les sciences experimentales, 2d printing (Paris: G. Masson, 1885),
vi; Pearson, “Geometry of Statistics,” Pearson Papers 49, folder 1. On Marey, see Frank,
“The Telltale Heart”; Daston and Galison, “Image of Objectivity.” On Pearson’s graphical
Gresham lectures, see Klein, Statistical Visions in Time, 17–-19.
42 The syllabi have been printed as Appendix II to E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson, 142–153.
For Pearson’s lecture notes, see Pearson Papers 49, and also “Lecture II. Chance and Igno-
rance,” ﬁled in Pearson Papers 67; “The Scientiﬁc Aspect of Monte Carlo Roulette” (1894),
in Pearson, Chances of Death, vol. 1, 42–62.
43 Stigler, History of Statistics, 335; Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking, part 2.

238 • Chapter Eight
44 Pearson Papers 49, folder 2, ﬁnal quote from a ﬁle without a lecture number, labeled by
Pearson “Notes.”
45 Weldon to KP, 22 June 1893, Pearson Papers 891; KP to Galton, 17 Nov. 1893, Gal-
ton Papers 293/A; Gresham lectures in Pearson Papers 49, folder 2, “Notes.”
46 See George Darwin’s report on a Pearson manuscript, 9 Nov. 1893, RR 12.11, Royal
Society Library. Darwin discerned Pearson’s assumption that the normal curve implies evo-
lutionary stability and asked for biological evidence.
“not old & stale products of other men’s writings, but something which
should be new not only in Gresham College, but outside it.” A vision was
taking form, even as he wrote his lectures, that evolution by natural selec-
tion could be comprehended statistically. Pearson’s enthusiasm, as he
imagined a new scientiﬁc reformation, shines through on every page. “We
are living in an essentially critical period of science, when more exact
methods & more sound logic” were replacing the old “scientiﬁc gospel.”
“For the ﬁrst time in the history of biology, there is a chance of the science
of life becoming an exact, a mathematical science. Men are approaching
the questions of heredity & evolution from a new standpoint.”44
The key, Weldon’s insight, was to look for departures from normality in
large collections of data. A simple rule governed the interpretation of
these distributions. The normal distribution implied an absence of selec-
tive pressure, or evolutionary stasis. At one point he seems even to have
worried that if Weldon’s irregular curve could successfully be divided into
two or more normal curves, it would undercut any argument for evolu-
tionary pressures. Irregular curves, departures from the simple symmetry
of the normal, were the signs of evolutionary change, now conceived un-
mistakably as a statistical problem with a statistical solution. As soon as he
found that a skew curve ﬁt biological measures better than the symmetri-
cal normal, he concluded that evolution was at work: “In other words
from my standpoint there is a change going on in the organ measured,
even if it be but a very slight one.” In his Gresham lectures, Pearson of-
fered the example of the lengths of wings within a population of a thou-
sand swallows. “We want to know whether the distribution is a normal
one,—a pure chance distribution or whether we have an abnormal curve
and something which suggests a tendency to deviate more in excess or de-
fect of the mean. We want shortly to know whether evolution is at work
now & to what extent.”45
These lines probably date from late 1893, when he made similar argu-
ments in a Gresham lecture on frequency curves and in a manuscript sub-
mitted to the Royal Society.46 His syllabus for the four lectures in
November 1893 proceeds systematically from normal curves to skew
curves and compound curves, offering abundant examples from work in
many ﬁelds by a variety of authors. Some of these topics are repeated in his
schedule for the winter lectures, from 30 January to 2 February 1894,

Scientiﬁc Education • 239
47 E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson, 150–153.
48 W.F.R. Weldon to KP, 17 Nov. 1892, Pearson Papers 891; Pearson, “Contribution to
the Mathematical Theory of Evolution,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series A, vol. 185 (1894), 71–110; citations from reprint in Karl Pearson, Early Sta-
tistical Papers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1948), 1–40.
suggesting that he may not have been able to cover all the topics he had
listed for November. For the last of these, on 2 February, he promised to
address the crucial topic of “Evolution in Man,” using measurements of
schoolchildren and of skulls from old German graves as his data. With
numbers and graphs he believed that he could detect the separation and
mixing of races and varieties, and the pressures of natural selection. For the
Gresham lecturer, the statistical study of evolution was ﬁrst of all visual and
graphical.47
INSPECTION AND ANALYSIS
This visual sense was important also for Pearson’s new mathematical re-
search program into problems of evolution and statistics. It took the form
of a preoccupation with frequency distributions. But the eye alone was not
sufﬁciently discerning to reach determinations on the vital questions of
science with which he was now concerned. His ﬁrst important research pa-
per on this new topic concerned the problem that Weldon had brought to
him, probably the subject of many conversations between the two men
over lunch at University College, the quantitative evidence of speciation in
Naples crabs. The not-quite-raw data took the form of a line graph that
rose jaggedly to a single peak, then fell off steeply, subdividing a thousand
crabs according to the ratio of breadth of forehead to body length. Wel-
don, who had been converted to statistics by Galton’s Natural Inheri-
tance, was surprised by the pronounced departure from normality and
suspected that the asymmetry of the curve might indicate a heterogeneous
population If so, it could presumably be broken down into its homoge-
neous elements by splitting it into two normal curves, and in November
1892 he informed Pearson of his success in subdividing a double-humped
curve of crustacean measurements. Pearson, suspecting that so important
a problem would repay a serious mathematical treatment, undertook with
the Naples crabs to go beyond the biologist’s makeshift procedures, to
identify some kind of optimum solution and to establish criteria for decid-
ing what it might mean.48
It was not an elegant business, but it was amenable to some of the tech-
niques Pearson knew from his work in applied mathematics. From the be-
ginning of his statistical career, and even before that, he ﬁt curves using

240 • Chapter Eight
49 Pearson, “Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution,” graphical methods
on 9; also Culmann, Graphische Statik, 392ff.
50 W.F.R. Weldon, “On Certain Correlated Variations in Carcinus moenas,” Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, 54 (1893), 318–329, on 324.
the “method of moments.” In mechanics, this meant matching a compli-
cated body to a simple or abstract one that had the same center of mass
and “swing radius,” respectively the ﬁrst and second moments. These
quantities corresponded in statistics to the mean and the spread or disper-
sion of measurements around the mean. Higher moments, for example
the third, were found by multiplying the number of crabs at every point
on the graph by the third power of the distance from the mean, and
adding all these quantities together. Since Pearson dealt in discrete mea-
surement intervals, this was a sum rather than an integral. He was seeking
a combination of two normal curves whose ﬁrst ﬁve moments matched
those of the original line graph. The textbooks of graphical statics pro-
vided methods of construction so that the moments could be read off a
curve to an accuracy of one percent by “a good draughtsman” using a
planimeter. But ﬁnding a sum of normal curves with ﬁve speciﬁed mo-
ments was beyond the reach of graphical methods. Pearson set up these
ﬁve equalities as a system of equations, which combined into one of the
ninth degree. A numerical solution was only possible by successive ap-
proximations. There could have been as many as nine real solutions,
though in the present instance there were only two. He graphed both re-
sults alongside the original, and was generally pleased with the appearance
of the result. He did not, however, rely on visual inspection to decide be-
tween them, but calculated the sixth moment to decide the best match.49
There remained a question of interpretation. Weldon, in his publication
based on these data, accepted the validity of Pearson’s curve-splitting re-
sults, but was cautious with claims about biological meaning, merely as-
serting that the frontal breadth was “slightly dimorphic.”50 Pearson, by
contrast, wanted evidence of the origin of species. If, he supposed, this
were simply a heterogeneous population, an indiscriminate mixture of dif-
ferent types, then they would presumably differ in other traits as well. By
contrast, a divergence of this one measure alone would indicate a process
of incipient speciation. To perform the test, he tried to dissect one of Wel-
don’s most symmetrical curves from measures of a different organ in the
same Naples crabs, to see whether it could be split into subpopulations
corresponding to those of the forehead index.
The result was negative, implying, by Pearson’s somewhat murky rea-
soning, that distinct types had arisen within a single population. This
important result, as he considered it, was a triumph of algebraic manipu-
lation. Any “judging of symmetry by the eye is very likely to be fallacious,”

Scientiﬁc Education • 241
51 Pearson, “Contribution to the Mathematical Theory” (see note 48), 27, 29.
52 See letter by Weldon, 6 March 1895, quoted in Stigler, History of Statistics, 337–338;
Galton to Pearson, 25 Nov. 1893, Galton Papers 245/18A, quoted in Porter, Rise of Statis-
tical Thinking, 299.
53 Olaus Henrici to KP, 18 June 1894, Pearson Papers 717/4; Pearson, “W.F.R. Wel-
don,” 18, 41n; Pearson, Francis Galton: A Centenary Appreciation (1922), 6; KP to Miriam
Louise Tildesley, 29 Nov. 1930, Pearson Papers 929.
he warned. In seeking to determine whether a graph reveals homogeneous
material, to rely on “the judgment of the eye” is almost certainly defec-
tive.51 Pearson put his faith now in algebra, a labyrinth of calculations. It
was the kind of mathematics he had recently set himself against when
vaunting the merits of graphical statics. It did not make visible the physi-
cal or biological problem, but circumvented the senses. He also tended to
ignore everything else that was known about the organisms measured,
even if clearly relevant, such as breakage and regeneration that might ex-
plain a few outlying crab measurements. If Pearson was troubled by the
detachment of his mathematics from ordinary experience, he did not let
on. Weldon, however, found Pearson the “pure mathematician” quite vex-
ing, sometimes for just such reasons, and even Galton doubted the relia-
bility of his curve-splitting.52
In one important sense Pearson was anything but a pure mathematician.
He was interested in mathematics as a tool for comprehending the natural
world and altering the social one, and he almost never did mathematics
without putting it to use by confronting it with scientiﬁc data. But some-
times he willingly isolated himself, as in the allegorical telephone exchange
of The Grammar of Science, and blocked out everything one might know
of the world except measurements. To be sure, there were satisfactions to
be found even within the windowless box. In 1894 Yule discovered for
him the possibilities of the Brunsviga calculator, a “brain of steel” (Gehirn
von Stahl), according to advertisements sent out by its German manufac-
turer, and of epochal signiﬁcance for Pearson. Thereafter, he kept his al-
ways at his side and was often photographed with it. He envisioned for it
a glorious future, the computer that was to come, growing from the his-
toric contributions of the pioneers of calculation. Those “little men” who
thought Napier had become irrelevant, he explained, failed to compre-
hend “that when mechanical knowledge is so far advanced that setting a
number on to a machine will record its logarithm, then one turn of the
handle will replace their forty turns.” In the meantime, he employed—or
more often accepted the volunteer labor of—dozens of “computers,” but
he held strictly to the moral principle that nobody was exempt from the
work of calculation. “What happens to a biometrician when he employs
another to do his computing? He becomes a parasite, who has lost touch
with his material.” Pearson’s instrument kept him in touch.53

Figure 13. Decomposing a jagged ﬁgure into two normal curves. (From Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, series A, vol. 185, 1894.


244 • Chapter Eight
54 Pearson, “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution .—II. Skew Varia-
tion in Homogeneous Material,” Phil. Trans. (1895), reprinted in Pearson, Early Statistical
Papers, 41–112, on 56, 52, 43.
His long memoir on skew distributions, published near the beginning
of his statistical career in 1895, was among those he wrote as if from a
closed world containing no objects but only quantities. The paper had two
parts, of which the second showed how well his family of curves could ﬁt
data of all sorts, including meteorological, anthropometric, biometric,
psychological, social, and economic. What did the phenomenon of divorce
as a function of duration of marriage or the distribution of the values of
houses have to do with barometric readings, the cephalic index of Bavari-
ans, or the number of projecting blossoms in clover? “We are really quite
ignorant as to the nature of the ‘causes’ in biological, physical, or eco-
nomic frequency curves.” Pearson claimed nothing, beyond the numbers.
Even a solution implying probability values that were greater than one,
negative, or imaginary left him unperturbed—or rather, triumphant:
“Even if our binomial constants have unintelligible values, yet our method
will give, in many cases, a closely-ﬁtting polygonal ﬁgure.” And, in gen-
eral: “As the great and only true test of the normal curve is: Does it really
ﬁt observations and measurements of a symmetrical kind? so the best ar-
gument for the generalised probability curve is that it does ﬁt, and ﬁt sur-
prisingly accurately observations of an asymmetrical character.”54
This preoccupation with the ﬁt of curves and indifference to causes pro-
voked Edgeworth to include some critical remarks in a review of Pearson’s
new work. Pearson knew Edgeworth, by then the Oxford professor of
economics, as a fellow Hampstead intellectual, and also as one of his most
important predecessors and peers in probability and statistics. In 1891–92,
the two had corresponded about graphical representations and mathemat-
ics in political economy. In 1895, Edgeworth wrote appreciatively of the
wonderful ﬁt of Pearson’s curves to his data, but wondered if this proved
anything about the world. With puckish wit, he asked if they had any more
validity than the schoolboy’s derivation of virago from vir (man) and ago
(I lead), a perfect match but defying the etymological intuition one devel-
ops through study.
When Pearson responded angrily, Edgeworth tried to back down wher-
ever he could. He conceded his own lack of insight on the difﬁculties of
curve-ﬁtting, and called on Pearson’s expertise to decide whether “it
might be possible to get good ﬁts with other kinds of curves, having four
constants at one’s disposal.” What most bothered him about Pearson’s
curves was just what Pearson had dismissed, a consonance of mathematics
with the causes of the thing. Laplace’s old derivation of the normal “law
of errors” in terms of the action of many small variable causes made phys-

Scientiﬁc Education • 245
55 F. Y. Edgeworth, “On Some Recent Contributions to the Theory of Statistics,” Jour-
nal of the Royal Statistical Society, 58 (1895), 506–515; Edgeworth to KP, 5–12 April 1891,
25–27 April 1892, 3–10 March 1895, Pearson Papers 681; see also Plackett, “Karl Pearson
and the Chi-Squared Test”; Stigler, History of Statistics, 339. In 1896 Edgeworth asked Pear-
son to comment on Vilfredo Pareto’s income curve in the Economic Journal, which Edge-
worth edited. Pearson declined, but expressed a negative view of Pareto’s graphics.
56 Pearson, “Contributions, II. Skew Variation,” 92, 101.
57 See Pearson, “Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolution.—III. Regres-
sion, Heredity, and Panmixia,” Phil. Trans. (1896), reprinted in Pearson, Early Statistical
Papers, 113–178, on 115.
ical sense as the basis for many applications of the normal curve. But the
chance arrangements assumed by Pearson as the basis of his derivations,
involving for example the random placing of cards in a book, were physi-
cally implausible and gave no insight into the reasons for asymmetry in the
rate of divorce as a function of years of marriage. Despite his careful def-
erence in response to Pearson’s wrath, Edgeworth insisted on the crucial
point of difference. “[C]loseness of ﬁt without a priori justiﬁcation is not
enough.” This was John Stuart Mill’s “veriﬁcation without deduction,”
which counted for little. Edgeworth wanted a rationale for assigning a par-
ticular type of curve, and Pearson, whose letters to him have not survived,
seems to have denied that this was important or even meaningful.55
Since all kinds of “conceptual” entities such as ether squirts, protyles,
and, later, Mendelian genes were acceptable by the standard of The Gram-
mar of Science, and since Pearson never hesitated in later like years to call
attention to the inadequacies of “spurious” and other meaningless corre-
lations, his refusal to consider the physical interpretation of his curves 
cannot simply be attributed to a general philosophical orientation. If pos-
itivism means refusing to look for causes or explanations, no working sci-
entist could adhere consistently to it, and Pearson certainly did not. But he
did sometimes invoke his philosophy as justiﬁcation for not looking be-
hind the numbers, and he nurtured a startling faith in the possibilities of a
geometrical science of lines and curves. In this memoir he sought purely
formal ways to discriminate between a “true curve of the skew type” and
a compound curve or sum of curves, which would imply heterogeneity.
The curves seemed to have a necessity of their own, as in one case of some-
what unsatisfactory ﬁt in botany, where he mentioned the difﬁculties of
measurement and argued that the curve was probably more accurate than
the raw numbers.56
He continued, in fact, to nurture a vision of a graphical science of evo-
lution. This was positivistic in the sense that it dispensed with any mecha-
nism of hereditary transmission at the individual level,57 but it was
perfectly amenable to explanation in terms of the Darwinian mechanism
of natural selection. He presented it most clearly in the two chapters he

246 • Chapter Eight
58 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 2d ed. (1900), chaps. 10 and 11.
59 KP to Galton, 6 Dec. 1894, Galton Papers 293/A, and Galton to KP, 16 Dec. 1894,
Galton papers 245/18A.
added to the second edition of his Grammar of Science, appearing in 1900,
which had a greater impact than the ﬁrst, prestatistical edition. The
process of evolutionary change was to be divided into three main ele-
ments. First was survival, or natural selection in the most literal sense. It
could be represented and investigated according to a graphical logic. A
frequency curve of some quantiﬁable character at an early phase of life
should be set against the same curve later in life to determine how survival
depended on this character. The researcher would have to correct for
growth, among other complications. Evolution depended, next, on repro-
duction: In what regions of the curve were individuals most successful at
ﬁnding mates and producing young? Finally, there was the problem of “in-
heritance,” or heritability: What proportion of the exceptionality of par-
ents was passed along to their offspring?58
This seemingly straightforward graphical procedure was complicated by
the problem of correlations. A particular trait could not, in general, be
treated in isolation, since what was favored directly might be weeded out
due to strong correlations with disadvantageous traits. The selection of
any particular organ was affected by the selection on correlated organs.
On this account he worked to develop the mathematics of correlation sur-
faces, perhaps of many dimensions. These were not so easily represented
on paper, and they stood in the way of a utopia of ready graphical solu-
tions to evolutionary problems. Still, he assigned great signiﬁcance to the
graphs that accompanied most of his mathematical papers, investing much
labor in the calculations and aggressively seeking out support to cover the
added costs of printing. Even if graphical representation was not, after all,
a royal road, he saw it as invaluable, and he remained convinced that evo-
lution was a quantitative problem from beginning to end.59
From the standpoint of this program, it makes sense that he would have
regarded empirical adequacy as the critical attribute of his frequency
curves. Their purpose was not, at ﬁrst, to be incorporated into the ma-
chinery of statistical inference but to work in a system of description and
modeling. Although Pearson’s statistical methods did not always hold the
scientiﬁc problem in direct view, much of his mathematics was designed to
preserve and emphasize a geometrical sense of curves and surfaces, some-
times—and as an old fourth-dimension man he quite liked this—in a “hy-
perspace” of higher dimensions. One occasion for his disputes with his
student Yule was Yule’s willingness to reduce to a line, to intercept and
slope, what Pearson wanted to investigate as a complex geometrical form.
For the same reason, he condemned the practice of reducing statistics for

Scientiﬁc Education • 247
Figure 14. The graphical representation of natural selection. The shaded area
represents the differential death rate as a function of the magnitude of a charac-
ter. (From chapters added to The Grammar of Science in 1900)
60 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 2d ed., 411; Pearson, “Dilettantism in Statistics,” review
of William Townsend Porter, The Growth of St. Louis Children, Nature, 50 (13 Dec. 1894),
145–146; Stigler, History of Statistics, 351–352; Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking, 145; KP
to Galton, 8 Nov. 1895, Galton Papers 293/A, where he complained of smoothing by Luigi
Perozzo; also KP to Galton, 24 Nov. 1895, and KP to Royal Society, 30 Nov. 1895, Royal
Society Library MM 17.55, where he complained of a memoir by Körösi that omitted the
tails of the distribution.
publication to a few numbers—means and quartiles. This had been en-
couraged by Galton, on the principle that, for normal variation, nothing
was lost. But Pearson took a quite different view, insisting on the necessity
of using all the numbers, including the tails of the distribution, in order to
calculate the constants of his skew curves. He also opposed smoothing,
which might blend away double peaks of correlation surfaces.60
This higher mathematics, though especially valuable in his view for its
contribution to quantitative studies of evolution, including eugenics, was
not limited to biology. He had discovered statistics as a set of quantitative
practices combining analytical and geometrical methods of solution. His
papers teemed with examples from many ﬁelds, because he believed that
his methods were of altogether general signiﬁcance. In his boldest mo-
ments, he thought he had taken hold of the key that would open up a vast
new domain of exact science and thereby contribute invaluably to the vital

248 • Chapter Eight
61 Pearson, “Dilettantism in Statistics,” 146.
affairs of state. Judging from a tirade against statistical dilettantism he sent
to Nature in 1894, he seemed to think he might have a role in this mon-
umental work:
We want a centre, which shall not only contain a statistical museum, but em-
brace as well a statistical laboratory and workshop. In such a centre students
might not only receive a mathematical training in dealing with raw statistics, but
also be exercised in the methods of collecting and tabulating, which must pre-
cede mathematical reduction. To such a centre the biologist and anthropologist
could send their measurements to be dealt with, and the economist or sociolo-
gist his price or labour statistics to be analysed. At the same time, absolute mea-
surements might be made on the problems of evolution, disease and national
economy. In this manner a number of efﬁcient young statisticians might be
trained, who would not only ﬁnd a life-work ready for them in craniology, zo-
ology, botany, and economics, but who, passing into governmental depart-
ments, census ofﬁces, and labour bureaus, might remove from us the reproach
of a recent continental writer, that nowhere were statistical dilettanti so rampant
as in England.61
Pearson’s imagined engineering laboratory of measurement and graphical
statics had been transformed, without quite losing its essential identity,
into a program for statistical mathematics.

C H A P T E R  N I N E
The Statistical Reformation
Frankly, I do not believe in groups of men and women who
have each and all their allotted daily task creating a new branch
of science. I believe it must be done by some one man who by
force of knowledge, of method and of enthusiasm hews out, in
rough outline it may be, but decisively, a new block and creates
a school to carve out its details. I think you will ﬁnd on inquiry
that this is the history of each great branch of science.
—Karl Pearson, address to the Sociological Society, 
in Sociological Papers, 1904
It is Saint Biometrika contra mundum.
—Karl Pearson to Florence Joy Weldon, 19 October 1906
PEARSON’S NEW FAITH in the world-historical role of statistics, arising grad-
ually from about 1891 to 1894, gave him at last the mission he had been
seeking for ﬁfteen years. Statistics was close to coextensive with what he
called scientiﬁc method. It was as wide ranging, and hence as glorious, as
his previous enthusiasms: German philosophy and literature, scientiﬁc his-
tory and socialism, the woman question, the physics of ether and of four-
dimensional geometry, and graphical statics. It had the further merit of
subsuming important aspects of each of these, reafﬁrming the continuity
of his interests and of the self that cultivated these diverse ﬁelds. This was
a program that did not require the genius or good luck to slip through the
formidable defenses of a well-known scientiﬁc problem, such as the struc-
ture of the ether. Pearson’s scientiﬁc talents were of a different order. He
was no brilliant mathematician, but a synthesizer and visionary who put
together the pieces of a mathematical program with far-reaching implica-
tions for science and for the social order. He had the will and enthusiasm
to make it work, despite the opposition of skeptics turned to enemies by
his single-mindedness.
Missionary fervor became increasingly characteristic of the man. Like
Freud’s psychoanalysis, which took shape in Vienna a few years later, Pear-
son’s statistical movement had aspects of a schismatic sect. He demanded
the loyalty and commitment of his associates and drove dissenters from the
church biometric. Fully aware that his severity in criticism might alienate a

250 • Chapter Nine
1 On Quaker hardships and plain speaking, see KP to Greenwood, 28 Dec. 1909, Pearson
Papers 915; also Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 1, 9, 31. Provoked by the Royal Society’s re-
jection of a meteorological paper, he wrote to Joseph Larmor, 19 July 1904, Royal Society
Library, MC 4673, of “the coming reformation of meteorology.” Clearly this was about sta-
tistics and not limited to meteorology.
2 KP to Galton, 19 April 1907, Galton Papers 293/H (phrased in the original as a ques-
tion); KP to Tildesley, 9 Aug. 1920, Pearson Papers 929.
friend or ally, this reformer could do no other. He identiﬁed increasingly
with his Quaker progenitors, themselves relentless sectarians who suffered
terribly for their faith. In this ancestry he found a eugenic explanation for
his own stubborn insistence on what he thought right, the source so often
of unfriendly relations with colleagues. We might suspect that his antipa-
thy for Luther was aimed in part at a disposition he recognized in himself.
By the beginning of the new century, these tendencies were more and
more in the open, and at times of disappointment he could be found up-
braiding the faint of heart and vaunting his statistical program as “the
coming reformation” of science.1
Pearson issued his claim that it took a great man to establish a new ﬁeld,
quoted above as an epigraph, in a comment on a lecture by Francis Gal-
ton. Nominally, he placed Galton rather than himself in this role, a char-
acteristic move for Pearson in these years. When by chance both were
scheduled at almost the same time to speak at Oxford, he asked Galton to
“look upon me as your John the Baptist making the way straight.” But the
octogenarian Galton, who always worked independently and never had
students, could not construct the church biometric. Galton’s role here was
as a Pearsonian double, not the ﬁrst we have seen, and one whose heroic
efforts could be praised unreservedly. He was no institution builder but an
intellectual progenitor who saw dimly what others might someday accom-
plish. If he was to be cast as Jesus in this passion play, Pearson was not
John the Baptist but the apostle Paul, model architect of a new faith. Or
perhaps he played Luther to Galton’s Erasmus, one who, in response to
obstacles, would give up trying to mend the old order from within. Pear-
son undertook instead to build the new Zion on Gower Street, where he
trained converts and from which he sent out emissaries.
The spirit of his operation is nicely epitomized by his advice in 1920 to
a student, Miriam Louise Tildesley, as she departed to assume a position
with the anatomist and anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith. You can learn
much from Keith, he wrote, “if you can preserve the traditions & spirit of
the Biometric Laboratory in your new environment.” Be receptive to sug-
gestions, but don’t accept them “until you have put them to the quantita-
tive test. Always think in terms of the probable error of a judgment! . . .
Don’t let the principle that truth is only going to be reached by hard work
& quantitative determination gradually become fainter, but look upon
yourself as a missionary, not necessarily a vocal one, in a new land.”2

The Statistical Reformation • 251
3 Stigler, History of Statistics; Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking; Desrosières, Politics of
Large Numbers; also Hald, History of Mathematical Statistics, who is especially original in his
recognition of the Scandinavian tradition of statistical mathematics.
4 Major Greenwood to E. S. Pearson, 2 Oct. 1941, Hacker Papers, Box 7.
The contribution of Pearson’s combative demeanor and religious sensi-
bility to the extraordinary success of his biometric program remains an
open question. Statistical thinking, having spread widely through the so-
cial and natural sciences in the nineteenth century, was already becoming
formal and mathematical by century’s end, and not only in Britain.3 Gal-
ton recognized in 1889 that the time was ripe to systematize the statistical
approach, even if Pearson’s laborious algebra was not exactly what he
had in mind. In exchanges concerning evolutionary genetics, medicine,
ofﬁcial statistics, psychology, and anthropology, Pearson made enemies not
mainly by pushing statistics where it was not wanted, but by condemning
the misdirection, as he felt, of the methods that had grown up already in
these ﬁelds and calling for their reformation. More often than he drew from
the statistical work of authors such as Edgeworth, Arthur Bowley, Wilhelm
Johannsen, Hugo De Vries, and Arthur Newsholme, he combated them.
But many of these opponents were quite conscious that statistics was rap-
idly changing, and they were open to new methods, even if they did not
immediately endorse Pearson’s strenuous biometric program. As his own
wayward students Yule and Raymond Pearl pointed out, he more often
alienated potential supporters rather than redeeming lost souls with his
ﬁerce diatribes.
Despite it all, the form assumed by statistical mathematics in the early
twentieth century owed more to him than to his colleagues and rivals. The
rising prestige and inﬂuence of his program was interrupted somewhat by
the First World War, resumed in the early 1920s, and then was challenged
with increasing effectiveness by the equally headstrong R. A. Fisher. Since
the two came to despise one another, and the younger man did much to
undermine Pearson’s statistical reputation, the new direction in statistics
championed by Pearson is not always given its due. From the perspective
of a history that looks back several centuries rather than a few decades and
emphasizes the statistical practices of the sciences, 1890 appears as a turn-
ing point of decisive importance. Major Greenwood, complaining in 1941
of what he called Fisher’s arrogance, recalled that a few decades earlier,
“pukka mathematicians sneered at statistics and biometry. . . . Without
K.P. and us, these others would never have come into statistics at all. If we
didn’t make the subject rigorously mathematical at least we made it intel-
lectually respectable.”4 In the broadest sense, the mathematical and theo-
retical elegance of Fisher’s work depended on and grew out of the
biometric program. Pearson’s statistics, whatever its failings, appears as
one of the outstanding scientiﬁc success stories of the twentieth century.

252 • Chapter Nine
Inevitably, however, it achieved less than Pearson desired. What he cre-
ated was a science more methodological than substantive, one that would
guide and regulate the deployment of quantitative reasoning in the pro-
fessions and in administration as well as in the social and natural sciences.
Statistics has been esteemed as a characteristic form of thought for an age
of specialization and bureaucracy, a machinery of calculation that provides
technical answers to narrowly posed questions. In reality it is of course
more than this, but not nearly to the extent to which Pearson aspired. His
ambitions for the ﬁeld drew from and carried forward the ideals of his
youth, simultaneously to reconstruct science and to transform society.
Quantitative reasoning would reshape public discourse, overthrowing the
egoistical appeal to private interest and prejudice by institutionalizing the
socialist idiom of impersonal science and consensus. It would refashion
aristocracy as well as bureaucracy as a grammar of exact science replaced
the grammar of dead languages in the formation of elites. But in this sense
scientiﬁc culture proved elusive, and Pearson’s life, founded on extrava-
gant ambitions, took on a tragic dimension.
STATISTICS AS CURVE FITTING
As an applied mathematician, Pearson did not participate in the Continen-
tal development of mathematical modernism, which tended to make math-
ematics self-referential and to value the internal rigor of a self-consistent
system over any claim to truth about nature. From his time to the present
day, statisticians have been divided about how far to adopt the twentieth-
century culture of pure mathematics, which, even in England, did not
greatly value applications. Pearson wanted statistics to be judged by its util-
ity as a tool of scientiﬁc investigation and argued that it should always be
worked out in engagement with real scientiﬁc problems and with data. The
alternative was a science like hydrodynamics, “its devotees having probably
never observed carefully even water running into a wash-hand basin.”
In this respect, his preaching was in accord with his practice. His statistical
papers from the outset were full of references to evolution, astronomy, me-
teorology, anthropometry, medicine, education, and eugenics, and some-
times at least he was able to address real problems in these ﬁelds. In his
historical lectures in the 1920s, he told the story of probability and statis-
tics in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in relation to the political
and religious developments of their time, with particular emphasis on how
institutions such as life insurance provided a stimulus to the development of
the mathematics. He complained of the narrowness of historical authors
such as Isaac Todhunter, his nemesis from elasticity days, for reducing this
rich and wonderful story to a tedious list of technical advances in mathe-

The Statistical Reformation • 253
5 Mehrtens, Moderne—Sprache—Mathematik;
Karl Pearson, History of Statistics,
154–157, 456.
6 Pearson, “Prefatory Essay: The Function of Science in the Modern State” (1902),
vii–xxxvii, on xxv; Karl Pearson, Tables for Statisticians and Biometricians, 2 vols. (London:
Biometric Laboratory of University College London, 1914 and 1931), part 2, iv–v, almost
certainly an allusion to Fisher.
7 Pearson, “The Scientiﬁc Aspect of Monte Carlo Roulette” (1894), in Chances of Death,
62. On fears of a lawsuit, see Frank Harris (of the Fortnightly) to KP, Jan. 1894, Pearson Pa-
pers 693. On breeding farms, see e.g., Pearson, “The Distribution of Prepotency,” Nature,
58 (28 July 1898), 292–293; “Editorial,” Biometrika, 1 (1901–2), 4.
matics, torn from the environment that produced them. How could you
hope to ﬁre the imagination of students with a history like that?5
He worked at statistics for over forty years, always refusing conﬁnement
within a discipline, yet there are unmistakable patterns in his career. One
was an insistence on the harmony of statistical methods with the problems
under study, so that mathematical tools, empirical data, and scientiﬁc am-
bitions developed in synchrony. Although he spoke repeatedly of the need
for experimental breeding farms to investigate questions of heredity, and
for decades bred and befriended dogs, controlled experimentation was
never the principal focus of his statistical work. Neither did he put much
faith in “brilliant mathematics” applied to the “sparse data” of small sam-
ples.6 His materials were more nearly natural historical, and his primary
concern was faithfulness to his abundant empirical data rather than causal
inference. Indeed, when data seemed to contradict calculation, he was pre-
pared to doubt the mathematics.
The most startling instance is his early essay on Monte Carlo roulette.
Since probability mathematicians had always credited gamblers with a re-
ﬁned sense of the odds in games they play often, and since the house had
so much at stake in avoiding predictable departures from randomness,
Pearson was stunned by the patterns he turned up in the statistics of the
wheel. Although the distribution of numerical outcomes seemed about
right, he found appreciably more switches from red to black than basic
probability permitted. This conclusion inspired fears of a lawsuit from the
casino, and he may possibly have tempered his conclusions so the Fort-
nightly would take it. But he was not the sort to let a publisher browbeat
him into compromising his scientiﬁc principles. Probably he meant it
when he interpreted his ﬁndings as a challenge to classical probability. Men
of science, he proclaimed, must not “shut their eyes to the facts.” Would
they become angry that the casino, as a laboratory of probability, deﬁes
their subtle theories and join the campaign pressing the French govern-
ment to close it down? He called instead for further study of these color
runs and, if his conclusions were upheld, a reconstruction of the scientiﬁc
theory of chance in deference to empirical reality.7

254 • Chapter Nine
8 See previous chapter. On the normal, see Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking.
It is hard to imagine the mathematical theory of probability reformu-
lated to take as foundational such failures of independence as he had found
in the alternation of colors at Monte Carlo. Pearson, we might reasonably
suppose, was more interested in a different adaptation of probability to the
facts, and he mentioned one in the concluding sentence of the essay. That
was the biological theory of evolution, which by 1894 he saw as the most
vital ﬁeld of statistical investigation. The combinatorial operations of ele-
mentary probability might not be easily discarded, but the normal curve as
a law of variation could be challenged on empirical grounds, and indeed
this became practically an obsession for Pearson. His family of skew
curves, like the normal itself, was derived from more basic mathematical
assumptions, but he never tried to account for them in terms of the causes
that produced natural variation in organisms, meteorological data, or ex-
amination results.
The bell-shaped “error law” or normal distribution, by contrast, had
since Laplace been identiﬁed with a proliferation of small causes, each of
which could displace a mean value up or down. Adolphe Quetelet had
imagined that anthropometric objects—human bodies—might reﬂect a
similar structure of causation. Edgeworth, who rejected the automatic as-
sumption of normality, nevertheless appreciated the logic of its construc-
tion. Pearson was convinced also by this theory of the accumulation of
small causes, which he applied to skew variation. In several early papers
he tried to infer their number, the degree of an underlying binomial,
from the empirical distribution. All this, however, was subordinate to the
ethical principle of exact science, that curves should ﬁt data as precisely
as possible.8
He did not abandon the normal curve. For purposes of analyzing data,
the normal was more tractable than his complicated skew curves, and
Pearson sometimes assumed its validity, counterfactually, until he could
learn how to handle the more general case. But the more exact ﬁt permit-
ted by skew curves retained its place as the higher ideal, and despite the
absence of plausible mechanisms to generate them, he certainly did not re-
gard them as mere conventions. The applied mathematician, who still as-
pired to dematerialize the laws of physics and replace them with pure
geometric laws of space, retained his faith in curves in his new guise as a
biometrician. In an early popular essay on the chances of death, for exam-
ple, he broke a mortality curve for English males into ﬁve component
curves of the Pearson skew type. Each rose to a peak and then declined to
zero, though the general curve showed only two peaks, one in infancy and
the other in old age. The ﬁve curves were centered at the ages of 71, 42,
22, 6 (but so asymmetrical that its mode or highest point was at 3.52), and

The Statistical Reformation • 255
9 Pearson, “The Chances of Death” (1895) and “Reproductive Selection” (1897), in
Chances of Death, 1–41 and 63–102; Gayon, Darwin et l’après-Darwin, 243–254; Edge-
worth to KP, 10 March 1895, Pearson Papers 681.
in the last month before birth. While he did offer some explanations in
terms of the diseases and other causes that carry men off in these various
phases of life, none could give any reason to presume that life in the womb
is subject to the same hazards as infancy. Yet Pearson regarded his curve
ﬁtting with some conﬁdence as a prediction of prenatal mortality, which
had never been measured, and he called for medical statistics to put it to
the test.
Similarly, in an essay on what he called “reproductive selection,” he ﬁt
one of his skews to a fertility curve, representing the proportion of moth-
ers who bear one, two, or three children in their lifetime, up to a maxi-
mum somewhere beyond twenty. But the data curve was depressed below
his theoretical one for families of ﬁve or six children, and exceeded it for
families of two, three, and four. The discrepancy, he explained, must be a
consequence of the spreading practice of birth control. He was thus com-
fortable drawing causal conclusions from a quantitative model, as it might
now be called, with no causal input. But this language of causal models is
not Pearson’s. He had sufﬁcient faith in his geometry to anticipate valid
conclusions from the curves themselves. Edgeworth commented that he
had at ﬁrst supposed Pearson to be speaking casually when he wrote that
“‘the true and only test’ of a formula is its ﬁtting (or to that effect). . . .
But now I think I see that it does fairly well represent your view.”9
The chi-squared formulation that Pearson introduced in 1900 was also
part of his regime of curve ﬁtting. He derived this function as a formal,
purely quantitative standard or criterion of the adequacy of a distribution
law, independent of subject matter. For his disciplinary descendants, this
measure of “goodness of ﬁt” ranks with his product-moment measure of
correlation as one of his outstanding contributions to the theory of statis-
tics. It soon became and long remained one of the most commonly used
statistical tests, a test that can be applied quite generally to compare theo-
retical or predicted results to empirical data. For Pearson in 1900, how-
ever, it was not mainly a test of causal hypotheses, but a defense of his 
skew distributions and a critique of the easy assumption of the normal law,
which he sought to dislodge even from its original and most secure
ground as the distribution of errors of observation. A valid law of errors,
he insisted, must be ascertained empirically, and his own investigations
showed that the normal did not give the best ﬁt. Edgeworth had earlier re-
marked that this better ﬁt was no surprise, since the skew curves contained
two more free parameters that could be adjusted in order to approximate
the data more closely. But if the purpose was merely to describe or even to

256 • Chapter Nine
10 Pearson, “On the Criterion that a given System of Deviations from the Probable in the
Case of a Correlated System of Variables is such that it can be reasonably supposed to have
arisen from Random Sampling,” Philosophical Magazine (1900); reprinted in Early Statisti-
cal Papers; Pearson, “On the χ2 test Goodness of Fit,” Biometrika, 14 (July 1922), 186–191;
“Further Note on the χ2 test Goodness of Fit,” Biometrika, 14 (March 1923), 418; Pearson,
Francis Galton: A Centenary Appreciation, 1822–1922 (London: Cambridge University
Press, n.d. [1922]), 11. See Stigler, “Pearson and Degrees of Freedom.”
extrapolate beyond the range of the available data, such considerations
were irrelevant, and so they seemed to Pearson.
More than two decades later, in 1922, when R. A. Fisher offered a cor-
rection of Pearson’s chi-squared analysis involving what Fisher called de-
grees of freedom, Pearson was unmoved. Fisher was thinking, as had
Edgeworth, in terms of causal explanation, and he argued that every free
parameter in the distribution formula reduced by one the degrees of free-
dom of the test. Pearson disagreed absolutely, without really responding
to the critique. He had long since developed the use of his chi-squared
analysis to test hypotheses about causes, as in a 1913 eugenic paper on the
relations between paternal wages and size of family. And he was willing to
recognize the relevance of a departure from independence built into the
design of an experiment. Thus, in a hasty correction to his initial reply he
noted that for a ﬁxed total of persons inoculated against cholera, the num-
ber of inoculated who die clearly determines the number of inoculated
who survive, so that we can have only one degree of freedom. But he de-
nied any mathematical analogy to the situation in which he used the data
to estimate one or more parameters, say the overall cure rate, then tested
some prediction about inoculation and survival against the same data. He
regarded curve ﬁtting, when artfully performed, as much more than a way
of summarizing data. Presumably he was responding to Fisher’s mathe-
matical critique when he inserted the following diatribe into a 1922 lec-
ture on Galton: “‘Give me enough arbitrary constants and I will describe
any past experience,’ cries the mathematician. ‘Possibly,’ replies drily the
natural philosopher, ‘but will your description not only sufﬁce to predict,
will it predict correctly future experience?’”10
Pearson commented several times on degrees of freedom after 1922 and
never admitted any problem with his original formulation. Posterity has
been unanimous in awarding Fisher the palm in this dispute. Yule and
Greenwood, authors of a 1915 paper on inoculation singled out by Fisher
for criticism, readily comprehended his point. They attributed Pearson’s
stubbornness to his personal defects, an unwillingness ever to admit error.
But perhaps there is also something in Pearson’s attitude that reﬂects a
long-standing ideal of ﬁtting curves, an understanding that made no sense
to Fisher. Pearson in 1922 compared his procedures to those used by as-

The Statistical Reformation • 257
11 R. A. Fisher, “On the Interpretation of χ2 from Contingency Tables, and the Calcula-
tion of P,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 85 (Jan. 1922), 87–94; G. U. Yule and M.
Greenwood, “The Statistics of Antityphoid and Anticholera Inoculations, and the Interpre-
tation of Such Statistics in General,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 8 (1915),
113–190. An exchange of letters by Yule and Greenwood about Pearson after the great
man’s death may be found in Box 2 of the Yule Papers (DP97), Royal Statistical Society. See
Baird, “The Fisher/Pearson Chi-Squared Controversy”; Magnello, “Pearson’s Mathemati-
zation of Inheritance”; and especially Stigler, “Pearson and Degrees of Freedom.”
12 Pearson, “Reaction,” in Chances of Death, 200; Pearson, “The Utility of Speciﬁc Char-
acters,” Nature, 54 (15 Sept. 1896), 461.
tronomers who, if they do not know the true value of a standard deviation,
substitute the estimate from their sample and then proceed with their
analysis. First estimate and then test: the purpose of estimation or curve
ﬁtting is still to match the data as well as possible. Only after establishing
the highest possible standard of precision does the statistician proceed to
analysis and testing of hypotheses. On this occasion, and in much of his
work, Pearson seemed to think often in terms of his old ideal of conve-
niently summarizing the data, of framing quantitative science as an exer-
cise in geometry. To Pearson, Fisher was mixing up what belonged apart,
just as Edgeworth had done a quarter century earlier.11
Pearson’s ethic of scientiﬁc description implied no skepticism about the
reliability of knowledge. It did not reject generalization, but advanced
seamlessly from measurement to prediction, without interposing causes as
an intermediate stage in the reasoning. This was quantiﬁcation in the de-
scriptive mode of graphical statics, a visual logic of statistics that accorded
nicely with the philosophical principles of The Grammar of Science: “The
mission of science is not to explain but to describe; to discover a descrip-
tive formula which will enable men to predict the nature of future percep-
tions.” Statistics, according to Pearson, can and must distinguish random
or misleading associations from those correlations that have implications
for the future, but it deals ultimately in phenomena, not material objects
or effective causes.12
THE SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF CORRELATION
Correlation was the key to biometry. Predicting the consequences of nat-
ural selection, Pearson argued, required a measure of the interactions of
organs or traits that tended to vary together. A complete correlational the-
ory of natural inheritance should demonstrate the possibility of unlimited
evolutionary progress through the gradual accumulation of continuous
variations. Galton, who by 1885 was using “regression” for the basic

258 • Chapter Nine
13 KP to Galton, 6 Sept. 1898, Galton Papers 293/C; Pearson, “Mathematical Contribu-
tions to the Theory of Evolution.—III. Regression, Heredity, and Panmixia,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London (1896), reprinted in Early Statistical Papers,
113–178, esp. 166–178; Pearson, “Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolution.
On the Law of Ancestral Heredity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 62 (1898),
386–412; Pearson, Galton, vol. 3A, 78.
mathematics of heredity, had chosen this term to express the overpower-
ing tendency for the descendants of exceptional parents to return gradu-
ally to the mean, understood as a point of stability. He came to believe that
secular evolutionary change was not possible through the action of natu-
ral selection on continuous variation, but depended on the spontaneous
production of “sports,” representing new points of stability.
Pearson doubted the evidence for such irregularities, arguing that os-
tensibly discontinuous change might arise from a happy combination of
continuous variations of several traits at once, which he described geo-
metrically as a displacement on a surface of many dimensions. He also
challenged the standing of points of (physiological) stability, discrete foci
of regression, as obstacles to continuous evolutionary change. He won-
dered at ﬁrst if the tendency to regress to the population mean might owe
to the effects of hereditary elements or “gemmules” (as Galton had called
them) passed on from more remote ancestors. Or the exceptional “organ”
or trait might regress due to interactions with other organs, which would
on average be more mediocre than the organ under study. The mathemat-
ical tool for studying such interactions, whether among the various organs
of a single individual or of a single organ across the generations, was cor-
relation. He codiﬁed the mathematics of Galton’s statistical idea, then
worked for years to develop suitably ﬂexible methods for dealing with
many variables at once. Multiple correlation should enable the biologist to
combine all effects into a single analysis. The results of multivariate statis-
tics, he found, were favorable to Darwin’s theory of progressive evolution
by natural selection and to his own faith in gradual evolutionary progress
over abrupt or revolutionary change. Although unusual traits, appearing
in isolation, would indeed tend to return to the mean, the characteristics
of exceptional parents should be preserved in the offspring with very little
regression.13
As statistics and especially biometry came to dominate Pearson’s scien-
tiﬁc work, correlation assumed an increasingly central role in his philo-
sophical defense of science. Although he had argued forcefully for the
unity of scientiﬁc method in the ﬁrst edition of the Grammar of Science, he
was not then prepared to see the same role for variability in physics as in
the sciences of life. This was an old problem in statistical reasoning. For
almost a century, since the time of Gauss and Laplace, the method of least
squares had been grounded on an assumption that measurement variation

The Statistical Reformation • 259
14 Porter, Rise of Statistical Thinking; Schaffer, “Late-Victorian Metrology and Its Instru-
mentation.”
was due to the impossibility of perfect observational precision. The bell-
shaped “error curve,” built into the standard mathematical derivation of
least squares, really was about error for them, and not about variation in
nature. When Quetelet and then Galton extended its reach to variability in
organic measures, it seemed that a new concept was called for, and in 1893
Pearson formally adopted a term Galton had used more casually, “normal
law.” This distribution had a role in physics too, ever since 1860 when
Maxwell proposed that molecular velocities were distributed according to
an extension of the same principle. But Maxwell did not suppose that the
structure of molecules and atoms varied in the same way as their velocities.
On the contrary, he spoke of them as “manufactured articles” and inter-
preted their perfect uniformity as pointing to a Creator.14
The method of drawing a line or other curve through a scatter of ob-
servations by minimizing the sums of squares of the deviations continued,
into the 1890s, to be associated speciﬁcally with error. Pearson, as we have
seen, did not ﬁt curves this way, but instead imported from mechanics the
method of moments. Eventually he would accept least squares as one of
the fundamental conceptions of statistics, but the initial impulse in this di-
rection came from Udny Yule. Yule had studied applied mathematics with
him at University College and then spent a year in the Bonn physics labo-
ratory of Heinrich Hertz before returning to London as Pearson’s assis-
tant. In 1896, he justiﬁed the use of least squares in his correlational study
of poverty rates and poor law administration by arguing for an analogy 
between sociological or biological relations and physical ones. Since varia-
tion in physics was fundamentally similar to biological variability, even
the equations of physics were at bottom only average relations, and this
made the theory of least squares appropriate also for social and biological 
science.
Pearson’s immediate reaction was to protest. There is an essential dif-
ference, he told Yule: “The greater your methods & powers of observa-
tions the closer the physicist gets to a single valued equation.” Before long
he changed his tune. While he never disavowed his point that functional
relations of variables were tighter in physics, he came to see it as less fun-
damental than the central role of variation in all our perceptions and mea-
surements, whether in physics, biology, or social life. This view was in
good accord with the idealist metaphysics of the Grammar of Science, and
it eventually became a part of Pearson’s creed. He liked to think of this ar-
gument, by analogy to the whole range of his scientiﬁc commitments, as
a once-heretical position that had since begun to gain acceptance, prepar-
ing the ground for the new science of biometry. When he got wind that

260 • Chapter Nine
15 Stigler, History of Statistics, 351–352; KP to Yule, 17 Sept. 1896; KP to Weldon, 31
Aug. 1899, Pearson Papers 266/9.
16 Pearson, “Notes on the History of Correlation,” Biometrika (1920), reprinted in E. S.
Pearson and Kendall, eds., Studies in the History of Probability and Statistics, 191; Pearson,
“Mathematical Contributions to Theory of Evolution.—III,” 121.
17 KP to Galton, 19 April 1907, Galton Papers 293/H and Galton reply, 22 April 1907,
Galton Papers 245/18H; reprinted with stylistic editing in Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3A,
314–315. There is no evidence of a reply by Pearson to this last question.
ideas like those of the Grammar were to be preached to the mathematical-
physical section of the British Association in 1899, he spoke of the scien-
tiﬁc establishment coming around to views it had recently condemned and
announced to Weldon “the end of the distinction between exact and de-
scriptive sciences.”15
His understanding of the signiﬁcance and meaning of correlation also
shifted gradually. His pioneering 1896 paper on correlation, very much a
contribution to the “mathematical theory of evolution,” did not even re-
fer to correlation in the title, but instead named three biological concepts,
“heredity, panmixia, and regression,” as its objects. While the paper re-
ferred to Galton’s Natural Inheritance as epoch making, Pearson credited
the theory of correlation to the French military ofﬁcer and polymath 
Auguste Bravais, who had written down its basic mathematics. In a histor-
ical study in 1920, Pearson would argue that Bravais went only a little be-
yond Gauss, having never conceived his x, y, and z as variables that could
be directly measured and then subjected to a mathematics of association to
determine their interrelationships. In 1896, however, he reduced the con-
ceptual dimension of Galton’s achievement to a novel deployment of es-
tablished mathematical methods.16
Soon Pearson began to see correlation as ﬁrst of all conceptual and
philosophical, indeed as the culmination and vindication of his own phi-
losophy of science. By this time he was playing the role of John the Bap-
tist, building up mathematical statistics through the creation of a Galton
mythology. He ﬁrst asserted the profound philosophical importance of
correlation in one of his 1907 talks at Oxford University. He prepared the
ground for Galton’s imminent appearance there by giving his Boyle Lec-
ture on the role of eugenics in the modern state, and his paper for the 
Oxford Philosophical Club on “the possibility of a wider category than
causation.” As he explained to Galton, the second presentation set out
from “the idea that no two physical entities are exactly alike,” not even
two atoms, since there is always variation about the mean. “Hence in
physics the ultimate basis of knowledge is statistical, a correlation & not a
causation.” Causation reduced to a limiting case where the residual varia-
tion was very low. These arguments, he reported, had perplexed the
philosophers and annoyed the scientists in his audience. Even Galton
asked skeptically if he had any evidence for the variability of atoms.17

The Statistical Reformation • 261
18 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 3d ed. (1911), 157, 173; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 2,
358; vol. 3A, 1 and 56–57.
But Galton was to become a patron of this argument, no matter what he
thought of it. When he died on 17 January 1911, Pearson began to pre-
side over his immortality. The third edition of The Grammar of Science,
dated 19 January 1911, announced that science had been transformed by
the discovery of correlation. “It is this conception of correlation between
two occurrences embracing all relationship from absolute independence
to complete dependence, which is the wider category by which we have to
replace the old idea of causation.” The tighter correlations and lesser vari-
ability of physics were differences of degree and not of kind. Galton, he
proclaimed in his biography, “relieved us from the old superstition that
where causal relationships could not be traced, there exact or mathemati-
cal inquiry was impossible.” Pearson recalled an impossible scene featuring
“some of us in the ‘eighties, when fresh from Cambridge we encountered
his papers.” The one on correlation worked “a revolution in our scientiﬁc
ideas,” and now (1930) there are thousands of correlation coefﬁcients cal-
culated every year in psychology, medical statistics, sociology, and anthro-
pology. “This has not only enormously widened the ﬁeld to which
quantitative and therefore mathematical methods can be applied, but it
has at the same time modiﬁed our philosophy of science, and even of life
itself.”18 The boundaries of science, he suggested, would henceforth be
practically coextensive with those of statistics.
DATA AND CALCULATIONS
This scientiﬁc program of ﬁtting curves and calculating correlations de-
pended on the availability of data. Pearson was assiduous in compiling
measures of all sorts, and as he accumulated the resources to build up a
staff, these activities expanded. His early papers, especially the pioneering
one on skew curves, integrated statistical mathematics with abundant and
diverse data gathered mainly from the work of other inquirers. But he
imagined biometric statistics as analogous to the methods of the Registrar-
General, and while this pointed intellectually to a science that reasoned
from mean values on the presumption of an underlying stability of statisti-
cal objects, he also took seriously the institutional analogy. His laborato-
ries became, in a way, a Biometric Registry Ofﬁce. He assembled a team of
workers to collect, measure, and compute, and surrounded them with
measuring devices and calculating machines. The data and calculations de-
pended particularly on the work of two women, Ethel M. Elderton and
Alice Lee, who also wrote and coauthored papers. With assistance from
various donors, he founded or took over a web of laboratories, of which

262 • Chapter Nine
19 Pearson, “Walter Frank Raphael Weldon, 1860–1906,” Biometrika, 5 (1906), 1–52, on
19; R. Love, “Alice in Eugenics Land: Feminism and Eugenics in the Scientiﬁc Careers of 
Alice Lee and Ethel Elderton,” Annals of Science, 36 (1979), 145–158; Magnello, “Non-
Correlation of Biometrics and Eugenics.”
20 Pearson, Tables for Statisticians, part 1 (1914; 2d ed. 1924), vi–vii, xxiv–xxvi; part 2
(1931), iv; Cox, “Biometrika: The First Hundred Years,” 6.
21 KP to Carnegie Institution, 28 Oct. 1905 (a recommendation for Raymond Pearl),
Pearl Papers, American Philosophical Society.
the Biometric Laboratory, created with a grant from the Company of
Drapers in 1903 and the Eugenics Laboratory, Galton’s brainchild, were
the most prominent.19
One result of all this computation was an array of tables, most of them
published ﬁrst in Biometrika and then compiled into reference volumes.
Although Pearson did not believe in textbooks, he introduced these books
with sample problems and guidelines for reducing them to a suitable form
and ﬁnding the appropriate entry in his tables. The introductions con-
veyed the basics of statistical reasoning as he understood it. In most cases
this meant ﬁtting a density curve or surface to the data, then perhaps de-
termining whether a point or set of data is consistent with the distribution.
In one example, he compared measures of a skull of uncertain provenance
with a collection of French ones, and calculated odds of 454:1 against so
great a deviation complex if it were French. He did not suppose that a
mastery of statistics could be attained simply by studying these examples,
but he thought the tables well suited to serve as the basis for personal in-
struction in a statistical laboratory.20
Pearson ﬁrmly denied that correct method in biometry meant assem-
bling numbers indiscriminately and then deciding what to do with them.
“The ﬁrst point in any work in this ﬁeld is to have a real biological, an-
thropological, or sociological problem which needs solution, the second to
discover the right material to discuss it upon, and only the third to select
and apply the appropriate statistical methods.”21 Often, however, he went
looking for materials to illustrate the use of a new method. Also, since ap-
propriate statistical records could not be called up at will whenever a prob-
lem presented itself, Pearson and his coworkers devoted immense effort to
assembling a general fund of measures suited to biometric investigations.
His was not the formalized protocol that later came to pass for scientiﬁc
method at journals and granting agencies, in which a speciﬁc question is
asked, a hypothesis offered, an experiment proposed, and statistical meth-
ods of analyzing the data speciﬁed, before work begins. Many of his inves-
tigations were more nearly exploratory, gathering data and looking for
correlations that might be of interest. This was not merely indiscriminate,
since he had deﬁnite ideas about what problems were pressing and what
solutions promising, but his style of statistics depended on an abundance
of materials and of data, and he assembled them aggressively.

The Statistical Reformation • 263
22 Galton to KP, 19 June 1895, Galton Papers 245/18A; also Boas Papers at American
Philosophical Society, and Pearson Papers 639/2.
23 Flinders Petrie to KP, Pearson Papers 815 (there are several letters from KP to Petrie at
the Petrie Museum, University College London); KP toYule, 21 July 1895; KP to Gregory
Foster, 2 Aug. 1903, College Correspondence AM/D/238 (University College Archives).
24 Fee, “Nineteenth-Century Craniometry”; Oppenheim, “Shattered Nerves”, 185; KP to
Galton, 25 Oct. 1901, reprinted Pearson, Galton, vol. 3, 247; Karl Pearson and G. M.
Morant, The Portraiture of Oliver Cromwell with Special Reference to the Wilkinson Head
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1935).
He was persuaded from very early of the research value of human skulls
for investigating racial differences. In June 1895, Galton put him in con-
tact with Franz Boas, then at the Bureau of Ethnology in Washington,
D.C., “a real catch for you” since he had “heaps” of measure of whites and
North American Indians. Soon Pearson was probing Boas for information
about relative degrees of correlation in “civilized” and “uncivilized”
races.22 He also befriended the University College archeologist Flinders
Petrie, who collected all kinds of artifacts from Egypt, including great
numbers of skulls. And he began his own collection, which became a life-
long project. “I have been down to College this morning,” he wrote Yule
in July of 1895, “—the skulls are simply perfect, most fascinating.” He ac-
quired an armamentarium of anthropometric instruments to measure
them along all their dimensions, and this kind of work became routine in
his laboratory. They had to be quick to keep the materials ﬂowing, as he
complained when university administrators seemed to be putting red tape
in his way. “A plague pit was opened in Broad Street on Thursday last,” he
wrote his provost in 1903, “& by Friday morning one of my workers, Mr.
S. M. Jacob, had with unwonted energy ‘begged’ the whole of the crania
& skeletons for the College.” Had he been obliged to wait for Council ap-
proval, Oxford or Cambridge would have made away with the loot.23
Nobody could have foretold the results of this skull research. Pearson
was soon convinced that none of the features of skulls, including interior
volume as well as the much-vaunted “cephalic index” that measured long-
headedness, correlated reliably with mental abilities. He and his coworkers
were the ﬁrst to discredit on the basis of quantitative evidence the claim
that skull volume measures proved the inferior intelligence of women. He
wanted to use craniological features to reconstruct patterns of migration
and to distinguish evolutionary change within a race from changes owing
to its replacement by an invading population. He also began using photo-
graphs and measurements to ﬁx the identity of mortal remains, most no-
tably in a profusely illustrated memoir on the skull of Oliver Cromwell.24
As much as he believed in mathematics, he lived his life above all for
data. This comes across clearly in his frequent critiques of every form of
mathematics that remained aloof from all empirical reality—that is, from
tallies and measurements. It takes two years, he once told Fisher, to turn a

264 • Chapter Nine
Figure 15. The statistician at work, with skulls and Brunsviga. (Courtesy of
UCL)
25 KP to R. A. Fisher, 2 Aug. 1919 (originals in Adelaide, Australia), Hacker Papers, Box
17; Pearson, History of Statistics, 427.
good Cambridge wrangler into a statistician. What he meant was that the
wranglers had to get out of the closed world of analysis and learn to do real
mathematical science, the science of quantity. Late in life he came to ad-
mire the efforts of Condorcet before and during the French Revolution to
use mathematics to advance justice. Condorcet’s great shortcoming was
his indifference to data, a defect he shared with his Gallic milieu, and Pear-
son, echoing Edmund Burke, speculated that this failure to test their the-
ories with practical facts made him and his science-minded allies incapable
of guiding the French Revolution.25
The values of calculation became a part of Pearson’s being, and he will-
ingly snared himself in his own quantitative net. His recurrent trips after
1897 to the ancestral home in Danby to uncover family records were not,
as might at ﬁrst appear, a mere exploration for private purposes of the fam-
ily tree, to learn his eugenic background. He was responding to his own
solicitation for family data. Galton had introduced these “Records of Fam-

The Statistical Reformation • 265
26 KP to Yule, 15 Aug. 1897 (from Danby); Pearson, “Statistical Investigation in Vari-
ability and Heredity,” Nature, 64 (30 May 1901), 102, an appeal for school forms, orange-
tip butterﬂies, and blackbird or thrush eggs for various statistical investigations.
27 Pearson, “Useless Body Measurements: A Call to Discard ‘Rusty Old Weapons,’” let-
ter to The Times, 25 Aug. 1920, 14e; “Tests of Mental Capacity,” letter to The Times, 14 Jan.
1926, 8b; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 2, 232; KP to Galton, 28 Jan. 1902, Galton Papers
293/E. He presented the results in his Huxley lecture for 1903, “On the Inheritance of the
Mental and Moral Characters in Man, and in Comparison with the Inheritance of the Physi-
cal Characters,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 33
(1903), 179–237 (and reprinted in Biometrika, 1903–4).
ily Faculties,” asking volunteers to send detailed information about as
many relatives, living and dead, as possible. Pearson carried on and ex-
panded this initiative, one product of which was the vast Treasury of Hu-
man Inheritance. Among the families mentioned in those volumes were
the Yorkshire Pearsons.26
The contents of the Treasury point to one other aspect of his data-
collecting activities—that he wanted to investigate traits that really mat-
tered, not merely to assemble data sets on which to exercise his statistical
tools. Since he was convinced that physical measures gave very little in-
sight into mental capabilities, he declined to use them for this purpose. He
insisted that (biological) anthropology should concern itself with really
important characteristics, and not be content with easily measured ones.
This meant studying character, will, and mental quickness, traits with con-
sequences for the “struggle of nations,” and assigning numbers as best
one could. He gathered up a large stock of evaluations of pupils by their
teachers to compare their abilities with those of siblings, and to assess
them against the achievements of their ancestors. This was in deﬁance of a
near consensus among natural scientists, which associated proper numbers
with neutral instruments, not personal judgment. At the Royal Society in
1902, according to Pearson, the biologist Ray Lankester called it a “dis-
grace” to put any weight “on examinations or on the opinions of school-
masters.” Pearson believed that those in authority at schools and other
institutions should have the capacity to make such determinations. His
mature understanding of objectivity joined it to wisdom and self-control,
and did not imply a radical exclusion of the personal.27
He also built an element of judgment into the interpretation of statis-
tics. The Fisherian style of signiﬁcance testing, as it was established in
many disciplines in the 1940s, typically enforced a particular standard,
most often the probability measure 0.05, as deﬁning a credible scientiﬁc
result. Fisher himself preferred greater ﬂexibility, leaving room for scien-
tiﬁc judgment. Pearson wanted to supply “as in physics” the probable error,
and let readers ﬁx their own standard of improbability. This was in a way
to afﬁrm Laplace’s well-known line about probability as common sense 

266 • Chapter Nine
28 KP to Greenwood, 7 Jan. 1905 (he stipulated that the standard of improbability should
be between two and four probable errors); Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 2, 150.
29 KP to Larmor, 19 July 1904, RR16.415; KP to Michael Foster, 5 Feb. 1902, CD 260,
Royal Society Library.
reduced to calculation or, as Pearson might have preferred, statistical
mathematics as a tool to elevate and inform common sense.28
THE STATISTICIAN EMBATTLED
Pearson’s combativeness was apparent already in his undergraduate days
and again during the 1880s in acerbic political lectures and reviews on the
German Reformation, but it was not until he found his calling in statistics
that polemic became his métier. At times, especially during his decade or
more of battles with the English biological establishment after 1899, he
felt wounded by the hostility of his opponents. He was still more hurt by
former students who seemed to turn against him. In the midst of a dispute
with Yule about contingency tables and with William Bateson about sta-
tistics and Mendelism, he lamented to Joseph Larmor at the Royal 
Society that he never himself started controversies, but was attacked gra-
tuitously in scientiﬁc papers in the name of original research. The Royal
Society, he advised Michael Foster, should publish only enduring knowl-
edge and remain aloof from ephemeral attacks.29 This was a policy he con-
spicuously failed to apply as an editor, unless Pearson the critic be granted
his understanding of self as above party prejudice. His disputes were really
all the more bitter on account of this attitude. He was beyond question a
ﬁerce antagonist, and he made many enemies.
On occasion Pearson seemed close to paranoia, as evidenced by point-
less and petulant insults scattered through inappropriate venues such as
Biometrika—“surely the most personally-edited journal that was ever pub-
lished,” remarks Yule. Yule’s examples include two titles, both from the
terrible year 1914: “On certain errors with regard to multiple correlation
made by those who have not adequately studied the subject,” and “Cor-
rection of a Misstatement Made by Mr. ———,” where the name omitted
by Yule, but not by Pearson, was that of Yule’s close friend and Pearson’s
former student, Major Greenwood. Still stranger is a line inserted in
the third volume of his monumental Galton biography, where he referred
to a statistical paradox now “again confusing the minds of Professors Ray-
mond Pearl and Leonard Hill, who cannot grasp. . . .” He was by then on
good terms with Pearl, also a former student with whom he had for a
time fallen out, and a few years earlier he had sent Pearl a review copy of

The Statistical Reformation • 267
30 Yule, “Karl Pearson,” 101; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3, 103; KP to Pearl, 3 Oct.
1924, Pearl Papers, American Philosophical Society.
31 The Chances of Death had only one edition. The Ethic of Freethought had, by 1892, sold
427 copies from a print run of 1000. Another 105 were given away, leaving 468 to be re-
maindered at half price. If Bernard Shaw is to be believed, its inclusion on the Fabian list
“What to Read” then cleared the stock. In 1901 it had a second edition. T. Fisher Unwin to
KP, Pearson Papers 866/6; Shaw to KP, 14 Nov. 1892, Pearson Papers 853.
the second Galton volume with the comment: “You are one of the few
people who will be able to appreciate Vol. II of the Life from the statisti-
cal side.”30
Yule referred in his obituary to Pearson’s domineering personality, and
this aspect cannot be entirely discounted, but the personality by itself is of
only secondary interest here. The point is to understand these controver-
sies in relation to Pearson’s statistical project, his social vision, and his
sense of the role and mission of the scientist. As in The Grammar of Sci-
ence, he often argued that scientiﬁc method is distinctly valuable for soci-
ety because it overrides subjectivity to produce consensus. This did not
mean that disagreement was necessarily inconsistent with productive work
at the frontiers of research, but it did discredit scientists whose methods
could not yield conclusive results. After 1892 he looked to create objec-
tivity by showing the way to an exact science of life, mind, and society. Au-
thoritative science, he held, was crucial for social stability, and practical
biological knowledge, that is, eugenics, would be needed in the struggle
of nations that had now become so pressing.
He announced his grand ambition in an 1894 review on “Socialism and
Natural Selection,” called by his editor at the Fortnightly Review “the
most important contribution to social science that has been made for
twenty years.” Despite his professed disdain for the “enthusiasm of the
marketplace,” Pearson welcomed the chance to express in a public forum
his new mathematical creed.31 The vital problems of evolution and society,
he declared, were now mathematical problems, and he looked to a future
when “the loose qualitative or descriptive reasoning of the older biologists
must give way to an accurate mathematico-statistical logic. The trained bi-
ologist may discover and tabulate facts, much as the physicist does today,
but it will need the trained mathematician to reason upon them. The great
biologist of the future will be like the great physicist of to-day, a mathe-
matician trained and bred.”
It is scarcely surprising that such messianic ambitions should have occa-
sioned unease among biologists. There also were forebodings of conﬂict in
his attack here on the doctrines of August Weismann, then at the peak of
his inﬂuence in Britain, and his allegation that biology had of late declined
into “semi-metaphysical” reasoning, akin to that of “mediaeval writers on

268 • Chapter Nine
32 Pearson, “Socialism and Natural Selection” (1894), in Chances of Death, vol. 1,
103–139, on 103–105; H. Blanchamp to KP, 21 June 1894, Pearson Papers 693. He also
raised Pearson’s fee.
physics.”32 Pearson’s excitement in these years about the statistical study
of Darwinian evolution reﬂected also a sense of social and political mis-
sion, to provide a quantitative basis for policy choices. In alliance with
Weldon, and with the support of assistants such as Yule and L.N.G. Filon,
he seemed to be making good progress in the 1890s, condoned if not wel-
comed by other biologists.
The quiet was disrupted by increasing tensions between statistical and
experimental biology in the last years of the old century. Pearson did not
initiate the controversy, which broke out in 1895 between Weldon and his
friend and contemporary from St. John’s College, Cambridge, William
Bateson. While both were admirers of Galton, Bateson endorsed the mas-
ter’s doctrine of discontinuous evolution between organic points of stabil-
ity rather than his statistical methods. A dispute about the interpretation of
some biological data, overlying this disagreement about the mechanism of
evolution and the best way to study it, turned quickly to intense personal
enmity. Pearson was brought into the debate in late 1896 when he joined
the Royal Society’s Committee for Conducting Statistical Inquiries into the
Measurable Characteristics of Plants and Animals, which had been formed
three years earlier by Galton and Weldon. Also in 1896, on Galton’s initia-
tive and against the advice of Pearson and Weldon, the committee was en-
larged by the addition of Bateson and several other biologists.
The same year, Galton introduced his statistical “law of ancestral inher-
itance,” which, without specifying any genetic mechanism, expressed in
percentages the contributions of parents, grandparents, and more remote
ancestors to the inherited traits of an individual. That law, and Pearson’s
more mathematical revision of it in early 1898, hardened the resolve of the
skeptics of statistical biology. Shortly afterwards, Gregor Mendel’s studies
of the inheritance of discontinuous traits emerged into the limelight—
with Bateson as his leading champion in England—more than three
decades after their initial publication. Pearson never took so public a role
in these debates as Weldon, but he too felt excluded by the biologists. Gal-
ton, Weldon, and Pearson all resigned in frustration from the Statistical
Committee in early 1900. Later that year, a very long memoir by Pearson
was handled badly at the Royal Society, which circulated a criticism by
Bateson even before the referees were sent the completed version of the
memoir itself. Pearson and Weldon were understandably angry, though in
one respect they may have welcomed the opposition, since it provided the
occasion to solidify their scientiﬁc program by creating a journal of their
own. Biometrika, established in 1901, became the ofﬁcial organ of the

The Statistical Reformation • 269
33 Provine, Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics, chaps. 3–4; MacKenzie, Statistics in
Britain, chap. 6; Olby, “Dimensions of Scientiﬁc Controversy”; Rushton, “Nettleship, Pear-
son and Bateson”; Sloan, “Mach’s Phenomenalism.”
34 Norton, “Metaphysics and Population Genetics”; Morrison, “Modelling Populations”;
Pearson, “Mendel’s Law,” Nature, 70 (27 Oct. 1904), 626–627; KP to Pearl, 28 Feb. 1910;
Pearson, Galton Centenary, 10; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3, 288.
new statistics, the standard-bearer of a quantitative program in opposition
to the biological mainstream, seeking converts. These debates crystallized
as the “Biometrician-Mendelian controversy,” which blazed away until
Weldon’s sudden death in 1906. Bereaved scientiﬁcally as well as person-
ally, Pearson then largely abandoned experimental studies of evolution,
though the attacks continued on both sides.33
Pearson is often supposed to have rejected Mendelian genetics on ac-
count of his positivistic refusal to countenance invisible, hypothetical ob-
jects. This is quite mistaken. As we have seen, he quested for the most
remote and fundamental entities. Having swallowed protyles and ether
squirts pouring forth from a higher dimension, he was unlikely to choke
on genes. He called the genetic element a conception rather than a mate-
rial reality, but for this philosophical idealist all explanations were concep-
tual, and if the status of the “gene” (a new word in the new century)
remained uncertain, this was because it had not yet been made an object
of sensory experience. His critical razor slashed away not at genes and
molecules, but at reiﬁcations of categories he thought purely descriptive,
such as “force” and “matter.” He never disputed the reality of Mendelian
unit characters on philosophical grounds.
Indeed, he never challenged their existence at all, but was at pains to
emphasize his open-mindedness about Mendelism. He wrote in Nature in
1904 that the existence of Mendelian traits, exhibiting a degree of discon-
tinuous variation and the characteristic ratios of dominant and recessive
traits, was perfectly compatible with the biometric program, and indeed
implied a law of hereditary regression. In a scientiﬁc paper the same year,
he pursued a line of inquiry initiated by Yule as to the consistency of pre-
dictions based on Mendelism with observed regressions of offspring on
parents, ﬁnding them somewhat too low. He called this a challenge to the
Mendelians, but then a few years later undertook to clear up the discrep-
ancy himself. In 1910, he told Pearl that Mendelism led directly to the law of
ancestral inheritance, a geometrical decrease of hereditary inﬂuence with
successively more remote ancestral generations. In 1922, he wrote rather
favorably about Mendelian genes, though stipulating that even simple
traits typically involve ﬁve or ten of them. Near the end of his life, he med-
itated that since science is only description, nature may be accurately char-
acterized in more than one way. It was, he charged, the Mendelians—he
meant Bateson—who deﬁned one and only one approach as legitimate.34

270 • Chapter Nine
35 Pearson, “Mendel’s Law.”
36 See his correspondence with Davenport, held by the American Philosophical Society;
KP to Pearl, 20 Dec. 1913. On these matters, see Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics; Spencer
and Paul, “Failure of a Scientiﬁc Critique.” 
37 He spoke in such terms in KP to Greenwood, 14 Aug. 1920, Pearson Papers 915.
38 Karl Pearson and Margaret Moul, “The Mathematics of Intelligence, I. The Sampling Er-
rors in the Theory of a Generalised Factor,” Biometrika, 19 (1927), 246–291; Pearson (anony-
mously), “The Mathematics of Intelligence” (review of Spearman, The Abilities of Man),
Nature, 120 (1927), 181–183; also letters to Nature about this, Pearson Papers 771/6.
Pearson’s philosophy of tolerance, however, was cast in the terms of pos-
itivist measurement, not quite a neutral language. “Biometry is only the
application of exact statistical ratios to the problems of biology. . . . A de-
scription by modern statistical methods need not, as such, be itself opposed
to any physiological hypothesis.”35 The problem was not that Pearson re-
jected genes or Mendelian ratios, but that he subordinated them to a larger
program of statistical description and prediction, and that he regarded the
higher statistics as the appropriate standard even for Mendelian genetics.
Statistical methods and positivistic laws in biology were thus elevated over
experimental interventions and genetic reductions. What Pearson allowed
in principle he often scorned in practice, ﬁnding decisive statistical ﬂaws be-
hind most Mendelian ﬁndings during the years of sharpest debate. On
some matters his opponents provided him easy targets, as with their prolif-
erating claims for one-gene traits, such as criminality, pauperism, and fee-
blemindedness. Such simplicities were condoned or even “discovered” in
many cases by prominent university biologists. To Pearson, this simplistic
Mendelian eugenics invited ridicule of his favorite political issue. He fell out
with Charles Davenport, listed at ﬁrst as a founding Biometrika editor, over
such issues, and he suspected that Americans were particularly susceptible
to Mendelian follies. “I think the day will come,” he told Pearl, “when
American men of science will themselves protest against the work that has
been put forth in the name of eugenics.”36
Pearson’s ambitions, uncontainable within any disciplinary barriers, led
him into disputes wherever he thought statistics was needed but not de-
ployed or was being used fallaciously. He complained of the failures of an-
thropometry and sought to deﬁne for this ﬁeld a new standard of statistical
quality—hence a new character and method for the anthropologist.37 He
attacked the theory of general intelligence put forth by his University Col-
lege colleague, the experimental psychologist Charles Spearman, for faulty
statistical methods and rejected the mathematics of general and speciﬁc fac-
tors that gave a theoretical grounding for IQ, the intelligence quotient.38
He was most frequently provoked, however, by medical and public
health writings, and his disputes about tuberculosis, parental alcoholism,
and the “opsonic index” as a guide to vaccine therapy were played out in

The Statistical Reformation • 271
39 KP to Leonard Huxley, 5 May 1898, Huxley Papers 24.91; KP to Bernard Shaw, 8 Nov.
1910, Ransom Library Research Center.
40 KP to Lt. Col. R.J.S. Simpson, 24 May 1904, Pearson Papers 159/1; Matthews, Quan-
tiﬁcation and the Quest for Medical Certainty, 99.
semipopular lectures as well as Biometrika articles. He took a dim view of
medical science, which, he told Shaw, was full of humbug, because medical
researchers feigned omniscience so their former students would refer pa-
tients to them for consulting practice. He called for more “general culture
or academical training” for practitioners and for hospital doctors to be paid
as teachers and researchers. Above all, medicine needed statistics, whose
proper role he saw as comprehensive. Statistics could deﬁne a new basis for
clinical studies of therapeutic effectiveness as well as for public health inves-
tigations of the causes of illness and the effects of habits and environments.
Perhaps it could even cure the most pervasive shortcoming of the medical
profession, “that it mistakes association for causation.”39 Notwithstanding
his professed skepticism about causes, he rejected mere correlations in
medicine. To get beyond them, he advocated large-scale medical experi-
ments with controls. On one occasion, he proposed to test antityphoid
serum by inoculating every second man in a regiment of eight hundred and
using statistics to determine if the results were “signiﬁcant.”40
In addition to his programmatic and critical writings, Pearson carried
the ﬂag for statistical medicine by assembling detailed family records and
by studying the variability of disease. By the 1920s his message was getting
through. Although he declined the invitation to chair an “advisory com-
mittee on statistics” under the Medical Research Council, he left a legacy
through the work of Major Greenwood. A doctor by profession, Green-
wood had been inspired by The Grammar of Science to answer the call of
the higher statistics. During the 1920s and 1930s, his position at the Min-
istry of Health and association with the Medical Research Council gave
him the standing to incorporate statistical designs and analyses ever more
systematically into medical studies. His own student, Austin Bradford Hill,
provided much of the statistical expertise in the late 1940s for the land-
mark British randomized clinical trials. This experimental tradition devel-
oped out of Pearson’s teaching, though with increasing input beginning in
the 1930s from Fisher’s work on the design of experiments. Pearson’s
medical battles, which peaked in the decade before the Great War, gener-
ally involved a combination of statistical and eugenic principles as well as a
deep suspicion of scientists who sold their souls to popular movements,
this much-despised “enthusiasm of the marketplace.” Typically, as in his
polemics about the effects of parental alcoholism on offspring, he held
that unthinking or tendentious quantiﬁcation lent spurious credence to
superﬁcial environmental explanations when deeper and more powerful

272 • Chapter Nine
41 His ambitions, and Greenwood’s, for medical statistics are expressed in the KP-Greenwood
correspondence, Pearson Papers 707 and 915. On the Medical Research Council, see E. S.
Pearson, Karl Pearson, 95. On Pearson’s medical controversies, see Matthews, Mathematics
and the Quest for Medical Certainty, chap. 5; Stigler, “Pearson and the Cambridge Econo-
mists”; Eyler, Sir Arthur Newsholme; Mendelsohn, “From Eradication to Equilibrium.”
42 KP to Yule, 25 Jan. 1895.
hereditary ones were passed over. These were rarely presented as honest
differences of opinion, but rather as a failure of competence or scientiﬁc
spirit in his opponents.41
As Yule, who suffered much, implied in his obituary notice for the Royal
Society, the unfailing courtesy and generosity of Jekyll in personal matters
gave way to the viciousness of Hyde whenever Pearson was challenged on
a scientiﬁc issue. There were a few exceptions. He was always respectful of
research physicists, as opposed to mere textbook writers, even when they
violated his canon of proper scientiﬁc thinking. His frequent attacks on
doctors, psychologists, and social scientists thus betrayed a meager respect
for their ﬁelds. Galton, a crucial source of his statistical methods and, by
the late 1890s, something of a father-ﬁgure for him, always had Pearson’s
respect, really reverence, even when his expressed doubts went to points of
some consequence. Conversely, Galton remained profoundly loyal to his
statistical protégé. Weldon, who could be as cantankerous as Pearson, also
maintained the right to dissent and sometimes exercised it bluntly. In early
1895 he criticized Pearson at a Royal Society meeting, inspiring the latter
to complain that he felt as if a family squabble were being publicly aired.
There must be some deeper reasons for such misbehavior by this “splen-
did fellow,” he told Yule. “I fear he considers that we are poaching on his
preserves. I would retire at once, but I am sure only the mathematician
can bring down the game upon them.”42 In the end, their alliance proved
stronger than such tensions, and within a few years they were joined in
battle against the enemies of biometry. Weldon’s research career had
formed quite independently of Pearson and indeed had provided him a
crucial inspiration. As a collaborator, indispensable and coequal, he could
never be dominated, and Pearson did not try.
But as statistics became a coherent program under Pearson’s charge, dis-
agreement or even independence had less and less place in it. The intersec-
tion of dominating personality and missionary ambitions that characterized
much of Pearson’s statistical career is perhaps most vividly revealed in the
relationships, harmonious as well as antagonistic, within his own labora-
tory. To his loyal staff, “the professor” was the most gracious and attentive
of masters. With some of his more expert male coworkers, notably Yule as
well as Weldon, private and scientiﬁc life were joined as one. Yule learned
some Norwegian, vacationed with Karl and Maria Pearson in Norway, and
was proselytized into reading, although without much enthusiasm, Nor-

The Statistical Reformation • 273
43 Yule, “Pearson”; MacKenzie, Statistics in Britain, chap. 7; Aldrich, “Correlations Gen-
uine and Spurious”; on the variability of genetic material as a critique of pure lines, see Pearson,
Galton Centenary, 12; on the controversy generally, see Roll-Hansen, “Crucial Experiment
of Wilhelm Johannsen.”
wegian authors such as Ibsen and Jonas Lie. In subsequent years, as the op-
eration expanded, Pearson worked hard to make his laboratory an island of
statistical comity in a hostile world. He dealt with the proliferation of staff
and students by making the rounds every day, discussing the problems
faced by each in her or his work. His excellent memory, so they said, en-
abled him always to recall their progress thus far. He encouraged many,
women as well as men, to sign on as coauthors, even when the inspiration
was clearly his, and on some occasions, as when most of the laboratory was
engaged in calculations to aid the war effort after 1914, he refused to take
personal credit but assigned authorship to the laboratory as a whole.
This ethic of collectivism, however, was a double-edged sword. Already
by the late 1890s there were deﬁnite limits to the independence allowed to
his students, former students, and employees, and in subsequent years this
was narrowed still further. He always took an interest in the careers and
livelihoods of his “coworkers.” In the case of the women, this meant trying
to be sure they were treated with respect and that their compensation (if
they worked for pay) did not fall too far behind what a man in a compara-
ble position would receive. For the men, he was aware that a successful ca-
reer would eventually mean moving on to an independent position, and
often he was a fount of encouragement and support. Yet institutional inde-
pendence did not imply full scientiﬁc autonomy. To depart from the lines
of research established by the professor was, almost always, to prove one’s
lack of competence or ill will, and this led again and again to painful rup-
tures. The break with Yule, himself an original thinker and a statistician of
the ﬁrst rank, was among the most disturbing. The two fought bitterly over
the correlations of discrete variables in contingency tables and about the
statistical treatment of time series. When Pearson condemned the generous
and well-meaning, if mathematically undemanding, efforts of the Dane
Wilhelm Johannsen to use Pearsonian statistics in his biological research on
“pure lines,” Yule came to his defense. Pearson, who was unimpressed by
Johannsen’s mathematics and subscribed as an article of faith to the doc-
trine of inherent natural variability, considered such behavior a betrayal of
the biometric way, and of himself as teacher and friend.43
The ﬁles of Pearson’s correspondence with other male collaborators, in-
cluding Greenwood, Davenport, and Pearl, tell similar tales. The break
usually followed an accusation by Pearson of statistical incompetence or
ill will. It was always the student who had abandoned true statistics,
never Pearson stiﬂing dissent. He would of course not think of discouraging

274 • Chapter Nine
44 Richmond, “Women in the Early History of Genetics.”
45 See letters by Yule, Greenwood, Elderton, and Bell in Box 2, Yule Papers, Royal Statisti-
cal Society. These letters make clear that Yule and Greenwood had both been deeply wounded
by Pearson’s criticism, and also that they regarded him as an almost superhuman ﬁgure.
independent or original work, but he could not allow Biometrika to be the
vehicle for publication of ﬂawed statistical analysis, since enemies were al-
ways scrutinizing the journal for points of weakness, and defective papers
would call into question the whole biometric cause. Sometimes, to be
sure, his criticisms were on the mark. But the demand for solidarity went
beyond monitoring his students and contributors for errors. He construed
every project as part of a collective undertaking.
His women assistants confronted the collectivity with fewer options.
They had less prospect of improving their circumstances by moving on
from Pearson’s laboratory, which in many ways provided them unusual
scientiﬁc opportunities. Pearson had networks of recruitment at Girton
College, Cambridge, the more mathematical of the two women’s colleges
there. (Bateson’s research program in experimental genetics, meanwhile,
recruited heavily from among women at Newnham, where the curriculum
placed more emphasis on biology).44 Pearson was steadfast in supporting
the right of students at the women’s colleges to earn university degrees.
He recognized that he could hire the same level of competence for a lower
salary, and get greater loyalty or at least continuity into the bargain, by 
recruiting women. Most, to all appearances, viewed “the professor” with
much appreciation. His attentiveness and charismatic demeanor inspired
real affection in many cases, and still stronger emotions in some. Julia Bell
and Ethel Elderton protested Yule’s critique of Pearson’s personality, re-
calling a man of great patience and kindness who allowed his coworkers to
maintain independent views.45 Within months of Maria Sharpe Pearson’s
death, in 1928, “coworker” Margaret Victoria Child, then in her early for-
ties, accepted his proposal of marriage.
Others faced a situation that could become unpleasant. Pearson re-
garded them not merely as employees, but as fellow laborers in the Lord’s
vineyard. Thus Beatrice M. Cave, who aspired to and eventually achieved
an independent research career, requested very politely in 1916—a partic-
ularly difﬁcult and unhappy period for Pearson—to be released from her
contract with the University of London to accept a better position else-
where. When the job fell through, she informed him that for the time 
being she wished to stay after all. But he would have none of this. Com-
plaining to the provost of the University of London, Gregory Foster, of
her disloyalty, he arranged for a letter of termination. To Cave he wrote
acidly that nobody who was scheming to leave had any place in his labora-
tory, and that her behavior was not in accordance with what public school
boys call “playing the game.” He would, he continued, never try to hold

The Statistical Reformation • 275
46 See Pearson’s wartime diary, with many letters pasted in, pp. 98–104, Pearson Papers 246.
On the biometric dinners, see Brautigam, “Inventing Biometry, Inventing Man”; E. S. Pear-
son, Karl Pearson, 108–111; quote on bust from 1928 biometric dinner, Pearson Papers 32.
47 College Correspondence AM/D/238; Pearson Papers 246.
onto his workers, contract or no contract, if “they have not full loyalty to
the ideas of our Founder.” This last personage was Galton, whom Pearson
increasingly invoked in an almost divine role. It was no personal feeling,
but the Great Cause, that disallowed Miss Cave’s selﬁsh behavior.
From 1920 until his retirement in 1933, Pearson organized a series of
annual Galton or biometric dinners to enhance his employees’ sense of
purpose and often to honor distinguished visitors such as Harald Wester-
gaard or Walter Shewhart. His lectures on these occasions could be ele-
gant and disarming, his facility with words undiminished. When the
sculptor Hope-Pinker presented his bust of the professor, Pearson quipped
that “looking the bust in the face, I can only say I feel unworthy to have
been its prototype.” Still, there was something decidedly maudlin about
the annual program of toasts, which began: “1. In pious memory of Sir
Francis Galton. 2. In Remembrance of all benefactors. 3. In memory of the
biometric dead.” These were biometric saints, models of self-sacriﬁcing 
devotion, whose efforts stood as inspiration to the living.46
Pearson’s expectations and demands did not lead to open controversies
with the women in his laboratory. Neither, for different reasons, were his
complaints to administrators at University College and the University of
London expressed directly as conﬂict. They found him always quite will-
ing personally to allow some grant funds to be used for other purposes,
but absolutely insistent that the intentions of donors, patrons, and
founders be respected to the letter. This was no matter of personal greed,
for among the diversions of funds he protested was one to increase his
own salary. By insisting on the letter of the law he succeeded in 1903 in
getting for his Biometric Laboratory the full £1000 offered by the Wor-
shipful Company of Drapers as an annual grant to one or more research
project at University College. He was less successful at gaining full control
of the 1911 Galton bequest to create a Eugenics Laboratory, and with the
anonymous donation by Sir Herbert Bartlett to create space for his grow-
ing empire in a new building, largely because the Great War intervened.47
A last person, this one masculine, who was subjected to Pearson’s in-
ﬂexibly impersonal commitment to the mission of his laboratory and who
could ﬁght back—with effects that in the end were quite devastating—was
R. A. Fisher. Pearson had recognized Fisher’s exceptional statistical talents
from the start, after Fisher submitted a paper to Biometrika in 1914.
There were some tensions when Pearson refused to publish Fisher’s cri-
tique of a paper by a biometric associate in 1916, on the grounds that
there would have to be a reply, and he could not waste precious space on

Figure 16. Pearson tracks down the eugenic sources of Galton’s talents. (From
Karl Pearson, ed., Treasury of Human Inheritance, vol. 1, frontispiece, 1912)

The Statistical Reformation • 277
Figure 17. Hope-Pinker sculpts a bust of Pearson, eight years before he joins the
biometric dead. (From E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson; courtesy of Cambridge 
University Press)
48 KP to R. A. Fisher, 2 Aug. 1919, Hacker Papers, Box 17; Norton and Pearson, “Note
on the Background.”
controversy during the war. That same year he wrote a lukewarm report
for the Royal Society on Fisher’s classic paper (as it now seems) reconcil-
ing biometry with Mendelism. In 1919, nevertheless, Pearson offered
Fisher a position in his laboratory. Since so much training was required to
make even an excellent mathematician into a statistician, he explained,
Fisher would have to commit for an extended period, and at the somewhat
modest salary of £350. “I want a man who will throw himself whole-
heartedly into the work at the Laboratory as it is at present organized,”
wrote Pearson, not one who would wander off on his own statistical proj-
ects. “A real taste for and patience in the somewhat laborious work of
computing, tabulating, and reduction is essential. Mathematical knowl-
edge is very essential, but it is in a sense secondary;” the scientiﬁc work of
the laboratory must drive the mathematics. Pearson of course did not
dream of claiming the prerogative to dictate Fisher’s career. He merely
asked Fisher to enlist his skills in the vital scientiﬁc work of the Biometric
Laboratory and to put aside all ambitions of a personal kind.48

278 • Chapter Nine
49 On Pearson and Fisher, see Eisenhart, “Pearson, Karl,” esp. 454–457. For Fisher on
Pearson, see Fisher, “Professor Karl Pearson and the Method of Moments,” Annals of Eu-
genics, 7, part 4 (June 1937), 303–318 (published just two months after Pearson’s death);
Fisher, “Statistics,” in A. E. Heath, ed., Scientiﬁc Thought in the Twentieth Century (London:
Watts, 1951), 31–55, on 34–36; Fisher, Statistical Methods and Scientiﬁc Inference (Edin-
burgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1956), 2–4; Fisher, Statistical Methods for Research Workers, 13th
ed. (New York: Hafner, 1958), 16–17, 22; Edwards, “R. A. Fisher on Karl Pearson.”
50 Hogben, Statistical Theory, 328–329; Savage, “On Rereading Fisher,” 447. 
Fisher, for some reason, declined, installing himself instead as statisti-
cian for the agricultural ﬁeld station in Rothamsted, where he developed a
brilliantly original scheme of experimental design and statistical analysis.
In later years, he became Pearson’s most effective statistical critic. His
tone, over the years, shifted from bitter to magisterial. In various retro-
spectives he dismissed Pearson as an unoriginal and sometimes incompe-
tent statistician who overshadowed more capable contemporaries such as
Edgeworth and W. S. Gosset (“Student”) through his energetic entrepre-
neurship and self-promotion. Fisher disdained not only Pearson’s own
work, but a whole tradition, including Yule and Greenwood, which he
characterized in terms of ﬁtting frequency curves to observational mate-
rial. “Modern” statistics, to Fisher, meant tests of signiﬁcance applied to
experimental data—rules of quantitative inference—which he defended by
sharply castigating his predecessor.49 Yet the despised forerunners had in-
troduced the language of statistical signiﬁcance and with it what the radi-
cal mathematician Lancelot Hogben called “the statistician as arbitrator
on matters about which trained observers disagree.” To Hogben, Fisher-
ian tests of statistical signiﬁcance were the highest development of Pear-
son’s biometric way, to be contrasted with Jerzy Neyman’s efforts to
reconceptualize statistical analysis as a direct basis for practical decisions.
“Freud too might have called Pearson a father to Fisher,” remarked the pi-
oneering Bayesian, Leonard J. Savage.50
EUGENICS, EVOLUTION, AND STATISTICS
Having come, by about 1885, to regard Darwinian evolution as the great
explanatory principle for human history as well as the development of life,
Pearson showed a clear willingness in the era of the Men and Women’s
Club to endorse state intervention in human reproductive decisions in the
name of socialism and social efﬁciency. He did not at that time distinguish
sharply between purely biological and cultural inheritance, and so his eu-
genic commitments were not very explicit before the late 1890s. Galton
established and funded a eugenic laboratory in 1906, which soon after-
wards fell under the supervision of an ostensibly reluctant Pearson, and

The Statistical Reformation • 279
51 Decisive here is MacKenzie, Statistics in Britain.
52 Magnello, “Non-Correlation of Biometrics and Eugenics”; Matthews, Quantiﬁcation
and the Quest for Medical Certainty, 126; Pearson, National Life from the Standpoint of Sci-
ence, 18; Pearson, Scope and Importance of National Eugenics, 11.
Galton’s will in 1911 led to Pearson’s selection as the ﬁrst Galton Profes-
sor of Eugenics. From about 1900 to the outbreak of World War I, eu-
genic themes dominated Pearson’s public addresses and essays. His tone
was quotably acerbic, and his arguments were often statistical. Contempo-
rary historical and literary scholarship on eugenics has, properly, placed
great emphasis on Pearson’s eugenic preaching. In recent decades, eugen-
ics has been widely seen as the real motivation for his statistical work, and
even as the force that shaped it.51
Galton had tried out eugenic advocacy in the 1860s without getting
much response. For the following three decades, he devoted himself princi-
pally to the scientiﬁc and statistical aspects of “natural inheritance,” with the
potential eugenic signiﬁcance of this knowledge always in mind. By 1890 his
ideas had become important for researchers on evolution, whether or not
they favored eugenics. Eugenics emerged as a popular movement only in the
new century. Pearson was among the earliest and most forceful of eugeni-
cists, having warned of the danger of modern reproductive patterns even be-
fore 1900. In that year he called on Galton to “take the ﬁeld for eugenics”
and enlisted himself as a loyal deputy. The eugenics movement, which be-
came international, was simultaneously popular and scientiﬁc, extending
from genetic congresses to ﬁtter family contests at the Kansas state fair. It
was as often Lamarckian as Darwinian, and its popularity in Britain and
America involved a wonderfully simple Mendelism, conveyed, for example,
by placards showing the inheritance of mental defect.
Pearson’s eugenic lectures drew deeply from the quantitative idiom of
statistics, the science of mass phenomena. “Of a deﬁnite child of A and B
we can assert nothing with certainty, but of all the children of a deﬁnite
class of parents like A and B we can assert that a deﬁnite proportion will
have a deﬁnite amount of any character of A and B with a certainty as great
as that of any scientiﬁc prediction whatever.” In his 1907 Boyle Lecture at
Oxford on “The Scope and Importance to the State of the Science of Na-
tional Eugenics,” he emphasized the statistical foundation of its objectivity:
To become a true science, you must remove our study from the strife of parties,
from the conﬂict of creeds, from false notions of charity, or the unbalanced im-
pulses of sentiment. You must treat it with the observational caution and criti-
cal spirit that you give to other branches of biology. And when you have
discovered its principles and deduced its laws, then, and then only, can you
question how far they are consonant with the current moral ideas or with pre-
vailing human sentiment.52

280 • Chapter Nine
53 Pearson, The Groundwork of Eugenics (London: Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series,
1909), 19; Pearson, Nature and Nurture: The Problem of the Future (London: Eugenics Lab-
oratory Lecture Series, 1910), 7–8.
In another lecture, “On the Groundwork of Eugenics,” he listed three
main points. First: “We depart from the old sociology, in that we desert
verbal discussion for statistical facts.” Next, we deploy the new calculus of
statistics. Finally, we recognize that nature is more powerful than nurture,
and that acquired traits are not inherited. From the data of human repro-
duction, it was plain that the least prosperous, and presumably the least ﬁt,
classes had overwhelmingly the largest families. To this he added his mea-
surements of the heritability of human traits, which he found to be very
high and virtually the same for mental and social as for physical character-
istics. In “Nature and Nurture: The Problem of the Future,” he argued
categorically that quantiﬁcation was the indispensable tool of eugenics:
“General theories of society are of no use, verbal discussions are no use,
philosophical reasoning is no use. We need to observe, measure, and re-
cord, to analyze by the methods of exact science, before we can advance in
our sociology.”53
Not all of Pearson’s eugenic investigations were founded on statistics.
Galton’s Eugenics Laboratory was more concerned with tracing family
records of disease and other peculiarities than with statistical analysis in the
mathematical sense, and even after taking over as its head, Pearson main-
tained its institutional distinctness from his Biometric Laboratory. The lav-
ish volumes growing out of this work that began appearing in 1907, the
Treasury of Human Inheritance, consisted of extensive genealogical charts
(omitting names) representing presence or absence of various traits, most
of them medical abnormalities but also including such characteristics as
the attainment of distinction in law and science. The last were of particu-
lar interest to Pearson, who evidently compiled those tables, and he also
was listed on the volumes as general editor, though the day-to-day work
had been mainly supervised by David Heron. Certainly there were inter-
actions, including a regular ﬂow of personnel, between the Eugenics and
Biometric Laboratories, and the Treasury was also full of information on
variability. At the time of his retirement in 1933, Pearson invoked the cru-
cial dependence of eugenics on statistics to challenge the separation of his
chair and his laboratories into statistical and eugenic units, under two dif-
ferent professors.
Against Huxley, whose lecture on “Evolution and Ethics” called for civ-
ilized interventions to move beyond the inhumanity of nature, Pearson
preached socialism and eugenics as the next phase in the biological
progress of the human species. Civilization, for Pearson, was the expres-
sion and not the antagonist of biological progress. But he was no more 

Figure 18. Abnormal eyes: specimen of the work of the Eugenics Laboratory.
(From Karl Pearson, ed., Treasury of Human Inheritance, vol. 2, part 5, 
plate P, 1932)

282 • Chapter Nine
54 Pearson, “Socialism and Natural Selection.” See Crook, Benjamin Kidd; T. H. Huxley,
Evolution and Ethics (London: Macmillan, 1894).
55 Pearson, Scope and Importance, 25; Paul, “Eugenics and the Left.”
favorable than Huxley to natural selection within society, which, by in-
creasing sickness and starvation among the poor, would promote discon-
tent, disorder, and possibly revolution. Since biological struggle was now
principally a competition of state against state, such inefﬁciencies could be
fatal to a whole nation. Pearson was especially provoked by the vast popu-
lar success of Benjamin Kidd’s Social Evolution, a book that drew from
contemporary biological thought and from political currents in which
Pearson also moved, but that was not the work of a trained scientist. He
had no truck with Kidd’s individualistic politics, his doctrine that socialism
meant biological degeneration. Kidd called for a biological religion as a
kind of opiate, to reconcile the unﬁt to the hardships and restrictions that
were unavoidable if natural selection was to continue to operate.
Pearson was not so much a social as a socialist Darwinist, and he saw
Kidd’s program as retrograde. The replacement of individual struggle with
scientiﬁc planning was for Pearson the next phase in human evolution.
Since social stability, and hence ﬁtness, depended on the health and con-
tentment of working people, Pearson demanded that the rewards of natu-
ral superiority be kept within “healthy bounds.”54 Reproduction had to
become a matter of policy, to be regulated by science and not by hunger
or poverty. To this end, he resurrected his early arguments for state sup-
port of child-rearing, now specifying more clearly that provision for moth-
erhood would be limited to cases of “sound parentage.” The afﬁrmation
of social hierarchy in such arguments has an obvious conservative dimen-
sion, but his willingness to make reproduction a matter or social rather
than individual choice was still radical. For Pearson, as for many Fabian so-
cialists, eugenics was allied to improved education and a socialized econ-
omy, which could only work, they supposed, if the population were
intellectually and morally ﬁt. Eugenics would not halt the advance of the
ﬁner moral sympathies, but guide them along the paths of efﬁciency and
racial progress. His views typify, or perhaps caricature, the role of eugenics
in the birth of the welfare state.55
Typical, too, was his support of empire, which in his youth he had dis-
dained as a distraction from the problems of class inequality at home. On
practical issues affecting populations near home, a measure of humanity
shone through. He demanded that technical and commercial teaching re-
main fully accessible to the less wealthy members of “the London middle-
classes—the democracy of this city.” He opposed Christian lectures at
University College in the name of preserving it as a welcoming place for
students of “Buddhist, Mahometan, and Jewish faiths.” Of the more dis-

The Statistical Reformation • 283
56 Pearson, “Lord Kelvin on Science and Religion,” letter to The Times, 11 May 1903,
7e–f; Pearson, “The University of London,” letter to The Times, 17 Dec. 1898, 9a; Pearson,
“Socialism and Natural Selection,” 111; Pearson, National Life, 21, 26.
57 Pearson, “The Decline of the Birth Rate,” letter to The Times, 23 Oct. 1906, 3b; Pear-
son, “National Deterioration,” letter to The Times, 5 Sept. 1905, 5c–d. He issued this chal-
lenge, “statistics on the table,” repeatedly, as in another letter to The Times, 12 July 1910,
11f, in a debate about the effects of alcoholism (see Stigler, “Pearson and the Cambridge
Economists)”; and again in 1912 in his debates with Almoth Wright about the opsonic index
(Matthews, Quantiﬁcation and the Quest for Medical Certainty, 110).
tant, however, he spoke with greater scientiﬁc stridency, and he unhesitat-
ingly asserted the inferiority of non-Europeans. “No thoughtful socialist,”
we learn, “would hesitate to cultivate Uganda at the expense of its present
occupiers if Lancashire were starving. Only he would have done this di-
rectly and consciously, and not by way of missionaries and exploiting com-
panies.” Many centuries, he argued, had not sufﬁced for the “Kafﬁr or the
negro” in Africa to produce a civilization that could be compared with the
Aryan, and Europeans had every right to move in and make use of the land
that native populations could not ﬁtly occupy. To hold back in the name
of peace and cooperation would be to halt human progress.56
In the early years of the twentieth century, Pearson spoke of the nation
being tested by its war against the Boers and failing, and of the need for a sci-
entiﬁc, eugenic socialism to improve its efﬁciency and restore its ﬁber. He
wrote of the “primary duty of the woman to rear strong and healthy chil-
dren, and the primary duty of the man to carry arms in its defence.” He be-
came a vocal champion of educated professionals as against idle aristocrats
and the lazy or incapable poor, and he increasingly naturalized class differ-
ence. In the relatively open society of railways, schools, and factories created
by the nineteenth century, most of the nation’s talent had already made its
way up the social hierarchy. To those who would challenge this conclusion,
imagining there was still a great reserve of ability in the lower classes, he
called for quantitative evidence: “Statistics on the table, please.”57
Pearson’s most militaristic phase extended from roughly the Boer War to
1910. Rejecting, as he insisted, the parochial jingoism of the barroom, he
instead called for military struggle in the name of science. The pressure of
competition was no less essential as a stimulant to progress in the era of so-
cial selection than it had been in the earlier era of individualistic natural se-
lection. “Mankind as a whole, like the individual man, advances through
pain and suffering only. The path of progress is strewn with the wreck of
nations, . . . the stepping stones on which mankind has arisen to the higher
intellectual and deeper emotional life of to-day.” On occasion he exalted
war as a necessary prod to human advancement. “Are not the physique, the
intellectuality, the morality of man, the product of that grim warfare be-
tween individual and individual, between society and society, and between

284 • Chapter Nine
58 Pearson, National Life, 64; Pearson, Scope and Importance, 22.
59 Pearson, “The Philosophy of Natural Science,” Nature, 55 (11 Nov. 1896), 1–4, on 1;
also two unsigned contributions during the war to The New Statesman: “Germany in the
Eyes of an Onlooker,” vol. 3 (22 Aug. 1914), 608–610; and “Wie steht’s mit der deutschen
Cultur,” vol. 4 (10 and 17 Oct. 1914), 9–11 and 33–35, on 33–34. See also Alter, “Bewun-
derung und Ablehnung”; Alter, Reluctant Patron.
60 Speeches at a Dinner, 23; KP to Raymond Pearl, 6 Nov. 1934, Pearl Papers.
61 See Pearson’s manuscript lecture on eugenics, 1923, in Pearson Papers 79/1.
humanity and nature, of which we even yet see no end?”58 More often,
though, he spoke of the healthy competition of nations as cultural and eco-
nomic rather than military, and, as his disenchantment with Germany
waxed, he increasingly identiﬁed military values with the regrettable domi-
nance of Prussia in the uniﬁed German state. Now that a wider European
war seemed no longer merely hypothetical, he feared it more and more,
and during the actual ﬁghting he called war “an unmixed evil,” even if “it
is an evil we must at times bravely and unhesitatingly face.” He complained
of German pretensions to a monopoly on culture, invoked by some there
as the ultimate rationale for war, and proclaimed the “international charac-
ter of all true science.” At the same time, he referred with increasing alarm
to German economic competition, and called for more liberal support of
science in his own country to restore its economic power. Unlike many
contemporaries, he seemed more desirous of public respect and apprecia-
tion for science than of institutionalized state ﬁnancing.59
What he had imagined in the early years of the twentieth century to be
the voice of an Old Testament prophet, challenging English complacency
with his calls for a more efﬁcient state, has been understood retrospectively,
and not without reason, as pandering to the worst forms of national impe-
rialism. Near the end of his life, in 1934, he once even spoke with seeming
indulgence of Hitler’s vast eugenic experiment, which, however, would
probably fail because the Germans were still novices in modern statistics.
Possibly this was a joke gone awry, for there is no other evidence in his writ-
ings of fascist sympathies, and a letter the same year suggests that he found
the Nazis intolerable.60 Still, his political standpoint for decades was almost
unremittingly harsh and disdainful of the gentler sympathies. In his most
moralistic moments, he could hector a middle-class audience for the self-
indulgent habit of choosing marriage partners on the basis of superﬁcial
love rather than thinking of the future of the race.61 On the other hand, he
was never the man on horseback, never the leader of a movement. While
appealing to eugenics to halt the catastrophic racial decline of his own na-
tion, he called for further study rather than precipitate action.
He was always, in his self-conception, the man of the study and not of
the marketplace, one who endorsed scientiﬁc enthusiasm but political cau-

The Statistical Reformation • 285
62 On the Eugenics Education Society, see Leonard Darwin to KP, Pearson Papers 673/
6; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3, 362, 371–372; on Shaw, see ibid., 260; on buffoonery, see
Pearson, “The Position of Eugenics as a Science,” letter to The Times, 15 Oct. 1913, 4e; on
study and marketplace, see Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3, 262; also Solovey, Demography
and Degeneration, 32, 73.
tion. The man who in 1879 was ﬂummoxed by the demand to inscribe his
faith in a box on the registration form at Heidelberg, wishing instead to
explain himself in a treatise on religion, had changed little by the early
twentieth century. Pearson so loathed the thought of being conﬁned
within someone else’s movement that he could not even remain loyal to
his own. Once his doctrines showed signs of becoming popular, he began
immediately to doubt them, or at least to question the competence of his
followers. He sneered at the propagandistic efforts of the Eugenics Edu-
cation Society and chided Shaw for supporting the immediate implemen-
tation of radical eugenic measures from which the founder of eugenics
himself, Galton, had drawn back. Shaw should remember, Pearson de-
clared, that eugenics, like socialism, must penetrate gradually, without
alarming mankind unduly. In 1913, he wrote to The Times that the science
of race efﬁciency had been turned by early popularization into a subject for
“buffoonery,” and that the need of the present was for the academic and
not the popular side of the movement. Eugenic politics required a level of
scientiﬁc knowledge that was not yet in place, he thought. At the peak of
his eugenic extremism, in 1904, he told the Sociological Society that eu-
genics remained a “question of the study now, but to-morrow it will be
the question of the market-place, or morality and politics.”62 When he
died in 1936, this tomorrow had still not arrived.
Pearson’s eugenics “of the study” consisted in practice of hortatory
speeches drawing from the analysis of public statistics, supported by bio-
metric measurements and other researches into heredity. His statistical
program was unmistakably linked to his eugenic commitments, but not as
effect to cause. The bond was loose and reciprocal, mediated by a deep de-
votion to a quantitative science of biological evolution. It was evolution
that had excited him so in 1893 when he began to envision a scientiﬁc ca-
reer in statistics. His sense at this time of eugenic entailments was vague
and indirect, subsumed in his exultation that he, an applied mathematician
of uncommon ambition and dilettantish attainments, might take a com-
manding role in advancing the most original and comprehensive scientiﬁc
theory of the nineteenth century. In 1896, when he and Galton began dis-
cussing eugenics, he professed surprise that his own studies showed the ac-
tion of natural selection to be overwhelmed by human fertility differences.
It must be muddled somewhere, he told Yule, perhaps disingenuously;

286 • Chapter Nine
63 KP to Galton, 2 Jan. 1896, Galton papers 293/B; KP to Yule, 30 Dec. 1895; KP to
Galton, 10 Jan. 1901, 25 Oct. 1906, Galton Papers 293/E–G.
64 KP to Greenwood, 3 Feb. 1911; KP to Pearl, 3 Oct. 1924; KP to Greenwood, 14 Aug.
1920; Pearson lecture on Galton, 1922, Pearson Papers 32; Pearson, Galton Centenary, 17;
Magnello, “Non-Correlation of Biometrics and Eugenics.”
65 Parts of this section are based closely on Porter “Statistical Utopianism.”
“otherwise there is another nail in the cofﬁn of natural selection as applied
to civilised man.” Not even in private documents did he reduce the im-
portance of statistics to eugenics. His correspondence with Weldon, his in-
separable biometric collaborator, is silent on eugenic issues.63
From the early 1890s, he explored the whole range of scientiﬁc ﬁelds
that might be reshaped by statistics. Some of his earliest statistical papers
addressed meteorological and astronomical topics as well as biological, an-
thropometric, and social ones. Two weeks after Galton’s death, in 1911,
Pearson told Greenwood that statistics, not eugenics, was the most im-
portant of Galton’s contributions, since “the spirit of mathematics must
inform all science.” When his second volume on Galton’s life came out, he
worried that Galton’s reputation was linked too narrowly to his eugenic
advocacy. “The ordinary reviewer has no other thought in his mind than
‘Galton & Eugenics,’ which is far from the whole story.” Statistics, after
all, “is almost the Novum Organon of all true sciences.” The development
of ideas inspired by Galton, he announced in a centenary appreciation, was
leading to a “revolution in scientiﬁc logic,” one that would “ultimately
produce a renascence in every science in which statistics plays a part,” in
short “every branch of modern knowledge.” But then he seems to have
regretted this distancing from eugenics, and in the published version of
this same lecture he omitted the sentence just quoted. If, he asked instead,
we take away Galton’s contributions to eugenics, “what is there left to ho-
nour him for?”64
THE ARISTOCRACY OF SCIENCE
What sort of science would statistics advance? What should be the role of
science in an age of statistics? Pearson’s ambitions were characteristically
exalted and have become almost unimaginable. He believed in scientiﬁc
expertise, but equally in science as the basis of wisdom. Although he ad-
hered to an ideal of scientiﬁc selﬂessness and renunciation, he thought it
perfectly consistent with the cultivation of individuality. His utopia would
have been a very special kind of scientiﬁc culture, led not by mere special-
ists but by moral leaders who rejected blind faith in favor of the naturalism
and rationality of scientiﬁc method.65

The Statistical Reformation • 287
66 For example Pearson, “Politics and Science,” Fortnightly Review (1894), and “Reac-
tion” (1895), both reprinted in Chances of Death, vol. 1, 173–255. 
67 Pearson, Charles Darwin: An Appreciation (London: Questions of the Day and of the
Fray, 12, 1923).
To deﬁne more circumspectly the signiﬁcance of Pearson’s commitment
to eugenics is not to displace him from the practical or political world. He
scarcely believed in pure science; he was unmistakably an applied mathe-
matician, and proud of it. In the 1890s, when he took up statistics, Dar-
winian evolution was for him the leading edge of advancing rationality.
This was less for eugenic than for religious reasons, a liberation from the-
ology. Science he viewed as a jealous God, which brooked no rivals. Al-
though he made a habit in his maturity of writing off the battle between
science and religion as now otiose, this stance was premised on the opti-
mistic assumption that, in the march of historical progress, Christianity
had already been vanquished and might now be preserved in its little en-
clave, a museum with a fence around it. But the inmates, who included
such nonnegligible personages as Gladstone, Salisbury, and Balfour, stub-
bornly refused this conﬁnement and threatened to mislead millions with
their challenges to Darwinian naturalism and their reafﬁrmation of design
in nature. The reactionary, because religious, view of science put forward
by these political worthies in the mid-1890s bothered Pearson all the
more because Lords Salisbury and Balfour were prominent in the new
conservative government, which he despised. That their scientiﬁc argu-
ments were endorsed by great physicists such as Kelvin appeared to Pear-
son to be part of an insidious movement that was impeding the ascent of
science in public life.
In the face of such arguments, Pearson counterattacked with bitter sar-
casm, impugning motives as well as competence.66 The new age would
have no more place for an archaic natural theology than for an outdated
materialism. Instead, the world was a scene of human activity and labor, a
collective effort to ﬁnd meaning by making truth and to gain success by
achieving efﬁciency. Rationality seemed a new and fragile thing. Not until
Darwin, he claimed, in a rare historical lapse, did mankind outgrow the
mythology of a moment of divine creation in 4004 B.C. The human spirit
was liberated by such discoveries, and science should ﬁght for them.67
There were other obstacles to the new order. Pearson had no sympathy
for ﬁn de siècle spiritualism, especially when it claimed the backing of sci-
ence. He complained of the physicist Oliver Lodge’s participation in the
Society for Psychical Research, discerning, he believed, a seeker after mys-
tical truth rather than a disinterested inquirer. To mix science with such
mysticism disturbed him as much as claiming a rational basis for religion,
and it was all the more dangerous because statistical analysis of spiritualist

288 • Chapter Nine
68 Pearson, “Peculiarities of Psychical Research,” Nature, 50 (13 Dec. 1894), 153; also
Nature, 50 (27 Dec. 1894), 200.
experiments had already in the 1890s assumed a prominent role in this dis-
course. H. G. Wells, a fellow skeptic, instanced the low social rank of medi-
ums and witnesses and the incapacity of statistics to detect slight effects as
reasons to reject claims for psychical phenomena. Pearson preferred to
doubt for other reasons. “If, to suppose an instance, the greatest living
anatomist were to announce that he had dissected a dogﬁsh and found
lungs therein, adduce his wife, a local general practitioner, two servants,
and a lady named ‘Miss Z.’ in evidence, and add that he had lost the speci-
men, there can be scarcely any doubt that, in spite of his position and his
character, the science of anatomy would remain exactly where it was before
his discovery was proclaimed.” The high odds achieved by these psychical
experiments were “signiﬁcant, very signiﬁcant,” but what they proved was
“lack of psychical acumen, and not telepathy.”68 Pearson was among the
most ardent of scientiﬁc naturalists, and in the early 1890s statistics was es-
pecially appealing to him as a bastion of support for the creed of science.
The growing role of quantiﬁcation and calculation in the world since
Pearson’s time has been achieved mainly in the guise of self-effacement, as
a set of methods made impersonal by the strict logic of rules and conven-
tions that govern their use. Statistics, by reputation, supplies a protocol for
seeking answers to comparatively narrow and clearly formulated questions.
Its domain is factual, not ethical, and it is wielded by specialists, not by
statesmen and intellectuals. But Pearson saw the future of this new mode of
science in terms more compatible with the social and political hierarchies of
his own time, as a basis for thought and action among the leaders of soci-
ety. His culture did not idealize rational bureaucracy, inﬁnitely subdivided,
but invested authority in elite generalists. An ambitious champion of a new
scientiﬁc organon naturally aimed to seize the opportunities presented in
his own world, and a history that presupposes the bureaucratic structures of
the late twentieth century, will inevitably miss the point.
There is no doubting that Pearson wanted to build statistics as a ﬁeld,
one that would, for example, provide posts for the students he set out to
train. He was not so sure about the “discipline,” a form of scientiﬁc or-
ganization that he identiﬁed with the scientiﬁc narrowness of contempo-
rary Germany. His frequent references to plodding Germans supplied the
exemplar of what his science should not become. He complained in 1895,
and then for decades afterwards, that “in the great research machine of
Germany there is scarcely more room for originality than in the great po-
litical machine.” The German system had been reshaped to train only the
Fachmann, the disciplinary specialist, and had lost its capacity to educate
“the men who wield imagination in science. . . . It is not a display of minu-

The Statistical Reformation • 289
69 Pearson, “Academic Germany—A Puff ” (unsigned review of Friedrich Paulsen, The
German Universities), Saturday Review, 80 (1895), 271. See also “Wie steht’s mit der
deutschen Cultur.” He often criticized German science in his letters, e.g., KP to Weldon, 9
Oct. 1900; KP to Yule, 30 Aug. 1896; KP to Greenwood, 17 July 1904. On statistical posts,
see Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3, 381.
70 Pearson, “Function of Science,” quote on p. xxv.
tiaea but an education in the use of the mind that the university must
provide.”69
The point was of course not to deny the value of scientiﬁc expertise, but
to comprehend it in relation to the wider domain of knowledge. On this,
as on so many topics about which he felt passionately, he was torn. He be-
lieved deeply in the need for specialist training. In his grand utopian proj-
ect for scientiﬁc education, “The Function of Science in the Modern
State,” published originally as the preface to a supplementary volume of
the Encyclopaedia Britannica in 1902, he invented a magniﬁcent hierarchy
of scientiﬁc schools. At the bottom were programs for shepherds and milk-
maids, whose work could after all be made more efﬁcient. This was a kind
of scientiﬁc management, but with a difference, for they would not receive
mere instruction in routines. Instead, their education would emphasize
principles, including an introduction to scientiﬁc method, to make them
adaptable and creative rather than machinelike practitioners of the agricul-
tural arts. Further up the hierarchy he imagined secondary and higher
craft schools, commercial schools and universities, technical universities,
law and medical schools, and schools for statesmanship. At the scientiﬁc
summit were national laboratories and institutes in every ﬁeld of science,
including technical and medical ones. Throughout, his principle was con-
sistent. Pure science should not be particularly emphasized, except for the
training of research scientists. The point was to focus on technical sub-
jects, but to teach in such a way that even the lowliest and narrowest study
became an exempliﬁcation of scientiﬁc method. “The recognition of this
fundamental fact is the reformation which must take place in academic
studies.”70
Even for technicians and others on the intermediate levels of prestige,
his protocol required deliberate efforts to broaden their curriculum. They
should receive an introduction to comparative history and folklore; they
should learn foreign languages, set off if possible on a Wanderjahre, and
participate in athletics. As much as possible, especially for elite students,
education should be a process of exploration akin to research. This was the
great German university ideal of the early nineteenth century, now, so far
as Pearson could see, largely lost. His career was in a way an effort to re-
store it in a new form, a campaign against excessive narrowness. In “this
day of specialization,” he wrote late in life, a wide-ranging intellectual
preparation such as Galton’s had become all too rare. Of course he was

290 • Chapter Nine
71 Pearson, Galton Centenary, 8–9. For his opposition to textbooks, see his complaints
about one that Davenport was writing, reﬂecting his doubts of Davenport’s biometric com-
petence: Davenport Papers, American Philosophical Society.
72 See KP’s lecture at a dinner for Harald Westergaard, 9 March 1925, Pearson Papers 32;
the words quoted were spoken in praise of Westergaard’s Copenhagen laboratory.
thinking also of himself, and as he became more secure about his own
early failure to specialize, he spoke with growing conviction of the need
for competence in many ﬁelds to investigate such vital problems as evolu-
tion. He condemned what he saw as the plodding style of textbooks, and
refused to write any of his own. Even for those unambitious mediocrities
who must make up the majority of students, it was the mission of the
teacher to force them to think for themselves. Superior students, driven by
a thirst for real knowledge, would demand the deeper understanding that
science could provide.71
Pearson’s own teaching, convincingly described as brilliant by various
observers and former students who were in no way blind to his ﬂaws, was
a creative synthesis of the newest ideas and methods. When he began lec-
turing in statistics, in 1894–95, he presented not the standard mathemat-
ics of probability or error theory, but his own research in progress, work
that would transform the ﬁeld. His ideal of the statistical laboratory was to
get beyond the limits of any classroom, to provide a space where the stu-
dent “learns to handle his own material.”72 And the education of a statis-
tician should not be limited to the merely professional. Late in his career
he relied on history to connect statistics with the broader currents of so-
cial and intellectual life, as well as to inculcate an ideal of a life in statistics.
The teacher, he believed, should educate the whole person, and for Pear-
son it was a tragedy when a good mathematician knew only mathematics.
His disdain for the commonplace and the formulaic reﬂected his mis-
sionary ambitions, “the gospel that statistics formed the narrow path,
which would lead to salvation.” This theme pointed back to his youth,
when he held up the “enthusiasm of the study” as his noblest life purpose.
His lectures on the history of statistics bemoaned the reduction of science
to a mere profession, another road to a respectable living. In more heroic
times, the banner for science and statistics was carried by men like Ed-
mund Halley, a passionate investigator: “We are not dealing with a profes-
sional scientist, a professor sitting in his chair and earning his living by
teaching and doing a reasonable amount of research to maintain his repu-
tation. No, we have something quite different; Halley was a man for
whom the whole book of nature had absorbing interest.” The eighteenth-
century mathematician Thomas Simpson, by contrast, was a scoundrel,
supporting himself by converting De Moivre’s great discoveries into text-
book routines. “We are passing from the scientiﬁc enthusiasm of the

The Statistical Reformation • 291
73 Pearson, History of Statistics, 95, 176; KP speech at dinner for Mr. and Mrs. Walter She-
whart, 5 May 1932, Pearson Papers 32; Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 2, 154–155.
74 Pearson, “Philosophy of Natural Science” (note 59), 2. On Kuhn’s reading of Pearson,
see the ﬁrst of his Lowell lectures (delivered March 1951), Box 3, folder 1, Kuhn Papers,
MIT (I thank Karl Hufbauer for this reference).
75 Quote from Pearson, “The Moral Basis of Socialism” (1887), in Pearson, Ethic of
Freethought, 306. On the opposition of Victorian moralists to selﬁshness, see Collini, Public
Moralists, 65.
founders of the Royal Society to a period when men followed science as a
profession.” It was a sad transformation. “Science as a pursuit must always
stand higher than science as a profession.”73
Pearson’s idealized man of science was creative yet disciplined, a Kuhnian
avant la lettre. “Fruitful new hypotheses have almost always been the prod-
uct of master-minds, which have worked out old theories to the point at
which they are seen to absolutely contradict phenomena. The ’prentice hand
ﬁnding some new fact at present unaccounted for by the old-established the-
ory is generally over-hasty with the fabrication of a new hypothesis.”74 Such
bold theorization had, in Pearson’s telling, a class dimension. His exem-
plary scientiﬁc heroes were not men of the professional middle classes, but
Darwin and Galton, whose inherited wealth allowed them to be true to
science and keep free of the petty corruption and careerism that were in-
creasingly prevalent in the sciences as in so much of life. For himself, a uni-
versity professor, it was a struggle to remain aloof from all the little
distractions and temptations of the academic world.
In political terms, too, he thought increasingly of the proper role of sci-
ence by analogy to the traditional standing of the aristocracy. As early as
1887 he had written of the need to “aristocratise government at the same
time as we democratise it; the ultimate appeal to the many is hopeless, un-
less the many have foresight enough to place power in the hands of the
ﬁttest.”75 In the twentieth century, his revisionist aristocracy took the
form of a concrete if whimsical proposal initiated by Francis Galton to re-
construct the House of Lords on the basis of hereditary merit. Neither
man thought much of the British hereditary elite as then constituted. Still
a socialist, Pearson had even less respect for the achievements of men of
business, and none at all for mere wealth as an index of capacity or achieve-
ment. Surely there were better ways to maintain the House of Lords than
to appoint grasping plutocrats, tradesmen, and failed cabinet ministers.
His admiration went out to scientists, scholars, artists, statesmen, and ad-
ministrators, and he imagined that an upper house might be formed from
the most accomplished of them. Neither Galton nor Pearson believed that
hereditary transmission should be perpetual, certainly not for those whose
descendants were mediocre, but the hereditary principle admitted a eu-
genic defense. Pearson invoked “the truth drawn from observation that,

292 • Chapter Nine
76 Karl Pearson, “Primogeniture and Heredity,” letter to The Times, 31 March 1910, 8.
77 Pearson, Galton, vol. 2, 93–94; vol. 3A, 353; Pearson, Function of Science, ix–xi.
78 Pearson, Galton, vol. 2, 122.
79 Pearson, National Life, 33, 54, 13–14; unsigned review of two books on socialism, Sat-
urday Review of Politics, Literature, Science, and Art, 79 (1895), 130–131.
80 Pearson, Scope and Importance.
for good or bad, children, in a certain marked and measurable degree, re-
semble their parents.”76
On occasion he endorsed the inclusive view that the “aristocracy of worth”
was “not conﬁned to any social class; it is a caste which is scattered through-
out all classes; let us awaken it.” At other times he took the caste notion more
literally, suggesting that through selective breeding and differentiated 
education it would be possible to cultivate distinctive scientiﬁc, political,
and commercial elites.77 This language of inheritance was, however, always
subordinated to meritocracy, the proper course “between the Charybdis of
Democracy and the Scylla of an Hereditary Peerage.”78 He would require
that family abilities prove themselves in every generation, demonstrating in-
tellectual and moral worth through high-level service to society. Carlyle’s
ideal of the hero and hero worship, which appealed so strongly to men of sci-
ence in Galton’s generation, remained attractive to Pearson.
Although science was far more central to Pearson’s ideal of the Carlylean
hero than in the original, he did not think that scientists should be placed
in charge of the apparatus of state. He merely insisted that their knowledge
should guide public decisions of all kinds, and that a proper scientiﬁc edu-
cation was indispensable for every person in a position of authority. He
adopted a tone of almost desperate urgency. What the country needed was
effective organization, a centralized state that could avoid the chaos of eco-
nomic competition at home to achieve efﬁciency in the struggle abroad.
Britain has “the ﬂesh, blood, and sinews of a nation, but to make it fore-
most in the struggle, to make it a homogeneous, highly-organized whole,
you must have a complex nervous system.” By nervous system he meant
knowledge, or science, “that classiﬁed experience which we term wisdom.”
Not religion or dogmatic philosophy but only scientiﬁc study could iden-
tify the requirements of continued progress and establish a sound morality.
He despised all talk of “rights of man,” calling instead for a “social moral-
ity,” founded on “the solid ground of human history, human experience,
and a knowledge of human nature.”79 Although his vision included a place
for specialized experts, each assuming responsibility for a domain of partic-
ular competence, this would not sufﬁce at the top of the hierarchy. Pearson
adhered to a somewhat traditional view that the ruling classes were quali-
ﬁed by supple, disciplined minds, hereafter to be formed by a grammar of
science. As he explained to an audience at Oxford, he envisioned the higher
statistics as an indispensable part of their mental equipment.80

The Statistical Reformation • 293
81 Letter, 17 November 1902, quoted in Harold Perkin, Rise of Professional Society, 169.
82 KP to Weldon, 6 Jan. 1901; Pearson, The Function of Science in the Modern State, 2d ed.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1919), preface to 2d ed., vi; H. G. Wells, Antici-
pations of the Reaction of Mechanical and Scientiﬁc Progress upon Human Life and Thought
(New York and London: Harper and Brothers, 1902), 167.
This notion of a scientiﬁcally literate elite was, in his time, more plausi-
ble as a strategy for bringing together knowledge and power than any
scheme for a tyranny of expert specialists. The period has too often been
characterized in intellectual histories of the late Victorian and Edwardian
periods, especially when they turn to social Darwinism and eugenics, as
straightforwardly an age of science. Although scientiﬁc education was
widely advocated, especially in the aftermath of the disastrous Boer War, as
an answer to national decline, the political elite continued to come up
mainly through Eton and Oxford, equipped with a classical education
rather than a scientiﬁc one.
Winston Churchill wrote in 1902 to H. G. Wells in response to his An-
ticipations of the Reaction of Mechanical Progress upon Human Life and
Thought: “Nothing would be more fatal than for the Government of States
to get in the hands of experts. Expert knowledge is limited knowledge,
and the unlimited ignorance of the plain man who knows where it hurts is
a safer guide than any rigorous direction of a specialized character.”81
Churchill’s protest has been dismissed by modernist-minded historians as
the vain effusion of a man now out of his time. Many contemporaries were
not so sure. Pearson related a pertinent anecdote to Weldon in 1901: “I
heard a good tale the other day from a Civil Service Examiner. The heads
of the Commission were asked why 75 p.c. of the appointments were
given to Oxford literary school men. They replied that there were only 25
p.c. of the civil service appointments wherein gentlemen were unneces-
sary; they accordingly were not able to give more than 25 p.c. of the civil
service appointments to mathematics & science. How in the world is the
country going to survive under such a regime?”
After the First World War, Pearson explained his ambitions very clearly,
and in print. The state must be freed from minds trained in literature and
jurisprudence. The function of science extends to every branch of admin-
istrative activity. But this was the vision of a disaffected man, not his de-
scription of current reality. Neither did Wells imagine that experts had as
yet acquired much inﬂuence. “The modern democracy, or democratic
quasi-monarchy, conducts its affairs as though there was no such thing as
special knowledge or practical education. The utmost recognition it af-
fords to the man who has taken the pains to know, and speciﬁcally to do,
is occasionally to consult him upon speciﬁc points and override his coun-
sels in its ampler wisdom.”82

294 • Chapter Nine
83 Thomas H. Huxley, “Science and Culture” (1880), in Huxley, Science and Education:
Essays (New York: Greenwood Press, 1968), 134–159, on 140–141.
84 Ross, “Scientist.”
85 Wells, Anticipations, 168.
Churchill’s disdain for mere experts conﬁrmed Wells’s assessment of the
standing of the man of science in relation to higher affairs of state. Pear-
son’s story, implying that mathematicians could not be gentlemen, re-
called the charge that so vexed T. H. Huxley after he himself had assumed
the tenuous role of statesman of science: “How often have we not been
told that the study of physical science is incompetent to confer culture;
that it touches none of the higher problems of life; and, what is worse, that
the continual devotion to scientiﬁc studies tends to generate a narrow and
bigoted belief in the applicability of scientiﬁc methods to the search after
truth of all kinds? How frequently one has reason to observe that no reply
to a troublesome argument tells so well as calling its author a ‘mere scien-
tiﬁc specialist.’”83 Huxley countered that science is vindicated by its utility
in practical life, but also by asserting the need for general understanding of
science in an increasingly scientiﬁc age. He thus answered critics such as
Matthew Arnold not by contesting the importance of culture, but by as-
serting the claim of science to an important part of it. Science could not
be limited to scientists or walled off from the rest of life. The very term
“scientist” suggested a soul too conﬁned. “To any one who respects the
English language, I think ‘Scientist’ must be about as pleasing a word as
‘Electrocution,’” he wrote in 1894. Perhaps he supposed, as did many
“men of science” of his generation, that this term, although in fact coined
by William Whewell half a century earlier, was one of those execrable
Americanisms by which the language was being corrupted.84 In a culti-
vated country, on the eastern shore of the Atlantic, science could be re-
ﬁned as well as practical.
Expertise among the Victorians was indispensable, but also, as Wells
noted, rather lowly. The word is related etymologically to “experience,”
and in the nineteenth century an “expert” was more likely to be a person
who did things than someone who had formally studied them. In educa-
tional terms, expertise was acquired principally by practical training rather
than by scientiﬁc schooling. It was the domain of specialists and suggested
narrowness and the distortion of personality, the fashioning of students
into useful tools rather than educated persons. As Wells put it: “The man
of special equipment is treated always as if he were some sort of curious
performing animal.”85 Pearson’s more elevated ideal did not exclude an
engagement with practical problems. He held that the study of steam en-
gines or bridge structures could be “more expansive to the mind” than
theoretical mechanics, and it was in such terms that he justiﬁed it. Science,

The Statistical Reformation • 295
86 Pearson, “The Proposed Technical Institute at South Kensington,” letter to The Times,
13 Feb. 1906, 7b; Pearson, “The Proposed English Charlottenburg,” The Times, 14 July
1905, 15b–c. 
87 Roach, Public Examinations in England; Kelsall, Higher Civil Servants in Britain,
60–62; Gowan, “Origins of the Administrative Elite.”
including technical science, remained for him an aspect of culture, to be
taught along with literary subjects at universities.86
This ambition, to merge technical education with science and even letters,
can scarcely be called successful in Pearson’s time. But the alternative, to in-
vest public authority in highly specialized technicians, was still less promis-
ing. Mere expertise was perhaps never more strictly subordinated to general
culture than in the decades around 1900. The Northcote-Trevelyan reform
of the British Civil Service, implemented by Gladstone in 1870, established
an examination system for government ofﬁcials that gave all the advantages
to Oxbridge. An expert, in the new system, was examined on knowledge rel-
evant to his post, then worked his way up through the lower ranks on the 
basis of practical experience. Further advancement into the higher ranks for
these specialists was not contemplated. The upper levels were ﬁlled by men
of general culture, as displayed by their demonstrated competence in elite
academic subjects, especially classical languages, modern languages, and
mathematics.87 The new upper civil servants regarded public service as a call-
ing. Rather than advancing within a single department, they followed a 
career track that moved from ministry to ministry. The intellectual capacity
to adapt almost instantly to a new domain and the moral integrity to ad-
minister selﬂessly were most valued by this system. The best qualiﬁcation for
the upper civil service was understood to be a classical education. Huxley
and Pearson would have science take over this role.
In science, as in administration, the late nineteenth century was in
Britain a time of professionalization based on meritocracy. Scientiﬁc pro-
fessionalism meant the growth of universities and an increasing number of
university posts, and the restriction of scientiﬁc bodies, most notably the
Royal Society, to a more selective membership. It also meant a greater dis-
tance between the scientist and the public, the narrowing of Huxley’s Vic-
torian role as public man of science. Through such social processes, and
through the mixing of science students from good families with literary
ones at public schools and Oxbridge, the social standing of science did ad-
vance somewhat during Pearson’s lifetime. Even statistics and related tools
of quantiﬁcation experienced a modest efﬂorescence. But it was more
nearly the assimilation of elite scientists into the upper classes than a tri-
umph of specialist expertise.
Pearson supposed correctly that enhancing the status of science meant
joining it to the formation of elites. But he could not be much encouraged

296 • Chapter Nine
by the very slow progress of this educational cause, and of the social trans-
formation that would attend it. Not only the literary men, but even stu-
dents of science, seemed incapable of seeing its cultural signiﬁcance.
Could the scientist be more than a trained monkey, competent to do just
what he had been taught, and lacking vision, suppleness, and wisdom? In
an age of advancing specialization, the obstacles to making scientiﬁc edu-
cation into liberal education were disheartening. The seeming incapacity
of scientiﬁc memory to grasp the deep commitment and complex personal
development at the heart of a successful scientiﬁc program frustrated him
equally. The denial of complex individuality to the scientist and the refusal
to see men of science as possessing the dignity and well-roundedness that
would ﬁt them for high ofﬁce were closely related. A scientiﬁc life was as
much a bildungsroman as a career in art, literature, or politics. Why did
posterity insist on reducing it to an eponymous discovery or equation, a
mere name with all the life left out?

1 Helen M. Walker to KP, 15 Jan. 1929. On these issues generally, see Shortland and Yeo,
eds., Telling Lives in Science.
C H A P T E R  T E N
Epilogue:
COMPOSING A LIFE
Today socialism is trying to declare the beloved private self to
be a worthless illusion, which should be replaced by social
causes and duties. But in this it had long since been preceded
by the natural sciences, which dissolved precious private things
into nothing but impersonal processes. . . . Psychologically . . .
one has already gone so far as to dissolve the person into typi-
cal bundles of typical averages of behavior. Sociologically, he is
treated no differently.
—Ulrich in Robert Musil, 
The Man without Qualities, p. 1617.
KARL PEARSON’S WAS a literary life of devotion to truth. From youth he
had understood his development as a bildungsroman, a character formed
through diverse experiences who is yet never dominated by external cir-
cumstances. He composed his life self-consciously as akin to a novel and
more than once portrayed it in writing as an actual work of literature. In
his later years he may have felt the justness of Shaw’s dramatic title: “Karl
Pearson: A Tragedy.” He felt this tragic dimension most acutely during
those periods of depression provoked by the deaths and other losses that
punctuate human existence. What had his tireless dedication to science
really accomplished, in the end? He was bothered especially by the ques-
tion of immortality, by then understood mainly as an issue of memory. He
feared, prophetically, that the passions, ambitions, and achievements of his
career would be reduced to eponymous labeling of a discovery, and all the
“toil of the years,” the expansiveness of his life, work, and vision, forgot-
ten. In 1929, he was asked by an early historian of statistics, Helen Walker
of the Columbia School of Education, how he should be represented in a
source book she was planning. He must have responded by insisting on
the unity and coherence of his work. No particular paper, she agreed,
could give a valid impression of the totality of his writings. “We shall cer-
tainly respect your preference not to be ‘fragmentised.’”1

298 • Chapter Ten
2 Pearson comments on the “inﬂuence of realism in literature and art on morality,” Pear-
son Papers 35, ca. 1900–1905.
3 See Espeland, Struggle for Water. Ken Alder meditates on statistics and the changing def-
inition of the scientist in Measure of All Things, 305–308.
Pearson believed, with cultural historians of his generation, that the indi-
vidualized “self ” was not timeless but had arisen in Europe with the wan-
ing of the Middle Ages. However deep was his admiration for the socialistic
ethos and economy of pre-Reformation Germany, he understood the emer-
gence of individuality as a necessary and, ultimately, beneﬁcial phase in
the progress of humanity. But in the age of professions and of mass society,
the rising social order that, according to his anticipation of human
progress, should combine personal development with collective organiza-
tion, the unity and wholeness of self seemed increasingly threatened. Per-
haps, as the line quoted above from Musil’s sprawling and unﬁnishable
novel implies, science had long since arrived at the same conclusion. But
Pearson was bothered by a different aspect of science from Musil. In the
quoted passage, Ulrich discussed persons as objects of science, the reduc-
tion of will, spirit, or mind to a material substrate on which causes act. Pear-
son ﬁrmly denied all through his life that scientiﬁc explanation was a threat
to human dignity. “The mechanical theory of the universe is the idealism of
science, not its realism.”2
Not the metaphysics of science but the increasing narrowness and
thoughtless careerism of its practitioners deﬁned Pearson’s tragedy. In sci-
ence, as Arthur of The New Werther had complained in 1880, it was possi-
ble to live a life that would be recalled for nothing more than the invention
of an integral. This was not renunciation, which could only be practiced by
a coherent and purposeful self, but liquidation. In an increasingly profes-
sionalized enterprise, it was becoming ever easier to be little more than the
inventor of an integral. Huxley, Pearson, and other scientiﬁc stalwarts res-
olutely opposed the procrustean compression of self into the cramped
frame of some specialty or strict methodological prescription. Yet Pear-
son’s position was a deeply ironical one. His work undoubtedly helped to
form what was, in the early twentieth century, virtually a new human type,
the scientist, social scientist, engineer, or manager who regarded legiti-
mate thought as equivalent to strict, impersonal quantiﬁcation. Even
within the tribe of professional quantiﬁers, it has generally been regarded
as eccentric, though it is by no means unknown, to extend the doctrine of
quantitative rationality to intimate relationships and aesthetic judgments.3
At the other extreme, some quantitative purists would rigorously separate
personal from scientiﬁc life, allowing an uninhibited emotionality to ﬁll
whatever spaces are not accessible to number and calculation.

Composing a Life • 299
4 Ross, Origins of American Social Science, 431–432; Bannister, Sociology and Scientism;
Musil, The Man without Qualities, 266, 837, 234, 312; Karl Pearson, ed., Treasury of Hu-
man Inheritance, vol. 1 (London: Dulau, 1912), preface, dated 14 Jan. 1912, iv.
Musil, by education a disciple of Mach, spoke in his authorial voice of
placing precision itself under observation, “considering it as an intellectual
habit and way of life, allowed to exert its exemplary inﬂuence on every-
thing it touches.” The man of precision, he explained, exists already as
businessman, administrator, sportsman, and technician as well as scientist,
but for the present only as an “inner man” and “only during those daytime
hours they call not their life but their profession.” The “logical outcome”
of this “utopia of precision” he identiﬁed as a “paradoxical interplay of ex-
actitude and indeﬁniteness.” As Ulrich explains: “Maybe the time is com-
ing when people will on the one hand be very intelligent, and on the other
hand be mystics. Maybe our morality is already splitting into these two
components. I might also say into mathematics and mysticism. Into prac-
tical improvements and unknown adventure.”
Pearson may never have read Musil, but he was in some ways the man
of “precision and soul” whom the novelist idealized and gently mocked.
He showed throughout his youth and into maturity an appreciation of the
mystical aspects of life. This mysticism inhabited for him the forms of real-
ity that went beyond the possibility of sensory experience, and also of what
determines the direction of a life, beyond the human will. But Pearson, in
contrast to Ulrich and also to Goethe’s Wilhelm Meister, refused to sub-
mit quietly to the destiny conveyed by events. Unlike Ulrich (and Mach),
he would not abandon the “whole man confronting a whole world” for 
“a human something moving about in a general cultural medium,” and he
was less skeptical of having “ﬁrm ground underfoot and a ﬁrm skin 
all around.” Pearson looked everywhere for wholeness and unity. Thus 
he could offer as the moral of his Treasury of Human Inheritance, a multi-
volume catalog of inherited deformities, “that the human being is to be
treated as a whole; there is not one inheritance of disease, another of an-
thropometric characters and a third of psychical qualities. You cannot di-
vide the human subject up.”4 For Pearson, as for Ulrich, precision and
mysticism were not opposites, but ran together. Pearson, however, was
desperate to save the self.
Udny Yule wondered if Pearson’s abandonment of literature and history
for the monomania of statistics so unbalanced his personality as to account
for his missionary fanaticism of middle age. This is unsatisfying, both be-
cause there is abundant evidence of harsh polemical tendencies from his
youth, and because he never really forsook his humanistic interests. Some-
how a belief in literature coexisted with his red-hot statistical fervor under

300 • Chapter Ten
5 Yule, “Karl Pearson,” 101; Pearson, History of Statistics, 185.
6 Pearson, History of Statistics, 266.
the philosophical rubric of effective summaries of experience. He justiﬁed
ﬁction as an alternative form of economical description that encompassed
emotion, morality, and human conﬂict as well as natural facts. He strug-
gled always to hold the extremes together, be it literature and science or
passion and reason, so as to maintain a sense of the larger frame within
which he moved. Such breadth of vision was a mark of the whole man, the
cultured individual, and he bemoaned the poverty of science walled off
into narrow specialties, conceived without reference to larger purposes or
historical development. Scientists in this professionalized mold, scientists
by occupation rather than by inspiration, could not comprehend the rich-
ness of conception and the intellectual grasp entailed in building a new
ﬁeld such as statistics. Knowing nothing of history, they did not under-
stand how the work of a scientist was formed against the background of
his time and place. Neither could they appreciate the formidable obstacles
to really original research and the greatness required to overcome them.
Mere fame meant little to Pearson, and he turned down most of the
honors offered to him as decoration for a career that, by 1905 or 1910,
was destined to succeed. He wanted to be remembered, but this would
count for nothing if he was reduced to a name. He despised the minimal-
ist caricature retailed by textbook authors who make a living from science
by reproducing and sucking the life from once-creative ideas, usually with-
out concern for their original context and hence with no possibility of
proper attribution.5
THE ABSENCE OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY
Such a person as this might have been expected to write an autobiography.
Yet despite, or perhaps on account of, being so concerned with his self-
development and with the relation of his work to the life he led, he did
not. Overlaying what he had self-mockingly called his egoism was a faith
in the collective character of science. Musil explained that the man of pre-
cision, “given to taking everything seriously and without bias, is biased to
the point of abhorrence against taking himself seriously, and there is, alas,
no doubt that he would regard the utopia of himself as an immoral exper-
iment on persons engaged in serious business.”6 Pearson, who took him-
self very seriously, worried about this self-obsession. Since it took him
three quarto volumes, the last a double one, to contain Galton’s life, it
would indeed have been a distraction, if not an immoral experiment, to
write his own.

Composing a Life • 301
7 Shaw to KP, 20 June 1893, Pearson Papers 793.
8 KP to Shaw, 24 June 1893, Shaw Papers, British Library, 50513 f 22. This particular ex-
change began with a detailed and seemingly critical letter on 20 June from Pearson about
Shaw’s play The Philanderer, a letter I have not found. Stanley Weintraub, Bernard Shaw: The
Diaries, 1885–1917, vol. 2, 947.
9 On this point, and indeed with speciﬁc reference to Pearson and Galton, I can recom-
mend a novel by A. S. Byatt, The Biographer’s Tale.
Shaw supposed that Pearson was terriﬁed of revealing himself, especially
of displaying his weaknesses: “You are absolutely the damndest fool I
know—a deliberately self-damned fool. Your aim is never to give yourself
away, never to make a fool of yourself, to efface all vestiges of the occasions
on which you have violated this rule, and never to expose yourself to the
same danger again. Further, you take it on yourself to urge this line of con-
duct on all young pilgrims, so that if Bunyan were alive now he would can-
cel Mr. Worldly Wiseman & the Flatterer and all other tempters, and
substitute only Karl Pearson.”7 Shaw, writing in 1893, had in mind the
anonymity of the passion play Pearson had just sent him and his refusal to
join forces with the Fabian Society. He replied to these charges, quite rea-
sonably, that exhibitionism must have its limits, and that his irreverent
publications on history, women, and scientiﬁc method were scarcely the
work of a shrinking violet.8 He was far from retiring, yet he was indeed full
of ambivalence about self-revelation and self-advertisement.
One early outcome of this tension was his New Werther, let out, as I
have noted, behind the transparent disguise of willful exaggeration under
the pseudonym of Loki. The passion play, a work of utter sincerity, con-
tained much of himself in the person of Jesus, and if he did not quite think
of it as autobiography, he certainly did exploit the medieval genre to cast
light on the deep moral choices facing an earnest person in his own time.
Thereafter, his repressed autobiographical inclinations assumed diverse
forms. At the end of his life he composed two brief reﬂective comments,
one on the altogether appropriate occasion of his retirement dinner, the
other inspired by a discussion of Tripos reform and the arguable defects of
the system that had prevailed in his youth. Just a few years earlier, in 1930,
he completed the third and ﬁnal volume of his Galton biography, covering
the years when he and Galton often discussed their shared concerns with
statistics and eugenics. Pearson printed extensive excerpts from both sides
of their correspondence, including much material about his own family
background and experiences of childhood and youth, letters that shed
light on Galton’s biographer but not on his biography.9 In the 1920s,
Pearson gave excellent, deeply researched lectures on the history of statis-
tics, organized biographically and written out in full. While these contain
only a little about his own life and accomplishments, there is much about
the relation of scientiﬁc careers to the times in which they were lived, and

302 • Chapter Ten
10 “Journal of the Galton Laboratory. Conﬁdential. 1915–1918,” Pearson Papers 246,
quote on 38.
11 Pearson, Life of Galton, vol. 3A, 241, quoting letter of 13 Dec. 1900 (also Galton Pa-
pers 293/D).
of mathematical production to the broader shape of a life. In the same
years, he often talked about himself in his speeches for the Galton and
biometric dinners, and again he left behind full texts.
During the Great War he started a diary, ostensibly for the beneﬁt of his
successor someday soon, but with all the features of an apologia pro vita sua.
It is a bilious text, written in a period of particular frustration and often, as
the document explains, during moments when he was laid up with lum-
bago. The diary consists largely of complaints about college and university
administrators, irresolute donors, unsupportive Galton Laboratory board
members, medical and Mendelian antagonists, misguided American con-
tributors to Biometrika, and insufﬁciently dedicated female laboratory as-
sistants, all documented whenever possible by letters pasted onto the
pages. In a typical episode, an uninvited visitor with whom he had once
crossed swords ignores his oft-expressed doubts that intellectual powers
could possibly be Mendelian and wonders aloud whether “music in the
Welshman was a ‘Mendelian recessive.’” This recalls to Pearson’s mind an
earlier incident, which he commits to the diary: “I said to one of the
Mendelians, I forget which, that there was a curious law of heredity wor-
thy of Mendelian investigation as a problem in dominance. He asked
which, and I replied The statement that it takes three generations to make
a gentleman, but I don’t think he saw the point of it.” What was the point?
The Mendelian in question, whose ancestry we might otherwise suppose
Pearson to have slyly insulted, is in no way identiﬁed. Possibly the anec-
dote signiﬁed that Pearson himself, offspring of a self-made man, was a
more dangerous animal than your average effete socialite, and let those
who would cross him do so at their own peril. It was a most uncourtly sol-
dier who composed these memoirs.10
There are other documents of a broadly autobiographical character. He
published in Biometrika some papers on the history of statistics in his own
time, often with himself on center stage, and made the journal itself a
deeply personal expression, even if the language was generally abstract and
mathematical. He told Galton already in 1900, apropos of its unexpected
spelling: “the ‘k’ was mine (K.P. not C.P.).”11 He was always present in the
obituaries he wrote for colleagues and workers. The Treasury of Human
Inheritance, with its material on the Yorkshire Pearsons, had a hint of an
autobiographical dimension, and there is much more of this in the ge-
nealogies he assembled. He came increasingly to regard the self, his own
in particular, as formed still more by hereditary inﬂuences than by personal

Composing a Life • 303
12 KP to Galton, 17 Feb. 1907, Galton Papers 293/H, and Galton to KP, 18 Feb. 1907,
245/18H, involving some undeﬁned but embarrassing relationship of Weldon to Eva Biggs,
a spiritualist.
13 “The Spirit of Biometrika,” Biometrika, 1 (1901–2), 3–5; Pearson, Chances of Death
(1897), preface, vi, ix.
experience. Finally, we have his letters, especially those written to Maria
Sharpe after he proposed marriage to her. A man less keen to preserve
what he could of the traces of his past would not have left so much behind,
and one who was self-consciously sculpting his own titanic reputation, a
Sigmund Freud, would have swum back across the Rubicon to burn let-
ters like these. Pearson may have been careless, or even have deliberately
destroyed some records, during his youth. On occasion he discarded let-
ters that upset him, or that appeared without interest, and there were cer-
tainly times when he wanted letters burned so that friends or family
members would not be hurt by what they contained.12 Still, the whole
Pearson Nachlass is in a way an invitation to examine and assess this life,
with remarkably little left out, and it includes much personal commentary
by K.P. himself.
Pearson believed in biography. For all his disparagement of egoism and
praise of renunciation—all his socialistic, later statistical, insistence that the
individual is nothing, the population everything—he wanted to represent
life as something that could be lived whole. There is one obvious instance
in which he expressed himself otherwise: his Machian parable (from the
Grammar) of the blackboard that is gradually refashioned into an enam-
eled table, a process of change that reduces identity to a ﬁction. In the
context of his other comments on the problem, it must be read as an ex-
pression of anxiety and not only as an attack on individualism. Of the “ap-
parent want of unity” in the contents of his collection The Chances of
Death, he explained that “this heterogeneity will be found more in the ti-
tles of the several essays than in their contents. There must always be a
unity . . . when a mind with its opinions and methods of investigation rea-
sonably matured approaches even very diverse problems.” Indeed, the sig-
nal characteristic of this mind was everywhere to ﬁnd unity, “to see all
phenomena, physical and social, as a connected growth.” In his historical
essays, some written as much as ﬁfteen years earlier, his fundamental con-
clusion was “that mediaeval or western Christianity was a product neither
of Jewish nor Greek minds, but of the Teutonic folk-spirit.” It illustrated
an indispensable axiom of comparative religion, “that neither the pro-
pounder nor the dogma, but the convert, makes a religion what it is.”13
Indeed, Pearson’s sense of life as bildungsroman, which allowed for and
even required personal development as continual change, applied also to
races and civilizations. He preferred the study of Teutonic to that of Greek

304 • Chapter Ten
14 Pearson, Life of Galton, vol 1, 112, 210; Pearson in Speeches Delivered at a Dinner;
Pearson, “The Ancestry of Sir Francis Galton,” The Times, 7 Feb. 1912, 5f.
15 Pearson, “The Double-Headed Mr. Balfour,” letter to the editor of the Daily Chroni-
cle, 7 Oct. 1895; Pearson, History of Statistics, 472.
culture because he believed the Germans and Scandinavians were effectively
the ancestors of the English nation, and surely of the Yorkshire Pearsons.
This harmony of racial and personal history reveals how his eugenic faith
gave expression to his sense of personal identity. From childhood he had dis-
liked the utilitarian psychology and philosophy of John Stuart Mill, whose
personal crisis grew out of the associationist theory of the mind as passive,
casting doubt on any idea of a core self. It is not so much the environment
that makes the mind, Pearson argued, as the mind that seeks and creates a
favorable environment. He came more and more to regard his own achieve-
ments in eugenic terms, as an expression of the hereditary traits of those
stubborn Quaker ancestors whose colossal strength of character had enabled
them to survive in a hostile world. Not least among the attractions of eu-
genics was that it gave assurance of a stable self, anchored in the past, which
would not ﬂutter and blow away in the winds of circumstance.14
In his assessments of others, also, he was inclined to presuppose some
essential unity to what might appear disparate. In reply to a critic in 1895
who doubted that Arthur Balfour’s natural theology had much to do with
his activity as a conservative leader, Pearson denied that we can “separate
Mr. Balfour the reactionary theologian from Mr. Balfour the reactionary
politician. It is against this principle of dividing a man into compartments
that I wish strongly to protest.” Of Condorcet, Pearson observed that it
would be impossible to understand his political action without reading
his mathematical works.15 In classic mathematical papers, he found pecu-
liarities of manner and temperament, implying the possibility of outstand-
ing personal distinction, everywhere. This view underlay his contempt for
textbooks, which ﬂattened the style and left the discoverers out. His dis-
crimination extended even to computation, to books of numerical tables,
which he refused to regard as interchangeable. When Major Greenwood
spoke injudiciously of the advantage of cheap and convenient tables, Pear-
son exploded. Let him, if he knew no better, take his squares and cubes
from Barlow:
My admiration goes to Guldinus, who computed the ﬁrst table of this kind &
did to the same extent; did it by brute force. . . . I am sensitive on the history of
science & simply shudder when you write why worry about Degen when there
is Rolbein for 2/6! Why worry about Briggs, or Vega or even Napier when
there is Chambers for 5/. ? Why worry about Galton or Darwin when you can
have J. Arthur Thompson in monthly parts? Why worry about any of the opera
magna of science, when you can ﬁnd their boilings down in a dozen textbooks.

Composing a Life • 305
16 KP to Major Greenwood, 7 Jan. 1922, Pearson Papers 915.
17 Pearson, Grammar of Science, 3d ed. (1911), 155–156.
For me the books I have mentioned stand as landmarks of computing science,
and I believe they will one day for you, if you are ever driven to heavy comput-
ing work.16
Even nature he described as teeming with individuality, and not only in
biology. To the astronomer, “it is hardly too much to say that every star he
has studied has its own physical and chemical individuality.” Beneath the
sameness of the statistics, there is, perhaps always, “an inﬁnity of bodies”
characterized by “individuality and change.” Pearson’s puzzling insistence
on the variability of molecules appears in the third edition of The Gram-
mar of Science as a defense of their uniqueness. “Experience gives a certain
sameness and a certain variation, both are really statistical results,” and be-
yond the numbers nothing may be fully identical with anything else. “The
absolute sameness of the molecule is only a statistical sameness, and . . . an
ultimate individuality, a variation within the class, may be hypothecated as
a means of describing new developments which may hereafter be observed
when the powers of discrimination are ﬁner.”17
THE FORM OF A LIFE
Pearson tried out various authorial styles in his sincere as well as his explic-
itly ﬁctionalized autobiographical accounts. The New Werther took Goethe
and Carlyle as inspirations. His passion play was steeped in Hamerling, and
Ibsen as well as Rousseau can be discerned in the tortured, well-meaning,
aggressively confessional ruminations he sent to Maria in the summer of
1889. The sour and solipsistic wartime diary recalls Meredith’s egoists and
some protagonists from Knut Hamsun’s early novels. Only in the tales of
the 1920s and 1930s does Pearson appear in his own reminiscences with-
out literary complications as a scientiﬁc or religious saint, bearing the torch
of truth and triumphing over adversity.
What forms are available to the historian to sketch out the shape of a ca-
reer, including its sources and implications? Modern historical writing
has been disturbingly insensitive to prose style, excellence being most of-
ten associated with the smooth ﬂow of journalism. We historians do attend
now to the question of voice, of letting the silent speak and avoiding the
impersonal guise of authorial omniscience. But history is about tone, ﬂow,
and feeling as well as information and argument. History is also a form
of literature, even if it aspires properly to accuracy and balance. There is
no call for aggressive displays of literary virtuosity, the historical text as

306 • Chapter Ten
18 I refrain from continuing here with questions of undoubted importance about eco-
nomic, political, commercial, and military aspects of science.
self-referential art. I would rather aspire to an adaptation of means to ends,
a style that conforms to its matter, and that opens up unexpected aspects of
a topic or a historical period. In writing of serious and ponderous yet heav-
ily ritualized activities such as science, diplomacy, law, scholarship, educa-
tion, and management, I prefer at all costs to avoid imitating the prose of the
natives. The noble task of historians of these things is to gently subvert it.
Science itself follows deﬁnite principles of style—principles, indeed, that
form an important element in its cultural identity. Pearson, a prickly non-
conformist in most of his activities, inadvertently helped to mold that style
with his statistical methods. The scientiﬁc paper in its standard form min-
imizes narrative, drawing attention away from the actual experience of the
work and the idiosyncrasies of the object under investigation to provide an
idealized view of an experiment or model after the bugs have been worked
out. It focuses overwhelmingly on principles or laws, the abstract claims of
science, in preference to concrete objects and events in the world, and the
person of the scientist remains largely out of the picture, even if the ﬁrst
person singular and the active voice are once again permitted in scientiﬁc
prose. This ﬁrst person, after all, is rarely allowed a more dynamic verb
than to set up, observe, or measure. We would be surprised to ﬁnd it pon-
dering, stewing, searching, yearning, arguing, or exulting. We never see it
on vacation, in bed, reading, with children, or even at a committee meet-
ing. We would search the journals and textbooks in vain to learn how sci-
entiﬁc life is made satisfying or frustrating; how it interpenetrates, or not,
with the everyday, the practical, and the human; how it makes meaning.18
Often with the aid of statistics, science simply reaches conclusions, within
certain margins of error, or at a speciﬁed level of signiﬁcance. We are deal-
ing here with the preeminent tool of modern scientiﬁc impersonality.
Where can we ﬁnd the delicacy of style to deal with that?
It would be self-denying indeed not to exploit humor. This exalted 
bureaucrato-scientiﬁc aspiration to selﬂess impersonality is an impossible
ideal. In what would seem on the surface the dullest meetings of technical
specialists, the contradictions of perfect standardization in a world that re-
mains mercifully heterogeneous play the part of the fool in a play, or the
unwanted relative in a farce. Repressed or exiled, they reappear again and
again in a new guise, always demanding attention and always ﬁnding ad-
vocates. The accounting standards board debates how “good will” should
be depreciated by a public corporation after being assigned to a Caribbean
subsidiary, while company executives motor around the offshore entity in
a luxury yacht acquired and outﬁtted at great expense with the proceeds
of this spurious sale. A vastly expanded water project, involving (let us 

Composing a Life • 307
suppose) port facilities for corporate pleasure boats, is recommended by
House political staff to create new “beneﬁts” and ease approval for a
ﬂood-control project—demanded by suddenly soggy cotton growers—
that has been turned down by public engineers for its inadequate ratio of
beneﬁts to costs. American medical researchers have their laboratory note-
books subpoenaed so that the Congress, that bastion of objectivity, can
determine if they have followed the rules of scientiﬁc method as articu-
lated in textbooks and public lectures. Deﬁnitions of Latin American or
Asian ethnicities propounded by a well-meaning census bureau and linked
to the management of diversity are broken apart through the political mo-
bilization of the populations classiﬁed. Humor here is not simply a sugar
coating for prose about an inherently dull subject, but a way of bringing
to light what faceless authors try so hard to ignore or suppress—the spon-
taneous processes, admirable or not, that subvert our modern drive for ra-
tionalization and reveal its contradictions.
In a story such as the career of Karl Pearson, emphasizing private rela-
tionships and utopian ambitions as well as scientiﬁc and historical writings,
jokes are a bit too easy. They have a place, and indeed are irrepressible, but
I have not wanted to ridicule the more personal aspect of this life of scien-
tiﬁc method and statistics. The choice to focus on a single life at all might
seem to turn attention away from the collective cultural, intellectual, and
material processes to which history should call attention, and this project has
found skeptics even among colleagues whom I particularly like and admire.
Incorrigibly, I continue to believe the work is justiﬁed by the extraordinary
interest of Pearson’s diverse activities. My deeper ambition, however, is to
raise a larger question: What has become of the liberal ideal of personal de-
velopment in an age of professionalized science and scholarship?
Modern humanists, if this somewhat archaic job description may be pre-
served, have perhaps rejoiced too much over the “death of the subject.”
Against the forces of disintegration, within and without, individuals try to
infuse their lives with meaning and continuity. The models for doing so
are historically speciﬁc, though for those who know history, as Pearson
did, they draw from many ages. His conscious struggle to preserve and as-
sert his own distinctive self across a wide range of activities might be un-
derstood as a symphonic creation. It did not, like Bolero, reiterate the
same statement with ever wilder abandon, but developed certain themes,
perhaps after the fashion of the Symphonie Fantastique. A motive or idée
ﬁxe, in several related versions, is central to the work. As it surfaces with
more or less clarity in the context of disparate musical developments, we
realize to what extent each movement in turn has been structured by it.
I have emphasized three related polarities that run through Pearson’s
personal and scientiﬁc life. One is the opposition between surface or sham
and authenticity or depth. On many occasions, in relation to objects as

308 • Chapter Ten
19 Houghton, Victorian Frame of Mind, chap. 14.
diverse as buildings, persons, and cultures, Pearson condemned superﬁ-
ciality and false appearances. These were the defects of a capitalist order
based on greed which yet pretended to the beliefs and morals of Chris-
tianity, a form of hypocrisy for which so many Victorian critics indicted
their own society.19 Yet Pearson frequently doubted the possibility of get-
ting beneath appearances and celebrated the merely descriptive language
that gave up vain metaphysics. This point leads to a second fundamental
polarity—between connectedness and detachment. As in love, so in sci-
ence, he longed for intimacy with the beauty of feminized nature. At cer-
tain ecstatic moments, especially in youth and early adulthood, he felt that
he had achieved something like this, but it could not last. For a few years
beginning in 1888 he imagined that conceptual or perceptual experience
of ether squirts might give him access to a higher dimension of reality, and
still later he looked to eugenics for a connection to the deep purposes
of the cosmos. In more sober moments, however, these desires seemed 
irreconcilable with the stern demands of science, for precision rather than
mystical union. This alienation from nature and from God signiﬁed, in
Pearson’s idiom of radical philosophical idealism, also an alienation from
self. He offered images of disembodied conﬁnement, as in the telephone
exchange, to which he was resigned by the early 1890s as destiny. Accord-
ingly, he spoke of the need for renunciation, elevating it as one of the
highest ideals of humanity. It was also the basic moral principle of science,
which thereafter should prefer accurate description and prediction over
any pretense to deep truth. Or could geometrical description itself be the
deeper truth, proving the utter dependence of world on mind that he was
forever seeking?
The third in this trinity of polarities is between egoism and the disap-
pearance of self. Pearson cultivated many versions of self-denial, from the
dissolving of self into nature to the selﬂess love of Spinoza’s pantheistic
God who offered no love in return, from an enveloping cultural history to
a moralized Marxian socialism. Statistics reafﬁrmed for him the lesson of
cultural history, that the individual is merely the inﬁnitesimal part of a col-
lective reality. He demanded in private that the woman he loved maintain
an independent career so as to protect him from his undoubted egoistic
tendencies and, in speeches and publications, exalted scientiﬁc method as
a check on personal prejudice and self-interest. His discovery of statistics,
his own decisive contribution to scientiﬁc method, completed and negated
this great project as he, Karl Pearson, became the voice of impersonal ob-
jectivity. As he preached self-denial, he became increasingly passionate
about the destruction of individuality, which he now dreaded. Science
should not annihilate the self but raise it up to higher social standard. The

Composing a Life • 309
right way could not be achieved mechanically, merely by calculation, but
required the wisdom and discernment of the cultivated scientiﬁc person.
These polarities, or tensions, were not his alone. I offer Pearson’s life as
a microhistory, a local story, involving a person much too odd to be called
“representative” of his age, place, or ﬁeld of activities, yet one who pro-
vides startling insights into historical transformations in the large. It was
his deeply ironical fate to contribute, through his language of scientiﬁc
method and his creation of new statistical tools, to a more standardized
form of scientiﬁc practice. For he was radically opposed to routine, a con-
sistent advocate of enthusiasm and creativity. Perhaps he deserved what
became of him, since he was very far from being an uncompromised ad-
vocate of human freedom. In the course of a life full of contradictions, the
tireless champion of method and calculation was snared in his own web.
Most scholars who have examined the personal and political aspects of
Pearson’s life have regarded him as a malign ﬁgure. For me, he is more
nearly a tragic one, and that despite the almost incomparable success of his
scientiﬁc program.
My interest in Pearson has, of course, a personal dimension, too. In my
dissertation research, more than two decades ago, I was put off by the ar-
rogance of his books and articles on scientiﬁc method, the function of sci-
ence, and eugenics, even as I was startled by his range and competence.
The highhandedness and complacency of these writings remain as unat-
tractive as before, and for me, after spending years working to compre-
hend his intellectual and emotional life, more disturbing than ever. In
Trust in Numbers I wrote of Pearson as an exemplary and inﬂuential ad-
vocate of science in opposition to the merely personal, emphasizing his
doctrine of scientiﬁc method as a strategy for standardizing the self. This
argument was not altogether wrong, and his Grammar of Science was of-
ten read that way in his own time, but it missed a crucial nuance. Method
for Pearson was not mechanical, to be followed as a routine, but a call to
the higher morality of the scientiﬁc spirit, to a self-overcoming that de-
manded a strong self and not a weak one. In treating Pearson as I did I
may have encouraged a misreading of Trust in Numbers as the story of an
iron cage whose destiny it is to close, of the inevitable tendencies of face-
less bureaucracy and objectivizing science. I did not, however, represent
the quantitative mentality as a conquering army in the tragic saga of im-
personality triumphant, but as an aspect of the mutual shaping of science,
bureaucracy, and the larger culture. From this standpoint, the outcome of
advancing quantiﬁcation may be subtly different from what many
thoughtful scientists wanted. For Pearson, despite his unﬂagging faith in
the fundamental validity of statistical methods, there was something dis-
tressing about where science seemed to be headed.
It may seem that this ambivalence is mine as much as Pearson’s. I would

310 • Chapter Ten
not disagree. I was drawn to Pearson—and managed to maintain my en-
thusiasm through eight years of research—because of the unwonted rich-
ness, the disaffection, uncertainty, and ambivalence that I continued to
discover. My interest began with his New Werther, which I had occasion to
seek out in 1994, just as I was ﬁnishing Trust in Numbers. The sense of
personal and religious crisis expressed in that juvenile production, with all
its ambition, frustration, and passionate longing, resonated for me despite
the conspicuously overwrought pathos. It also suggested promising con-
nections between the personal and the scientiﬁc. His vast correspondence,
which I began to read systematically at University College, London, con-
ﬁrmed and enriched my sense of interwoven threads of the personal, liter-
ary, historical, and scientiﬁc.
Did ever a Renaissance magus inhabit a world denser with meaning than
that of Karl Pearson? He was torn between mathematical science and his-
tory, as I had once been, and he tried against all odds to hold out against
the crushing demand for specialization without being reduced to a dilet-
tantish gadﬂy. After his choice was seemingly made in 1884 for applied
mathematics, his intellectual career continued to range over an immense
territory, and this did not quite cease even in 1892, when he found his
mission in statistics. I have been fascinated also by the personal dimension,
this intense, passionate, generous, yet self-obsessed man with a strong
confessional urge, an obstreperous individual and habitual loner who was
lost without friendship, who sexualized nature and intellectualized sex,
who drew on every resource available in an effort to know himself, who
took his belief in ideals to an impossible extreme. His career went off in
every direction yet was far from merely disjointed, providing me the li-
cense to explore a world that deﬁed all specialties, and to try to compre-
hend, following my subject, what sense was to be made of it.
Pearson’s life, as lived, was very far from the objective rules of scientiﬁc
method. He was, as should by now be clear, an inveterate producer of ﬁc-
tions. He was forever telling and embellishing his own story, not only for
friends but for posterity, as if one purpose of his life was to supply a char-
acter for a novel or a history. Unlike the peasant participants in passion
plays whose simplicity so charmed him, and for whom God and an um-
brella were equally real, he could not believe in the supernatural, and he
insisted on the moral duty to distinguish ﬁction from reality. Yet the pat-
tern of his life was a mosaic of experience and imagination, which a faith-
ful history should somehow capture, and in my writing I have tried to
envelop the inﬁnitesimal moment of an event within those reconstructions
in memory and embellishments in ﬁction that make it part of the record of
a life. Raphael Wertheimer, Oscar Browning, Maria Sharpe, and even
Francis Galton were imaginary as well as real characters, and the moments
of confrontation between their physical persons and Pearson’s imaginative

Composing a Life • 311
representation could be disturbing to other friends and correspondents,
and to themselves.
Pearson also was imaginative in reconstructing himself. He shaped his
life partly in reference to the ﬁctions of Goethe, who wrote of life as a
process of growth and self-realization, and of Hamerling, who justiﬁed
sensuality as a source of artistic expression. In his betrothal drama, Pear-
son followed or consciously avoided scripts from Ibsen dramas, which
were also known to Maria. To face the public he required always a dis-
guise, so that in his published writings that inner self he once identiﬁed as
feminine was usually concealed behind a mask of self-conﬁdent rationality.
Over the years, this persona became more and more real as its vulnerable
counterpart was allowed to atrophy. Hence his reminiscences as an old
man display almost nothing of the uncertainty, the confusion, and the self-
doubting so copiously illustrated in his early letters and anonymous ﬁc-
tional writings. As the author of his own life, Pearson created a character
of relentless rationality, the very solution he offered as remedy for the
world’s ills. Even this did not mean rejecting literature, whose purpose he
now construed as the economical summary of experience. Pearson ex-
plained ﬁction as the representation of human patterns of feeling and be-
havior, nature as following laws of mind, and science as utterly dependent
on imagination. This great champion of statistics, then, managed very
nearly to merge science and literature in a life devoted to fact and suffused
by ﬁction.
He lived equally in a dialogue with the past, situating his own society
within the long-term historical development of Germanic culture. Some
speciﬁc turning points, especially the German Reformation, had a deﬁnite
contemporary meaning for him, representing the danger of unreason un-
hinged. Scientiﬁc rationality he understood not just as epistemology, but
historically and socially, as the foundation of a new age. He was keenly in-
terested in the larger tendencies of history, which he made it his business
to comprehend and from which he then drew meaning and morals. His-
torical ﬁgures, as much as literary ones, were part of his world of reference,
and he compared himself and his contemporaries to them. He held stead-
fastly to a faith, very nearly religious, in progress, perhaps all the more so
because of his tendency to pessimism, and it was important for him to un-
derstand the direction of history in his own time so he could align himself
with it. He was loyal to the end to a historical sensibility that would re-
cover the conditions of life and thought within which scientists and other
creative individuals worked. They had a place in his imagination, which I
have tried to express.
Science, for Pearson, reﬂected the values of the collective; it was itself
socialism, since it deﬁned a mode of thought and investigation that can-
celed out the private self. The individual had at best uncertain status in the

312 • Chapter Ten
20 Pearson, History of Statistics, 489, 649.
social and cultural form of history he preferred, and still less signiﬁcance in
statistics. Yet the ideal of individual development was among his enduring
commitments, one he applied most implacably to himself. Intensely ambi-
tious, he wanted deeply to make his mark on the world, and he came to
believe that he had through a program of statistics that he saw as princi-
pally the outcome of his own efforts, though he pretended sometimes to
credit everything to Galton or Weldon. Science might be universal, but he
was determined to put his stamp on it, and even to see the distinctive signs
of his own personality in scientiﬁc works as unpromising as compilations
of measurements and computations. As with Condorcet, whose mathe-
matical abilities Pearson thought unimpressive, he wanted his own mathe-
matical writing to reveal “the presence of a strong and unique personality;
here in the somewhat arid desert of symbols, is an oasis with its spring of
refreshing ideas for the parched and weary traveler.” He had no truck with
the idea that real science might ever be routine or automatic. Instead, it
should become forever richer, placing ever greater demands on the skill
and inspiration of the scientist. In some remarks on Newton, for example,
we ﬁnd: “Like every simpliﬁcation of scientiﬁc notions the law of gravita-
tion while simplifying our philosophy of the universe, made the study of
it—which hardly existed before—inﬁnitely more complicated.”20
Pearson’s analysis of scientiﬁc method in The Grammar of Science, and
his relentless advocacy of statistics throughout the sciences, were an inspi-
ration to reformers, engineers, and social and natural scientists who saw
his work as the key to an escape from history, the negation of individual
peculiarities, the standardization of reasoning, and the triumph of pure
fact over the subtleties of literary invention. They had plausible grounds
for believing so. But the founder of modern statistics was a very compli-
cated man, who on various occasions refused almost all of his own simpli-
ﬁcations, and who yearned to reshape the sciences and their interactions
with the world in a way quite different from what his ﬁeld was made to
stand for.
KARL PEARSON: A TRAGEDY?
Shaw thought Pearson’s life a tragedy because of his insistence on “enthu-
siasm of the study” over that of the “marketplace” and his habit of work-
ing and acting independently. Pearson practiced detachment also in his
positivistic distancing from nature, that object of intense youthful longing.
“But what are we going to do with the things that won’t let us understand
them? [Musil’s character] Fishel asked prophetically. We measure them,

Composing a Life • 313
21 Musil, Man without Qualities, 1678.
22 Pearson, History of Statistics, e.g., 450, 505; E. S. Pearson, Karl Pearson, 125. The last
line is from his remarks on the passing of his coworker H. E. Soper, in Pearson, Tables for Stat-
isticians, Part II (1931), vi. He chose to be cremated, his body released by ﬁre from the
prison of the tomb. He called it “the more ﬁtting end for what must one day perish. It is with
pain that I think even today of Francis Galton’s mortal remains conﬁned in a vault.” Pearson,
Life of Galton, vol. 3 (1930), 435n.
23 Pearl to KP, 31 Dec. 1932, Pearson Papers 782; KP to Pearl, 30 Aug. 1935, Pearl
Papers.
we weigh them, we analyze them mentally.”21 Pearson himself did not 
believe that this distancing proceeded from any remoteness or lack of
warmth on his part. He identiﬁed with a characterization of Condorcet,
his predecessor in social quantiﬁcation, which he repeated several times in
his lectures. Condorcet was a volcano, the heat of passion boiling in his
heart, though his exterior was draped in ice. Pearson arranged to have read
at his funeral, in 1936, some lines from “A Grammarian’s Funeral” by
Robert Browning. “This man decided not to Live but Know.” In death he
hoped to pass “to the place where either no problems exist, or their solu-
tions are clear as day.”22
Although Pearson’s name is known to almost everyone who works with
statistics, his desire that it might be associated with a distinctive style and
vision went nowhere. So personal an institution as his collection of labora-
tories could scarcely survive his retirement intact. Raymond Pearl antici-
pated the worst “if the university should appoint that lousy scoundrel 
R. A. Fisher . . . to succeed you.” Fisher was, in fact, named to the Galton
chair and was installed in Pearson’s ofﬁce, from which he removed the
tasteful backdrop of skulls and took down many of the pictures of eminent
statisticians and inspirational mottos posted on the walls. “His chief aim
seems to be to cast scorn on his predecessor and all who use any of his
methods,” complained this disgruntled predecessor.23 Indeed, Fisher per-
suaded many statisticians of the next generation of Pearson’s indifferent
mathematical competence. They came to believe, with some reason, that
he had put himself in the way of further progress in his ﬁeld. Subsequently,
as is the fate of most scientists, he was reduced to a name, which many no
longer know to distinguish from that of his son, Egon. In the building
now named for him at University College London, nobody knows who
this Karl Pearson was.
How could he be remembered for his wide-ranging intellectual ambi-
tion, his odd and untimely program for the future, and his very personal
style in a ﬁeld of endeavor—exact science—that puts little value on any of
these and has scarcely any capacity to hold on to memories beyond a sin-
gle generation? If, as the institutions and practices of scientiﬁc recollection
generally presuppose, the history of science is not much more than a

314 • Chapter Ten
progress of technical knowledge, the people and the cultures that make
and nurture it are really of very little signiﬁcance. Pearson, who believed
quite otherwise, nevertheless helped to create this more standardized
world of seemingly interchangeable science. This is what his beloved “sci-
entiﬁc method” has come to stand for, a form of intellectual practice that
he inadvertently encouraged and that he sought to challenge with a life
whose keynote would be intellectual love.
Pearson insisted on the integrity and coherence of his career and vision,
but it is difﬁcult to examine that life from the standpoint of the present
without ﬁnding a deep tension. He appears as the disciplinary founder of
a program of calculation that deﬁnes and symbolizes for us the mechanical
aspects of scientiﬁc reason, the utter impersonality of science. Yet there is
another Pearson who rejected routines, condemned the distortion of self
implied by excessive specialization, and tried to redeem his own individual-
ity along with that of every scientist. One Pearson stands for technical so-
lutions to precisely stated problems, the other for generality and wisdom. I
am far from believing that Pearson’s own words and deeds were consis-
tently wise. The question, however, loses none of its poignancy: Which of
these ideals constitutes his legacy? We can scarcely doubt that his career
has come to stand for the more routine, mechanical, and bureaucratic vision
of science. And in this sense, we really do live now in a scientiﬁc age, one
that depends utterly on the technical methods and achievements of science.
But if we wonder why the knowledge of science seems to have so little in-
ﬂuence on larger decisions and public attitudes, this legacy may give us a
part of the answer. Call it Pearson’s choice, though he tried to opt for the
other one.

Bibliography
There are two indispensable works of reference for anyone who cares
to undertake work on Pearson. G. M. Morant, A Bibliography of the Sta-
tistical and Other Writings of Karl Pearson (London: Biometrika Ofﬁce,
1939), provides a very nearly complete list of Pearson’s writings apart
from letters to newspapers, including summaries of some of his more im-
portant books and articles. M. Merrington, B. Blundell, S. Burrough, 
J. Golden, and J. Hogarth, A List of the Papers and Correspondence of Karl
Pearson (1857–1936) Held in the Manuscripts Room, University College Lon-
don Library (London: University College, 1983), is a guide to the archive.
The bibliography to follow does not provide anything like a complete
list of primary sources used in this study but is really only a guide to the
footnotes. I list the Pearson correspondents who are most important for
this study, then a few of his papers and books, and ﬁnally I list my main
secondary sources.
ARCHIVAL SOURCES
Karl Pearson Papers, Manuscripts Room, University College London (listed below
are the ﬁles I used most extensively)
Elisabeth Cobb to KP (663/1)
William Martin Conway to KP (666/3) and KP to Conway (910)
William Herrick Macaulay to KP (753) and KP to Macaulay (920)
Robert Parker to KP (780) and KP to Parker (922)
Fanny Pearson to KP (787) and KP to Fanny P (924)
Maria Sharpe (Pearson) to KP and KP to MSP (793)
William Pearson to KP (805) and KP to William P (927)
Olive Schreiner to KP (840/4)
George Udny Yule to KP (905) and KP to Yule (931)
Other collections in Manuscripts Room, University College London
Applications
College Correspondence
Francis Galton Papers: KP to Galton (293) and Galton to KP (245/18).
Helga Hacker Papers (consists mostly of typed transcripts from the Pearson
Papers)
Oliver Lodge Papers

Other archives consulted
American Philosophical Society (Papers of Franz Boas, Charles Davenport,
Raymond Pearl)
British Library (George Bernard Shaw Papers)
Imperial College, London (Thomas Huxley Papers)
International Institute of Social History, Amsterdam (KP letters to Karl Marx)
King’s College Library, Modern Archive Center (Papers of Henry Bradshaw,
Oscar Browning, J. E. Nixon, G. W. Prothero)
Library of Congress (Simon Newcomb Papers)
Ransom Library Research Center, University of Texas, Austin (George Bernard
Shaw papers)
Royal Society Library (general correspondence, referee’s reports)
Royal Statistics Society (Yule Papers, DP97)
SELECTED WRITINGS OF KARL PEARSON
“Loki,” The New Werther (London: C. Kegan Paul, 1880).
[Anonymous], The Trinity: A Nineteenth Century Passion-Play. The Son; or, Victory
of Love (Cambridge: E. Johnson, 1882).
William Kingdon Clifford (completed by Karl Pearson), The Common Sense of the
Exact Sciences (1885; New York: Dover, 1955).
Isaac Todhunter, “edited and completed . . . by Karl Pearson,” A History of the
Theory of Elasticity and of the Strength of Materials from Galilei to Lord Kelvin, 2
vols. in 3 (New York: Dover, 1960); vol. 1 (1886); vol. 2 (1893).
Die Fronica: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des Christusbilders in Mittelalter (Strass-
burg, Germany: Karl J. Trübner, 1887).
The Positive Creed of Freethought, with some Remarks on the Relation of Freethought
to Socialism, lecture at South Place Institute, 15 April 1888 (London: William
Reeves/The New Temple Press, 1888).
The Ethic of Freethought and Other Addresses and Essays (London: T. Fisher Unwin,
1888; 2d ed., London: Adam and Charles Black, 1901).
The Grammar of Science (London and New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1892;
2d ed., London: Adam and Charles Black, 1900; 3d ed., 1911, reprinted, New
York: Meridian, 1957).
The New University for London: A Guide to Its History and a Criticism of Its Defects
(London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1892).
The Chances of Death and Other Studies in Evolution, 2 vols. (London: Edward
Arnold, 1897).
National Life from the Standpoint of Science (1901; London: Adam and Charles
Black, 1905).
“Prefatory Essay: The Function of Science in the Modern State,” in The New Vol-
umes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 10th ed., made up of supplements to the
9th ed., vol. 32 (1902), vii–xxxvii, 2d ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1919).
316 • Bibliography

The Scope and Importance to the State of the Science of National Eugenics (1907); 3d
ed. (London: Cambridge University Press, 1911).
“Wie steht’s mit der deutschen Cultur,” New Statesman, 4 (10 and 17 October,
1914), 9–11 and 33–35.
The Life, Letters, and Labours of Francis Galton, 3 vols. in 4, (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1914, 1924, 1930).
Francis Galton: A Centenary Appreciation, 1822–1922 (London: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, n.d. [1922]).
Speeches Delivered at a Dinner Held in University College, London in Honour of
Professor Karl Pearson, 23 April 1934 (privately printed; Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1934).
“Old Tripos Days at Cambridge, as Seen from Another Viewpoint,” Mathemati-
cal Gazette, 20 (1936), 27–36.
Early Statistical Papers (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1948).
The History of Statistics in the 17th and 18th Centuries, Against the Changing Back-
ground of Intellectual, Scientiﬁc, and Religious Thought (from his lectures at
University College from 1921 to 1933), ed. E. S. Pearson (London: Charles
Grifﬁn, 1978).
SECONDARY SOURCES
Ackerman, Gretchen P., Ibsen and the English Stage, 1889–1903 (New York and
London: Garland Publishing, 1987; reprint of a 1959 Harvard Ph.D. disserta-
tion).
Alder, Ken, The Measure of All Things (New York: Free Press, 2002).
Aldrich, John, “Correlations Genuine and Spurious in Pearson and Yule,” Statis-
tical Science, 10 (1995), 364–376.
Alter, Peter, The Reluctant Patron: Science and the State in Britain, 1850–1920,
trans. Angela Davies (Oxford: Berg, 1987).
Alter, Peter, “Bewunderung und Ablehnung: Deutsch-britische Wissenschafts-
beziehungen von Liebig bis Rutherford,” in Lother Jordan and Bernd Kortlän-
der, eds., Nationale Grenzen und internationaler Austausch (Tübingen: Max
Niemeyer Verlag, 1995), 296–311.
Anstruther, Ian, Oscar Browning: A Biography (London: John Murray, 1983).
Ashton, Rosemary, The German Idea: Four English Writers and the Reception of
German Thought, 1800–1860 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Baird, Davis, “The Fisher/Pearson Chi-Squared Controversy: A Turning Point for
Inductive Inference,” British Journal of the Philosophy of Science, 34 (1983),
105–118.
Bannister, Robert, Sociology and Scientism: The American Quest for Objectivity,
1880–1940 (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1987).
Barnard, Frederick M., “Spinozism,” in Paul Edwards, ed., The Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy, 8 vols. (New York: Macmillan and Free Press, 1967), vol. 7, 541–544.
Barton, Ruth, “John Tyndall, Pantheist: A Rereading of the Belfast Address,”
Osiris, 3 (1987), 111–134.
Bibliography • 317

Beals, Polly A., “Fabian Feminism: Gender, Politics and Culture in London,
1880–1930,” Ph.D. diss., Rutgers University, 1989.
Karl Beckson, London in the 1890s: A Cultural History (New York and London: 
W. W. Norton, 1992).
Beer, Gillian, Meredith: A Change of Masks (London: Athlone Press, 1970).
Bellot, Hugh Hale, University College, London, 1826–1926 (London: University of
London Press, 1929).
Bernhardt, Rüdiger, Henrik Ibsen und die Deutschen (Berlin: Henschelverlag,
1989).
Blackmore, John T., Ernst Mach: His Life, Work, and Inﬂuence (Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1972).
Bland, Lucy, Banishing the Beast: Sexuality and the Early Feminists (New York:
New Press, 1995).
Boyle, Nicholas, Goethe: The Poet and the Age, Vol. 1: The Poetry of Desire (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1991).
Brandon, Ruth, The New Women and the Old Men: Love, Sex, and the Woman Ques-
tion (New York: W. W. Norton, 1990).
Brautigam, Jeffrey, “Inventing Biometry, Inventing Man: Biometrika and the
Transformation of the Human Sciences,” Ph.D. diss., University of Florida,
1993.
Britain, Ian, “A Transplanted Doll’s House: Ibsenism, Feminism and Socialism in
Late-Victorian England,” in Ian Donaldson, ed., Transformations in Modern
European Drama (London: Macmillan, 1983), 14–54.
Brock, William H., From Protyle to Proton: William Prout and the Nature of Mat-
ter (Bristol and Boston: Adam Hilger, 1985).
Brock, William H., “Building England’s First Technical College: The Laboratories
of Finsbury Technical College, 1878–1926,” in Frank A.J.L. James, ed., The
Development of the Laboratory (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK:
Macmillan, 1989), 155–170.
Browning, Oscar, Memories of Sixty Years at Eton, Cambridge, and Elsewhere (Lon-
don and New York: John Lane, 1910).
Burdett, Carolyn, Olive Schreiner and the Progress of Feminism: Evolution, Gender,
Empire (Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK: Palgrave, 2001).
Burrow, J. W., A Liberal Descent: Victorian Historians and the English Past (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).
Byatt, A. S., The Biographer’s Tale (New York: Knopf, 2001).
Cannadine, David, The Decline and Fall of the British Aristocracy (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1990).
Carlyle, E. I., “Alexander William Blackie Kennedy,” in Dictionary of National Bi-
ography, Supplement 4, 1922–1930 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1937).
Chickering, Roger, Karl Lamprecht: A German Academic Life (1856–1915) (At-
lantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1993).
Clarke, Bruce, Energy Forms: Allegory and Science in the Era of Classical Thermo-
dynamics (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2001).
Collini, Stefan, Public Moralists: Political Thought and Intellectual Life in Britain,
1850–1930 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Conway, William Martin, Episodes in a Varied Life (London: Country Life, 1932).
318 • Bibliography

Courtney, Janet, “Ralph Thicknesse, 1856–1923,” in An Oxford Portrait Gallery
(London: Chapman and Hall, 1931), 161–205.
Coward, Rosalind, Patriarchal Precedents: Sexuality and Social Relations (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1983).
Cox, David R., “Biometrika: The First Hundred Years,” Biometrika, 88 (2001),
3–11.
Crook, D. P., Benjamin Kidd: Portrait of a Social Darwinist (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1984).
Dale, Peter Allan, In Pursuit of a Scientiﬁc Culture: Science, Art, and Society in the
Victorian Age (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1989).
Danziger, Kurt, Constructing the Subject: Historical Origins of Psychological Re-
search (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison, “The Image of Objectivity,” Representations,
no. 40 (Fall 1992), 81–128.
Dehue, Trudy, “Deception, Efﬁciency, and Random Groups: Psychology and the
Gradual Origination of the Random Group Design,” Isis, 88 (1997), 653–673.
Den Otter, Sandra M., British Idealism and Social Explanation: A Study in Late
Victorian Thought (Oxford: Clarendon, 1996).
Desmond, Adrian, Huxley: The Devil’s Disciple (London: Michael Joseph, 1994).
Desrosières, Alain, The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reason-
ing, trans. Camille Naish (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).
Dickens, A. G., and John Tonkin, The Reformation in Historical Thought (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1985).
Dowling, Linda, Hellenism and Homosexuality in Victorian Oxford (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1994).
Draznin, Yaffa Claire, ed., “My Other Self ”: The Letters of Olive Schreiner and
Havelock Ellis, 1884–1920 (New York: Peter Lang, 1992).
DuBois, Ellen Carol, Harriet Stanton Blatch and the Winning of Woman Suffrage
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997).
DuBois, Ellen Carol, and Linda Gordon, “Seeking Ecstasy on the Battleﬁeld: Dan-
ger and Pleasure in Nineteenth-Century Feminist Sexual Thought,” in Carole S.
Vance, ed., Pleasure and Danger (London: Pandora, 1984), 31–49.
Dyhouse, Carol, Feminism and the Family in England, 1880–1939 (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1989).
Edwards, A.W.F., “R. A. Fisher on Karl Pearson,” Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London, 48 (1994), 97–106.
Eisenhart, Churchill, “Pearson, Karl,” in Charles Gillispie, ed., Dictionary of 
Scientiﬁc Biography, 16 vols. (New York: Scribners, 1970–1976), vol. 10,
447–472.
Espeland, Wendy, The Struggle for Water (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1998).
Evans, Joan, The Conways: A History of Three Generations (London: Museum
Press, 1966).
Eyler, John M., Sir Arthur Newsholme and State Medicine, 1885–1935 (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Fee, Elizabeth, “Nineteenth-Century Craniometry: The Study of the Female
Skull,” Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 53 (1979), 415–433.
Bibliography • 319

First, Ruth, and Ann Scott, Olive Schreiner (London: André Deutsch, 1980).
Fradkin, Betty McGinnis, “Olive Schreiner and Karl Pearson,” Quarterly Bulletin
of the South African Library, 31 (1977), 83–93.
Frank, Robert, “The Telltale Heart: Physiological Instruments, Graphic Methods,
and Clinical Hopes, 1865–1914,” in William Coleman and Frederic L. Holmes,
eds., The Investigative Enterprise: Experimental Physiology in Nineteenth-
Century Medicine (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), 211–290
Friedman, Robert Marc, Appropriating the Weather: Vilhelm Bjerknes and the Con-
struction of a Modern Meteorology (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989).
Gayon, Jean, Darwin et l’après-Darwin (Paris: Editions Kimé, 1992).
Gigerenzer, Gerd, Zeno Swijtink, Theodore Porter, Lorraine Daston, Lorenz
Krüger, and John Beatty, The Empire of Chance: How Probability Changed Sci-
ence and Everyday Life (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Gilbert, Felix, History: Politics or Culture? Reﬂections on Ranke and Burckhardt
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).
Gillispie, Charles, The Edge of Objectivity (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1960).
Goldstein, Doris S., “The Professionalization of History in Britain in the Late
Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” Storia della Storiographica, 3
(1983), 3–27.
Gooday, Graeme, “Teaching Telegraphy and Electrotechnics in the Physics Labo-
ratory: William Ayrton and the Creation of an Academic Space for Electrical
Engineering in Britain, 1873–1884,” History of Technology, 13 (1991), 73–111.
Gossman, Lionel, Basel in the Age of Burckhardt: A Study in Unseasonable Ideas
(Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
Gowan, Peter, “The Origins of the Administrative Elite,” New Left Review, 61
(March–April 1987), 4–34.
Grosskurth, Phyllis, Havelock Ellis: A Biography (New York: Knopf, 1980).
Hacking, Ian, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1990).
Haight, Gordon S., George Eliot: A Biography (New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1968).
Hald, Anders, A History of Mathematical Statistics from 1750 to 1930 (New York:
John Wiley and Sons, 1998).
Haldane, J.B.S., “Karl Pearson, 1857–1957, Being a Centenary Lecture,” Bio-
metrika, 44 (1957), 303–313.
Harris, Jose, Private Lives, Public Spirit: A Social History of Britain, 1870–1914
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Harvie, Christopher, The Lights of Liberalism: University Liberals and the Chal-
lenge of Democracy, 1860–1886 (London: Allen Lane, 1976).
Haskell, Thomas L., “Professionalism versus Capitalism: R. H. Tawney, Emile
Durkheim, and C. S. Peirce on the Disinterestedness of Professional Communi-
ties,” in Haskell, ed., The Authority of Experts (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1984), 180–225.
Heilbron, John L., “Fin-de-Siècle Physics,” in Carl-Gustav Bernhard, Elisabeth
Crawford, and Per Sèrböm, eds., Science, Technology and Society in the Time of
Alfred Nobel (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1982), 51–73.
320 • Bibliography

Heimann, Peter, “The Unseen Universe: Physics and the Philosophy of Nature in
Victorian Britain,” British Journal for the History of Science, 6 (1972), 73–79.
Henderson, Linda Dalrymple, The Fourth Dimension and Non-Euclidean Geome-
try in Modern Art (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983).
Hill, Roland, Lord Acton (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000).
Hogben, Lancelot, Statistical Theory: The Relationship of Probability, Credibility
and Error (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1957).
Hollinger, David A., “Inquiry and Uplift: Late Nineteenth-Century American
Academics and the Moral Efﬁcacy of Scientiﬁc Practice,” in Thomas Haskell,
ed., The Authority of Experts (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1984),
142–156.
Hollinger, David A., “Justiﬁcation by Veriﬁcation: The Scientiﬁc Challenge to the
Moral Authority of Christianity in Modern America,” in Michael J. Lacey, ed.,
Religion and Twentieth-Century American Intellectual Life (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1989), 116–135.
Hollinger, David A., “James, Clifford, and the Scientiﬁc Conscience,” in Ruth
Anna Putnam, ed., The Cambridge Companion to William James (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997), 69–83.
Hoppen, K. Theodore, The Mid-Victorian Generation, 1846–1886 (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1998).
Houghton, Walter, The Victorian Frame of Mind (New Haven, CT.: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1957).
Howsam, Leslie, “Forgotten Victorians: Contracts with Authors in the Publication
Books of Henry S. King and Kegan Paul, Trench, 1871–1889,” Publishing His-
tory, 34 (1993), 51–70.
Howsam, Leslie, Kegan Paul, A Victorian Imprint: Publishers, Books and Cultural
History (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1998).
Hulse, James W., Revolutionists in London: A Study of Five Unorthodox Socialists
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970).
Hunt, Bruce J., The Maxwellians (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991).
Hunt, Karen, Equivocal Feminists: The Social Democratic Federation and the
Woman Question, 1884–1911 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
Huxley, Leonard, Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley, 2 vols. (New York: D.
Appleton, 1901).
Jones, Gareth Stedman, Outcast London: A Study in the Relationship between
Classes in Victorian Society (1971; New York: Pantheon Books, 1984).
Jones, Peter d’A., The Christian Socialist Revival: Religion, Class, and Social Con-
science in Late-Victorian England (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1968).
Kelsall, R. K., Higher Civil Servants in Britain from 1870 to the Present Day (Lon-
don: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1955).
Kent, Christopher, Brains and Numbers: Elitism, Comtism, and Democracy in
Mid-Victorian England (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978).
Kent, Susan Kingsley, Sex and Suffrage in Britain, 1860–1914 (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1987).
Kevles, Daniel J., In the Name of Eugenics: Genetics and the Uses of Human Hered-
ity (New York: Knopf, 1985).
Bibliography • 321

Klein, Judy L., Statistical Visions in Time: A History of Time-Series Analysis,
1662–1938 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Klein, Martin J., “Mechanical Explanation at the End of the Nineteenth Century,”
Centaurus, 17 (1972), 58–82.
Klimm, Peter, “Zwischen Epigonentum und Realismus: Studien zum Gesamtwerk
Robert Hamerlings,” dissertation, University of Vienna, 1974.
Köhnke, Klaus Christian, The Rise of Neo-Kantianism: German Academic Philoso-
phy between Idealism and Positivism, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1991).
Kragh, Helge, Quantum Generations: A History of Physics in the Twentieth Century
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999).
Krüger, Lorenz, Lorraine Daston, and Michael Heidelberger, eds., The Probabilis-
tic Revolution, vol. 1: Ideas in History (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987).
Krüger, Lorenz, Gerd Gigerenzer, and Mary Morgan, eds., The Probabilistic Rev-
olution, vol. 2: Ideas in the Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987).
La Vopa, Anthony, “The Philosopher and the Schwärmer: On the Career of a Ger-
man Epithet from Luther to Kant,” in Lawrence E. Klein and Anthony J. La
Vopa, eds., Enthusiasm and Enlightenment in Europe, 1650–1850 (San Marino,
CA: Huntington Library, 1998), 85–115.
Lears, T. J. Jackson, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of
American Culture, 1880–1920 (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1984).
Levine, George, Dying to Know: Scientiﬁc Epistemology and Narrative in Victorian
England (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
Levy, Paul, Moore: G. E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles (London: Weidenfeld
and Nicolson, 1979).
Lewes, George Henry, The Life and Works of Goethe, 2 vols. (London: David Nutt,
1855).
Lightman, Bernard, The Origins of Agnosticism: Victorian Unbelief and the Limits
of Knowledge (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987).
Lightman, Bernard, “Robert Elsmere and the Agnostic Crises of Faith,” in Richard
J. Helmstadter and Bernard Lightman, eds., Victorian Faith in Crisis: Essays on
Continuity and Change in Nineteenth-Century Religious Belief (London:
Macmillan, 1990), 283–311.
Lightman, Bernard, “Huxley and Scientiﬁc Agnosticism: The Strange History of a
Failed Rhetorical Strategy,” British Journal for the History of Science, 35 (2002),
271–289.
Love, R. “Alice in Eugenics Land: Feminism and Eugenics in the Scientiﬁc Careers
of Alice Lee and Ethel Elderton,” Annals of Science, 36 (1979), 145–158.
Lubenow, W. C., The Cambridge Apostles, 1820–1914: Liberalism, Imagination,
and Friendship in British Intellectual and Professional Life (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1998).
Luftig, Victor, Seeing Together: Friendship between the Sexes in English Writing from
Mill to Woolf (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993).
Lundgreen, Peter, “Engineering Education in Europe and the U.S.A., 1750–1930:
The Rise to Dominance of School Culture and the Engineering Profession,”
Annals of Science, 47 (1990), 37–75.
322 • Bibliography

Lynd, Helen Merrell, England in the Eighteen-Eighties: Toward a Social Basis for
Freedom (New York: Oxford University Press, 1945).
MacCarthy, Fiona, William Morris: A Life for Our Time (New York: Knopf, 1995).
MacKenzie, Donald, Statistics in Britain: The Social Construction of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge (Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press, 1981).
MacKenzie, Norman and Jeanne, The Fabians (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1977).
MacLeod, Roy M., “Education: Scientiﬁc and Technical” (1977), in The “Creed of
Science” in Victorian England (Aldershot, Hampshire, UK: Variorum, 2000).
Magnello, M. Eileen, “Karl Pearson’s Gresham Lectures: W.F.R. Weldon, Specia-
tion, and the Origins of Pearsonian Statistics,” British Journal for the History of
Science, 29 (1996), 43–63.
Magnello, M. Eileen, “Karl Pearson’s Mathematization of Inheritance: From An-
cestral Heredity to Mendelian Genetics,” Annals of Science, 55 (1998), 35–94.
Magnello, M. Eileen, “The Non-Correlation of Biometrics and Eugenics: Rival
Forms of Laboratory Work in Karl Pearson’s Career at University College Lon-
don,” History of Science, 37 (1999), 79–106, 123–150.
Marks, Harry, The Progress of Experiment: Science and Therapeutic Reform in the
United States (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Marsh, Joss, Word Crimes (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
Mason, Michael, The Making of Victorian Sexual Attitudes (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1994).
Matthews, J. Rosser, Quantiﬁcation and the Quest for Medical Certainty (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).
Maurer, Bertram, Karl Culmann und die graphische Statik (Stuttgart: GNT Ver-
lag, 1998).
McBriar, A. M., Fabian Socialism and English Politics, 1884–1918 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1966).
Mehrtens, Herbert, Moderne—Sprache—Mathematik: Eine Geschichte des Streits
um die Grundlagen der Disziplin und die Subjects formaler Systeme (Frankfurt
am Main: Suhrkamp, 1990).
Mendelsohn, J. Andrew, “From Eradication to Equilibrium: How Epidemics Be-
came Complex after World War I,” in Christopher Lawrence and George Weisz,
eds., Greater than the Parts: Holism in Biomedicine, 1920–1950 (New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 1998), 303–331.
Meyer, Michael, Ibsen: A Biography (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1972).
Moore, James R., “Theodicy and Society: The Crisis of the Intelligentsia,” in
Richard J. Helmstadter and Bernard Lightman, eds., Victorian Faith in Crisis:
Essays on Continuity and Change in Nineteenth-Century Religious Belief (Lon-
don: Macmillan, 1990), 153–186.
Morgan, Mary S., The History of Econometric Ideas (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1990).
Morgan, Mary S. “Searching for Causal Relations in Economic Statistics: Reﬂec-
tions from History,” in Vaughn R. McKim and Stephen P. Turner, eds., Causal-
ity in Crisis: Statistical Methods and the Search for Causal Knowledge in the Social
Sciences (Notre Dame, IN.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1997), 47–80.
Bibliography • 323

Morris, Christopher, King’s College: A Short History (Cambridge, UK: King’s Col-
lege Cambridge, 1989).
Morrison, Margaret, “Modelling Populations: Pearson and Fisher on Mendelism
and Biometry,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 53 (2002), 39–68.
Morse, David, High Victorian Culture (New York: New York University Press,
1993).
Musil, Robert, The Man without Qualities, trans. Sophie Wilkins (New York:
Knopf, 1995).
Newsome, David, The Victorian World Picture (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers Uni-
versity Press, 1997).
Norton, Bernard J., “Metaphysics and Population Genetics: Karl Pearson and the
Background to Fisher’s Multi-Factorial Theory of Inheritance,” Annals of Sci-
ence, 32 (1975), 537–553.
Norton, Bernard J., “Karl Pearson and Statistics: The Social Origins of Scientiﬁc
Innovation,” Social Studies of Science, 8 (1978), 3–34.
Norton, Bernard, and E. S. Pearson, “A Note on the Background to, and Refereeing
of, R. A. Fisher’s 1918 Paper ‘On the Correlation between Relatives on the Sup-
position of Mendelian Inheritance,’” Notes and Records of the Royal Society of
London, 31 (1976), 151–162.
Olby, Robert, “The Dimensions of Scientiﬁc Controversy: The Biometric-
Mendelian Debate,” British Journal for the History of Science, 22 (1989),
299–320.
Oppenheim, Janet, “Shattered Nerves”: Doctors, Patients, and Depression in Victo-
rian England (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Palsky, Gilles, Des Chiffres et des cartes: Naissance et développement de la cartogra-
phie quantitative française au XIXe siècle (Paris: C. T. H. S., 1996).
Pastor, Ludwig, Johannes Janssen, 1829–1891, ein Lebensbild (Freiburg im Breis-
gau: Herder’sche Verlagshandlung, 1892).
Paul, Diane B., “Eugenics and the Left,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 45 (1984),
567–590.
Pearson, E. S., Karl Pearson: An Appreciation of Some Aspects of His Life and Work
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1938).
Pearson, E. S., and M. G. Kendall, eds., Studies in the History of Probability and
Statistics (London: Grifﬁn, 1970).
Perkin, Harold, The Rise of Professional Society: England since 1880 (London:
Routledge, 1989).
Peters, Sally, Bernard Shaw: The Ascent of the Superman (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1996).
Pierson, Stanley, Marxism and the Origins of British Socialism: The Struggle for a
New Consciousness (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1973).
Plackett, R. L., “Karl Pearson and the Chi-Squared Test,” International Statisti-
cal Review, 51 (1983), 59–72.
Porter, Theodore M., The Rise of Statistical Thinking, 1820–1900 (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1986).
Porter, Theodore M., “The Death of the Object: Fin-de-Siècle Philosophy of
Physics,” in Dorothy Ross, ed., Modernist Impulses in the Human Sciences (Bal-
timore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), 128–151.
324 • Bibliography

Porter, Theodore M., “Rigor and Practicality: Rival Ideals of Quantiﬁcation in
Nineteenth-Century Economics,” in Philip Mirowski, ed., Natural Images in
Economic Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 128–170.
Porter, Theodore M., Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and
Public Life (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995).
Porter, Theodore M., “Reason, Faith, and Alienation in the Victorian Fin-de-
Siècle,” in Hans Erich Bödeker, Peter Hanns Reill and Jürgen Schlumbohm,
eds., Wissenschaft als kulturelle Praxis, 1750–1900 (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck
und Ruprecht, 1999), 401–413.
Porter, Theodore M., “Statistical Utopianism in an Age of Aristocratic Efﬁciency,”
in Lynn K. Nyhart and Thomas H. Broman, eds., Science and Civil Society,
Osiris, 17 (2002), 210–227.
Prothero, George W., A Memoir of Henry Bradshaw (London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, 1888).
Provine, William B., The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics (Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1971),
Ratcliffe, S. K., The Story of South Place (London: Watts, 1955).
Richards, Jeffrey, “‘Passing the Love of Women’: Manly Love and Victorian Soci-
ety,” in J. A. Mangan and James Walvin, eds., Manliness and Morality: Middle-
Class Masculinity in Britain and America (Manchester, UK: Manchester
University Press, 1987), 92–122.
Richards, Joan, Mathematical Visions: The Pursuit of Geometry in Victorian En-
gland (Boston, MA: Academic Press, 1988).
Richards, Joan, “The Probable and the Possible in Victorian England,” in Bernard
Lightman, ed., Victorian Science in Context (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1997), 51–71.
Richards, Robert J., The Romantic Conception of Life: Science and Philosophy in the
Age of Goethe (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002).
Richmond, Marsha L., “Women in the Early History of Genetics: William Bateson
and the Newnham College Mendelians,” Isis, 92 (2001), 55–90.
Ringer, Fritz, The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic Com-
munity, 1890–1938 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969).
Rive, Richard, ed., Olive Schreiner Letters, vol. 1: 1871–1899 (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1988).
Roach, John, Public Examinations in England, 1850–1900 (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1971).
Roll-Hansen, Nils, “The Crucial Experiment of Wilhelm Johannsen,” Biology and
Philosophy, 4 (1989), 303–329.
Ross, Dorothy, The Origins of American Social Science (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1991).
Ross, Sydney, “Scientist: The Story of a Word,” Annals of Science, 18 (1962),
65–85.
Rothblatt, Sheldon, The Revolution of the Dons: Cambridge and Society in Victo-
rian England (London: Faber and Faber, 1968).
Rushton, Alan R., “Nettleship, Pearson and Bateson: The Biometric-Mendelian
Debate in a Medical Context,” Journal of the History of Medicine, 55 (2000),
134–157.
Bibliography • 325

Savage, Leonard J., “On Rereading Fisher,” Annals of Statistics, 4 (1976), 441–497.
Schaffer, Simon, “Late-Victorian Metrology and Its Instrumentation: A Manufac-
tory of Ohms,” in Robert Bud and Susan Cozzens, eds., Invisible Connections:
Instruments, Institutions, and Science (Bellingham, WA: SPIE Optical Engineer-
ing Press, 1992), 23–56.
Scholz, E., “Graphical Statics,” in Ivor Grattan-Guinness, ed., Companion Ency-
clopedia of the History and Philosophy of the Mathematical Sciences, 2 vols. (Lon-
don and New York: Routledge, 1994), 987–993.
Schorske, Carl E., “The Quest for the Grail: Wagner and Morris” (1967), in
Thinking with History: Explorations in the Passage to Modernism (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1998), 71–89.
Schorske, Carl E., “History as Vocation in Burckhardt’s Basel” (1988), in Think-
ing with History: Explorations in the Passage to Modernism (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1998), 56–70.
Schramm, Percy Ernst, “Englands Verhältnis zur deutschen Kultur zwischen der
Reichsgründung und der Jahrhundertwende,” in Werner Conze, ed., Deutsch-
land und Europa (Düsseldorf: Droste, 1951), 135–175.
Schults, Raymond R., Crusader in Babylon: W. T. Stead and the Pall Mall Gazette
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1972).
Semmel, Bernard, The Governor Eyre Controversy (London: MacGibbon and Kee,
1962).
Sherburne, James Clark, John Ruskin, or the Ambiguities of Abundance (Cam-
bridge, MA.: Harvard University Press, 1972).
Shortland, Michael, and Richard Yeo, eds., Telling Lives in Science: Essays on Scien-
tiﬁc Biography (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
Showalter, Elaine, A Literature of Their Own: British Women Novelists from Brontë
to Lessing (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1977).
Siegel, Daniel M., “Thomson, Maxwell, and the Universal Ether in Victorian
Physics,” in G. N. Cantor and M.J.S. Hodge, eds., Conceptions of Ether: Studies
in the History of Ether Theories, 1740–1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981), 239–268.
Sillitoe, Allan, Leading the Blind: A Century of Guidebook Travel, 1815–1914
(London: Macmillan, 1995).
Sloan, P. R., “Mach’s Phenomenalism and the British Reception of Mendelism,”
Comptes-Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, ser. II, Sciences de la Vie, 323 (De-
cember 2000), 1069–1079.
Smith, Crosbie, and M. Norton Wise, Energy and Empire: A Biographical Study of
Lord Kelvin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Smith, Warren Sylvester, The London Heretics, 1870–1914 (London: Constable,
1967).
Solovey, Richard A., Demography and Degeneration: Eugenics and the Declining
Birthrate in Twentieth-Century Britain (Chapel Hill: University of North Car-
olina Press, 1990).
Somervell, Robert, Chapters of Autobiography (London: Faber and Faber, 1935).
Spencer, Hamish G., and Diane B. Paul, “The Failure of a Scientiﬁc Critique:
David Heron, Karl Pearson and Mendelian Eugenics,” British Journal for the
History of Science, 31 (1998), 441–452.
326 • Bibliography

Stigler, Stephen, The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty to 1900
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Preses, 1986).
Stigler, Stephen M., “Karl Pearson and the Cambridge Economists,” in Statistics
on the Table (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 13–50.
Stigler, Stephen, “Karl Pearson and Degrees of Freedom,” in Statistics on the Table
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 338–357.
Sumner (Baron), John Andrew Hamilton, “Parker, Robert John, Baron Parker of
Waddington (1857–1918),” in Dictionary of National Biography, Supplement 3
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1927).
Taylor, Barbara, Eve and the New Jerusalem: Socialism and Feminism in the Nine-
teenth Century (London: Virago, 1983).
Thompson, E. P., William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary (New York: Pan-
theon, 1977).
Thompson, F.M.L., The Rise of Respectable Society: A Social History of Victorian
Britain, 1830–1900 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).
Tournès, Dominique, “Pour une histoire du calcul graphique,” Revue d’Histoire
des Mathématiques, 6 (2000), 127–161.
Tsuzuki, Chuschichi, The Life of Eleanor Marx, 1855–1898: A Socialist Tragedy
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).
Turner, Frank M., The Greek Heritage in Victorian Britain (New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1981).
Turner, Frank M., “Public Science in Britain: 1880–1919” (1980), chap. 8 in
Turner, Contesting Cultural Authority: Essays in Victorian Intellectual Life
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Turner, Frank M., “The Crisis of Faith and the Faith That Was Lost” (1990), chap.
3 in Turner, Contesting Cultural Authority: Essays in Victorian Intellectual Life
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Venn, John A., comp., Alumni Cantabrigienses, part II, from 1752 to 1900, 6 vols.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1940–1954).
Walkowitz, Judith R., Prostitution and Victorian Society: Women, Class, and the
State (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Walkowitz, Judith R., City of Dreadful Delight: Narratives of Sexual Danger in
Late Victorian London (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992).
Warwick, Andrew, “A Mathematical World on Paper: Written Examinations in
Early 19th-Century Cambridge,” Studies in the History and Philosophy of Mod-
ern Physics, 29 (1998), 295–319.
Warwick, Andrew, “Exercising the Student Body: Mathematics and Athleticism in
Victorian Cambridge,” in Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin, eds., Sci-
ence Incarnate: Historical Embodiments of Natural Knowledge (Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1998), 288–326.
Watts, Michael R., The Dissenters, vol. 2. The Expansion of Evangelical Nonconfor-
mity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995).
Weintraub, E. Roy, How Economics Became a Mathematical Science (Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2002).
White, Paul, Thomas Huxley: Making the “Man of Science” (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2003).
Willey, Thomas E., Back to Kant: The Revival of Kantianism in German Social
Bibliography • 327

and Historical Thought, 1860–1914 (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press,
1978).
Willis, Kirk, “The Introduction and Critical Reception of Marxist Thought in
Britain, 1850–1900,” Historical Journal, 20 (1997), 417–459.
Wolfe, Willard, From Radicalism to Socialism: Men and Ideas in the Formation of
Fabian Socialist Doctrines, 1881–1889 (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1975).
Yeo, Richard, “Scientiﬁc Method and the Image of Science, 1831–1891,” in Roy
MacLeod and Peter Collins, eds., The Parliament of Science (Northwood, Mid-
dlesex, UK: Science Reviews, 1981), 66–88.
Yeo, Richard, “Scientiﬁc Method and the Rhetoric of Science in Britain,
1830–1912,” in John A. Schuster and Richard Yeo, eds., The Politics and
Rhetoric of Scientiﬁc Method: Historical Studies (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1986),
259–297.
Yule, G. Udny, “Karl Pearson,” Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society,
1936–1938, vol. 2, 73–110.
328 • Bibliography

Index
Abbot, Edwin: Flatland, 193
Achurch, Janet, 162
Acton, J.E.E. Dalberg, ﬁrst Baron Acton,
94, 101–2, 115n.59
Adam, Robert, 63
Adams, Henry, 7
agnosticism, 108–9
Agnostic Journal, 205
algebra: contrasted with geometry and
graphics, 216, 232–34; and KP’s statis-
tics, 240–41
alienation: economic, 103; from folk cul-
ture, 124; from man’s own divinity, 200;
from nature, 8, 49–50, 178, 198,
204–11, 308; and quantiﬁcation, 50;
from self, 204, 308
Allen, Grant, 224
American Journal of Mathematics, 190
amor dei intellectualis, 65, 150.  See also
intellectual love
Anabaptists (of Münster), 81, 113–14
analogy, 180–81, 187, 189, 190
anarchism, 108, 135
anthropology, 251, 261–63, 265, 270. See
also craniometry
Archer, William, 162
aristocracy, 286, 291–92
Arnold, Edward V., 85, 86
Arnold, Matthew, 38, 87, 116, 117, 220,
294
art: KP on, 53, 58, 61, 103, 121
Arthur (hero of KP’s New Werther), 1,
48–59, 64; and Tennyson, 48, 56
Aspasia, 86, 152 See also Hamerling, Robert
Association for Promoting a Professorial
University for London, 218
Association for Promoting a Teaching
University for London, 217
astronomy, statistical, 256–57
atoms: ether models of, 179–83, 186–87,
190; and higher dimensions, 192–94;
variability of, 260
Aveling, Edward, 141, 162
Bachofen, Johann Jakob, 152 
Bacon, Francis, 38
Baden-Powell, R.S.S., 224
Baedeker guidebook, 62, 98, 164
Balfour, Arthur, 210, 287, 304
Balfour, Gerald, 94
Balliol College, Oxford, 35, 56, 65, 193,
195, 197
Bartlett, Sir Herbert, 275
Bateson, William, 266, 268–69
Bax, Belfort, 107
Beare, Thomas Hudson, 226n.18, 228,
233
Bebel, August, 151–52
Bedford College, 220
Beesley, W. C., 14
Bell, Julia, 274
Bentham, Jeremy, 33, 157, 225
Berkeley, George, 200
Berlin, 54, 67, 84: KP’s discontent with,
62; police visits in, 75; socialism in, 73,
75–76; “Berlin University,” 219
Besant, Annie, 108
Bible: vernacular translations of, 115
Bildung (cultivation), 229, 231
bildungsroman, 9, 45, 297; history as, 303
biography and autobiography, 1, 11, 13,
42, 118–19, 300–303, 311; and confes-
sion, 165–66
biology. See biometry; Mendelism
Biometric Laboratory, 226, 248, 250, 262,
272–75
Biometrician-Mendelian controversy, 269
Biometrika: founding of, 8, 268–70; KP’s
editing of, 8, 266, 274–76, 302; on
medicine, 270–71; tables in, 262
biometry, 5, 238, 261; and Mendelism,
269
Bismarck, Otto von, 74–75, 99
Bjerknes, Carl Anton, 182, 187
Black Forest, 53, 54
Blatch, Harriet Stanton, 159
Blavatsky, Madame, 34n.47, 108
Blore, E. W., 23n.20
Boas, Franz, 263
Boer War, 283, 293
Boole, George, 193
Boström, Christopher Jacob, 229n.25

Bowley, Arthur, 251
Bradlaugh, Charles, 108
Bradshaw, Henry, 95–96; and cultural
history, 95; as friend of KP, 26, 92, 95,
114, 198
Bravais, Auguste, 260
breeding farms, 253
Brion, Friederike, 48, 50
British Association for the Advancement of
Science, 11, 78, 233
Brixlegg passion play, 119–22; God and the
umbrella at, 120–21, 209, 310
Broadhouse, John, 78n.26
Brooke, Emma: on J. Hinton as sexual
predator, 136; on men’s sexual impulse,
140; on paid motherhood, 159–60; on
preventive checks, 137; on women’s
sexuality, 136–37
Browning, Oscar: as dilettante and gadﬂy,
94–95; dismissal from Eton College of,
30–32; and Goethe, 30, 50; on Ger-
many, 54, 62, 74, 79; on King’s College,
25; and King’s College historical school,
93–95; KP supported by, 27, 85; KP’s
European journey with, 32; represented
in KP’s New Werther, 46
Browning, Robert, 94, 313
Brunsviga calculator, 241, 261
Buckle, Henry Thomas, 152
Buddhism, 111
Bulwer Lytton, Edward, 13, 24
Burckhardt, Jakob, 96, 152
Burke, Edmund, 106, 264
Caird, Mona, 159
Cambridge Apostles, 93 and n.5
Cambridge Extension, 84 
Cambridge Modern History, 93
Cambridge Philosophical Society, 183, 188
Cambridge Review, 66, 86
Cambridge University: educational reforms
at, 25–26, 218; engineering professor-
ship at, 226–27; mathematics at, 181,
229; socialism at, 74, 77. See also Girton
College; King’s College; Mathematical
Tripos; Newnham College; Trinity
College 
Cambridge University Press, 185
Capel, Monsignor, 110
capitalism, 90, 103, 308
Carey-Foster, George, 218
Carlyle, Thomas: and British socialism, 76,
79; on French Revolution, 104; on hero
worship, 97, 292; late Victorian refer-
ences to, 38, 132, 305; on Mill’s sexual
abstinence, 140; as mystic, 65; on re-
nunciation, 51; Sartor Resartus, 29–30,
36; on sham, 61
Carpenter, Edward, 149–50
Castella, C. de, 72
causes: and correlations/association, 260,
271; dispensability of 257;  inaccessibil-
ity of, 244–45; inference of from curves,
255 
Cave-Browne-Cave, Beatrice, 274–75
cephalic index, 244, 263
Chances of Death, The (by KP), 254–55,
267n.30, 303
Cheysson, Emile, 236
Child, Margaret Victoria. See Pearson,
Margaret Victoria
chi-squared test, 255–56
Chree, Charles, 184
Christianity: KP’s loss of faith in, 7, 14–15,
26–28; as outdated, 287; as sham, 15,
28, 61, 308
Churchill, Winston, 293–94
Clifford, Lucy, 144–46
Clifford, William Kingdon, 36–38, 144,
178; Common Sense of the Exact Sciences
(edited and completed by KP), 59n.43,
184, 195; and Congress of Liberal
Thinkers, 110; on higher dimensions,
195–96; and Pollock, 65; and University
College, London, 226
Clough, Arthur, 94n.5
coaches, 40
Cobb, Elisabeth, 131–35; desire of for
intellectual life, 132; and Hamerling,
79n.30, 132; as KP conﬁdante, 2, 57,
132–33; on KP’s impersonality, 132–33,
140; and KP’s New Werther, 132; and
KP’s sensualizing of nature, 58–59, 66;
in Men and Women’s Club, 135, 150;
on renunciation, 133; and Schreiner,
141–42, 144, 148; and Sharpe, M. (her
sister), 174
Cobbett, William, 107
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 135
Commonplace Book, KP’s, 27–30
complexity, 191
Comte, Auguste, 33
330 • Index

conceptions: contrasted with perceptions,
201–2, 204, 269, 308
Condorcet, Marquis de, 264, 304, 312–13
Contagious Diseases Act, 127
controversies, 14, 266–78
Conway, Moncure, 110–11
Conway, William Martin: and Bradshaw,
95; and KP’s New Werther, 56; and KP’s
passion play, 88; marriage of, 57; mathe-
matical coaching of, 22, 23n.19
Cornelius, Carl Adolf, 114, 123
correlation, 257–61; in biometry and
evolution, 246, 257, 262–63; multiple,
258; in physics, 261; philosophical
signiﬁcance of, 260–61; product-
moment measure of, 255; spurious,
245; surfaces of, 246
Courtauld, Sidney, 155n.71
craniometry, 239, 244, 262–63. See also
anthropology
Cremona, Luigi, 233
Cromwell, Oliver: skull of, 263
Crookes, William, 201
Culmann, Carl, 231–32
curve-ﬁtting, 239–44, 261–62 ; and causes,
244–45, 254
Curzon, George, 94
dance: medieval, 122
Dante Alighieri, 145
Darwin, Charles: as aristocrat of science,
291; German reputation of, 76, 152; on
natural and artiﬁcial selection, 237, 245;
theory of evolution of, 38, 112, 153,
214
Darwin, George, 238n.46
Darwinism: as contest between societies,
173, 213, 222, 227, 267, 282; and need
for efﬁciency, 201; social vs. socialist,
282; as struggle for existence, 10, 158
Davenport, Charles, 270, 273, 290n.72
David, Rhys, 111n.48
Davidson, Thomas, 108
degrees of freedom, 256
democracy, 282, 291–92
De Morgan, Augustus, 212
Descartes, Réné, 197, 231, 233
description, scientiﬁc: and biometry, 270;
and ﬁtting curves, 246, 257; and inac-
cessibility of nature, 61, 198, 308; as
limitation of biology, 267; in mechanics,
59, 200; and plurality of scientiﬁc repre-
sentations, 269–70
desire: science and freedom from, 204.  See
also sexual desire
De Vries, Hugo, 251
dilettantism: of British historical writing,
114; Browning’s, 94–95; KP’s anxieties
about, 3, 221, 310; and statistics, 248
disciplines, 288
dolldom (and women), 129, 158–59, 161,
167
Döllinger, J.J.I. von, 99, 101–2, 115n.59
Donkin, Horatio Brian, 136, 147–48
Drapers, Worshipful Company of, 228,
262, 275
Dresden, 62
dualism, 191, 197
Du Bois-Reymond, Emil, 94, 219; doctrine
of Ignorabimus of, 38–39
Duhem, Pierre, 179
Dürer, Albrecht, 62, 103
Eastty, Annie, 121
Eckenstein, Lina, 161, 169, 195
economics: graphical, 235–36; historical,
70, 78–79, 215; KP’s critique of, 158;
Marxian, 78; old socialist, 103
Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro, 212, 220, 251,
278; on curve-ﬁtting and causes,
244–45, 255–57
education: ideals of, 220–29; vs. profes-
sional instruction, 223–24, 227–28,
233, 290; technical, 226, 229–30, 233,
289, 293–95
efﬁciency, 97, 201, 220, 287, 292; and
eugenics, 278, 283, 285; and marriage,
168, 284; national, 220; and universi-
ties, 219
egoism: under capitalism, 93; Goethe’s, 51;
in Hamerling, 80; of KP, 64, 171–72; an
inherited Pearson trait? 167–68, 176;
science as control of, 9–10, 126, 252, 300,
308; and selﬂessness, 308; and subordi-
nation of women, 126, 161, 168, 308
Einstein, Albert, 7
Eisenach, Julius, 42n.63, 73n.12
Elam, Charles, 37
elasticity: as “imperial science,” 185; math-
ematical theory of, 159, 181, 189, 231;
taught to KP by Routh, 23; Todhunter’s
book on, completed by KP, 184–85
Index • 331

Elderton, Ethel, 261, 274
Eliot, George, 45, 94
Ellis, Havelock,141, 144, 146, 223n.11 
Enﬁeld, Alice, 170
Engels, Friedrich, 153
engineering: and graphical methods, 216,
227, 230–32, 234; mathematics of, 181,
185, 227–30; Tripos (at Cambridge),
226; at University College, London,
225–26
English Historical Review, 93
enthusiasm, 44, 111–12; Hamerling on,
80, 111; of marketplace and study, 88,
112, 117, 271, 284–85, 290, 309, 312;
religious/sexual, 156; and statistics, 249.
See also gush; Schwärmerei 
Erasmus, Desiderius, 100, 103, 117, 250
error law, 255, 259
Ethel (heroine of New Werther), 47–48,
54–58, 64
ether, 179–80, 199; as basis of physical
reality, 186; and continuum mechanics,
191; ether squirts, 6, 179, 189–94, 204,
212, 245, 269; mathematics of, 181;
and matter, 181; and pulsating spheres,
182, 187–89; and theory of elasticity,
185; and vortices, 182, 192 
Ethic of Freethought, The, 43, 119; publica-
tion details for, 267n.31
Euclid, 232
eugenics: and cultural history, 97; Galton
on, 279; KP’s critique of, 270, 285; and
KP’s pedigree, 13, 250, 264–65; in KP’s
public lectures, 8, 279; and medicine,
271–72; vs. natural selection, 282; and
socialism, 151, 260, 278, 280, 283; and
statistics, 8, 247, 256, 278–86; and
wholeness of self, 302–4
Eugenics Education Society, 285
Eugenics [Galton] Laboratory, 262,
264–65, 275, 278, 280–81, 302
evolution: continuous and discontinuous,
258, 268; and genetic theories, 251; as
mathematical problem, 267, 272; need
of laboratory for, 248; and secular
rationality, 285, 287; statistical study of,
238–39, 245–48, 254, 257–58, 267–68
Ewing, James Alfred, 227
examinations: school, 265; university, 217,
219, 226 
experimentation, 253: 270–71, 274, 278
expertise, 286, 293–95
Extension lecturing, 84, 98, 102; and
socialism, 105; and University of Lon-
don, 217
Eyre, Governor, 76
Fabian Society, 108, 135, 160, 282, 301
Fabian Women’s Group, 174
factor analysis, 270
fairy tales, 153
Favaro, Antonio, 231–32
Fawcett, Millicent, 41
Fawcett, Philippa, 40–41
Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 211
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 51–52; and Hegel,
63; and Kant, 64; and KP’s idealism,
63–65, 196, 202
ﬁctions: KP’s, 29–30, 44–45, 310–11
Filon, L.N.G., 268
Fischer, Kuno, 32, 42, 63–64, 66
Fisher, Ronald Aylmer: on design of experi-
ments, 271, 275–78; disputes of with
KP, 8, 251, 256–57; and measurement,
264–65; and reputation of KP, 4, 275,
313; and signiﬁcance testing, 265, 278
Fitzgerald, George F., 190, 199
Florence, Maude, 193
folk culture and folklore: ancient, 153; and
Catholic church, 103, 122; and cultural
history, 2; Germanic, 91, 98–99, 101;
Norwegian, 164, 173; and Roman law,
104
Foote, G. W., 109
force: subjectivity of, 59–60, 64, 199, 212,
225
Forster, E. M., 33
Fortnightly Review, 28, 108, 253, 267
Foster, Gregory, 263
Foster, Michael, 266
fourth dimension, 37, 184, 246; and di-
mensional release, 193–95; and ether
squirts, 179, 192–96, 212; and ﬂatland,
193, 196
Fox, William Johnson, 110
Foxwell, Herbert, 158
Frazer, James George, 174
freedom: KP on, 75, 114
Freedom (anarchist journal), 170, 171n.107
Freethinker (radical news sheet), 109
Freethought, 72, 109, 111
French Revolution, 28, 81, 102, 112
332 • Index

frequency distributions, 216, 235, 237–39,
254
Freud, Sigmund, 249, 278, 303
Freytag, Gustav, 79
friendship: male, 56–57; “from man to
man,” 10, 142, 175; and sexual love,
140, 145–48; between women and men,
57, 139–40
Froude, James Anthony, 114
Galileo Galilei, 204
Galton, Francis: apotheosis of, by KP,
260–61, 272, 275; as aristocrat of sci-
ence, 291; and Bateson, 268; biogra-
phies of by KP, 11, 13, 42, 256,
266–67, 300–301, 313n.22; and Bio-
metrika, 8; and Boas, 263; doubts about
KP of, 241; endowment of KP’s research
by, 228, 262, 275, 278–79; on eugenics,
279, 285, 286; and Eugenics Labora-
tory, 262, 275; as founder of biometry,
236, 239, 251, 268, 286; KP’s identiﬁ-
cation with, 13, 43, 250; Natural
Inheritance, 161, 215, 239, 260; on
normal curve, 237, 259; Quaker back-
ground of, 13, 14; on regression and
correlation, 257–58; as scientiﬁc gener-
alist, 289; and Weldon, 239, 268
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 260
Gee, Thomas, 19
gemmules, 258
genealogy: KP’s interest in, 13, 302
genes, 245, 269–70
geometry: advantages of over algebra, 216,
232–34, 236–37; as basis of physical
reality, 179, 192, 196–97, 254, 308; of
evolution, 258; graphical, 181, 230–31,
234–35; insufﬁciency of, 240; intuitive
appeal of, 234; non-Euclidean, 196; of
statistics, 236
George, Henry, 77, 158
Germany: attitude of KP toward, 84, 91,
121, 157, 219, 284, 304; British rivalry
with, 54, 233, 284; medieval history and
folklore of, 84, 118; scholarship and
science in, 114, 284, 288, 289n.69;
Victorian interest in, 33
Girton College, Cambridge, 136, 274
Gladstone, William Ewart, 287, 295
Glaisher, James, 23n.20
Godwin, William, 141
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von: Browning
on, 30; English reputation of, 33, 38,
135; as favorite author of KP, 27, 29, 30,
53, 214, 305; and Hamerling, 79–80;
and Ibsen, 163; and Kätchen, 48n.14; on
Luther, 117; as mystic, 65; and Newton,
142; and renunciation, 48–51, 68; and
sexuality, 87; and Spinoza,  49, 66; on
women, 129. Works: Faust, 32, 36, 49,
66, 71, 79, 88, 178; “Ganymede,” 49;
Poetry and Truth, 43, 85; Sufferings of
Young Werther, 43, 49, 81; Wilhelm
Meister, 9, 28, 34, 50–51, 68, 299, 311
Goldsmid, Sir Francis: and Goldsmid chair,
226, 228–29
Gosset, W. S., 278
grammar: educational role of, 221–23 and
n.10
Grammar of Assent (by J. H. Newman),
208–11
Grammar of Science (by KP): on biometry
and evolution, 245–48; and connected-
ness with nature, 6–7, 10, 126, 201–8,
234, 241; and educational reform,
221–25; on ether and ether squirts, 6,
192–93, 201–2, 308; and ethics of
knowledge, 7, 179, 267; and grammars
of dead languages, 221–23; and Gre-
sham Lectures, 198, 216, 223; on
higher dimensions, 193–96; and human-
ist religion of KP, 200; idealism of,
199–203; and Mach, 201, 206–8, 211;
and objectivity, 267, 309; as philosophi-
cal rationale for statistics, 7–8, 213; on
probability, 212–13, 237; reception of,
7–8, 59–60, 271, 312; on universal
variability, 259–60
graphical methods: and commercial studies,
216; in economics, 235–36; in engineer-
ing, 216, 230–31
graphical statics, 216, 230–35, 257; and
measures of area, 240
graphical statistics, 216, 234–36; of biolog-
ical evolution, 246–48
gravitation, 182, 187, 189–90, 197; laws
of, a creation of human mind, 202
Green, John Lawrence, 32, 34–35
Greenwood, Major: as correspondent of
KP, 286; disputes of, with KP, 266, 273;
and Fisher, 251, 256, 278; and medical
statistics, 271 
Index • 333

Gresham Lectures (by KP): on chance and
statistics, 235–39; and Grammar of
Science, 198, 212, 235; and graphical
geometry, 198, 234–35
gush, 45, 56. See also Schwärmerei
Hacker, Helga Pearson (KP’s daughter), vii,
47, 57, 120
Haeckel, Ernst, 36–39
Haldane, J.B.S., 78, 182
Hallam, Arthur Henry, 56
Halley, Edmund, 290
Hamerling, Robert, 79–84; as 1848 Vien-
nese radical, 81–82; and KP’s essay on
Anabaptists, 113; KP’s lecture on,
85–86; in KP’s New Werther, 53; and
KP’s passion play, 70, 85–86, 90, 305;
and Schwärmerei, 80–83, 111; on
women and sensuality, 129–30, 311.
Works: Ahasver in Rom, 79, 80–81;
Aspasia, 83, 86, 129–30; König von
Sion, 69, 79, 80, 81–84, 85, 114, 132
Hampstead, 108, 164
Hamsun, Knut, 305
Hardy, Thomas, 155n.71, 218
Harris, James R., 22, 23, 24
Harrison, Frederic, 107, 110
Hasak, Vincenz, 116
Haussmann, Baron, 32
Hegel, G.W.F.: in Berlin law teaching, 67;
and Fichte, 63; on freedom, 102; and KP,
35–36, 65, 73, 204; KP’s epigraphs from,
118; and Oxford philosophy, 33, 34
Hegelianism, 108
Heidelberg: castle in, 52, 54, 58, 64; Uni-
versity of, 42, 47, 54, 63, 70–71, 284
Heine, Heinrich, 25
Held, Adolf, 78
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 67, 219,
223n.10
Henrici, Olaus, 230
Hensley, Lewis, 20
Herder, Johann Gottfried, 62
Heron, David, 280
Hertz, Heinrich, 188–90, 259
Hewitt, James, 29
Hewitt, Ralph (ﬁctional), 29, 195
Hill, Austin Bradford, 271 
Hill, Leonard, 266
Hinton, Charles Howard: “casting out the
self,” 194; and fourth dimension,
193–95; as metaphysician, 194–95; trial
for bigamy of, 136, 193
Hinton, James: and Hintonianism, 136; KP
on, 137n.25, 149, 193; Schreiner on,
142, 146, 149
Hinton, Mary Boole, 193
historical contingency, 6, 157
historicism: KP’s, 91, 103; relation of to
statistics, 214
history: as collection of facts, 93–94; cul-
tural, 2, 185, 298, 308; vs. dogma, 292;
in Germany, 96–97; Janssen and, 99; KP
applies for position in, 91; KP’s reputa-
tion in, 123–24; KP’s understanding of,
97, 151, 153, 311; objectivity in,
114–16, 148; political, 97, 118, 152;
professionalization of, 124; and sectarian
biases of scholarship, 114–15; stages of,
91; of statistics/science, 290, 300–302;
of universities, 219; and weakness of
English scholarship, 114; of women and
sexuality, 151, 153, 157
Hitler, Adolf, 284
Hogben, Lancelot, 278
Homer, 80, 152
Hope-Pinker, Henry B., 275, 277
House of Lords, 291
Hüllmann, Karl Dietrich, 97
humanism: KP on, 103–4
Hume, David, 33, 208
Huxley, Thomas Henry: Evolution and
Ethics, 280–81; and Eyre controversy,
76; in Mallock’s New Republic, 38; and
the Reformation, 112; on scientiﬁc
education, 294–95, 298; as spokesman
for science, 117, 178, 206; and univer-
sity reform, 218–19, 220–21
hydrodynamics, 179, 182, 185, 187, 190,
192, 252
Hyndman, H. M., 106–7
hypocrisy: of Christianity, 15; of society, 
28
Ibsen, Henrik: and Goethe, 163; and KP’s
engagement trauma, 167, 170–71; life
of, 161–62; male egoism in, 11, 305;
reputation of, in England, 161–63, 214;
reputation of, in Germany, 161–62;
Shaw on, 163; and Yule, 272–73. Works:
Brand, 161, 163–64, 166, 168, 186;
Doll’s House, 161–63, 167; Ghosts, 162;
334 • Index

Lady of the Sea, 170–71; Peer Gynt, 163,
164, 174; Pillars of Society, 161
idealism, philosophical: at Cambridge,
32–33; in England, 32; German sources
of, 30, 32, 43, 52; and positivism,
178–79, 200, 269; reactions to KP’s
philosophy, 7; and religion, 7, 34, 200;
and science, 7, 196–97, 298; and Spi-
noza, 34, 64. See also Fichte, Johann
Gottlieb; Hegel, G.W.F.
identity, personal, persistence of, 11
immortality, personal: 15, 29, 39, 297
imperialism, 76
impersonality: of knowledge and institu-
tions, 5, 9–10, 126, 288; of men and
women, 10, 132, 145, 149–50, 306; as
moral ideal, 9, 177.  See also objectivity
individualism: effects of, on women, 157;
effects of, on workers, 101, 157; as
phase of history, 91, 102, 113, 282,
298; and science, 157
individuality: of atoms and stars, 183, 305;
commitment of KP to, 35–36, 71, 206,
285, 305; vs. individualism, 176; me-
dieval lack of, 121–22; persistence of,
11; as preconception of statistics, 305;
rise of, 123; in science, 5, 304–5, 312,
314; of the universe, 34; of women,
175–76
intellectual love, 10, 12, 89, 142, 148, 175,
314; and sexual love, 144–45, 148–50
intelligence: measurement of, 270; and
skull measures, 263, 265
Jacob, S. M., 263
Janssen, Johannes, 99–101; KP’s assess-
ment of, 99, 103–4, 117
Jan van Leyden, 82–83, 85, 113
Jenner, Henry, 116
Jesus, 52, 65; Galton as, 250; in KP’s
passion play, 87–90, 301
Jevons, William Stanley, 212
Johannsen, Wilhelm, 251, 273
John the Baptist, 250, 260
Joule, James Prescott, 185n.21, 224
Jowett, Benjamin, 33, 38, 56
Joynes, J. L., 109
Julius, W. H., 190n.30
Kant, Immanuel, 60, 64, 73, 196
Kegan Paul & Co., 46, 47n.9, 87
Kegan Paul, Charles, 87, 89–90
Keith, Sir Arthur, 250
Kennedy, Alexander B. W., 226, 229, 233
Kepler, Johannes, 200
Keynes, John Neville, 78
Kidd, Benjamin, 282
King’s College, Cambridge, 24–26; and
Browning, 25; connections with Eton
of, 25, 26; historical school at, 93–96;
KP gains scholarship at, 24; KP holds
fellowship at, 42, 84, 98; KP returns
there in 1880, 84
King’s College, London, 217, 225
Kingsley, Charles, 208
kinship: kin atoms, 191; kindred 
group-marriage, 154; and sexual bond,
154 
Kirchhoff, Gustav, 59–60, 64
Knott, C. G., 59
König (KP acquaintance at Saig), 99
Köstlin, Julius, 100
Kropotkin, Prince, 108, 171
Kuhn, Thomas S., 291
Kulturkampf, 99
laboratories: Biometric, 226, 248, 250,
262, 272–75, 280; engineering (at
UCL), 225, 229, 248; Eugenics (Gal-
ton), 262, 264–65, 275, 278, 280–81;
technical, at Cambridge, 226; statistical,
290 
labor movement, 106
Lamprecht, Karl, 97, 123
language, science of, 153
Lankester, Edwin Ray, 218, 265
Laplace, Pierre Simon, 212, 265–66
Larmor, Joseph, 184, 206, 266
Lassalle, Ferdinand, 43, 106
law: as destined career for KP, 19, 23, 34,
42, 67, 84–85, 97–98; as doubtful
science, 98; as intellectual suicide, 67;
old German, 104; Roman 100–101, 104
law (scientiﬁc), 59–60, 64; generated by
human mind, 200, 202; graphical dis-
covery of, 236; necessity of, for social
order, 203
law of ancestral inheritance, Galton’s,
268–69
least squares, method of, 259
Lee, Alice, 261
Legendre functions, 23
Index • 335

Lenin, V. I., 7, 200
Leonardo da Vinci, 85
Levasseur, Emile, 236
Lewes, George Henry, 50, 66n.68; on
Goethe and renunciation, 68
Liddon, Henry Parry, 110
Lie, Jonas, 273
Lindemann, F., 188, 195
Lindsay, T. M., 115
literature; realism in, 45–46, 80, 299–300
Locke, John, 33–34
Lodge, Oliver, 190n.31; on electricity, 185;
on ether machinery, 180–81; on history
of science, 185n.21; on psychical re-
search, 287–88
logic: ineffectiveness of, 208–9 
Loki, 45, 47, 54, 190, 301
London: as public forum, 225; radicalism
in, 105–6
London Mathematical Society, 188, 189
Luther, Martin, 10, 71; Arnold on, 116;
and creation of individuality, 123; dog-
matism of, 91, 104, 112–13, 117, 224;
Döllinger on, 101–2; KP’s dislike of,
101, 104, 116–17, 250; New Testament
translation by, 115; on the old socialism,
103; and princely absolutism, 101, 104;
on Schwärmerei, 81; and selﬁshness, 113
Macaulay, William Herrick, 25, 46, 181,
224, 226, 227; as KP’s mathematical
correspondent, 181, 183, 184, 188, 189
Mach, Ernst, 206–8; on economy of
thought, 201; KP’s independence from,
64, 178, 211, 299; on mechanics, 60;
on mixing of self with world, 211
Macrory (barrister), 98
Magdalene, Mary, 86–87, 89–90, 130,
144, 166
Maimonides, Moses, 14, 52, 55; and 
Spinoza, 65
Mallock, W. H., 37–38, 106
manhood, 159
Marey, Etienne-Jules, 236
marriage: as free marital union, 56–57,
128, 130, 167; idealization of, 175; of
KP’s parents, 16–19, 127; and loss of
independence, 127; Luther on, 117; 
and mutual sympathy, 129, 167; as
obstacle to friendship between men, 57,
127; and prostitution, 128–29;
Schreiner and, 141
Marshall, Alfred, 235–36
Martineau, James, 110
Marx (Aveling), Eleanor, 141, 162
Marx, Karl, 43, 75, 136; British reputation
of, 77, 106; as historical economist, 78;
and KP’s proposed translation of Capi-
tal, 69, 75, 76–78; and role of women,
152; on surplus value, 78, 158
Marx reading group (Hampstead), 108
Mary (Virgin), 156, 171
mask: cool rationality as, 166
materialism, 192, 197, 199, 205, 212,
224–25, 287
Mathematical Tripos (prize examination),
20–25, 29, 39–42; KP’s view of, 40, 42,
48, 301; mathematics of, 39, 180–81;
and statistics, 264
mathematics: and data, 241, 252–53,
261–66, 277; and engineering, 226–30;
mathematical modernism, 252; pure and
applied, 241, 253, 287; teaching of at
University College, London, 226, 228,
230
Mathys, Jan, 82, 113
matriarchy. See mother-law
matter, negative, 189–90
Maupertuis, Pierre-Louis Moreau de,
185n.21, 224
Maurenbrecher, Wilhelm, 116, 123
Maxwell, James Clerk: analytical mathe-
matics of, 182; death of, 74; and ether
models, 180, 199; and graphical statics,
233; greatness of, 185; on limits of
science, 38; on molecules and statistical
physics, 259; wave theory of, 188
Mayr, Georg von, 236
McLennan, John F., 153
measurement, 265, 280
mechanical analogies, 180–81
Medical Research Council, 271
medicine: and medical statistics, 251, 256,
261, 270–72
memory: and science, 1–3, 296, 297, 300,
313
Men and Women’s Club: Cobb’s role in,
135, 149; discusses prostitution and
sexual desire, 90, 133–40, 150–51;
dissolution of, 159; and ideal of objec-
tivity, 10, 132, 140, 145, 148–49; KP
discusses Galton at, 215; origins of, 125,
128; and paid motherhood, 160, 282;
records of, 131; scholarly ambitions of,
336 • Index

151; Schreiner and, 141, 147, 169;
Sharpe and, 148, 151; Stepniak at,
108n.40
Mendel, Gregor, 245, 268
Mendelism, 266–70; and eugenics, 279; KP
on, 269–70, 277, 302
Meredith, George: Egoist, 172, 305; male
egoism in, 11, 172; and university
reform, 218
meritocracy, 9, 22, 41, 158–59, 292, 295
metaphysics: KP’s rejection of, 192, 197,
200; as poetry, 178; temptations of, 179,
193, 204
Middleton, John Henry, 109 n.41
Mill, John Stuart: Fanny Pearson’s interest
in, 27n.33, 111; as individualist and
utilitarian, 33, 76, 79; as logician, 304;
on women, 140, 157, 245; youthful
crisis of, 27
mind: as active and creative, 206; analogous
to a sorting machine, 202–3; as basis of
reality, 179, 196–97
miracles: impossibility of, 213
models, 189, 199; as ﬁctions or analogies,
199–200; KP vs. Mach, 201; mechani-
cal, 179–81
Modern Review, 113
Moivre, Abraham de, 290
moments, method of: in mechanics and
statistics, 240, 259
Mommsen, Theodor, 152
monism, 191, 197
Monte Carlo roulette, 237, 253–54
morality: deﬁned as knowledge by KP, 
112
More, Sir Thomas: Utopia, 55, 75
Morgan, Lewis Henry, 153–54
Morley, Henry, 14
Morley, John, 28, 108
Morris, William, 87, 108, 109; and social-
ism, 76, 79, 107, 158; on stucco, 63
mortality, curves of, 254–55
motherhood: as paid work, 128, 159–60;
and social insurance, 173–74
mother-law (Mutterrecht) and mother-age,
125, 151–53, 156, 188
Muentzer, Thomas, 81
Müller, Friedrich Max, 45, 110
Müller, Henrietta, 136
Murray, John (publisher of guidebooks),
62, 119
Musil, Robert, 215, 297–300, 312–13
mysticism: KP’s approval of, 65, 299
mythology, 152–54
Naples crabs, Weldon’s, 239–40
naturalism, scientiﬁc, 288
natural theology, 199, 202, 225, 287
Nature, 36
nature: inaccessibility of, 10; and incom-
patibility of ecstasy and exact science,
58–59, 61, 203–5; KP’s fondness for,
28–29; as object of desire, 126; rapturous
experiences of, 52, 57–59, 65, 196, 308;
and religion, 71
neo-Kantianism, 64
Newman, John Henry (Cardinal), 
208–11; and Browning, 94; on knowl-
edge as instinctual, 209–10; on power-
lessness of logic, 208–9; on religion and
tradition, 209 
Newnham College, Cambridge, 85, 274
Newsholme, Arthur, 251
Newton, Isaac, 142, 153, 186, 200, 202,
204, 210, 233, 312
New Werther (by KP), 43–58; anonymity
of, 44–46, 86; and intimacy with nature,
58–59, 234; and KP’s confessions, 165;
KP’s gifts of, 74, 132; on objectivity, 67,
72; publication details of, 46–7; relations
of to KP’s life, 54, 156; and scientiﬁc
memory, 1, 298; versions of, 47–48.
See also Loki
Neyman, Jerzy, 278
Nineteenth Century (periodical), 36
normal distribution, 216, 237–40, 244–45,
254–55, 259
normality: as quality of mind, 203
Northcote-Trevelyan reforms, 295
Norway: and the English, 161, 171n. 107;
folklore of, 164, 173; KP’s interest in,
164, 166–67, 304; as scene of KP’s
marriage proposal, 164–65, 168; and
Yule, 272–73
objectivity: changing sense of the word, 67
objectivity: and the character of the scien-
tist, 309; and communication between
the sexes, 10, 126, 132, 140, 145,
148–49; and controversy, 266–67; and
eugenic science, 279; in historical schol-
arship, 99–100, 116; history of, 4–6;
and judgment, 265; and renunciation,
67, 308. See also impersonality
Index • 337

Oxford University: KP applies for job at,
228; lectures by KP and Galton at, 250,
260, 279; reforms at, 218, 220; skull
collections at, 263; and statistics for
statesmen, 292–93. See also Balliol
College
Pall Mall Gazette, 116, 127–28, 217
Pareto, Vilfredo, 245n.55
Paris Commune, 114
Parker, Robert: friendship of with KP,
32–33, 132, 148; as KP’s correspon-
dent, 38, 55, 60, 130, 163, 172, 196;
role of in Men and Women’s Club, 135;
role of in New Werther, 46, 54, 56; and
Saig, 98; on socialism, 74–75
passion plays, 69, 80, 84–90; in Brixlegg,
119–22, 209; Hamerling and, 85; KP’s
essay on, 118–24; link to socialism, 122;
at Oberammergau, 94, 108, 119; per-
formances of, viewed by KP, 85, 119;
reality of, for medieval audiences,
120–21. See also Trinity, The
Pater, Walter, 94
patriarchy, 151, 153, 156, 160–61
Pattison, Mark, 112, 220–23
Paul (the Apostle), 250
Pearl, Raymond, 251, 266–67, 269–70,
273, 313
Pearson, Arthur (KP’s older brother), 36, 
38, 54; death of, 20; sent to Rugby, 
16, 20 
Pearson, Egon S. (KP’s son), vii, 164,
227–28, 313
Pearson, Fanny Smith (KP’s mother):
closeness to KP of, 16–19; on KP’s legal
career, 67; marriage of, 16–19; on sham,
61; and South Place Chapel, 111; weak-
ness of, 168
Pearson, Margaret Victoria (Child) (KP’s
second wife), 175, 274
Pearson, Maria Sharpe (KP’s ﬁrst wife). See
Sharpe, Maria
Pearson, Sigrid (KP’s elder daughter), 164
Pearson, William (KP’s father): concern of
with KP’s education, 24, 27, 41–42;
described by KP, 15; historical researches
of, 70; and KP’s work in law, 67, 98;
marriage of, 16–19; as source of KP’s
inherited tendencies, 165, 167
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient, 1, 255
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 222
perceptions: as opposed to conceptions,
201–2, 204, 245, 269; ether squirt as
perceptual fact, 195, 204, 308
Pericles, 129
Perry, Edwin Cooper, 32
Perry, John, 230
Petrie, W. M. Flinders, 263
philology, 153
philosophy: KP’s studies of, 30–36, 42
physics: as exemplary ﬁeld, 272; as KP’s
intended career, 42n.63, 84, 181; math-
ematical, 179, 182; statistics in, 265
Pius IX, Pope, 99
Plato: Jowett’s editions of, 33, 56; as mys-
tic, 65
poetry: KP on, 8, 15, 27–28, 44 
polarities, KP’s, 154, 307–8
Pollock, Frederick, 64, 67
Poncelet, J. V., 231–32
positivism: Comtean, 107–8; as detachment
from nature, 126, 178; and inaccessibil-
ity of microstructures, 187–88, 199; and
Mendelian genes, 269; statistical, 241,
244–45, 270; and unknowability of
things in themselves, 37–38, 70
precision: limits of, 194; in mathematics,
212; Musil on, 299; and mysticism, 299,
308
prediction: in science, 308; statistical, 256–57
probability, mathematical: challenged by
gambling results, 253–54; in Grammar
of Science, 212–13; in KP’s Gresham
lectures, 235–37
profession of science: KP’s disdain for,
290–91, 300
progress: and changing role of women,
125, 156–57; Darwinian, 156; as indi-
vidual development, 83; KP’s faith in,
102, 113, 154, 298, 311
prostitution, 125, 127; and capitalist in-
equality, 127–28; in Hamerling’s Aspa-
sia, 129; history of, 151, 155; and
marriage, 128–29, 157–59, 175; as sex
without desire, 139; Sharpe’s research
on, 161; as survival of matriarchate, 155
Protestantism: and capitalism, 10; and
scriptural literalism, 72; severity of
toward women, 156. See also Luther,
Martin; Reformation, German
Prothero, George W., 26, 41, 93
protyle, 201, 245, 269
Prussia, 62, 152, 284
338 • Index

psychology, 251, 261, 270, 272
Pusey, E. B., 38
Pythagoras, 180
Quakerism, 14n.2; of Bradshaw’s family,
95; in Galton’s ancestors, 13, 14; in
Pearson’s ancestors, 14, 250, 304
Quetelet, Adolphe, 212, 237, 254, 259
radicalism, political, 7
Rafﬂes, Robert Blanchard, 87
Ranke, Leopold von, 97, 116, 124
Raphael (in New Werther), 52, 54–55, 76.
See also Wertheimer, Raphael
rationalization, 5
Rayleigh, John William Strutt, Lord, 186
Reformation, German: and analogies to
modern England, 104–5, 112–13, 311;
as “Deformation age,” 104; and ideals of
objectivity, 9–10, 148; and individual-
ism, 113;  Janssen on, 100; KP’s Exten-
sion course on, 99; KP’s interpretation
of, 97, 101–2, 113, 116, 266; and
repression of folk culture, 122–23; and
role of women, 125; scientiﬁc, 112, 250,
289. See also history; Luther, Martin
Registrar-General, 261
Rembrandt, 84
Renan, Ernest, 88
renunciation: Cobb on, 133; Goethe on,
68; Hamerling on, 83; Lewes on, 68; in
love; 171–73; and objectivity, 67; and
religion, 15, 209–10; and science, 6,
43–44, 50, 66–70, 84, 126, 178, 204,
209, 298, 308; and socialism, 70,
121–22
reproductive selection, 255, 285–86
Reuchlin, Johannes, 112, 117
revolution: in biology, 258; KP’s distaste
for, 86, 102, 117, 282, 285
Ricardo, David, 79
Riemann, Bernard, 195
rights, language of, 157, 292 
Roberts, W. Rhys, 26n.30
Robertson, George Croom, 14
Rogers, James E. Thorold, 107
Roman Catholicism: appeal of for British
socialists, 107; appeal of to KP, 5, 60,
70–73, 208; as feeling, not reason, 72;
and ﬂourishing medieval culture, 100,
117; and folk culture, 103, 122, 156;
historical position of, 73, 117; as intel-
lectual suicide, 67, 71;  medieval social-
ism of, 10, 73; and Protestant biases of
history, 114–15; and role of women,
156; symbolism of, 72
Rosebery, Earl of, 220
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 27–28, 29, 30,
305; Social Contract, 33
Routh, Edward J., 22, 23, 40
Rowe, R. C., 184
Royal Society, 266, 268, 272, 275, 291,
295; Committee for Conducting Statisti-
cal Inquiries . . . , 268
Royal Statistical Society, 236
Ruskin, John, 38; and artisanal creation,
101; and socialism, 76, 79, 158; on
stucco, 63 
Russia: anticipated revolution in, 102, 108
Saig, bei Lenzkirch (KP’s summer destina-
tion), 98, 132, 163, 165, 188
Saint-Venant, Barré de, 185 
Salisbury, Robert Cecil, marquess de, 287
Savage, Leonard J., 278
Schäfﬂe, Albert, 75, 78
Schelling, F.W.J. von, 63
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 81n.33, 85
Schreiner, Olive, 10, 131–32, 141–50;
African Farm, 141; and Brooke, 137;
calls herself a man, 142; caricatures of
KP by, 131, 149, 145–46, 149; and
Cobb, 141–42, 144; as conﬁdante for
KP, 144; and Donkin, 147; and Ellis,
141, 144, 146–47; friendship/love of
for KP, 142, 145–48; From Man to Man,
125; on Hintonianism, 142, 146, 149;
idealization of KP by, 149; on sexuality
and women’s sex drive, 136, 139, 141
Schwärmerei (zealotry or enthusiasm), 69,
73; Hamerling on, 80–83, 111; in KP’s
passion play, 89, 90; Luther on, 81; in
Men and Women’s Club, 141, 147, 169;
for science, 111
science: criticized as merely utilitarian,
220–21, 230; cultural role of, 5, 124;
and education, 293; as a faith, 65, 111;
as force of progress, 113; and individual-
ism, 157; and literary style, 306; in
Meredith’s Egoist, 172; moral qualities
of, 6, 90; need of state support for, 284;
and reason, 287; and renunciation, 178;
and selﬂessness, 12; and separation from
nature, 60–61, 178
Index • 339

scientiﬁc law. See law (scientiﬁc)
scientiﬁc method, 6; and citizenship, 7,
9, 213, 222; as deﬁning feature of
science, 212; and failings of scientists,
224–25; and popular education,
223–24, 289; and scientiﬁc attitude,
216, 222, 286, 287; as self-elimination,
213, 222; and socialism, 10, 222; and
statistics, 248, 249, 286; as union of
specialization and generality, 221, 289,
295, 300; and unity of science, 221–22;
universality of, 212; unlimited reach of,
9, 179, 289
scientist: history of the category of, 6, 294  
Seeley, John Robert, 61n.47
self and selfhood: continuity/wholeness of,
119, 249, 299, 303–4; cultivation of,
222, 229; and eugenics, 302–4; frag-
mentation of, 1, 9, 206–7, 297–99, 303;
and individuality, 298; KP’s anxieties
about, 1–3, 303, 308; Mach on, 206–7
sensuality: and art, 130, 157; dangers of,
113, 129–30, 155–57; as healthy, 152,
157; necessity of, 130–31; Protestant
opposition to, 156–57.  See also women
sex-festivals, 154–56
sexual desire: discussions of, 125–26; KP
on, 138–39; lacking in women, 136;
reciprocity of, 126, 135–36, 137n.26,
139, 155; relation of to friendship, 139
sexual intercourse: KP’s suffering from
abstinence, 133, 135–36, 144, 146;
like eating a strawberry, 136; like moun-
tain climbing, 57, 136, 139; and
nursing women, 142–43; Sharpe’s fear
of, 170
sexuality: anarchic potential of, 113; as
bond of primitive society, 154; degrad-
ing to man? 144; and eugenics, 125; and
friendship, 56, 140; Hinton on univer-
sality of, 136; intellectualized by KP,
150, 310; and love, 89; Luther on, 117;
morality of, 85; need for higher stan-
dards of, in men, 156; and religion, 122;
role of for health of men, 130, 135;
Schreiner on, 141
Shakespeare, William, 80, 87, 142
sham, 10, 46–47, 51, 61–62, 197, 307–8;
of Berlin, 62; of Christianity, 61; KP’s
objectivity as, 166
Sharpe, Loetitia, 161, 170
Sharpe (later Pearson), Maria: as correspon-
dent of KP, 10, 131, 186, 188, 195;
courtship of by KP, 126, 148, 165–73,
189–90, 226, 303; rationalism of, 167;
as secretary of Men and Women’s Club,
148, 151, 168–69; on sexuality and
marriage, 141; on women and men’s
minds, 139; work on Ibsen of, 161, 164,
169, 174n.114
Shaw, George Bernard: on doctors, 271; on
eugenics, 285; and Ibsen, 163; on KP, 1,
297, 301, 312; KP on, 46; and London
radicalism, 105; on passion plays, 108;
on women, 57n.39
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 27, 30, 82, 128
Shewhart, Walter, 275
signiﬁcance testing, 265, 271, 278
Simpson, Thomas, 290
skew distributions, 237–38, 244, 247, 
254
skulls: biometric studies of, 239, 244,
262–63
Smith, Robert, 232–33
Smith’s Prize, 20, 41, 184
Social Democratic Federation, 106, 108–9,
160
social/socialist Darwinism, 282–83
socialism, 73–79; and adult education
movement, 105; at Cambridge, 74;
Catholic or old, 73, 100, 103, 105, 113,
122, 298; and communism, 101; and
eugenics, 15, 260, 278, 280, 283;
German and British, 106; Hamerling on,
80; historical, 70, 79; KP’s conversion
to, 69–70; and land nationalization,
158; and medievalism, 76, 107, 121,
123; of professors, 73, 75, 78; and status
of women, 125, 127, 157–58, 160–61,
169; and Wertheimer, 55, 73
Socialist League, 107
Society for Psychical Research, 287
Sociological Society (London), 224
sociology, 224, 261–62, 280
Socrates, 52, 129
Somervell, Robert, 26n.30, 27n.32, 93,
94n.5
South Place Chapel, Finsbury, 105, 110,
196, 214
space, 196.  See also fourth dimension;
geometry
Spearman, Charles, 270
340 • Index

specialization, 5–6, 44, 221, 223, 286,
288–90, 293–95, 300, 310
Spencer, Herbert, 157
Speyer: cathedral in, 71
Spinoza: and amor dei intellectualis, 65, 89;
and the dissolution of self, 51; Fischer
on, 63; and freedom from desire, 204;
Goethe on, 49, 66; H. Hinton on,
194n.37; in KP’s reviews and ﬁctions,
52, 64, 85; on man and God, 43, 71;
pantheism of, 8, 65; Pollock’s on, 64; on
reason vs. religion, 34; and renunciation,
66, 178, 308
Spinozists, 108
spiritualism, 192, 199, 225, 287
Spurgeon, Charles Haddon, 110
stability: biological points of, 258, 268
standard deviation, 237
standardization, 306–9, 314
State (or nation): KP’s reverence for, 93,
97, 124, 158, 163, 283–84; and science,
177, 284, 292; support of child rearing
by, 159
statistics: albums of, 236; and commercial
studies, 216; compatibility of with
Mendelism, 269; controversies in, 3–4,
266–72, 275–78; and eugenics, 8, 247,
256, 278–86; graphical, 216, 234–36;
histories of, 4–5; and humanism, 299;
and individuality, 305, 308; as integra-
tive ﬁeld, 244, 248, 249; as key to
evolution, 238–39; KP’s early doubts of
and conversion to, 215–16; in KP’s
Gresham Lectures, 235–39; KP’s history
of, 252; KP’s style of, 262; KP’s teach-
ing of, 290; as a mathematical ﬁeld, 1,
251, 288; and medicine, 271; as a pro-
fession, 290–91; of prostitutes, 127; and
psychical research, 287–88; and public
reason, 2, 4, 288; and scientiﬁc method,
221, 248, 249, 252
Stead, W. T., 127–28
Stele, William John, 59
Stephen, Leslie, 65
Stepniak, Sergius, 108
Stewart, Balfour, 38–9
Stokes, George Gabriel, 183, 186, 187,
224–25
stucco, 109n.41; and sham, 62–63
subjectivity: ﬂight from, 5
suicide: contemplated by KP, 29, 60, 67, 195
Sunday Lecture Society, 109, 197
surface, 197; and depth, 10, 61, 128,
307–8; and interior, 166; and truth,
63, 67
surplus value or “surplus labour”: theories
of, 78
survivals: of mother-age, 155–56
Swinburne, Algernon Charles, 87 
tables: computation of, 262, 304–5, 312
Tait, Peter Guthrie, 38–39, 59, 199
Taussig, Frank, 54, 57n.40, 94; and KP’s
socialism, 74–75
Taylor, Harriet, 140
Taylor, John Peter, 22, 24
telephone exchange: as analogy for mind,
205–6, 241, 308
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 27, 48, 56, 79, 87,
94
textbooks: KP’s dislike of, 262, 290, 304
theory and practice: KP on, 219, 234
theosophy, 34, 108, 135
Thicknesse, Ralph: KP’s moonlight pro-
posal to, 57, 58; with KP in Norway,
164; with KP in the Tyrol, 58, 66
thing in itself (Ding an sich), 7, 178, 192
Thiselton-Dyer, W. T., 218
Thompson, Edward P., 107
Thomson, J. J., 23n.19, 186, 197
Thomson, William (Lord Kelvin): Baltimore
Lectures, 188; on ether and vortex atoms,
182, 191–92, 199; greatness of, 185; and
mechanical explanation, 180, 190n.31,
199, 224; on natural theology, 287
Thoreau, Henry David, 29
Thornbury, Walter, 63
Thornely, Thomas, 78n.28
Tildesley, Miriam Louise, 250
Times (London): celebration of Virchow in,
36; and university reform, 218
Todhunter, Isaac, 184, 252
Treasury of Human Inheritance, 265, 280,
299, 302
Trinity, The (KP’s passion play), 85–90,
130–31, 200, 301
Trinity College, Cambridge: and Browning,
25; in KP’s ﬁction, 29; scholarship
examinations at, 22–24; and Whewell,
232, 294
Tripos, mathematical.  See Mathematical
Tripos
Index • 341

Twain, Mark, 94
Tyndall, John, 36–38: and nature worship,
65
Tyrol: KP’s travels in, 19, 50, 55, 57–58,
66, 119–21
Unitarianism, 72, 108, 110, 167
universities: in Germany, 219, 229; and
KP’s medievalism, 219; role of examina-
tions at, 217; and technical education,
289, 294–95; value of idiosyncrasies of,
218
University College, London (UCL): and
democracy, 282; engineering education
at, 225–26, 232; history of, 225–25;
KP’s appointment at, 14, 91, 183, 217;
and KP’s research grants, 275; KP’s
teaching at, 216, 232, 290; and univer-
sity reform, 217 
University College School, 20
University of London: and KP’s research
grants, 275; and reform efforts of 1890s,
216–17, 224
Urwerther, KP’s, 47, 49, 55, 73
variability: of atoms, 260; in biology,
258–59; universality of, 212, 259
Veronica story: KP’s study of, 95, 198
Vienna: 1848 revolution in, 81–82
Viète, François, 231
Villiers, Brougham, 107
Virchow, Rudolf, 36–37, 39, 219
visual representation, 234
Voltaire, 27–29
Voss, J. H., 80
Wagner, Adolph, 78
Wagner, Richard, 94 and n.7, 108, 122
Walker, Helen, 297
Walpurgis, 19, 61, 156
war: KP on, 283–84
Webb, Beatrice, 107, 110
Webb, Sidney, 108
Weber, Max, 5
Weismann, August, 267–68
Weldon, Walter Frank Raphael: and Bio-
metrika, 8; collaboration of with KP, 216,
237–40, 268, 272; and controversy of
Biometricians and Mendelians, 268–69;
as correspondent of KP, 228, 286, 293;
death of, 269; as follower of Galton,
239, 268; as stimulus for KP’s statistics,
235–41, 272; and university reform, 218
welfare state, 282
Wells, H. G., 194n.39, 288, 293–94
Wertheimer, Raphael, 53–55, 73, 76, 132.
See also Raphael
Westergaard, Harald, 275, 290n.72
Whewell, William, 232
Wilde, Oscar, 45, 56, 63, 94
Williamson, Alexander, 14
Wilson, Charlotte, 108, 160, 171n.107
wisdom: KP on, 220, 286, 292, 309
witchcraft: as mother-age survival, 156
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 141
woman question (or “woman’s question”),
126
women: as biometric collaborators, 261,
273–75, 302; as creators of civilization,
154; eugenic duties of, 283; as Extension
students, 98; Goethe’s retrograde views
of, 129; Hamerling’s portrayal of, 82,
86, 129–30; history of women’s roles,
125, 151–52, 157; individuality of, 175;
Mill on, 157; need for paid work of,
128; need for protective legislation of,
159, 173; as reproductive, not sexual,
beings, 135; sensuality of, 48, 52, 55,
86–87, 113, 152, 155–56; as shopping
dolls, 158–59; skull measures and intelli-
gence of, 263; and socialism, 125, 169;
women’s movement, and KP, 159–60
wrangler (Cambridge). See Mathematical
Tripos
Wright, Almoth, 283n.57
Young, Edward, 27
Yule, George Udny, 259; and Brunsviga
calculators, 241; on chi-squared test,
256; disputes of with KP, 246, 251,
266–67, 272–73; on the ether, 192; and
Fisher, 256, 278; and graphics, 234; as
KP’s biometric collaborator, 268, 272;
and Norway, 272–73; obituary of KP by,
267, 272, 274, 299; on physics in rela-
tion to biology, 259; on reproductive
selection, 285–86; and skull collecting,
263
Zeller, Eduard, 32
Zöller, Egon, 164, 229
Zöller, Sigrid, 164 and n.93
342 • Index

