HAL Id: hal-01220771
https://u-paris.hal.science/hal-01220771
Submitted on 29 Jun 2021
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The semantics and pragmatics of the possessive
determiner (translated from Kleiber, G., 2008)
Georges Kleiber, Christopher Gledhill
To cite this version:
Georges Kleiber, Christopher Gledhill. The semantics and pragmatics of the possessive determiner
(translated from Kleiber, G., 2008).
Müller, H.H.; Klinge, A. Essays on Nominal Determination:
From morphology to discourse management, John Benjamins Company, pp.309-336, 2008, Essays on
Nominal Determination, Amsterdam-Philadelphia. ￿hal-01220771￿

The Semantics and Pragmatics of the Possessive Determiner.
Georges Kleiber
(Université Marc Bloch in Strasbourg, LDL & Scolia Research Groups)
Introduction1
Generally research on the possessive has either focused on its syntactic restrictions and the (re)-
presentation of its pronominal origins (Godard, 1986, Gross, 1986, Zribi-Hertz, 1999, etc.), or has
examined possession as a semantic category, especially in typological work where the approach
has been more or less openly universalist and cognitivist (Seiler, 1983, Barker, 1995, Taylor,
1996, Heine, 1997, Baron, Herslund and Sørensen, eds, 2001, etc.). There has also been much
careful description and analysis of the semantic and pragmatic relations which can hold between
the  'possessor'  and  the  'possessed'  in  particular  languages  (Baron  et  Herslund,  eds,  1997,
Tasmowski, ed., 2000, Heinz 2003b, etc.). It seems to us however that it would be interesting to
adopt a different approach, and to look at the textual properties of the possessive, in particular
when it coincides with the corresponding use of an associative definite article, as in the following
examples:
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Le tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. The trunk was full of cracks.)
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Son tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. Its trunk was full of cracks.)
We shall not be dealing here with the questions that are routinely asked about the possessive,
namely: What is possession? Is there a general semantic relation which accounts for all cases of
the possessive? or What are the basic relations created by the possessive and how do we explain
their implications? These are clearly legitimate and relevant issues, and indeed they turn out to be
essential in the argument developed by Baron, Herslund and Sørensen (2001), when they talk of
"dimensions of possession"2. But unfortunately the level of generality and the terminological
debate which these questions raise do not leave much room for the equally important issue of the
discursive role of the possessive determiner. In fact, in the literature on textual reference the
possessive determiner is hardly mentioned. It seems to us that it would be extremely fruitful
therefore to take this indirect textual approach rather than attempt a frontal attack on the
possessive. 
The approach we are taking only seems to have taken up previously by Fradin (1984)3. That is,
we start from the discursive context established by an associative anaphor (Kleiber, 2003a) and
we examine how the possessive determiner operates on the basis of this. As we see below, this
method allows us to shed new light on the semantics and pragmatics of the possessive, and
perhaps even allows us to relate the definite article to our overall approach. Although this is a
preliminary study, it may in fact lead us to intuitive and original observations about the definition
and role of this referential marker.
The possessive adjective and the definite article can be directly compared in situations where both
are markers of anaphoric reference corresponding to a predictable set of discourse criteria. These
criteria correspond to two conditions:
1 This paper summarises, develops and complements, with appropriate modifications and corrections, previous work 
on this subject by Kleiber (2003 and 2004). The author wishes to thank Christopher Gledhill for translating this 
article.
2 The introduction to the book by Herslund and Baron has the same title (2001 : 1-25).
3 As well as Mitsuru Ohki in articles published in Japanese in 1991 et 1993, which unfortunately we have only been 
able to take account of superficially on the basis of abstracts published in French. 
1

(I) There are two entities, the first E1, normally realised by a nominal antecedent (thus N1),
and a second entity (E2), which follows E1 and is also nominal (N2) and which is
considered to be an anaphoric expression. The phrases NP1 and NP2 which denote E1 and
E2 cannot be coreferential,  since they are two different entities (E1 ≠ E2).
(II) The entities E1 and E2 can be related by use of a preposition such as de in French or of in
English as in le N2 de NP1or the N2 of NP1.4
These conditions allow for both an indirect associative anaphor with the definite article, or a
possessive anaphor, where the possessive adjective indicates coreference with the referent E1
introduced by NP1. In our example tilleul / limetree (E1) and tronc / trunk (E2) can be linked
either by the associative use of the definite article (un tilleul —> le tronc / a limetree —> the
trunk ) or by a possessive adjective (un tilleul  —> son tronc / a limetree —> its trunk). In both
cases, the referent of NP2 can be reformulated as a prepositional phrase: le N2 de NP1 (le tronc
du tilleul) / the N1 of NP1 (the trunk of the limetree). 
Not all the different E1 - E2 combinations corresponding to conditions (I) and (II) allow for
the  use  of  the  associative  definite  article  and  the  possessive  determiner.  There  are  three
possibilities: 
A) the possessive adjective can do the job, but the definite article cannot, 
B) the definite article works, but the possessive does not, or 
C) both can be used.
The source of this variation, as we see when we look at each case below, is the kind of entities
encountered as E1 - E2. In the following sections we examine and explain each of these cases in
turn. In the final section, we conclude by explaining the main differences between these two
discourse markers.
1. The possessive does the job, but not the definite article.
There are a number of cases where the definite article cannot be used5. The first involves
instances where E2 is a property of an animate or inanimate E1, as in the following two
examples:
? L’homme enleva sa casquette. La calvitie plut à tout le monde
(? The man took off his cap. Everyone was delighted by the baldness.)
? Paul a acheté une Clio, parce qu’il a été séduit par la sobriété
(? Paul bought a Clio, because he was seduced by the simplicity.)
While there is nothing from a cognitive point of view to prevent us from understanding  the
baldness and the simplicity as in the baldness of a man taking off his cap and the simplicity of the
Clio, it appears that the definite article does not allow us to make this anaphoric connection. On
the other hand, the possessive6 appears to fit the bill perfectly:
L’homme enleva sa casquette. Sa calvitie plut à tout le monde
(The man took off his cap. Everyone was delighted by his baldness.)
 
Paul a acheté une Clio, parce qu’il a été séduit par sa sobriété
4 Since our main focus is on French examples, we do not dwell here on the use of the genitive in English. 
5 A detailed analysis of this problem is set out in Kleiber (1999a and 2001a).
6 In French, the pronoun en can sometimes be used anaphorically:  cf. ?Ils habitent un quartier central. J’apprécie 
beaucoup le calme / ?'They live in a central neighbourhood. I like the calm'.  vs  Ils habitent un quartier central.  
J’en apprécie beaucoup le calme / 'They live in a central neighbourhood. I like the calm of it.' (Fradin, 1984). 
2

(Paul bought a Clio, because he was seduced by its simplicity.)
A second instance involves an awkward use of the definite article when the E2 refers to a process
(an event, an activity, etc.). Thus in the following examples, we cannot use the article to
emphasise that the words and gestures are those of Paul:
? Paul entra. Les paroles réveillèrent l’assemblée
(? In came Paul. The words stirred the audience.)
 ? Paul entra. Les gestes étaient brusques 
(? In came Paul. The gestures were brusque.)
There is no a priori cognitive reason why the relevant associative inference cannot be made. But
again, the possessive allows us to make the necessary link:
Paul entra. Ses paroles réveillèrent l’assemblée
(In came Paul. His words stirred the audience.)
Paul entra. Ses gestes étaient brusques
 
(In came Paul. His gestures were brusque.)
Looking now at E1, a rather surprising constraint occurs when E1 is an animate entity, as has
often been noted in work on part-whole relations7. Contrary to parts of inanimate E1's, as in:
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Le tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. The trunk was full of cracks.)
La voiture fit une embardée. Les freins avaient lâché
(The car swerved. The brakes had failed.)
E2s referring to parts of animate E1s do not usually allow for the definite article:
? Une femme rêvait. Les yeux étaient fermés
(? A woman was dreaming. The eyes were closed.)
? Le chien eut peur. Les oreilles se dressèrent
(? The dog became afraid. The ears pricked up.)
Although less clear-cut, this also occurs in references to the clothes of E1, as Fradin (1984) has
noted:
? Les enfants sont rentrés. Les souliers étaient pleins de boue 
(? The children came home. The walking shoes were covered in mud.)
It has also been occasionally remarked that the 'intentional' parts of an animate E1 share the same
constraint:
? Paul pouvait enfin se reposer. L’esprit était libre de tout souci
(? Paul was finally able to rest. The mind was free of all worries.)
 
Once more, the possessive is needed in all these cases to repair the anaphoric link of identity
between  E1 and E2:
7 For an overview, see Spanoghe (1995) and Salles (1995a) inter alia.
3

Une femme rêvait. Ses yeux étaient fermés
(A woman was dreaming. Her eyes were closed.)
Le chien eut peur. Ses oreilles se dressèrent
(The dog became afraid. His ears pricked up.
Les enfants sont rentrés. Leurs souliers étaient pleins de boue (Fradin, 1984).
(The children came home. Their walking shoes were covered in mud.)
Paul pouvait enfin se reposer. Son esprit était libre de tout souci
(Paul was finally able to rest. His mind was free of all worries.)
This distribution is rather surprising, because it is not intrinsically obvious just what is blocking
the use of the article. We thus have an intriguing problem which cries out for an explanation. 
One solution we have proposed (Kleiber, 1999a and 2003a) in order to prevent the associative
definite article referring to NP2, is to posit a constraint that we have termed the  alienation
condition:
"Le référent d’une anaphore associative doit être présenté ou donné comme aliéné par
rapport au référent de l’antécédent " (Kleiber, 1999a and 2003a) 
[The referent of an associative anaphor must be alienable or be interpreted as such in
relation to the referent of the antecedent.] 
The origin of this condition is iconic. The aim is to account for the difference between an NP with
an associative definite article, such as the trunk, and a post-modified NP with the definite article,
such as the trunk of the limetree, which gives us the identity of the tree whose NP2 referent is the
trunk. In contrast to the complex descriptive NP, the simple version, the trunk, even though it
refers to the same referent as the complex descriptive NP, refers by way of a single noun without
any  semantic  subordination  to  another  individual.  It  is  thus  semantically  independent  or
autonomous. Although on a pragmatic level the simple NP remains dependent on a prior mention
of another individual, as far as its referential interpretation is concerned, the form the N gives it
an iconic freedom, and thus it can be said to be 'alienated'8. Of course it should be pointed out that
the trunk is not materially separated from the limetree: it is merely understood as an autonomous
individual. To explain this, we have previously used the analogy of a camera focussing on
separate things. The fact that a camera can take a picture of a whole limetree or a close-up of its
trunk does not mean that the trunk becomes detached from the rest of the tree (Kleiber, 1999a and
2003a).
 The alienation condition also allows us explain in a straightforward way why the definite
article cannot perform an associative link between a property and a process. We have termed
these entities syncategoremic (Kleiber, 1981: 40), because in contrast to categoremic entities,
whose particular  occurrences  are  autonomous,  syncategoremic  items  are  not  ontologically
independent, but depend on the existence of other items. A particular occurrence of a property or
an event is not as autonomous as a categoremic noun. In contrast to chimpanzee, for example, a
property such as  bald (or  baldness) or  simplicity, or a process such as  speaking /  speech or
gesturing presupposes an individual who is bald or simple, who speaks or uses gestures. The best
test for this is still the deletion test: if you delete the individual on which they depend, these
occurrences simultaneously disappear. If you do the opposite, that is you try to 'alienate' the
syncategoremic item visually or in thought, it seems impossible to carry out such an operation. I
cannot detach the baldness, simplicity, speech and gestures from an individual who is bald,
simple, uses gestures, and so on. 
8 According to Azoulay (1978 : 29), the part is considered to be "considérée dans son existence propre" [seen from 
the point of view of its own existence].
4

This takes us back to Husserl's distinction between  independent contents and dependent
contents, i.e. between contents which can be represented separately and contents which cannot9: 
"on peut assurément se représenter une tête séparée de l’homme auquel elle appartient, on ne
peut se représenter de cette manière une couleur, une forme, etc., elles ont besoin d’un
substrat, dans lequel on les remarque sans doute exclusivement, mais dont elles ne pourront
être séparées" (Husserl, 1962: 24).
[one can surely imagine a head separated from a man's body, but one cannot similarly
represent a colour, a shape, etc. These require a substratum in which one clearly notices them
on their own, but from which they cannot be separated.] 
We can now understand why anaphoric associative reference is not possible with properties and
events. These do not satisfy the alienation interpretation required by the form le N / the N, since it
is not possible to detach them from the individual on which they depend. We can also clarify the
role of the possessive adjective in this case, which appears to operate at one remove from the
notion of possession10. The possessive adjective, by an anaphoric link of coreference with an
individual, helps to express anaphorically a discourse continuity between the individual E1 and a
property or event by respecting the ontological relationship of inalienability which unites E2 and
E1.
How does this relate to parts of animate bodies? The definite article, as we have seen, is
awkward in this context. Yet as Husserl's example of the body and its head shows us, imaginary
alienation is possible and thus, even if we are dealing with syncategoremic nouns, where the part
depends on the whole, the alienation condition ought to be satisfied. An associative definite article
is therefore possible, as we saw with parts of inanimates:
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Le tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. The trunk was full of cracks.)
La voiture fit une embardée. Les freins avaient lâché
(The car swerved. The brakes had failed.)
There must therefore be another reason for those instances where the article cannot be used. The
model of perceptual alienation (whether real or imaginary) assumes that basic referential features
are used to identify different entities. In order to be detached, a part must have the same features
as the whole from which it is being isolated. Thus if we take a concrete object, an object with the
features 'substance' and 'shape'11, we can only visually alienate an entity with the same basic
ontological features. This explains why it is impossible to alienate properties and events relating
to a concrete object: they do not have the same ontological ingredients as their wholes. They have
no substance or shape of their own ,and cannot as a consequence be isolated from the substance
and shape of the object to which they relate. 
This notion also explains how parts of animates are different from parts of inanimates. Only
the latter are alienable because they possess the same ontological features as the wholes from
which they have been separated. I can isolate the  trunk from a  limetree because, just like a
limetree, the  trunk possesses the same substance and shape which allow us to represent it
separately from the tree. Parts of animates do not obey this principle, which we have called the
principle of ontological congruence (Kleiber, 1999a et 2003a). This is because together with
substance and shape, an animate noun also has intentionality (or the feature 'animacy'). A part
only carries the features substance + shape if it is part of a concrete object, and may only have the
feature 'animate' when it refers to an intentional object (see the above example the mind of Paul /
9 See Salles (1995a and b) on this point.
10 Although of course possession is still relevant!
11 A concrete object, at least according to one of its meanings, is a noun whose referents have substance and shape, 
as we have shown elsewhere in collaboration with Michel Galmiche (Kleiber, 1994a, Ch. 3). Other dimensions can 
be added, such as a temporal dimension (see Kleiber, 1994a for more details).
5

Paul's mind), in which case it contravenes the principle of ontological congruence. Thus parts of
bodies and the other components associated with the notion of animacy are not just parts of an
animate referent. They are both parts of the body, which is an animate referent (and which indeed
has both substance and shape) and also parts of its intentional component. We can note in support
of this analysis that it is difficult to have expressions of the type ?a part of John, ?a part of our
dog, etc.12, whereas it is quite possible to talk about a part of a chair, a part of a car etc. This is a
particular difficulty of using the article in an associative context with parts of animate bodies. The
possessive adjective is on the other hand well suited to this kind of link, in that it maintains an
explicit connection with the animate referent, avoiding the ontological break that would be
implied by the article. Thus in contrast to the definite NP the N, the possessive NP Poss Adj. + N
keeps its 'animate' character by virtue of the possessive anaphor.
This brings us to a curious feature of French, where in certain appositive contexts, the definite
article can find its rightful place again, as has been noted in various studies (Vergnaud et
Zubizaretta, 1992):
Une femme rêvait, les yeux fermés 
(? A woman was dreaming, the eyes closed.)
Paul pouvait enfin se reposer, l’esprit libre de tout souci
(? Paul was finally able to rest, the mind free of all worry.)
The explanation for this lies in the absolute construction13. In French, the absolutive use of the
article describes or expresses the attitude of an animate referent, functioning like a circumstantial
of manner (Hanon, 1989 and Choi, 1991), and thus allowing for alienation of a part of the
animate referent, either its body (substance + shape), or its 'intentionality'. 
From a discourse perspective, alienation is also possible in intersentential contexts, as long as
the alienation from the body is in some way justified by the context, as in the following examples
mentioned by Julien (1983: 137), Fradin (1984: 362) and Salles (1995a/b):
Le malade est livide. Les yeux sont hors de leurs orbites  
(? The sick man is livid. The eyes are poking out of their sockets) (Julien, 1983)
Autour de la table les joueurs s’épiaient. Les mains étaient crispées sur les revolvers
(? The players stared at each other across the table. The hands clutching the revolvers.) 
Les coureurs redoublent d’effort. On voit les muscles saillir sous les maillots 
(? The racers are redoubling their effort. You can see the muscles bulge under the jerseys)
(Fradin, 1984)
Hughes recommençait chaque soir le même itinéraire, suivant la ligne des quais, d’une
démarche indécise, un peu voûté déjà, quoiqu’il eût seulement quarante ans. Mais le veuvage
avait été pour lui un automne précoce. Les tempes étaient dégarnies, les cheveux pleins de
cendre grise. 
(? Every night Hughes took the same route, following the quayside, unsteady and already
rather stooped, although he was only forty. The widowerhood had been an early autumn for
12 The problem is more complex than this. We would need to study the potential referents of part and what 
conditions determine how a part is identified. It is interesting to note that, from a very different line of argument, 
Tamba (1994) comes to a similar conclusion concerning the notion of part.
13 Other kinds of alienation are also at work in French, as in Il lève les yeux  (?He raises the eyes) or in expressions 
with a direct object complement  (Sylvie a les yeux bleus / ?Sylvie has the blue eyes). A 'syntactic' explanation for this
is given in Vergnaud and Zubizaretta (1992). In constructions such as  Il lui prend le bras  (?He took from him the 
arm = He took his arm) or  Il se pince la peau (?He pinches himself on the skin = He pinched his skin), it is 
noticeable that dependency is marked by a personal or reflexive pronoun: lui / se (to him, from him / himself).
6

him. The temples were drawn, the hair speckled ash grey. (G. Rodenbach,  Bruges-la-morte,
Babel, 1989, 25)
Il la dévisagea ; elle était pâle ; la bouche était serrée, les yeux pluvieux battaient.  
(? He stared at her, she was pale, the mouth tight shut, the tearful eyelids trembling) (J.-K.
Huysmans,  Là-Bas, Gallimard, Folio, 1991, 292) 
Le Christ (...).  L’aisselle éclamée craquait,  les mains grandes ouvertes brandissaient des
doigts hagards (...) ; les pectoraux tremblaient  (...) 
(? Christ…. The disjointed armpit cracked, gaunt fingers dangled from the wide open hands,…
the pectorals twitched…) (J.-K. Huysmans,  Là-bas, Gallimard, Folio, 1991, 33) (these last
three examples cited by Salles).
In all of these referential links, a part of the body is isolated by a kind of alienation which is
indicated by verbs of perception relating to vision (as in the two examples from Fradin: s’épier /
stare at each other, voir / see). Salles analyses Rodenbach's example and Huysmans' first
example thus: 
"Et, quelquefois, c’est simplement le regard qu’on porte sur un personnage qui permet une
énumération descriptive des parties au moyen d’une anaphore associative" 
[Sometimes the portrayal of a character allows for a descriptive enumeration of its parts by
way of an associative anaphor.] (Salles, 1995 b : 54). 
It is worth emphasising that this perceptual alienation does not operate directly on the animate
referent, but only on the body14. In Julien's example, this is brought to the fore by the fact that  the
animate referent is sick, and in the other examples by the fact that a zone of the body has been
prominently placed in view, as illustrated strikingly in the following example taken from a cheap
paperback novel:
Il s’assit sur le lit et la regarda. Les paupières étaient boursouflées et les poches sous les yeux
étaient striées de veinules bleues
(? He sat on the bed and looked at her. The eyelids were swollen and the bags under the eyes
were lined with blue veins.)
Since the ontological congruence has been respected, the definite article can be used in these
examples, at least in French. Having said this, we now need to account for the fact that the
possessive adjective can also be used in the same contexts. Indeed, it is obligatory in English in
all of these cases, as we can see in the following possessive versions:
Le malade est livide. Ses yeux sont hors de leurs orbites
(The sick man is livid. His eyes are poking out of their sockets) (Julien, 1983)
Autour de la table les joueurs s’épiaient. Leurs mains étaient crispées sur les revolvers
(The players stared at each other across the table. Their hands clutching their revolvers.) 
Les coureurs redoublent d’effort. On voit leurs muscles saillir sous les maillots 
(The racers are redoubling their effort. You can see their muscles bulge under their jerseys)
(Fradin, 1984)
14 I believe this kind of explanation could also apply to 'residuals' in English cited by Ebert (1982), Vergnaud et
Zubizaretta (1992): if, contrary to expectations, the definite article appears instead of the possessive, this is likely to
be because the part has been removed from the body.
7

Hughes recommençait chaque soir le même itinéraire, suivant la ligne des quais, d’une
démarche indécise, un peu voûté déjà, quoiqu’il eût seulement quarante ans. Mais le veuvage
avait été pour un automne précoce. Ses tempes étaient dégarnies, ses cheveux pleins de cendre
grise. 
(Every night Hughes took the same route, following the quayside, unsteady and already rather
stooped, although he was only forty. His widowerhood had been an early autumn for him. His
temples were drawn,  his hair speckled ash grey.) (G. Rodenbach,  Bruges-la-morte, Babel,
1989, 25)
Il la dévisagea ; elle était pâle ; sa bouche était serrée, ses yeux pluvieux battaient
(He stared at her, she was pale, her mouth tight shut,  her tearful eyelids trembling.) (J.-K.
Huysmans,  Là-Bas, Gallimard, Folio, 1991, 292)
Le Christ (...). Son aisselle éclamée craquait, ses mains grandes ouvertes brandissaient des
doigts hagards (...) ; ses pectoraux tremblaient
(Christ … His disjointed armpit cracked, gaunt fingers dangled from his wide open hands,…
his pectorals twitched…) (J.-K. Huysmans,  Là-bas, Gallimard, Folio, 1991, 33) (these last
three examples cited by Salles).
We set out below in the conclusion how the parallel uses of the article and possessive differ in
these examples. A partial explanation here would be to suggest that the two referential markers
express a difference of scope. The possessive adjective presents a part of the body in terms of
individual identification, underlined by a dependency relation with the animate individual. In
contrast, the definite article implies a more generic notion relating to body parts. The individual is
no longer in the foreground, and instead the part is taken to be a stereotypical component of the
body, detached iconically from the individual in question. The possessive contributes to the
individualisation of the body part, while the article contributes to the opposite process.  Even if
les yeux are in fact the eyes of the sick man in the first example, they are not presented as such, a
function associated with the possessive, but rather they are a generic part of the man's body, as
opposed to any other part. 
It should be pointed out here that that we are not dealing with a generic NP. Rather we are
claiming that the isolation of a part is expressed at the generic level in terms of: un homme a des
yeux / a man has eyes15. The associative link, as we have shown at length elsewhere (Kleiber,
2001a), is based on an a priori relation, which is part of our shared knowledge of how objects are
related in reality or in terms of more stereotypical relationships. The main evidence for this is that
the addition of a specifier which runs contrary to our usual lexico-stereotypical expectations,
prohibits the definite article and makes the possessive a necessary part of the expression (see
especially Julien, 1982):
? Le malade est livide. Les yeux bleus sont hors de leurs orbites
(? The sick man is livid. The blue eyes are poking out of their sockets.)
Le malade est livide. Ses yeux bleus sont hors de leurs orbites
(The man is livid. His blue eyes are poking out of their sockets.)
It should be added that as far as the enumeration of parts is concerned, as can be seen in
Rodenbach  and  Huysmans'  examples  quoted  above,  the  definite  article  is in  theory  more
appropriate than the possessive determiner in French simply because it does not mark, as the
possessive does, a reference back to E1 each time. It is thus more suited, at least in French, to the
close determination of details about E1 than the possessive. 
15 This also explains the definite article in the attributive complement structure Sylvie a les yeux bleus (?Sylvie has 
the blue eyes -> Sylvie has blue eyes) (see Riegel, 1988, 1989 et 1997).
8

2. Cases B) and C)
We now turn to the other two possibilities, where either the possessive is not possible or where
both determiners can be used.
2. 1. Cases where the article can be used, but not the possessive
There are few examples where the definite article can be used, but the possessive cannot. As can
be seen in the context of  anaphoric agency (Kleiber, 2001a and  2003a), the possessive can
never be used in place of the article: 
Paul s’est pendu. Sa corde s’est cassée  (sa = Paul, *sa = that of the hanging)
(Paul hanged himself. His rope snapped.) (his = Paul, *its = that of the hanging)
Paul s’est pendu. La corde s’est cassée
(Paul hanged himself. The rope snapped.)
Il y a eu un assassinat hier soir à Souffelweyersheim. * Son assassin a pris la fuite 
(*son = that of the murder). 
(There was a murder last night in Souffelweyersheim. *Its murderer ran off.) 
Il y a eu un assassinat hier soir à Souffelweyersheim. L’assassin a pris la fuite
(There was a murder last night in Souffelweyersheim. The murderer ran off.) 
These  examples  can  be  partly  explained  by  invoking  our  initial  constraint  on  forming  a
prepositional phrase of the type le N1 de SN2 / the N1 of NP2. Clearly not all agentives fulfil this
condition. Thus we can have a prepositional construction with  of  referring to  the rope or  the
hanging, even if the phrase is rather awkward, such as: 
La corde de la pendaison
(The rope of the hanging.)
But we cannot have in the case of murder a post-modified NP:
? L’assassin de l’assassinat 
(? The murderer of the murder)
The same goes for collective anaphors (Kleiber, 2001a and 2003a), which appear to resist the
possessive  and  do  not  allow  for  replacement  by  the  article,  even  though  we  can  use  a
corresponding prepositional phrase with  de / of  in the NP. A similar case involves  kinship
relations. Although we have in the case of mother and family, couple and husband post-modified
NPs such as the mother of the family and the husband of the couple, a possessive determiner
could not be used to mark such a relation:
Dans les familles d'origine immigrée notamment, *leur mère  (= des familles) est en porte à
faux entre sa culture d'origine et sa volonté d'intégration, elle est complètement larguée au
niveau scolaire et *leurs enfants  (= des familles) en profitent.
(In immigrant families especially, *their mother (= of the families) is caught between her
original culture and her desire to integrate; she is out of her depth in the educational system
and *their children (= of the families) take advantage of this.)
Dans les familles d'origine immigrée notamment, la mère est en porte à faux entre sa culture
d'origine et sa volonté d'intégration, elle est complètement larguée au niveau scolaire et les
enfants en profitent
9

(In immigrant families especially, the mother is caught between her original culture and her
desire to integrate; she is out of her depth in the educational system and  the children take
advantage of this.)
Un couple s'installa à la terrasse. *Son mari  (= du couple) commanda une 1664
(A couple sat down outside a café. *Its husband (= of the couple) ordered a glass of 1664.)
Un couple s'installa à la terrasse. Le mari commanda une 1664
(A couple sat down outside a café. The husband ordered a glass of 1664.)
2.2. Cases where both determiners can be used
In contrast, there are plenty of situations where both referential markers are allowed. In the
context of a  locative anaphor  (Kleiber, 2001a), both markers can appear and are thus in
competition:
Le village était situé sur une butte. Son église dominait toute la région
(The village was on top of a hillock. Its church dominated the whole area).
Le village était situé sur une butte. L’église dominait toute la région
(The village was on top of a hillock. The church dominated the whole area).
The same can be said of meronymic anaphors (Kleiber, 2001a), which express a part-whole
relation with inanimates16. As we saw in our previous examples, the article can be easily
substituted for the possessive:
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Le tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. The trunk was full of cracks.)
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Son tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. Its trunk was full of cracks.)
La voiture fit une embardée. Les freins avaient lâché
(The car swerved. The brakes had failed.)
La voiture fit une embardée. Ses freins avaient lâché
(The car swerved. Its brakes had failed.)
The same goes for functional associative anaphors (Kleiber,  2001a):
Une voiture s’est renversée hier dans le fossé. Le conducteur s’était assoupi
(Yesterday a car crashed into the ditch. The driver had fallen asleep.)
Une voiture s’est renversée hier dans le fossé. Son conducteur s’était assoupi
(Yesterday a car crashed into the ditch. Its driver had fallen asleep.)
Le village de Pfaffenheim est de plus en plus fleuri. Les habitants / Le maire raffole(nt) des
géraniums 
(The village of Pfaffenheim is getting more and more flowery. The villagers are / The mayor is
wild about geraniums.)
Le village de Pfaffenheim est de plus en plus fleuri. Ses habitants / Son maire raffole(nt) des
geraniums
16 We do not need to recall here the specific case of parts of animates, discussed above. 
10

(The village of Pfaffenheim is getting more and more flowery. Its villagers are / Its mayor is
wild about geraniums.)
Finally, a member-collection relationship also allows for both referential markers, at least for a
certain category of N:
Nous entrâmes dans une forêt magnifique. Les arbres resplendissaient de lumière verte
(We went into a magnificent forest. The trees were ablaze with green light.)
Nous entrâmes dans une forêt magnifique. Ses arbres resplendissaient de lumière verte
(We went into a magnificent forest. Its trees were ablaze with green light.)
Le régiment a été défait. Les soldats n’ont pas eu le temps de combattre
(The regiment was defeated. The soldiers did not have time to fight back.)
Le régiment a été défait. Ses soldats n’ont pas eu le temps de combattre
(The regiment was defeated. Its soldiers did not have time to fight back.)
Situations B) and C) thus raise two specific questions: 
Q1) Why is the possessive suitable in the C) examples but not in the B) examples?
Q2) When the possessive is in competition with the definite article, is there a discourse
explanation which can help us distinguish between the two types of occurrence? 
2. 3. Question 1: Ontology and Lexical Relations 
2.3.1. The a priori dependency asymmetry.
We should recall here that the second contextual condition we initially proposed (condition II)
was that it should be possible to have for any two entities E1 and E2 an NP of the type le N2 de
NP1 / the N1 of NP2. This was based on the observation, commonly noted in the literature on the
possessive adjective, that there is a close relationship between the NP  Poss. Adj. + N2  and
prepositional NPs of the type  le N2 du (d'un) N1 / the N2 of the (of a) N1.  The possessive
determiner, as noted by Godard (1986 :102):
"…possède une propriété spécifique : il alterne avec un complément de Nom de la forme de
GN" 
[…has a specific property: it alternates with a post-modifier of the form of + Noun Group]17
Whichever syntactic explanation may be adopted18, this combination, which is not necessarily an
'assimilation'19, can be summarised in the interpretive equation Poss. Adj. + N1 = the N1 of NP.
17 Most authors point out that the NP1 is a personal pronoun and they therefore relate the possessive phrase Poss. Det
+ N to the structure Le N de + Pro / The N of + Pro.  This approach is adopted by Wilmet (1986: 108, 1997: 241), 
who talks about quantifiants-caractérisants personnels and Riegel et al. (1994: 158), who argue that "le déterminant 
possessif est l'équivalent de le (...) de moi, le (...) de toi, etc. […et] représente la synthèse de deux éléments 
généralement disjoints du GN : l'article défini et un complément du nom introduit par de  (en l'occurrence un pronom 
personnel)" [the possessive determiner is the equivalent of the … of me, the … of you etc and this represents the 
synthesis of two elements which are generally separate in the noun group: the definite article and the noun 
complement introduced by of (in the case of a personal pronoun)]. 
18  See Godard (1986).
19 See Gross (1986) for a presentation of the two principal theoretical positions on the possessive adjective, i.e. (i) the
possessive is an irreducible expression, (ii) it is the result of a transformation.   We prefer option number (i). Bartning
(1989: 196-197)  summarises the syntactic debate of the 1970s and 80s. In Godard (1986) a generative solution is 
worked out according to Chomsky's modular grammar of 1981, a solution which "combines hypotheses concerning 
lexis, syntax and interpretative semantics" (Godard, 1986: 103).  Zribi-Hertz (1999) proposes a generative analysis in
terms of Chomsky's Principes and Paramters adopting an 'autonomist' conception of inflectional morphology which 
11

This implies that an NP such as his book can be interpreted as more or less the same as the book
of Paul (see Bartning, 1989 et 1996). However, whether it is possible to have the possessive in
cases B) or C) does not depend on this, since condition II has already been satisfied. However it
does contribute greatly to the interpretation of N1 and N2. So how does it operate?
In the first instance, for E1 a 'human' or 'animate' feature is generally considered to be relevant
in the motivation of a possessive NP. The 'human' or 'animate' feature also figures, as pointed out
by Bartning (1996), at the top of Hawkins' possessive hierarchy (1981), whereas inanimates are
placed at the bottom (see also Seiler, 1983: 81). However, as all the grammarians who have
commented on this have pointed out, this feature cannot be treated as a formal constraint since the
possessive determiner can be easily used with inanimate antecedents, or even inanimate N1s in
the structure le N2 du (d'un) N1 / the N2 of a (of the) N1, as the following example from Bartning
(1996) shows: 
 La gravité de la situation. Sa gravité
(The seriousness of the situation. Its seriousness.)
We have already seen this in the following examples: 
Le tronc du tilleul  / son tronc (The trunk of the limetree / its trunk.)
Les freins de la voiture / ses freins (The brakes of the car / its brakes.)
L'église du village  / son église (The church of the village / its church.)
Les arbres de la forêt / ses arbres (The trees of the forest / its trees.)
We cannot ignore the characteristics 'animate' or 'human' and the more general ontological
dimension in our explanation. But these features nevertheless need to be associated with two
further factors, namely the lexico-semantic relations between N1 and N2 and the discourse
context.
To start with, it has often been noted that the entity E1, which is referred to by the possessive
determiner, is itself used to determine, localise or identify entity E2, which is the referent of a
possessive description belonging to the category N2 representing the N in a possessive NP. E2
and E1 can be termed respectively the  target and the  site, or using Culioli's terms  repère
(marker) and repéré (marked) or Langacker's (1993, 1995 and 2004) target and domain. The
main point, as shown by the complementarity of a prepositional NP and the possessive, is that an
NP of the type Poss. Det + N marks a referential dependency, an asymmetry between the two
entities involved in the NP20.
This asymmetry has a consequence that is often acknowledged, but rarely followed up. It is
required that E1 identify or localise entity E2 as part of the class N2 in which, as we have pointed
out, E2 has been categorised. In other words, the referential dependency of E2 on E1 and the
categorisation of E2 as an N2 both lead to a specific distinctiveness condition: entity E1 must be
such that it can be distinguished or isolated from E2 within the class N2, i.e. by particularising it
in terms of other N2 entities. 
A second, less acknowledged, feature can be added to the notion of referential asymmetry and
to its corollary, the distinctiveness between N2 entities. This relates to the anaphoric pronominal
character of the possessive determiner. We have already noted that several authors draw a parallel
also goes by the name of Distributional Morphology.
20 For Zribi-Hertz (1999), this is explained by predication: the predicative character of the relation YP-XP is a 
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for the use of the possessive. For her, (1999: 15), "l’équation Possession = 
Prédication éclaire les commentaires souvent confus ou ad hoc  faits par les grammairiens sur la relation qu’ils 
nomment ‘possessive’. En réalité, la Possession est une relation juridique et la Prédication une relation grammaticale 
indépendante de la première." 
[…the equation Possession = Predication sheds light on the often confused or ad hoc comments made by 
grammarians on the relationship they call 'the possessive'. In reality, Possession is a legal relationship, and 
Predication is a grammatical one independent of the former.] 
12

between the demonstrative possessive and a prepositional structure involving an article and
personal pronoun (my N = the N of me, his N = the N of him). And we have pointed out, we are
not obliged to assimilate these structures, since the possessive determiner can be considered
irreducible even though it can at the same time be reformulated as a definite article structure with
a preposition and personal pronoun. The more important point is that the possessive determiner
still has a personal pronoun function, which is partly obscured by the term 'possessive adjective'.
Thus by relating the pronominal features of the possessive determiner with the distinctiveness
condition, which is a consequence of the referential asymmetry between E1 and E2-N2, and
which is fulfilled by the possessive determiner denoting entity E1, the implication is that E1 can
be understood as one of a group of entities of the same type. If we take my / your / her hat, the
possessive determiner only has a specifying function if it assumes that other entities of the type
that it refers to could also identify or localise the E1 entity, hat. If such a paradigm were not
available, the possessive would not be able to distinguish the specific E1 entity from within the
class of hats. That this comes from the pronominal nature of the possessive determiner can be
easily understood for 1st or 2nd person possessives which retain referential identity because of their
marked roles in the speech context. But for 3rd person possessives, things are less clear-cut,
because like the 3rd person pronoun they can be applied to virtually any named or pre-classified
entity (Kleiber, 1994b), and thus to a group of entities which have little in common. However,
this difficulty is less real than it seems, since this heterogeneity vanishes in actual usage, where
only one specific category can be understood. Incidentally, the plural pronoun ils / they cannot be
applied to a group of different entities precisely because of this well-known requirement for prior
naming or classification.
It could be objected that the same argument applies to the prepositional NP in de or of as in le
chapeau de Jean / the hat of Jean. This is certainly valid, but the explanation is down to the
properties of the Ns in the phrase: Jean, chapeau, hat, as argued below, and not to the properties
of the prepositions de / of, and consequently not to the intrinsic properties of the post-modified
NP itself. This is possible even if the entity E1 is not understood as a natural localiser of E2, as is
the case with the possessive determiner in a variety of structures. We only need to examine
Bartning's examples (1996, 1998 et 2001), which he terms 'discursive' to distinguish them from
'prototypical'21 occurrences of the type le chapeau de Jean. We can very well have an NP of the
type le chapeau de la voiture / the hat of the car where the E1 entity la voiture localises entity E2
le chapeau without assuming that the distinction implies the possibility that cars can localise
these types of E2 entities. We can indeed create a context which could justify this post-modified
NP, as the  following sequence shows: 
Sur la banquette arrière de la voiture, le commissaire remarqua un curieux chapeau vert, orné
d’une fleur rouge. Ce n’est qu’au bout d’un moment qu’il fit le rapprochement : le chapeau de
la voiture était celui de l’avocate assassinée il y a trois mois. 
(On the back seat of the car, the officer noticed a curious green hat, decorated with a red
flower. It took a while for him to make the connection: the hat of the car was that of the lawyer
murdered three months ago.)
The possessive determiner is prohibited in this context, since we cannot have the NP son chapeau
/ its hat as a replacement of the post-modified NP:
Sur la banquette arrière de la voiture, le commissaire remarqua un curieux chapeau vert, orné
d’une fleur rouge. Ce n’est qu’au bout d’un moment qu’il fit le rapprochement : *son chapeau
était celui de l’avocate assassinée il y a trois mois. 
(On the back seat of the car, the officer noticed a curious green hat, decorated with a red
flower. It took a while for him to make the connection: *its hat was that of the lawyer
murdered three months ago.)
21 In the case of 'prototypical' interpretation, the meaning of the determinant relation is given by the micro-structure 
of the phrase, in the case of 'discursive' interpretations, the meaning follows from the information provided in the 
discourse context. 
13

The constraint on paradigm or on prior category for E1 that we have just set out, means that
referential dependency cannot be established between the specific or particular entity E1 and the
entity E2 expressed by N2, but must already exist in the homogenous class in which E1 and the
class of N2s to which E2 belongs can be recognised. We express this relation by saying that the
possessive determiner requires an a priori dependent asymmetry. 
2.3.2. The three motivations for the possessive22
This a priori asymmetry is motivated by three criteria, of which two correspond to an intrinsic
subordination related to the Ns in context. The third corresponds to the subordination of an E2
class to an E1 class established by context:
(1) the ontological status of the entities involved,
(2) a lexico-semantic relation between the Ns of the entities involved indicating an a priori
dependent asymmetry,
(3) a relation which is not lexico-semantic as such but rather discursive, between two specific
groups or classes of N1 and N2 established by the linguistic or situational context.
Criterion (1) posits that if general categories or ontological types to which the different entities
belong are in a dependency relation, a possessive connection is possible with most prominent
entity as antecedent of the possessive, i.e. the entity which serves as determiner. The scale of
ontological dependency on which these categories can be placed is more or less as follows:23
Humans  > Animals > Concrete objects >  Events > Properties
The second and third categories account for uses of the possessive which appear to contravene the
first category. If we have two entities of the same type, or two entities of which the lower one in
the hierarchy appears as the antecedent of a higher entity, there is either a lexical relation between
the Ns involved which can provide a necessary a priori determinative asymmetry, or a discursive
situation exists  which makes  possible a dependency relation similar to that of the second
criterion, but at a contextual level, and which is thus necessarily construed before the use of a
possessive NP. 
This approach posits that the absence of a prior intrinsic referential asymmetry24 is ontological
or lexico-semantic, and would indicate which of the two Ns present is dependent on the other and
thus blocking a possessive connection. Thus to give a basic example, if we have two concrete
objects which are at the same ontological level and whose nominal expressions do not have any a
priori  semantic relation between them, the possessive determiner is impossible, even if the
discourse context permits a contingent and entirely specific link between the two entities which
can be expressed by a post-modified NP with de / of. We have already seen this in the example le
chapeau de la voiture / the hat of the car which cannot allow a possessive NP in the context set
out above. Criterion (2) cannot be applied here in order to obtain a possessive, since there is no
lexico-semantic relation between  voiture / car  and  chapeau / hat  which would establish the
necessary a priori referential asymmetry for a possessive determiner. 
But criterion (3) is available, even though it appears rather contrived. For this we just need to
create a context in which a series of cars each have a hat inside, allowing us to justify the
possessive expression son chapeau / its hat. Imagine an antique car exhibition where each car has
22 In Kleiber (2003a and 2004), we only emphasise the first two criteria. 
23 This hierarchy may require more refined analysis. It is perhaps just worth pointing out here that it corresponds 
approximately to the one which is often used for referential salience. 
24 See Strawson (1973) for this. Zribi-Hertz (1999: 23) comes to the same conclusion positing that "l'acceptabilité du 
syntagme possessivisé semble (...) solidaire de l’interprétation prédicative de la relation YP-XP dans le XP de YP". 
["the acceptability of the possessive phrase seems …to support the predicative interpretation of the YP-XP relation in
the XP of YP." ] 
14

a hat on the bonnet with the make of the car written on it. We would then be able to freely accept
sequences of the type:
Lorsqu’il arriva au niveau de la deuxième voiture, Paul ne put savoir quelle était sa marque.
Son chapeau (= le chapeau de la voiture) avait été volé par un visiteur collectionneur.
(When he got to the second car, Paul couldn't work out what make it was. Its hat (= the car's
hat) had been stolen by a marauding visitor).
 
The possibility that the possessive determiner can localise or distinguish the hat by reference to
the category E1 (car) is due to the fact that its hat can be contrasted with the hats of other cars.
Here we have a construction involving a class which is entirely contingent (the class of cars with
hats on) in a part-whole relation (the hats in this particular reading become honorary parts of
cars25).
The situation changes when we have entities of a different ontological order. Let us examine
two cases. First, a concrete object with a property, such as a car with a colour. Here we have an a
priori referential dependency, i.e. criterion (1), since the occurrence of colour depends, by its
ontological nature as a property, on an occurrence such as  car. The reverse is not true: the
occurrence  car  is not subordinate to  colour, because its properties (including that of  colour)
depend ontologically on the object whose property they are, and objects do not depend on their
properties. We mentioned this above in terms of the alienation condition and syncategoremic
entities. So, the possessive determiner is possible in this case since there is an a priori referential
dependency which is not limited to the two particular entities at stake:
 sa couleur  (its colour = the colour of the car)
 *sa voiture (*its car = ? the car of the colour)
Now let us take a second example, in which we have a human being and a concrete object, as in
Jean  and  book. The feature 'human' means that there is a prior asymmetry between the two
entities, i.e. criterion (2), an asymmetry which is a permanent difference between these entities
and not just contingent. Clearly, the animate or human controls the concrete object rather than the
other way round. In Strawsonian terms of subject-object asymmetry, it is clear that only one
order is allowed: the concrete object can be predicated on the animate human being, but the
animate or human being cannot be predicated on the inanimate26. The consequence is that we can
freely form NPs of the type son livre / his book for le livre de Jean / the book of Jean, whereas the
converse *son Jean / *its Jean27 is not possible. However, it is possible to dream up contexts
which might temporarily justify the reverse, and may for example allow for such constructions as
the post-modified NP le Jean du livre / the Jean of the book. There is in fact one example of this
in Alexandre Dumas, quoted by Bartning (2001: 148, following Eriksson 1980: 399), which
illustrates a discursive construction using the preposition de:
Debout devant la cheminée était un homme de moyenne taille, à la mine haute et fière ;  (…).
De temps en temps, l’homme de la cheminée levait les yeux de dessus les écritures. (A. Dumas,
Les Mousquetaires, 183-184)
(Standing in front of the fireplace was a man of medium build, his face held high and haughty;
… From time to time, the man of the chimney looked up from the writings.)
It is clearly not possible to have a possessive determiner in this example. But even though it may
appear somewhat contrived, perhaps even more so than in our first example, criterion (3) in which
25 In other words, we can refer to a prior statement such as the cars have a hat. It happens that we can also say: 
chaque voiture a son chapeau / every car has its hat.
26 As pointed out before, this position has also been argued by Zribi-Hertz (1999)
27 This obviously does not mean that we can never have a possessive NP of the type son Jean / its Jean. Such NPs 
are in fact quite common (cf.  ton  Zidane / your Zidane..., ma chère Françoise / my dear Françoise , etc.). But the 
possessive is not referring in these instances to a concrete object. 
15

the prior establishment of a context in which two entities E1-E2 share referential dependency, can
once again allow the possessive determiner to reappear. We can justify this by  relying again to
the relational mode introduced by the second criterion. In the example le Jean du livre / the Jean
of the book, if we can imagine that several books are talking about Jean, we can talk about a
particular book in a series as son Jean / its Jean in order to talk about each individual instance of
Jean.
2.3.3. How the three criteria apply to situations B) et C)
Our criteria (1) and (2) are enough to deal with situations B) et C), as discussed above, because
the associative anaphor, which is our basic starting point, is 'fuelled' by a stereotype relation. This
is not a contingent relation since it is intrinsically linked to the content of the Ns present (Kleiber,
2001a).  On  the  other  hand,  our  'third  way',  criterion  (3)  involving  the  prior  contextual
construction of dependency relations, is hardly relevant to situations B) and C).
The conjunction of criteria (1) and (2) allows us therefore to explain the presence of the
possessive in the context of meronymic and locative metaphors, as in our previous examples:
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Son tronc était tout craquelé
(He sheltered under an old limetree. Its trunk was full of cracks.)
Le village était situé sur une butte. Son église dominait toute la région
(The village was on top of a hillock. Its church dominated the whole area).
The appearance of the possessive here can not be explained by ontological factors (the two
entities are at the same ontological level), but by the lexical relationship between N1 and N2,
which creates a necessary asymmetry or dependency hierarchy. There is thus a meronymic
relationship between tilleul - tronc / limetree - trunk (Kleiber, 2001a) and a stereotypical locative
relationship between village - église / village - church (Kleiber, 2001 a). The point here is that
this relation is asymmetrical, i.e. one N is defined by the other N. In the case of a meronymic
relation, the part N(i) is defined in terms of the whole expression, and not the reverse. 
It is interesting to note that if a noun in the anaphoric expression is in fact intrinsically marked
as being a part, the antecedent noun which represents the whole does not qualify as a 'holonym',
as Tamba has argued (1994). The antecedent cannot possess the equivalent semantic trait of
wholeness which a meronym would imply when used to express 'a part of'. Thus although trunk
and wheel are defined semantically as parts of a tree or a car, tree and car are not intrinsically
defined as being 'wholes' (Tamba, 1994 and Kleiber, 2001a). In the case of our locative relation
then, whereas a village is a place where we can usually find a church, a church is not defined in
terms of a village. The locative noun28 village - N(j) - is thus defined as an entity where the entity
church - N(i) - can be found and not the reverse. In support of this observation, we can note that
the possessive is not allowed in the converse expressions: son N2 / its N2 even though we could
have a prepositional phrase of the type le N2 de NP1 / the N2 of the NP2. Thus we could not have
its car (where its = of the steering wheel) or its village (where its = of the church), but we could
have instances such as the following (although this may be more awkward in the English
version):
La voiture du volant qu’on a ramassé dans le fossé n’a jamais été retrouvée
(?The car of the steering wheel that was recovered from the ditch has never been found.)
It is noticeable that the meronymic and locative contexts share a common characteristic in that
they represent a general form of inclusion, the meronym possibly being considered as a particular
case of internal localisation. In both cases, at an intrinsic level the included item is E2 and the
inclusive item is E1.
28 Bartning (1998) refers to 'locative nouns' and categorises them as N2s whose lexical meaning contributes to the 
relational meanings associated with complex NPs post-modified by de / of.
16

A second point is that the possessive determiner can also be explained in what we have termed
functional contexts:
Une voiture s’est renversée hier dans le fossé. Son conducteur s’était assoupi.
(A car crashed into a ditch yesterday. Its driver had fallen asleep.)
Le village de Pfaffenheim est de plus en plus fleuri. Ses habitants / Son maire raffole(nt) des
géraniums
(The village of Pfaffenheim is getting more and more flowery. Its villagers are / Its mayor is
wild about geraniums.)
While the ontological hierarchy implies that the E1 antecedent is less prominent than E2, since it
is a  non-human, the existence of a functional semantic relation such as X is N2 of Y in fact allows
us to invert this relation. But now there is no longer a relationship between a human and the E1
(car, village), but between a non-human car or village and a facet of a human corresponding to a
functional predicate noun such as, driver, mayor, villager etc. Evidence for this comes from the
impossibility of relating the N1 voiture / car, to the possessive son N2 / its N2 when we have an
N2 such as automobiliste / car user. This is because these are not functional Ns. On the other
hand there is no problem with a predicate N such as conducteur / driver (Kleiber, 2001c):
son conducteur  (its driver) = le conducteur de la voiture  (the driver of the car)
*son automobiliste  (*its car user) = ? l'automobiliste de la voiture (? the car user of the car)
Thirdly, the impossibility of having a possessive determiner in an agentive context can also be
explained by the ontological hierarchy, since the concrete object corde / rope is much higher up
on the scale that the event pendaison / hanging29:
Paul s’est pendu, mais *sa corde (= la corde de la pendaison) s’est cassée
(Paul hanged himself, but *its rope (= the rope of the hanging) snapped.)
Our final case involves collective expressions, where the situation is less clear, since as we have
seen the possessive is possible in certain cases:
Nous entrâmes dans une forêt magnifique. Ses arbres resplendissaient de lumière verte
(We went into a magnificent forest. Its trees were ablaze with green light.)
Le régiment a été défait. Ses soldats n’ont pas eu le temps de combattre
(The regiment was defeated. Its soldiers did not have time to fight back.)
though not in others:
Un couple s'installa à la terrasse. *Son mari  (= du couple) commanda une 1664
(A couple sat down outside a café. *Its husband (= of the couple) ordered a glass of 1664.)
This is rather intriguing, since it is difficult to see why the member – collection lexical relation,
which can be used to explain the use of the possessive in the case of forest – tree and regiment -
soldiers30, cannot be used in the same way when dealing with kinship relations. Presumably, if the
NP *son mari  / *its husband is not possible, this is because the kinship items do not functionally
refer to a collective term (i.e. mari / husband  to couple or mère / mother to famille /  family) but
29 The reverse is not possible either (cf. ? sa pendaison / its hanging), but here things are already awkward because of
the level of dependency of the prepositional phrase (*La pendaison de la corde / *The hanging of the rope) (cf. 
above).
30 A forest has trees, a regiment has soldiers, but not the reverse. 
17

instead to their complementary kinship terms: mari / husband to femme / wife and mère / mother
to enfants / children (Kleiber, 1999b et 2003b).
Conclusion: Two Markers in Competition.
We now have to address the issue of 'discourse' which we raised at the beginning. If the
associative definite article and the possessive can at times occur in the same contexts, what is the
difference between the two items in such contexts? We have already sketched out a reply to this
in our discussion above about parts of animate bodies. In this section we develop this point again
and apply it to the wider set of contexts where both items are possible. Since the identity of the
referent is the same for both the article and the possessive in these cases, the distinction can only
come from the way in which both markers view the identical referent from differing semantic
perspectives. This semantic contribution is entirely down to a distinction of scope and topical
continuity. The associative definite article, as we pointed out above, downplays the role of the
antecedent, while the possessive determiner actively underlines a topical link with the antecedent
by creating a coreferential anaphor.
In the first instance, a referent is identified as part of an antecedent whole by means of an
associative anaphor (Kleiber, 2001a) which functions as a kind of referential space containing
entities which can also be potentially part of this associative anaphor. The associative referent is
thus understood in virtual opposition to these other entities which could equally have been taken
up associatively.  The referent of le tronc (du tilleul) / the trunk (of the limetree), as in: 
Il s’abrita sous un vieux tilleul. Le tronc était tout craquelé 
(He sheltered under an old limetree. The trunk was full of cracks.)
is considered to be the unique object of the antecedent whole tilleul / limetree and is understood
in terms of the paradigm of other entities (or Ns) which also have an associative link with the
antecedent whole (leaves, branches, etc.). The particular or specific relation which links le tronc /
the trunk and le vieux tilleul / the old limetree is based, as we have argued above, on a generic
relation between limetrees and trunks (un tilleul a un tronc / a limetree has a trunk). This leads us
to express the referent, albeit particular and specific, in terms of a generic part-whole relation,
thus making explicit its generic identity with other trunks.
In contrast, the possessive creates a different topical chain in which the antecedent remains
salient at the level of the new referent of a possessive expression. The identification of this
referent is not based on a whole unit containing other entities at the same level, but instead comes
from a direct link with the antecedent. This has two consequences. First, whereas the associative
article implies an internal contrast between the antecedent and different Ns capable of being in the
same associative relation, the possessive implies a contrast with different antecedents. The
possessive son tronc / its trunk opens up the paradigm of trunks belonging to other individuals:
the trunk of tree X, Y, or Z. As we have also pointed out above, the referent is thus oriented
towards the identification of an individual rather than of a stereotypical or generic relation, as is
the case with the definite article.
Secondly, the pronominal nature of the possessive adjective requires the antecedent to be in  a
position of semantic salience (Kleiber, 1994b) and to have an individualising function (De
Mulder et Tasmowski, 2000). This feature is not shared by the antecedent of the associative
article and, while it leads to an interpretation of particularity, also builds on a rather transitional
kind of discourse continuity. The possessive NP maintains a thematic link with its antecedent and
at the same time creates a new topic capable of being the subject itself of a new continuity.
It comes as a no surprise to see that in the following examples both determiners can be used
with a referent which is identical but open to different readings:
Si tout se passe comme prévu, l’arbre sera enlevé le lundi 12 ; d’après le scénario, le / son
tronc devrait être ébranché, coupé en trois morceaux et évacué avant midi  (DNA, 27/12/97)
(Provided everything happens on time, the tree will be removed on Monday 12th. According to
the schedule the / its trunk should be lopped, cut into three pieces and taken away by midday.)
18

La ville, à sept heures du matin, n’avait pas perdu cet air de vieille maison que lui donne la
nuit. Les / Ses rues étaient comme de grands vestibules, les / ses places comme des cours (J.L.
Borgès,  Fictions)
(At seven in the morning the town had not lost the look of an old house at night time. The / Its
streets were like great hallways, the / its squares like courtyards.)
Dessiné par Gérard Ecklé, le grand bâtiment comprendra un rez-de-chaussée et 6 étages, les
deux niveaux se trouvant en retrait. Les / Ses façades seront rythmées par des terrasses et des
loggias  (DNA, 05/06/96)
(Designed by Gérard Ecklé, the tall building will comprise a ground and 6 floors, with two
levels being set in relief. The / Its façades will be broken by terraces and loggias.)
Cette entreprise mène une action intéressante à signaler :  les  / ses salariés  fabriquent
bénévolement des fenêtres — 750 jusqu’à nos jours  — au profit de la fondation.  (DNA,
30/1/1998)
(This firm is making a very significant gesture: the / its employees have been making windows
free of charge – 750 of them up to now - as a gift to the foundation.)
The discourse context lends itself here to both a possessive interpretation, individualising a
particular referent in relation to the antecedent, as well as an interpretation based on the generic
definite article linking the class of N1 antecedents to the class N2. Just taking the last example,
with the article les salariés / the employees, the referent is understood by means of the functional
relation  X is an employee of (firm) Y  or  a firm has employees. Here no comment is made
whatsoever about the particularity of the firm and its employees. Such an interpretation creates
the possibility of making a virtual contrast with other entities in the same relationship, such as le
patron / the boss. The employees are only particular occurrences of employees (working for the
firm), when we consider the generic relationship which unites salariés / employees to entreprise /
firm. On the other hand, the possessive (ses salariés / its employees) has the same referent, which
is understood immediately as a particular one with specific employees (the employees of this
firm). This individualisation is marked by a pronominal anaphor and reinforced by the fact that
we are dealing with a particular firm whose employees are specifically working for charity. 
Our  analysis  predicts  that  if  the  context  does  not  include  elements  which  motivate  an
individualising specification of this kind, then the possessive becomes superfluous as we see in
the following:
Le jour déclinait lorsqu’il arriva, avec son troupeau, devant une vieille église abandonnée.
Le / ?Son toit s’était écroulé depuis longtemps, et un énorme sycomore avait grandi à
l’emplacement où se trouvait autrefois la /
    ?sa
 
  sacristie  (Paolo Coelo, L’alchimiste)
(The day was waning when he arrived with his flock in front of an old abandoned church.
The / ?Its roof had collapsed long ago, and an enormous sycamore tree had grown at the spot
where before there had been the / ?its sacristy.)
Fleischmann arriva enfin dans la rue de banlieue où il habitait chez ses parents dans une
petite villa entourée d’un jardin. Il ouvrit  la /
 
   ?sa
 
  grille, sans aller jusqu’à  la /
 
   ?sa
 
  porte
d’entrée (J.L. Borgès, Fictions)
(Fleischmann arrived at last in the suburban street where he had lived with his parents in a
little detached house with a garden. He opened the / ?its gate, without going up to the / ?its
door.)
La voiture dérapa et alla s’écraser contre un platane. Le / ?Son chauffeur avait été pris d’un
malaise (DNA, 15/02/92)
(The car skidded and went on to crash into a plane tree. The / ?Its driver had been taken ill.)
19

Let us look at the last example, since the first two are straightforward enough. If son chauffeur /
its driver seems less natural than le chauffeur / the driver, this is because the possessive focuses
on a singularity and not a virtual opposition between other drivers which the context does not
justify. The context, given that it deals with an accident, foregrounds the functional relation X is
driver of Y  and a coherent reading requires the associative definite article rather than the
possessive. We would need to place more emphasis on the individuality of the antecedent than is
required by the higher level pronominal definition implied by the possessive, and we would
require more detail about how and at what level the different ingredients of this context fit
together before justifying it. Such a task is clearly beyond the objectives of this paper. But at least
we may have begun to set out a clearer path for future analysis!
 
References
Azoulay, A.., 1978, Article défini et relations anaphoriques en français, Recherches  linguistiques 
françaises, 7, 5-46.
Barker, C., 1995, Possessive Descriptions, Stanford, CSLI Publications.
Baron, I., and Herslund, M. (eds), 1997, Possessive Structures in Danish, [KLIMT 3], 
Copenhague, Copenhagen Business School. 
Baron, I., Herslund, M. et Sørensen, F. (eds), 2001, Dimensions of Possession, Amsterdam-
Philadelphia, John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Bartning, I., 1989, Le déterminant possessif et les compléments adnominaux en de, Revue 
Romane, 24, 2, 163-203.
Bartning, I., 1996, Eléments pour une typologie des SN complexes en de en français, Langue 
française , 109, 29-43,
Bartning, I., 1998, Modèle intégré des syntagmes nominaux complexes en de, Romanische 
Forschungen, 110, 2, 165-184.
Bartning, I., 2001, Towards a Typology of French NP de NP structures or how much possession 
is there in complex noun phrases with de in French ?, in Baron, I. and Herslund, M. (eds), 147-
167.
Choi, I., 1991, Etude des compléments de manière non prépositionnels du type  les yeux fermés, 
Thèse de doctorat de l’Université de Provence, Aix-en-Provence, Université de Provence.
Chomsky, N., 1981,  Lectures on Government and Binding, La Haye, Foris Public. 
De Mulder, W. et Tasmowski, L., 2000, Déterminant possessif et anaphore associative, in 
Tasmowski, L. (eds), 69-82.
Ebert, K., 1982, Definite Articles with Inalienables in English and German,  in Lohnes, W. et 
Hopkins, E. (eds),  The Contrastive Grammar of English and German, Ann Arbor, Karoma 
Publ.
Eriksson, O., 1980, L’étiquette (fixée) sur la valise — l’étiquette de la valise — l’étiquette de 
valise, Studia Neophilologica, 52, 389-414.
Fradin, B., 1984, Anaphorisation et stéréotypes nominaux, Lingua, 64, 325-369.
Godard, D., 1986, Les déterminants possessifs et les compléments de nom, Langue française, 
72,102-122 
Gross, G., 1986, Syntaxe du déterminant possessif, in David J. et Kleiber G. (éds), 
Déterminants : syntaxe et sémantique, Paris, Klincksieck, 87-111.
Hanon, S., 1989, Les constructions absolues en français moderne, Louvain-la-Neuve, Editions 
Peeters.
Hawkins, R., 1981, Towards an account of the possessive constructions : NP's Nù and the N of 
NP, Journal of Linguistics, 17, 247-269.
Heine, B., 1997, Possession. Cognitive Sources, Forces and Grammaticalization, Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Heine, B., 1997, Possession.  Cognitive Sources, Forces and Grammaticalization, Cambridge.
Heinz, M., 2003, Le possessif en français. Aspects sémantiques et pragmatiques, Bruxellles, De 
Boeck-Duculot.
Herslund, M. et Baron, I., 2001, Introduction : Dimensions of possession, in Baron, I., Herslund, 
M. et Sørensen, F. (eds), 1-25.
20

Husserl, E., 1962, Recherches logiques, t.2, Paris, PUF.
Julien, J., 1983, Sur une règle de blocage de l’article défini, Le français moderne, 51 /2, 135-156.
Kleiber, G., 1981, Problèmes de référence. Descriptions définies et noms propres, Paris, 
Klincksieck.
Kleiber, G., 1994 a, Nominales, Paris, Armand Colin.
Kleiber, G., 1994 b, Anaphores et pronoms, Bruxelles, Duculot. 
Kleiber, G., 1999 a, Anaphore associative et relation partie-tout : condition d’aliénation et 
principe de congruence ontologique, Langue française, 122, 70-100.
Kleiber, G., 1999 b, Les noms relationnels en anaphore associative : le cas des noms de parenté, 
Studi Italiani di Linguistica teorica e Applicata, XXVIII, n°2, 282-300.
Kleiber, G., 2001 a, L’anaphore associative, Paris, PUF.
Kleiber, G., 2001 b, Anaphore associative, lexique et référence ou Un automobiliste peut-il rouler
en anaphore associative, in  De Mulder, W. et Vet, C. (éds), Anaphores pronominales et 
nominales, Amsterdam, Rodopi, 27-42.
Kleiber, G., 2003 a, The possessive via associative anaphora, in Coene, M. & D’Hulst, Y. (eds), 
From NP to DP. Volume II : The Expression of Possession in Noun Phrases, Amsterdam / 
Philadelphia, John Benjamins Company, 43-71.
Kleiber, G., 2003 b, Un « puzzle » référentiel en anaphore  associative,  in Fonseca, F.I. & Brito, 
A. M. (éds),  Lingua portuguesa : estruturas, usos e contrastes, Porto, Centro Linguistica  da 
Universidade do Porto, 97-110. 
Kleiber,  G., 2004,  Défini associatif et possessif en concurrence textuelle, in Adam, J._M., Ali 
Bouacha, M. et Grize, J.-B. (éds), Texte et discours : catégories pour l’analyse,  Dijon, 
Editions Universitaires de Dijon, 51-61. 
Langacker, R. W., 1993, Reference-point constructions, Cognitive Linguistics, 4 : 1, 1-38.
Langacker, R. W., 1997, Possession and possessive constructions, in Taylor, J.. R. and Mac 
Laury, R. E. (eds), Language and the Cognitive Construal of the World, Berlin, Mouton-de 
Gruyter, 51-79.
Langacker, R. W., 2004, Remarks on Nominal Grounding, Functions of Language, 11 : 1, 77-
113.
Riegel, M., 1988, L’adjectif attribut de l’objet du verbe avoir : amalgame et prédication 
complexe, Travaux de linguistique, 17, 69-87.
Riegel, M., 1989, Avoir + attribut de l’objet : construction syntaxique et paradigme idiomatique, 
Recherches germaniques, 2, 337-347.
Riegel, M., 1997, De Il a les yeux bleus à Je n’ai pas le cinq à sept facile : les avatars de la 
constrution attributive de avoir, Travaux et Recherches en Linguistique Appliquée, série B, 
n°1, 99-108.
Riegel M., Pellat J.C. et Rioul, R., 1994, Grammaire méthodique du français, Paris, PUF.
Salles, M., 1995 a, La relation lexicale « partie-de », Thèse de Doctorat de l’Université de Caen, 
Caen, Université de Caen.
Salles, M., 1995 b, Anaphore, partie-de et stéréotypes, Scolia, 3, 47-58.
Seiler, H.-J., 1983, Possession as an Operational Operator of Language, Tübingen, Narr.
Spanoghe, A.-M., 1995  La syntaxe de l’appartenance inaliénable en français, espagnol et en 
portugais, Berne, Peter Lang. 
 Strawson, P.F., 1973, Les individus, Paris, Seuil.
Tamba, I, 1994, Un puzzle sémantique: le couplage des relations de tout à partie et de partie à 
tout, Le gré des langues,  7, 64-85.
Tasmowski, L.(ed.), 2000, The Expression of Possession in Romance and Germanic Languages, 
Cluj-Napoca, Editura Clusium.
Taylor, J. R., 1996, Possessives in English. An Exploration in Cognitive Grammar, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press. 
Vergnaud, J.R. et Zubizaretta, M.L.,1992, The Definite Determiner and the Inalienable 
Constructions in French and in English, Linguistic Inquiry, 23, 4, 595-652.
Wilmet, M., 1986, La détermination nominale, Paris, PUF. 
Wilmet, M., 1997, 3e éd. 2003, Grammaire critique du français, Bruxelles, Duculot. 
21

Zribi-Hertz, A., 1999, Le système des possessifs en français moderne, Langue française, 122, 7-
30. 
22

