Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
Barry Smith 
1. Practical n. Propositional Intelligence 
More than forty years after Gilbert Ryle published his 
paper on "Knowing How and Knowing That" in 1945, 1 
the problem of practical knowledge has still failed to 
establish for itself a secure position in the field of 
problems dealt with by analytic philosophers. Thus even 
today it can safely be asserted that it is discursive or 
theoretical knowledge, knowledge linguistically expressed, 
above all knowledge in the form of propositions, that 
holds centre stage in analytic treatments of epistemology 
and cognition. The present volume, which consists of 
treatments of the presuppositions and specific character 
of practical knowledge in different spheres, is an attempt 
to fill this gap. The successive chapters fall into four 
interrelated groups: 
( 1) those dealing with general theoretical problems 
associated with knowledge and practice and their inter-
relations; 
(2) those dealing with habit, learning, technique and 
skill as social phenomena, phenomena tied to socially 
established traditions and customs; 
(3) those dealing with that special kind of practical 
knowledge which is manifested in our use of language; and 
(4) those dealing with the role of practical knowledge 
and of tradition in the sphere of art. 
J. C. Nyíri and Barry Smith (eds.), Practical Knowledge. 
Outlines of a Theory of Traditions and Skills, London/
Sydney/New York: Croom Helm, 1988, 1–16

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
Questions as to the role and nature of practical know-
ledge were addressed by the classical Greek philosophers -
not least by Plato in The Statesman and by Aristotle, for 
example in his writings on akrasia -
as also inter alia by 
American pragmatist philosophers such as William James 
and Dewey. 2 It is however in the more recent philosoph-
ical literature of continental Europe that the most sus-
tained attempts to cope with questions of this sort are to 
be found. One thinks, for example, of Nietzsche, with his 
emphasis on the role of training and drill and of the pain 
involved in repetition and in the punishment of deviation, 
all of which Nietzsche sees as powerful determining 
factors in the moral and cultural evolution of mankind. 
One thinks of Heidegger, whose Being and Time is, in its 
phenomenological core, nothing less than a description of 
the various forms of everyday action, both successful and 
unsuccessful, and of the ways in which such action shapes 
and determines the ontological structure of the world of 
everyday experience. Above all one thinks of the Gestalt 
psychologists with their conception of perceptual experi"-
ence as a spontaneous total process of physiological equi-
libration, as contrasted with more traditional empiricist 
views of perception as involving separate or separable 
phases of sensation and cognition. 
2. Perception and Action 
Central to the different theories of Gestalt is the idea 
that our perceptual experiences do not arise because we 
consciously or unconsciously apply rules or concepts to 
putatively meaningless collections of data gathered at our 
sensory receptors. Rather, we have been formed by our 
previous experiences and by our immersion in our present 
perceptual environment to the extent that the informa-
tion taken in by our senses is already, in normal circum-
stances, endowed with meaning. That this is possible is a 
consequence of the fact that the contents of sensation are 
not mere sums of elementary data separated off from the 
2 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
other elements of the physiological and material contexts 
to which they belong. Rather, our sensory contents are a 
matter of holistic structures, experienced as being tied 
intrinsically to certain kinds of surrounding conditions and 
to certain characteristic presuppositions and outcomes. 
Such contents are, most importantly, regularly recurring, 
so that we have been able to build up through experience 
a repertoire of perceptual structures which we are able 
spontaneously to call in aid in relevant circumstances. 
It might indeed be argued that it is recurring holistic 
structures of this sort which constitute the true building 
blocks of our perceptual world, something which may 
explain for example our capacity spontaneously to appre-
hend a facial physiognomy or the style or period of a 
work of art or piece of music. 
What holds of perception, now, holds also of our 
actions. Thus Christian von Ehrenfels, founder of Gestalt 
psychology in the 1890s, points to the way in which 
complex higher order actions are executed by being 
broken down into constituent, relatively routine ta:ks, 
each of which may be performed without thought or con-
scious reflection. A given higher order action is then 
itself able to be carried out more or less automatically in 
virtue of the fact that the objects whose successive 
realisation is aimed at in the given constituent micro-
actions have become, in different ways, stamped with 
value in their own right. The desires necessary to call 
for th each particular task thereby enter into consciousness 
automatically, or, to put the matter in another way, the 
subject himself has become affected in such a way that 
desire for the realisation of each given object arises 
spontaneously within him, without his having to recalJ or 
work out rational1y in each successive instance why it is 
that he finds this given object valuable. 3 
Our everyday actions in the world are effective, then, 
not primarily because we think out in each case what it 
is that we want to do. Rather -
in part because we have 
been shaped in certain ways by past experiences -
the 
world in which we act is positively and negatively charged, 
in different ways, by a pattern of values which as it were 
attract or repel our successive actions. 
3 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
3. The Structure of Behaviour 
The later Gestaltists argued quite generally that our capa-
cities to think and to perceive are not separate, independ-
ent faculties, but rather mutually dependent aspects of a 
single physiological-psychological whole which would 
embrace in principle also the habits and skills of the 
thinking and perceiving subject. The philosopher who 
has done most to bring out the implications of a view of 
this sort in regard to its practical, behavioural implica-
tions is undoubtedly Maurice Merleau-Ponty, whose 
phenomenology of bodily experience must come close to 
being the most sustained defence of the primacy of prac-
tical knowledge in the literature of philosophy. For while 
Gestalt-theorists such as Koffka acknowledged that the 
holistic implications of their work extended beyond the 
sphere of purely perceptual phenomena, they themselves 
were concerned in their work almost entirely with the 
latter, so that Merleau-Ponty can be said to have drawn 
out the latent implications of their ideas for the sphere 
of human practical experience. 
In his The Structure of Behaviour, 4 Merleau-Ponty 
argues that, just as proponents of empiricist theories of 
perception have been misled by the assumption that sensa-
tion is to be understood in terms of sums of elementary 
data, so proponents of behaviourist theories of stimulus 
and response are misled by the parallel assumption that 
higher levels of behaviour are a matter of mere sums 
of meaningless reflexes. Such summative or aggregative 
accounts of behaviour may, it is true, have some sort of 
validity for actions carried out under the abnormal condi-
tions of laboratory experiments. In our everyday experi-
ence, however, it is precisely the global, non-aggregative 
effects that are of greatest importance; for our actions 
are here not passive or mechanical responses to separate 
pre-existing stimuli of equal value; rather, they are complex 
wholes within which it is at best possible to distinguish 
relatively stimulus-like and relatively response-like 
dimensions. They are in addition wholes whose elements 
4 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
manifest different degrees of salience -
to the extent, in 
fact, that the subject may be said to choose the stimuli to 
which he will be sensitive. The functioning of our muscles, 
nerves and psyche is not, then, identical to the functioning 
of a mosaic of juxtaposed parts. Human action is rather a 
matter of integrated behaviours whose physiological and 
psychological sides are fused together, in much the same 
way as the information from our five separate senses is 
fused together in our everyday perceptual experience. 
Here again, the subject will acquire, in part through 
repetition, a repertoire of behaviour patterns, a wealth of 
different portmanteau reactions (walking, running, trip-
ping, sliding, lifting, pushing, speaking, writing), to which 
he may resort, spontaneously, from occasion to occasion. 
These behaviour patterns are as it were written into his 
muscles ('become part of his very flesh', as Merleau-Ponty 
would express it). They are however built up in such a 
way that they can be transferred immediately for example 
from one group of muscles to another, should occasion 
arise (for example when a limb is amputated, or when we 
move from writing words on paper to writing the same 
words on a blackboard or in the sand). 
It is in the promotion of such adaptability -
some-
thing which cannot be explained by appeal to the notion 
of repetition -
that Merleau-Ponty sees the distinguishing 
feature of human learning. For where conditioning or drill 
seems to be at best capable of establishing only the power 
to produce copies of responses which have been produced 
earlier, learning proper may lead to spontaneously adapt-
ive responses, to the aptitude to produce novel forms of 
behaviour in unfamiliar circumstances. Something like this 
occurs already, for example, in the course of an everyday 
conversation: the successive remarks of my interlocutor 
constitute, in effect, a series of more or less trivial prob-
lems which I must solve by making remarks of my own 
in more or less spontaneous and more or less predictable 
ways. Our adaptability as users of language is indeed so 
well developed that human speech is to a large extent 
automatic: we produce our sentences without thinking 
them out word for word. For our bodies have acquired a 
sophisticated repertoire of portmanteau reactions in rela-
tion to the different words of our language and to the 
5 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
different patterns of combination of words; this allows us 
not only to produce well-formed sentences at will, but 
also to improvise with language, to enjoy successful lin-
guistic combinations and to detect unsuccessful combina-
tions through the displeasure they may cause. 
Where such holistic patterns of adaptive responses 
have been laid down, it is not as if there were cognitive 
strings pulling different muscles in succession, muscles 
which are in themselves passive and uninvolved. Rather. 
the cognitive and muscular movements of the organism 
are part of a single spontaneously equilibrating whole. 
Human life itself is conceived by Merleau-Ponty as a 
single non-decomposable, behaviour-Gestalt -
where 
theories of conditioned reflexes and the like impose onto 
our organic behaviour alien modes of cleavage, divisions 
appropriate to a world of merely physical events. 
The fact that perception, cognition and action are 
intertwined in the way Merleau-Ponty describes implies 
also that the objects experienced in perception are not in 
the first place things (and nor. a fortiori, are they mere 
data of sense). Rather, they are salient figures against a 
less salient ground. Typically, they are objects for use, 
objects with practical, symbolic and emotional values, bound 
up in our experience with possibilities of action and 
movement. Thus the objects of experience are not separate 
items existing side by side and independently of each 
other and of the subject. Rather, they manifest relations 
of interdependence and mutual involvement, are locked 
together within larger networks of interrelations wherein 
'each dynamically knows its neighbours'. But now also, as 
Merleau-Ponty conceives matters, the linguistic signs 
representing such objects are themselves similarly linked 
in parallel networks, so that signs represent objects not 
merely in virtue of their direct empirical association with 
objects taken singly, but also in virtue of the fact that 
they stand in relation to other signs in ways which track 
the relations of the objects signified. Children are there-
by able to learn the meanings of words not merely by 
ostension but also by a constant cross-checking of con-
texts, to the extent that the similarity of one thing to 
another may in certain depend for the child upon the fact 
that the same word is used for both. 
6 
. ............. " ... ..... . ...............
.
.
.... .. ..
. ...... -.,---------· 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
4. Learning by Doing 
Our experience, then, as Merleau-Ponty conceives it, in-
volves of necessity the gradual building up of aptitudes, 
of general powers of responding to situation-types in ways 
which will bring about a spontaneous but always provi-
sional equilibrium of action and cognition. We do not 
need mental processing in order to react appropriately to, 
for example, the handle of a door. Such processes have 
been long ago internalised, as also have many of the 
processes involved for example in reading French. 
For all the generality of Merleau-Ponty's results, how-
ever, there is one area where his work seems less than 
adequate: the area of science, or of higher cognitive pro-
cesses in general. Here it is above all the Hungarian philo-
sopher Michael Polanyi who has done most to compensate 
for this defect, and Polanyi's works are indeed in a 
number of respects complementary to (though produced 
independently of) those of Merleau-Ponty. 5 Central to 
Polanyi's work is the idea that science, far from being a 
purely rational enterprise of cognition and calculation, 
involves of necessity a non-formalisable, non-mechanisable, 
characteristically human phenomenon which one might call 
•judgment', •intuition', or, with Polanyi himself, •tacit' or 
•personal knowledge'. 6 This tacit or personal element is 
manifested, for example, in the scientist's skill in anticip-
ating the consequences of given adjustments of his equip-
ment or in seeing through or beyond established conceptual 
divisions; it is manifested in the scientist's capacity 
spontaneously to recognise the rightness of the pattern 
generated by some new axiom or theory or taxonomy or in 
his capacity to distinguish what might be a highly subtle 
and hitherto unacknowledged type of order against a 
background of randomness. Polanyi, in fact, sees the 
scientific enterprise itself as resting on a deep-rooted and 
fundamentally non-utilitarian fascination with order or 
pattern. Such fascination, which is present already in the 
baby's pleasure in experimenting with coloured blocks or 
7 
' :, 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
with the melodies of language, is manifested particularly 
clearly in the drive of the pure mathematician to discover 
the properties of abstract mathematical structures for 
their own sake, structures for which an application may 
be found, if at all, only generations after his death. 
This personal dimension of science is not capable of 
being rendered explicit and codified into rules, Polanyi 
argues, since the higher forms of human activity are al-
ways such that the rules for their performance are not and 
cannot be fully known to the performer. This implies the 
indispensability, where such activities are cultivated, of 
personal contact between master and pupil, of learning by 
doing (an idea which might be exploited, in passing, to 
explain the relative fertility of those contemporary schools 
of philosophy -
from the Brentano and Schlick circles in 
Vienna to the Wittgenstein circle in Cambridge -
where 
philosophy has been cultivated as a matter of disciplined 
discussion and argument between successive generations 
of disciples). 
Learning by doing facilitates the extension of the pu-
pil's focal awareness beyond the particular features which 
first catch his eye to the global features which are normally 
more truly relevant to the exercise of a given skill. 
Polanyi makes much of the way in which the craftsman 
will encourage his apprentice to use his tools in such a 
way that his attention is focused directly always on the 
object worked and only subsidiarity on the means applied. 
Similarly, Polanyi argues, the novice scientist must be 
brought to a state where he need pay only subsidiary 
attention to the theories, languages or interpretative 
frameworks which he is called upon to employ in his 
work: he must, in Polanyi's own words, learn to 'dwell 
within them', to allow theoretical tools, languages, 
disciplines, to serve as natural extensions of his psyche in 
much the way that the blind man's stick serves as an 
extension of his body in walking. 
Theories, languages and interpretative frameworks are 
therefore, in Polanyi's view, not abstract objects fixed in 
some Platonic realm, but rather social formations tied to 
their contingent factual realisations in the practices nur-
tured by the community of scientists at any given stage. 
Thus the technical terms of a science as these are con-
8 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
ceived by Polanyi have meanings which are the residues of 
established usage; hence they will change and mutate with 
the gradual evolution of this usage within the larger con-
text of scientific practice and will at any given stage be 
only partially determinate. 
That linguistic meanings are only partially determin-
ate, however. implies that language in and of itself must 
remain at a certain distance from the concrete objects or 
experiences which it is used to describe; hence in this 
respect, too, language is subject to a necessary completion 
or animation in or through the personal experience of 
relevant language-using subjects. This incompleteness or 
lack of full determinacy explains also the transparency of 
language, the fact that when listening to someone speak-
ing the primary focus of our attention is normally dir-
ected to the objects to which his words refer and not to 
these words themselves. (This explains our greater facility 
in producing summaries of what people say than in 
remembering the precise words used.) This transparency 
has limits, however, and it should not be forgotten that 
there is a sense in which the objects to which we refer 
are themselves shaped to different degrees by the 
networks of terms we use to describe them. Thus for 
example the object-domain of a given science is ordered 
and integrated by the gradually developing language of the 
science itself. so that, as Polanyi shows, creative 
breakthroughs in science may in the end come down to a 
scientist's having coined a peculiarly apt expression for 
some given phenomenon. This power of language to shape 
objects holds not only for each science taken as a whole, 
but also for each scientist's individual grasp of the 
science as he learns to 'see' the objects with which it 
deals. Thus Polanyi points to the way in which, when 
novice radiologists are attending lectures on how to 
interpret radiographs, what they see is to a large extent 
dependent on what they hear the expert say; yet the 
meaningfulness of the latter is itself at the same time 
dependent on the novices' gradually developing capacity 
to see appropriate structures in the radiographs before 
them. As Polanyi points out however, it is here not so much 
individual words that are important, but rather the gen-
eral structures to which these words relate and which 
9 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
they may indeed have helped to crystallise. This is seen in 
the fact that the words may be forgotten -
for example 
after a skilled practitioner has b~come used to working in 
a new language -
while the capacity to pick out the rele-
vant structures survives unimpaired. 
5. Natural vs. ArtiCiclal Intelligence 
Both Merleau-Ponty and Polanyi see what might be called 
discursive or theoretical intelligence as resting necessarily 
on a seedbed of practical knowledge and perceptual judg-
ment. Perhaps the most interesting recent illustration of 
the failure, or at least one-sidedness, of purely discursive 
conceptions of knowledge is provided by recent work in 
the field of artificial intelligence. For one can use the 
insights and sugge~tions of Merleau-Ponty and Polanyi, as 
also of Wittgenstein and Heidegger, to show that computer 
models based on a purely discursive conception of what 
human knowledge is. may be incapable of coming close to 
simulating those achievements of human beings which 
involve the taking account of a wealth of interdependent 
contextual clues in spontaneously adaptive behaviour. 
Certainly the artificial intelligence community is aware of 
the need to do justice in their models to these aspects of 
human experience. Already Turing in his essay "Intelligent 
Machinery" written in the late 1940s had pointed out that 
the simulation of developed human cognitive performances 
would be achieved only with the construction of a mach-
ine capable not merely of interacting directly with human 
beings and with the surrounding world but also of learn-
ing from this interaction. There is a big question, how-
ever. as to whether the necessary interplay across the 
. 
entire range of experience could ever be achieved. For the 
concrete experiments actually carried out in the field of 
artificial intelligence, for all their successes in specific, 
well-delimited fields, have revealed what seem to be dif-
ficulties of principle in taking the computer beyond the 
realm of what is formally specifiable in any given sphere. 
The machine seems rather to be cut off from that back-
10 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
ground of experience which lends broader contextual 
relevance and immediate behavioural adaptability to the 
things we do or see or say. 
It is especially the American philosopher Hubert Drey-
fus who has sought to draw attention to the I imitations of 
computer models in relation to the achievements of prac-
tical human intelligence. In his recent Mind over Machine, 7 
written together with Stuart E. Dreyfus, there is presented 
a taxonomy of levels of human skill, against which the 
achievements of computer models can be gauged. 
The first level of human skill, according to Dreyfus 
and Dreyfus, is that of the novice. that is to say, someone 
who has learned a collection of context-free rules which 
he then allows to govern his step-by-step behaviour. The 
novice is unable to pick out global features of the objects 
with which he is working (there is a sense, indeed, in 
which he does not yet see these objects), and he has no 
sense of an overall task. 
The second level is that of the advanced beginner, some-
one who has learned both situational and context-
free rules, so that he is able to recognise global features 
(the bark of a particular dog, the face of a particular 
patient), though he is not yet able to say how he achieves 
this. 
Level three is that of competence, where the beginner, 
having begun to be constrained by the fact that he has 
acquired too many rules, not all of which can be put into 
practice at once, has succeeded in internalising a network 
of hierarchical procedures enabling him to bring some 
strategic order to his ruJe-followjng behaviour. Compet-
ence the ref ore implies the ability to recognise what is 
important and to unify a constellation of separate elements 
within a single overall plan. 
The fourth level is that of proficiency, which signifies 
the presence of the new dimension of involvement: the 
practitioner is no longer confined to a fixed stock of 
rule-governed responses in relation to a fixed stock of 
stereotypical situations; rather he is now so intimately 
bound to his environment and to the instruments with 
which he works that he can spontaneously recognise 
entire constellations of situations as wholes of different 
l l 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
sorts, in such a way as to call forth immediately appro-
priately adaptive behavioural responses. 
The fifth level, finally, is that of the expert, of the 
practitioner who is in the possession of what Dreyfus and 
Dreyfus call 'deep situational understanding', someone 
whose involvement has reached the point where he has 
become one with his car, his plane, his chessboard, his 
violin, his audience, or what you will. The expert does 
not, in normal circumstances, solve problems or follow 
rules or make decisions; rather, he simply does what 
normally works and his fluid performance depends upon 
the absence of planning and conscious reflection. He is 
possessed, that is to say, of know-how of the very highest 
degree. 
6. Discipline and Tradition 
The reader might now have some idea as to what is meant 
by 'practical knowledge' as this term 'is used in the pres-
ent work. Many of our critical remarks in the above have 
been directed at one or other form of what Ryle calls the 
'intellectualist doctrine', and before concluding it may be 
useful to look once more at Ryle's account this doctrine 
in his paper of 1945. 
The intellectualist, according to Ryle, holds: 
( 1) that Intelligence is a special faculty, the exercises 
of which are ... specific internal acts of thinking, 
namely, the operations of considering propositions; 
(2) that practical activities merit their titles 
'intelligent', clever', and the rest only because 
they are accompanied by some such internal acts of 
considering propositions. 8 
Much of Ryle's essay is devoted to a linguistic analysis 
of terms such as 'intelligent', 'clever', 'skilful', etc., as a 
means of showing that the given predicates relate not to 
any special inner faculty but are rather applied directly to 
12 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
the performances of the relevant actions. Intelligence, 
Ryle wants to insist, is manifested in our actions quite 
regardless of any inner intellectual processes by which 
these actions might be accompanied. But when is the 
performance of an action an intelligent performance? 
When, Ryle tells us, it manifests itself to us as being 
governed by principles, rules, canons -
whether or not 
these latter are capable of being explicitly articulated by 
the subject himself. The propounding of principles and 
rules is in fact itself 'just another special activity, which 
can itself be judiciously or injudiciously performed'. 
So far, so much in line with our deliberations above, 
though we have seen that talk of 'following rules' may be 
out of place when we are dealing with the 'fluid perform-
ance' of the expert. Ryle's account neglects, however, that 
dimension of our intelligent behaviour which is marked 
by our use of words and phrases from the vocabulary of 
feeling. He neglects, in orher words, the sense in which 
intelligent behaviour will involve and give rise to responses 
that are in different ways emotionally charged. Thus he 
ignores also the fact that such emotional responses may be 
indispe nsable to the successful execution of the relevant 
actions. The most interesting feature of Ryle's account for 
our present purposes, however, is that it leads him to a 
revisionary annlysis of the notion of 'discipline'. This 
te rm, Ryle tells us, 
covers two widely disparate processes, namely, 
habituation and education, or drill and training. 
A circus seal can be drilled or ~conditioned' into 
the performance of complicated tricks, much as 
the recruit is drilled to march and slope arms. 
Drill results in the production of automatisms, i.e. 
performances which can be done perfectly without 
exercising intelligence. This is habituation, the 
formation of blind habits. But education or training 
produces not blind habits but intelligent powers . 
Drill dispenses with intelligence, training enlarges it. 9 
Ryle sees further that 'discipline' relates not merely to 
the process o f training but also to the results of this 
1 3 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
process, to the 'skills', 'competences' or 'intelligent 
powers' which are acquired by the individual subject of 
training and which he is then able to exercise in his 
future actions. What is not here acknowledged is that 
'discipline' also has a social meaning: it signifies the 
· common system of principles and rules or of ways of 
acting which different members of society may acquire. 
Thus we speak of the 'discipline' which is a certain 
science, or a special method of painting. It is above all 
this social dimension of intelligent behaviour to which 
Ryle's analysis does less than justice. There is a sense, 
indeed, in which even discipline as process is itself 
already a social phenomenon. Thus disciplinary actions 
do not come out of nowhere: the trainer or drill-master 
behaves as he does in relation to his subjects because 
certain customs, rites or usages are rooted in the society 
to which he and they belong, granting him a certain 
limited authority over those with whom he deals. Further, 
reflection shows that the results of this process of train-
ing, too, are social objects, in spite of the fact that they 
inhere in each case in some one individual subject. For 
the subject acquires not merely the abstract capacity to 
perform in such a way that his actions are manifested as 
being in accordance with given principles and rules: he 
acquires also the capacity to do things as his fellows do, 
and as his ancestors may have done in the past, to do 
things in virtue of which he may become part of a certain 
elect group within society, perhaps to do things in such a 
way that he himself will acquire a certain authority of his 
own. 
A discipline will, therefore, share in the history of the 
culture or society in which it is manifested. It will consti-
tute -
when taken together with the rules or principles, 
social groupings, customs and methods of training, and all 
that hangs together therewith -
a tradition of a certain 
sort. Individuals acquiring the discipline may do so in such 
a way. that they think of themselves not merely as being 
in possession of a certain new capacity or skill, but as 
contributing to the maintenance of the traditions and 
institutions of the discipline itself. An understanding of 
practical knowledge, of that knowledge which is mani-
fested in intelligent or judicious behaviour, will therefore 
14 

Knowing How vs. Knowing That 
-
and this is perhaps the principal lesson of Wittgenstein's 
philosophy -
involve a new sort of understanding of soci-
ety and of the rules, customs and institutions maintained 
within it. 
Notes 
I. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. XL VI. 
1945/461 1-161 as repr. in vol. II of Ryle's Collected 
Papers. London: Hutchinson, 1971, 212-225. See also ch. 
2 of The Concept of Mind, London: Hutchinson, 1949. 
2. It seems to have been Dewey who introduced the op-
position between knowing how and knowing that into the 
modern philosophical literature. Thus in his Human Nature 
and Conduct Dewey identifies knowledge how with habitual 
and instinctive knowledge, as contrasted with knowledge 
that things are thus and so, which 
6invotves reflection and 
conscious appreciation'. It is, he tells us, 
6a commonplace 
that the more suavely efficient a habit the more uncon-
sciously it operates. Only a hitch in its workings occasions 
emotion and provokes thought.' This, as Dewey points out, 
may lead some to view consciousness 'as a kind of disease, 
since we have no consciousness of bodily or mental organs 
as long as they work at ease and in perfect health.' See 
Human Nature and Conduct. An Introduction to Social Psy-
chology, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1922. esp. p. 
178. 
3. See Ehrenfets• System der Werllheorie, as repr. in vol. 
I of his Philosophische Schrif ten, Munich and Vienna: 
Philosophia, 1982, esp. p. 372. 
4. La Structure du Comportement, Paris: Presses Univer-
sitaires de France, I 941; Eng. trans. as The Structure of 
Behaviour, London: Methuen, 1965. 
15 

Knowing How vs. Knowing Thal 
5. See especially Polanyi's Personal Knowledge. Towards 
a Post-Critical Philosophy. London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1958. Polanyi's thinking has been for a long time 
familiar to philosophers of science. but it has received 
little attention from philosophers jnterested in the wider 
aspects of knowledge and action. 
6. Here I run together two notions developed by Polanyi 
himself at different times. 'Personal knowledge' is used 
above aH to bring out the element of commitment on the 
part of the scientist to his as yet unknown, but approach-
ing, discovery. 'Tacit knowledge' relates rather to the 
scientist's skHls; see his The Tacit Dimension, London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967. 
7. Mind over Machine. The Power of Human lntuiJion and 
Experlise in the Era of Jhe Computer, New York: Free 
Press, 1986. 
&. uKnowing How and Knowing That'\ p. 212 of the re-
print. 
9. Ibid., p. 223. 
16 

