 
Kingdoms: The Kingdom of Chaos 
Written by E. M. Buchan 

 
 
Copyright © 2022 E. M. Buchan* 
All rights reserved. 
ISBN-13: 9798819792827 
*and other published names held by Author including Elijah Buchan, Elijah M Buchan, Green Leaf Writing 
 
All names, characters, places, races, countries, etc. are original concepts of the Author and no part of this work may 
be reproduced for sale or by any means without written permission from Author except brief quotes with citation.  
 
The characters and events in this book are fictional, and any resemblance to actual persons or events is coincidental.  
 
Unless otherwise stated, Scripture quotations (and some paraphrases) are from the ESV® Bible (The Holy Bible, 
English Standard Version®), copyright © 2001 by Crossway, a publishing ministry of Good News Publishers. Used 
by permission. All rights reserved. 
Additional Scripture paraphrases are taken from the Holy Bible, New Living Translation, Copyright © 1996, 2004, 
2015 by Tyndale House Foundation. Used by permission of Tyndale House Publishers, Inc., Carol Stream, Illinois 
60188. All rights reserved. 
Additional Scripture paraphrases are taken from the New King James Version®. Copyright © 1982 by Thomas 
Nelson. Used by permission. All rights reserved. 
 
www.elijahbuchan.com 
 

 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Prologue 
 
 
1 
I  
 
 
 
25 
II  
 
 
 
41 
III 
 
 
 
58 
IV 
 
 
 
76 
V  
 
 
 
100 
VI 
 
 
 
124 
VII 
 
 
 
148 
VIII 
 
 
 
171 
IX 
 
 
 
196 
X  
 
 
 
227 
 
 
 

 
Introduction 
 
 
I created the Kingdoms Saga in the wake of many 
fantasy stories popularized with vulgar and graphic 
content. My desire was to make an epic, fun, and clean 
story that would captivate adults, young adults, and 
teens. 
I love fantasy novels. They offer an escape from 
the real world. But the best books are those that also 
teach the reader about the world they actually live in. 
C. S. Lewis had a talent for creating alternate realities 
but with similar spiritual truths to our own. Like him, 
I hope to lead readers to another world where the 
laws, lands, and peoples are different, but the God, 
the Creator, is similar in heart, purpose, and action. 
All this to help us understand why we exist on Earth 
and if we are bound to the situational constraints that 
come with our placement. But mostly, to understand 
His relentless pursuit for our affection and loyalty. 
I value transparency when it comes to the content 
of the books I read. Therefore, I’ve listed below any 
element of this book that may be of concern to you, 
whether you’re a parent or a discerning reader. Below 
is a spoiler-free content advisory and to start, this 
book was written for mature readers. 

 
 
Kingdoms is a fantastical series that depicts many 
ways of death as it is based in a fictional world, called 
Teros, during times of war. In The Kingdom of Chaos, 
we follow many characters of the race known as the 
Orken. 
The Orken are brutal creatures whose entire lives 
revolve around war and subsequently: killing. 
Decapitation, crushing of skulls, death by axe, sword, 
hammer, and arrow are all featured in this gory 
beginning to the Kingdoms Saga. 
Along with a violent society, the Orken do not 
marry as other races do. In the beginning chapters, we 
read that the Orken males take a “mate” and procure 
children through her. They are loyal to this mate until 
she dies, at which point they would find another mate 
to fulfill their reproductive duties. Other than these 
brief mentions, there are no sexual cautions for this 
story. 
Family within the Orken culture is another thing 
to be cautious of when considering this story. We read 
of many instances of family members killing each 
other as their bonds are not enduring and love is not 
even an emotion found in the Orken culture. 
A spiritual warning may need to be mentioned. A 
character introduced in the latter chapters of this 
book features abilities that some may view as sorcery: 
please note that the power of this character, and 

characters introduced in later stories, does not stem 
from witchcraft, magic, sorcery, or divination. Teros 
is a fantastical world and thus the creatures and beings 
that live within it have access to abilities (gifts) that 
would be considered supernatural in comparison to 
our own definition of physics. Also, the lore of 
Kingdoms contains a Creator of the world and 
although we never directly hear from, see, or have 
direct encounters with this Creator, the presence of a 
higher power is quite evident as the series progresses. 
Personal note: If you have seen fantasy films or 
read other fantasy novels, the violent content found 
in Chaos will be the same as, if not less than, what you, 
or your children, have experienced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For my 2nd grade teacher, who asked me to dedicate 
my first book to her. Thank you for believing in me 
and encouraging this talent even at my young age. 
May I be simply one of many inspired by you. 
 
And for my wife, who listened to every single word 
of this story while it was being built. This would not 
be the story it is without your enthusiasm, support, 
and input.  
 
 

 
“The eyes of the LORD are in every place, 
keeping watch on the evil and the good.” 
 
Proverbs 15:3

 
1 
Prologue 
DEPRAVITY IS A WIDELY AFFECTIVE AND 
yet seldom understood nor appreciated concept. Its 
scope is grand, and it saturates even the unliving and 
unbreathing things of the dirt and sea. It wanders 
about hearts in the shadows, making itself known only 
in times of war or lust or chaos. And yet, the deeply 
tragic state of all life, acts as a directive point. Not life 
itself being such a beacon, but the depravity with 
which it carries. As the dark sky makes all widely 
aware of the absence of sunlight, or as winter reminds 
land and life of summer. For depravity to be known, 
experienced, and hated, there then remains the need 
for a wholeness; for perfection. For without 
perfection, the want and disgust and despair of the 
darkness within has no power. Indeed, all would do 
what was right in their own eyes with no will for the 
contrary nor appreciation for beautiful things like 
peace. 

 
 2 
And so, this tale befalls within a kingdom 
abounding in such depravity. To first learn of those 
who are chief among most others as being in a poor 
state, is no simple thing. Being creatures of war and 
brutal in their conduct with others, cruel even, the 
red-skinned Orken are considered vile beasts by most 
neighbouring kinds for their predisposition to 
violence and lack of care for life and sacred things. 
They are of the larger kinds of those with intelligence, 
standing near twelve feet for the average male and 
weighing a great sum. Their harsh appearance aids in 
the disdain others feel for them; all are bald and 
adorned with horns on their heads and faces, with 
small dark eyes. The Orken have a single mindset: 
war. They are born into it, raised by it, and led by it. 
War rules their society. These are they that occupy the 
depraved kingdom of which this tale is written. While 
the kingdom’s name is Kru’aka, named after its 
founder, the true name of it, if it were to be called 
according to its dealings and people, would be the 
Kingdom of Chaos. And amidst this kingdom, hope 
and light, the inverse of its depravity, began to rise 
within the hearts of a select few. And indeed, this 
grand tale of kings and kingdoms, begins with these; 
the chosen and the redeemed.  
Presently, within the grand forested region of 
Kru’aka that borders the northernmost reaches of its 

 
 3 
middle, a small red foot pressed into white snow. The 
girl to whom the foot belonged dwelt in the Forest of 
Fal’kir; the region that began at the heart of the land 
and stretch northward until the mountains the 
shouldered the country. The girl was an orken child, 
called an orkling in her culture. Being of a race replete 
with depravity, the child’s future was bleak. Strong 
orken males were typical to join in warfare, the 
females being they that reared orkling and provided 
for the various economic needs of the kingdom. This 
child, however, was of a savage sect within the 
kingdom. Indeed, the kingdom itself was fractured. 
Four tetrarchs reigned within the land, each claiming 
to be king of their followers. The worst of which, in 
practice and governance, was called the Hagronen 
kingdom: to which the child in the snow belong. 
She stood, awed by the frozen white neath her. 
Being young, merely two years without the female that 
birthed her, for orkling are born large and walking, 
she had never experienced that which was before her. 
The Hagronen, the orken folk she was born unto, 
dwelt exclusively within the forestry of the Fal’kir 
region which, despite its northern position, was 
protected from the elements of winter. The trees kept 
out the density of the sky’s frozen offerings, and the 
great fires that the orken built and sustained 

 
 4 
perpetually destroyed the power of the cold winds 
that beat upon the trees from the surrounding plains. 
The child had wandered from her clearing and the 
fire that blazed in the middle. There, she had a tent 
wherein the two that had begotten her lived also. She 
was the youngest of that pair’s orklings, the rest of 
whose whereabouts were unknown to them. The 
males were likely dead in battle, the females mated 
with and elsewhere or killed in the various conflicts 
about the wood. Despite being at a slowly waged war 
with three other sects, all orken were violent toward 
their own. Indeed, an orken could live to one 
thousand years or more if battle had not prevented 
any recorded orken from accomplishing such a thing. 
The child stood in the snow, still within the 
reaches of the trees, gazing at the wall of white before 
her. She faced south and the winds were blowing 
wildly about the land, sweeping up the snow that was 
falling. The air was frigid, and she shivered for it. But 
something had beckoned unto her and drew her near. 
Such a beckoning was not a thing of childish 
wandering, but something placed upon her heart to 
come nigh. And thus, doomed with a poor fate in the 
years before her, the child stood still, examining the 
unknown.  
For her call, she had felt fear enough to keep 
herself from coming into the snowy land before her. 

 
 5 
The trees were all she knew and thus, she stayed for 
some time before collapsing from the cold and 
sinking into the snow. Her red face had preceded the 
rest of her and she neared death for she was young 
and weak.  
It was then, as if for the affirmation of her 
helpless estate, that two outstretched arms reached 
into the snow and, wrapping around the downed 
orkling, caught her up, out of the cold mire. She then 
dangled in a close embrace, the stranger that had 
come to her carrying her deeper into the forest, 
beyond the unknown that had overwhelmed her. 
Walking with haste for a while, the stranger came 
upon a small clearing and, laying her gently upon the 
ground, formed a fire. He took off his cloak and 
swaddled her, bringing her as near the fire as was 
needed. And sitting upon the twigged ground, he 
placed her in his lap and held her through the night 
that had come upon them. 
In the morn, when the sun began to rise from 
behind the mountains in the east, the child had 
awoken and was restored, being warmed by the 
evening of care. She was startled upon the sight of the 
stranger, for he was of a different kind than her and 
she had only even beheld the sight of orken and 
beasts. She gasped and threw off the cloak that was 
about her. She struggled to stand so she could flee 

 
 6 
from his embrace and, helping her become free so she 
would not fall into the fire, the stranger turned and 
released his grip upon her. She fled swiftly from him, 
running into the darkness of the morning forest. Yet 
he stood and patiently came behind her, walking with 
long strides so that he kept her running pace. Noticing 
the futility of her fleeing, she took to a nearby tree, 
scaling it in a manner taught her by being a dweller of 
the forest. Upon seeing this, and not for his inability 
to climb after her, the stranger subsided in his pursuit 
and returned to the fire, which could be seen from the 
tree the child then clung to. 
All that she observed that following day was of 
great wonder to her. The stranger had sat by the fire 
until the sun was high, its heat undisturbed from the 
previous night’s storm. Once light was upon the 
dealings of the forest, the stranger vanished from her 
sight for a few minutes before returning to the fire 
with the body of a hare. He peeled the skin and fur 
from its flesh and then cooked it over the fire, sending 
the aroma of meat into the nostrils of the child who 
then became aware of her great hunger. Although 
orken warriors could last a fortnight without 
sustenance, she was weaker and frail; childish in the 
ways of her kind, having yet to partake of the malice 
and cruelty of her kinfolk. And yet, such a path was 
before her, undeniable for her to walk. Thus, the 

 
 7 
stranger came to her for many things. But presently, 
he brought the smell of his cooking. And with it, the 
child descended.  
He was hunched over the fire, grinning at her 
which was an odd thing to behold. His smile was 
wide, stretching from either side of his head for his 
mouth was large and pointed as if he had a beak of 
flesh. Neath his white hood, his skin was blue but 
darkened by the shadows of the trees and discoloured 
by the fire. She saw before her one glowing with the 
orange of flames, and he frightened her still. But for 
the gnawing in her stomach, she drew near and sat 
expectantly. The stranger was pleased by this and 
offered her the beast. She took it and ate, like a critter 
would upon a sacred morsel after many days of 
hunger. 
“What is your name?” asked the stranger. His 
voice was soft and low. He had spoken to her in a 
language she knew not, and for such, she only gazed 
at him a moment before returning to her meal. 
Laughing, the stranger spoke with words she had 
heard: the Orken tongue. Harsher than many others, 
it took effort to speak it and the stranger felt it 
difficult to speak tenderly with such speech. 
Nonetheless, he asked again, “What are you called?” 
The child shook her head while whispering, 
“Orkling.” Her voice was timid and sweet. Silence 

 
 8 
prevailed for a great while after she spoke, for she 
returned to her eating and the stranger thought deeply 
of the girl before him. He understood that her having 
no name was not due to her youth, as if it would come 
later, but it was a proof of the deep state of depravity 
her culture had sunk. The Hagronen folk seemed 
beyond the hope of redemption.  
“You called?” asked the child once finished with 
the hare. The question startled the stranger and he 
smiled for her young speech. She was merely four feet 
in height and looked even smaller when sitting.  
The stranger sighed. “You may call me Ru,” he 
said. 
“Ru,” she responded effortlessly. He knew it was 
a word her tongue could speak with ease. 
“I go back,” said the child as she stood. “Hail, 
Ru.” 
Ru stood, laughing. “Come to me again, will 
you?”  
The child looked up at the great being before her. 
“If hungry,” she said with a smile, before darting into 
the brush and out of sight. Upon the sun’s setting, she 
at last returned to her camp. Despite her young age, 
she knew the forest well enough. She came into the 
clearing, which was filled with hagronen warriors and 
orkling, and found her tent. She had eaten her fill 
earlier from Ru’s meal, but there awaited her what was 

 
 9 
left of a carcass nearby. She came to it and toyed with 
the flesh to see if anything of worth was upon the 
bones. It was the uncooked corpse of a beast and only 
bones and tendons were upon it. She decided to rest 
with the satisfaction of her solitary meal and entered 
her tent. The female that had birthed her was present, 
although she spoke nothing to the child upon her 
entering. The older female sat in the corner of the tent 
running her red hand up and down the canvas, staring 
thoughtlessly at her own skin. The child lay upon the 
ground and watched as her elder engaged in motions 
that seemed to have no purpose.  
After a short while, the sound of conflict filled the 
clearing. Two males were fighting with their hands 
and biting each other, having forsook their axes some 
time ago. Such was nothing strange to the onlookers 
nor to the child in her tent. Her mother left the tent, 
however, and entered the fray. Once the noise of the 
commotion had settled, the child’s mother returned 
with cuts and bite marks all over her body. And with 
that, filled with no concern or fright, the child fell 
asleep. 
 
*** 
 
Ru began to breathe heavily once the child had 
left him. His first task was to find her, which had 

 
 10 
proved quite pleasant to him for she was a beautiful 
child. Not beautiful upon the eyes, for she was red 
and hairless, but her speaking and her innocence were 
greatly adored by the stranger for he loved the purity 
of children. Although she was born into depravity, 
and held it within her, she was yet to participate in any 
of its sorrows and that adorned her with a sweet 
purity.  
Ru’s second task, however, was much less 
pleasant to him. His presence within the lands was 
then known by only one: the orken child. But there 
was another whose role in the coming conflict was 
needed: the lost one. Named such for his malice and 
twisting of good gifts, this being was not an orken nor 
was he of any folk still living, save for himself.  
Thus, once the child had left him, Ru came to the 
lost one’s cave which sat high in the hills of a stony 
country, east of Kru’aka. The cave was not the only 
place he dwelt, but it was one, and Ru knew him to be 
there for he could feel his hatred. Coming unseen and 
unfelt, when Ru spoke, the mountain before him 
seemed to shake as if his voice were an unwelcome 
yet long awaited thing. 
“Hear now, ye of darkness,” spoke Ru, his voice 
echoing through the stone valley in which he stood. 
“Thine allotted time is nigh. Do what you must.” And 
with that, before the lost one could slither from his 

 
 11 
cave and cast before Ru’s feet assaults and curses, Ru 
fled from the land in a white cloud coming up from 
the ground so that when the yellow eyes peered from 
the darkness in the cave, only a white fog could be 
seen drifting upward from the ground and into the sky 
with the haste of lighting. 
Returning to the clearing in the Forest of Fal’kir, 
Ru appeared and fell to his knees before the fire he 
had made which was then embers and smoke. He 
wept bitterly for all that he felt and all that his words 
meant.  
Having slumbered, when he awoke, the sun was 
coming up again and before him sat the orken child. 
Seeing her returned happiness to him and he looked 
upon the fire which was low and near dead. 
“Awaken,” he said, and it burned again. The sudden 
outburst of flames startled the child and she fell 
backward, lying on the twigged ground. Upon 
realizing what had happened, that fire came from the 
very mouth of the stranger, she laughed an innocent 
and childish laugh. Ru loved to see such a strange 
thing come forth from an orken, for they were too 
harsh a kind for such jubilance, even laughter. It 
caused him to laugh also, forgetting the pains of the 
that day’s eve. 
The child grew as the years passed solemnly in the 
Kingdom of Chaos. She came, as often as she ought, 

 
 12 
to Ru’s clearing, which had become a pleasant 
dwelling for him and a peaceful escape for her. The 
two had fashioned a hut for him, built in the trees. 
The child would scale the trunk and come to his door, 
spending the proceeding day with him in conversation 
and play. Although some foreign thing had drawn her 
to the edge of the forest that fateful day when her 
helplessness had overtaken her, presently, her own 
desire for Ru’s fellowship drew her often.  
The war outside the forest continued to rage as 
the tetrarchs toiled for regions and the loyalty of the 
inhabitants of Kru’aka. But more fierce was the war 
waged within the forest. This was the battle that had 
come upon the Hagronen many years prior. But then, 
nearing eight years since the stranger’s arrival, it had 
come to a heavy culmination where the fate of the 
folk themselves was to be determined. The battle was 
not that of axe and sword, nor kingship and loyalty. It 
was the decision to forever seal the fate of the 
Hagronen kingdom in their depravity, or to cling to 
the hope of a better way. And yet, the king of the 
Hagronen, the orken sect that dwelt in the Forest of 
Fal’kir, had decided upon the hideous option.  
To him had been given a foul gift of healing. It 
was the ability to heal most wounds gained in battle. 
All orken could heal wounds naturally, faster than any 
other kind, for their design to be a kind for warring. 

 
 13 
However, the healing which was given unto the 
Hagronen king was drastic in its potency. Such was 
granted to him, and any of his subjects, if he ate of a 
creeping creature which had lived deep within the 
heart of the forest. Yet the cost of such a power was 
sanity. And thus, a society already cruel and harsh 
made void of reason or loyalty, would collapse into 
chaos. Knowing this, the king had formerly kept most 
from it, including himself. But slowly, as the four 
fractures of the kingdom grew, including his own, he 
shared the gift. And with his sharing, spread the 
insects’ dwellings further out from the heart of the 
region and into the outskirts of the forest so that more 
could be found, more could be consumed, and the 
Hagronen kingdom could be poisoned with the 
savagery that ensued such consumption. Clearing by 
clearing, depending on the closeness to an upcoming 
battle, the king had previously distributed the gift, 
granting near invincibility to its consumers. 
Years prior, the king had come to the child’s 
home clearing and her own kin had consumed the 
things. This led them to debased thinking, and the 
child remained unnamed for it. Another of the 
tetrarchs had assaulted the woods in hopes to gain a 
foothold for future warring. Having poorly setup his 
kingdom for replenishment of armour and weaponry, 
the Hagronen king gave forth the maddening black 

 
 14 
creatures. Consuming them caused one’s vision to 
fade into a trance of red so that one was guided by 
impulse. Whatever came upon them, had a mind of 
its own and the orken could see well and fight 
viciously and knew which limb to tear from an enemy, 
but the warrior themselves knew not of what occurred 
and often awoke confused yet hungry for more.  
Coming upon their enemies with unmatched 
savagery, the battle had been won, but at the cost of 
the child’s father. And her mother had ran into 
conflict that night, as she had prior, retaining the red 
gaze and unbridled mind, and she never healed from 
her wounds, as she had many times prior. Madness 
terrorized the clearing and the dozens of orken that 
dwelt within it, despite their victory over their enemy. 
Each saw the other as the enemy and they turned 
against each other in their savagery. 
However, the child had the retreat of Ru’s camp, 
and she was thus saved from the self-slaughtering that 
besieged her home that dreaded night. Elsewhere 
within the forested kingdom, similar events had 
occurred and thus, the king had decided to withhold 
the creatures and their consumption for a time. Yet 
the folk failed to recover fully, but the population at 
least steadied and horrid rumours of their savage ways 
spread throughout the other three Orken kingdoms. 

 
 15 
Presently, alone and without kin, save for Ru, the 
child aged ten years and was still sanctified in her 
innocence. But it was her being such an age and being 
still innocent, that brought trouble to her. For 
although the king had withdrawn the insects from his 
followers years prior, for his madness and the 
rampant killing that lessened his forces, he began to 
redistribute them again. 
The Orken culture is one of war and death is part 
of such. Most have killed another by the age of ten 
and if not, one sought to do so. Separated from the 
other orken kingdoms kept not such a cultural rite 
from permeating the Hagronen society. Thus, when 
others saw the age of the child, she would join the war 
efforts soon. If proven capable of fighting, she would 
join the warriors in battle, if not, she would be slain in 
training or become the mate of an orken to rear 
orkling. Although, if she had dwelt within one of the 
cities in Kru’aka, she could join cookhouses or tend 
to crops. However, the Hagronen kingdom had 
continued their deepening in their horrid state over 
the previous decade and no such practices remained. 
The life then that lay before her was even more bleak 
than it had been when Ru had first come to her. Her 
future was to fight, mate, or be slain.  
Another ill fate came to her when the king in the 
forest had tasked those in her clearing to continue 

 
 16 
consuming the creature. It had been many years since 
the last hagronen dwelling there had done so for the 
king had seen the death and madness it had caused. 
Yet the victory it granted him in battle was far too 
great for him to heed the consequences of its 
continued use. The child’s clearing, repopulated in 
recent years, was in the southern reaches of the forest, 
east of a great valley that plunged southwest. Another 
orken kingdom had begun to come upon the coasts 
of the southern forest, hoping to claim more territory 
in the kingdom. That kingdom was the strongest 
kingdom in the land, and indeed was the very 
kingdom that the Hagronen king had originally 
usurped from. The sect of orken, which reigned from 
a large city in the west, was called the Draken 
kingdom. They dwelt in and controlled the great 
valley also, and moving eastward, along the coast of 
the forest, provided a great advantage in warring 
against the other kingdoms who dwelt in the eastern 
plains of Kru’aka.  
The Hagronen king however, thought ill of the 
Draken’s increasing presence in the forest. Yet the 
kingdom remained seldom defeated. Their army was 
larger, their weapons sharper, their armour stronger, 
and their king was ferocious. The Hagronen king 
knew his only hope in evicting the Draken presence 

 
 17 
from the forest was to attack them with the savagery 
and invincibility consuming the insects offered. 
And thus, one dreaded, yet fateful day, he came 
upon the child’s clearing. She was young but old 
enough to fight and pledge loyalty to the king. Being 
creatures of war and monarchy, the Orken’s strongest 
emotion, for they felt few, was loyalty. Such loyalty 
dictated their every thought and action and was given 
to whomever they deemed the strongest orken. In the 
four kingdoms that warred against one another in 
Kru’aka, the four kings were deemed the strongest. 
Neath them were elders and commanders and 
captains who could also hold the loyalty of lesser 
orken. However, each rank stretch loyalty upward 
unto the throne itself. 
The Hagronen king, his mind slowly eroding with 
madness, allowed a great hubris to well up within him. 
He branded each of his subjects’ arms with the sap of 
a foul tree that grew in the woods. The markings were 
a stain upon the skin, unremovable and permanently 
identified all Hagronen as the king’s loyal followers. 
With several orken males who were dressed only in 
cloth around the waste, the Hagronen king stood 
himself in the middle of the clearing, having a flask of 
the sap, and a large sack which was writhing with the 
black horrors within. Gazing around at all those who 
stood attention, he spotted the sweet child whom Ru 

 
 18 
had befriended. Seeing her bare arms, he pointed at 
her and grunted in summoning. Two large orken 
came at her and seized her, throwing her before the 
feet of the king. He instructed another to take a rusted 
blade, dipped in the sap, and carve into the child’s 
arms, branding her as his for the remainder of her life. 
Although most young females of any kind would 
weep for the brutality shown her and the pain she felt, 
the child did not. She lay on the forest floor and her 
own heart thrilled at what had happened to her. Being 
depraved, she trusted the wickedness within her and 
her loyalty was cast upon the king for the show of 
strength over her. She was helpless against him, 
branded by him, and would be a servant of him from 
then on. She would be proud of and loyal to the 
Hagronen king until she met another that was greater 
than he. 
Being grounded and still for the pain, the child 
was passed by the other hagronen warriors and not 
fed the insects that shrieked inside the sack. The 
others who were in the clearing were older or too 
young to be branded and fight. Thus, those of age 
were fed the large black things with many legs and bid 
to rush upon the draken warriors that had come into 
the forest not far from there. The king went with, 
staying at the rear for he consumed the insects 
sparingly, understanding their effect upon his mind. 

 
 19 
And he had consumed them for many years so that 
the healing power granted him stayed with him longer 
than most. From the decades, he had learned a fair 
balance, but even he, being of a strong bloodline, was 
prone to succumbing to the red-eyed madness that 
would never fade. 
Alas, that battle was won, leaving few draken left 
alive; a true feat for the hagronen warriors. But for 
their madness, they failed to strip the bodies of 
armour and axes, surging around the woods as their 
crazed state dwindled before returning to tents. 
Before then, Ru had beckoned for the child to 
come to him. So strong an urge came upon her that 
she rose from her stupor and ran until she came to 
him. He stood at the base of his tree, looking upon 
her with sorrow in his eyes. 
“How do you fare?” he asked. 
Upon hearing his words, she wept. The pride she 
felt for her king choosing her faded and the 
graciousness she felt from Ru caused her to know the 
hideousness of what had happened to her. She fell to 
her knees and said a thing an orken would seldom 
ever say, “I am sorry, Ru.” She continued her 
weeping. 
Ru came to her, kneeling in the dirt and embraced 
her. The two stayed in each other’s arms for a great 
deal of time and Ru spoke to her mind, as if speaking 

 
 20 
aloud but just to her so that if one were watching the 
two, all that could be observed was a silent pair 
embracing. 
“Now you shall not know sorrow, nor shall you 
know shame. For these are the things of your way. 
But soon deliverance will be granted you and you shall 
see thineself made anew. For now, weep not. For such 
tears will soon be turned to laughter.” The words 
came upon the child and comforted her, although she 
understood little of them. Not for her poor 
understanding of language, for she was older then and 
fluent; but for the hope her depraved heart could not 
fathom. Still, the words of life came upon her, 
soothing her as they ought, and her weeping ceased. 
That evening stretched long as the sounds of 
battle and savagery filled that region of the forest. 
Most of the draken that had come upon the forest 
were slain and a few fled the beastly fighting of the 
Hagronen. However, such fleeing in the Orken 
culture was prohibited, being against their nature. 
Thus, those who fled ran unto other kingdoms and 
lands or, if they returned to the city from where they 
had come, they were slain in the streets by other 
militants. 
Not a week later, the forces of the draken came 
again to the forest. That fateful day would be the last 
time in a long while the child and Ru would see each 

 
 21 
other. Sensing the approach, Ru rose early and had 
come to the child’s own clearing. Those dwelling 
there seemed accustomed to the dark effects and the 
red sight that the king’s gift had caused. Ru gazed 
upon many as they slept, lying about the forest floor, 
mostly unclothed like animals for the thrashings they 
endured from one another. Yet their red skin was 
spotless, for their wounds healed just as soon as they 
were made. Coming into her tent, Ru sat next to the 
girl who had been forgotten by the king and allowed 
to return and dwell. 
“Rise, my sweet child,” said the stranger. And she 
did, obedient to his whisper. “What if I told you the 
age was nearly finished?” he said unto her mind, 
speaking in such a way so none else would hear.  
Lying back down on her mat and closing her eyes, 
the child replied in thought, “I would wonder what 
you meant. I would wonder what such an age was or 
what its end might be.” 
Ru stretched out his hand and placed his long blue 
fingers on her bald head, stroking her forehead with 
his thumb where small horns would eventually grow 
as she matured. “Well,” he began, “what is now shall 
no longer be. And so stirs such that I have come to 
you. Not now, but then, all those years ago. A blink 
to me, your life to you.” 

 
 22 
“Hmm,” said the child aloud. “I cannot say I 
understand your strange speech, Ru.” 
The stranger laughed one last time. He then began 
to speak things to her which, to her, were utter 
nonsense. She neither understood the words then nor 
would she remember them later for her juvenile mind 
could not comprehend his speech. He spoke long and 
quiet, sometimes in thought, other times aloud. He 
said things like, “He” and “Him” and “Granted” and 
“Wisdom” and “Redeemed” and “Chosen” and many 
more words and phrases and parables and things that 
she heard only as foolishness. And with each 
mysterious word spoken presently, a former word he 
had once told her, within her memory, vanished. As 
if confusion could not dwell with the knowledge of 
Ru, the grace of their time together faded from what 
the child’s heart could grasp. Indeed, as the mist of 
the morning flees from sunlight, so did the thoughts 
and memories of Ru flee slowly from the child’s mind. 
Such was a thing the stranger had prepared for, and 
he wept for it. 
Alas, the sun was in the sky, and the camp stirred. 
At the silence that came upon her mind, the child 
opened her eyes to behold no friend in front of her. 
But she missed him still. Although she no longer 
knew of most of what he had said unto her and done 
for her, there remained the warm memory of his 

 
 23 
touch and his love. But it was merely a shadow of 
memory, soon darkened by the life that lay before her. 
A life without Ru. 
Suddenly, a roar filled the forest, followed by 
dozens more. These were the roars of orken, deep and 
growling like beasts and thunder. The roars of orken 
in battle. The sound of great stomps and shouts 
followed and coming outside the tent, the child saw 
the swarm of warriors entering a fray that was brought 
on by a draken assault. With great number and vigour, 
the draken army’s commander surged into the forest, 
downing as many as he could. One of his captains 
came further into the forest and saw the child busying 
about the wood, fleeing, her arms mark afresh with 
the black markings of his enemy. With hatred in his 
eyes and loyalty unto his king, he wished to slay her, 
even a child. 
But speed came upon her feet, and she outran her 
foe, fleeing deep into the forest. Despite their 
advantage, the hagronen fled deeper as well. The 
wounded stirred and were beheaded or snuck away. 
Alas, by nightfall, the whole of the Hagronen 
kingdom had rallied further into the forest and their 
draken pursuers returned to the coast, where the 
woods met plains. 
The Draken kingdom then shortened the 
coastline and built structures of the wood in the 

 
 24 
following months, making well-suited buildings for 
defending their expanded territory. 
The king of the Hagronen fumed and slew many 
in his rage. But being deeper in the forest brought a 
plenty of the insects and the kingdom continued to 
consume them so that their healing prowess was 
strengthened, and their madness intensified. Slowly, 
and ferociously, the king in the forest determined to 
regain his wooded kingdom, even to capture the great 
valley and perhaps the plains surrounding.  
The child, raised mostly by the tender stranger, 
whom she no longer knew of, was spared from the 
depravity engaged in by the other hagronen. For the 
stranger’s presence remained with her and guarded 
her and guided her, even throughout the horrors of 
an orken life, although she knew not of his touch. As 
another decade passed, she neither consumed the 
insect, nor was taken as a mate, nor did she take the 
life of anything. She went about the forest with her 
fellow orken, her innocence going unnoticed and 
untainted.  Yet her loyalty to her kind and king 
increased, and she was in darkness, yet being spared 
from being of darkness.  

 
25 
 
I 
THE SHRILL SOUND OF METAL ARMOUR 
rattling from the cold winter’s breeze could be heard 
far from the scene of battle. Standing in an unbroken 
line, hundreds of orken gazed across the icy Valley of 
Kal’ka. One orken, a male standing close to twelve 
feet tall, showed his blackened teeth as a deep growl 
rumbled from his throat. He let out a fearsome roar 
of challenge. 
The trees on the opposite side of the Valley began 
to sway. Yet it was not from the cold breeze that had 
swept by. The orken who roared in hope to bring out 
his foe, named Ful’kag, after his father whom he slew 
when he was young, knew what the swaying meant: 
they were coming. Those who dwelt amongst the 
trees were a far lesser kingdom than the one he 
represented. 
He was proud to be of the Draken kingdom. The 
Orken kingdom that reigned over those who were 
loyal with a strong and fierce grasp. Their warriors 

 
 26 
were always clad in tough metal armour, wielding 
heavy axes that could easily break any foe. And their 
king was stronger and mightier than any living orken. 
The tales tell he crushed the skull of his older kin, a 
fellow offspring of those who sired him, when he was 
a mere orkling, not three years of age. Bred for war 
and a seemingly perfect leader, Kul’drak and his army 
were undefeated. This filled Ful with the fire of pride; 
it burned fiercely in his chest. Long ago, there were 
tales told of the Orken having a literal fire ablaze 
within their body for their fierceness and ferocity. He 
felt it in his eyes as he watched his enemy burst 
through the treeline. 
A far lesser Orken kingdom they were, indeed. 
The Hagronen kingdom survived in a Forest north of 
the Valley, called Fal’kir. The superstitions of the 
Orken tell all creatures in the woods are deadly and 
could kill even the most powerful of kings. The 
hagronen berserkers, however, eat the creatures and 
all those who enter the forest. With no laws, no 
honour, no armour, and no weapons; these ruthless 
warriors surged across the Valley toward the Draken. 
Ful and his army had stood on the cusp of the 
grand Valley for almost half a day. Their intent was to 
intrigue their foe into engaging them in battle on the 
rocks of the Valley rather than in the unknown and 
thick terrain of the Forest beyond. Their goal had 

 
 27 
been achieved, and as Ful confidently believed, their 
victory was soon to be as well. The tree line of the 
Forest had been lost in prior years and no warriors 
were recovered. Once there were structures to house 
and defend, then used for kindling, the Draken were 
expelled from the Forest and even the Valley, which 
offered the defence of far sight and ambush against 
eastern kingdoms. Thus, the present battle was of 
great importance and would be fought valiantly. 
A roar left the warrior once again. Ful lifted his 
weapon toward his enemy: a large axe, designed for 
all forms of destruction. He charged forward to 
engage in battle. His fellow draken followed closely 
behind him. With a killing rage, he leapt into the 
crowd of berserkers and with one swing of his 
weapon, sent many to the ground. 
The two forces collided aggressively. The sound 
of flesh being slashed by axes and torn by hands filled 
the air. No distinct duel between two orken could be 
heard, rather, all the noise merged into one sound: the 
sound of battle. Ful listened to it carefully as he 
hacked his way through the swarm of hagronen. 
A few minutes into the battle, Ful raised his axe 
against a charging hagronen. He swung harshly 
toward the ground, with the hagronen in his axe’s 
path. However, despite the gaping wound in his chest 
caused by Ful’s axe, the hagronen leapt onto Ful. The 

 
 28 
strength of that orken was incredible and Ful was 
taken aback by his resilience. Two large red hands, 
with distinct black markings on them, took hold of 
Ful’s head and smashed it against the Valley’s rocky 
floor. As Ful lay still and concussed on the ground, 
that hagronen rushed on to attack another draken. 
The two armies fought for quite some time. By 
the end, hundreds of orken were dead. But, contrary 
to expectation of skill, ability, and terrain; the 
Hagronen overpowered the Draken and won the 
battle. Their stored angst and ferocity came upon the 
battlefield to defend their captured Valley and their 
way of life. It would be historically noted by the other 
tetrarchs that the Draken were becoming lesser in 
prowess and the Hagronen threat increased. That 
battle was one of the few times the Hagronen 
kingdom had, led by their king, Kil’hagron, won an 
organized battle against another Orken kingdom. It 
was also a devastating loss for the Draken kingdom, 
who had failed to regain Fal’kir and Kal’ka. 
  
*** 
  
The great King Kul’drak sat on his throne carved 
from a single stone and decorated with various 
weapons and skulls of all sorts. The throne, from top 
to bottom, ranged fifteen feet tall. Down the long, 

 
 29 
dark steps from this great throne knelt the 
commander of the Draken army: Ful’kag. He knelt on 
a wide patch of stone, serving as a walkway from the 
entrance to the throne. The walkway was in between 
two chasms that led down to a dark pit. The throne 
room was a grand, circular hall. The king’s throne sat 
in the middle like an island, while the Elders of the 
Draken kingdom sat on balconies, each lit by a fire 
signifying that elder’s presence, forming a perimeter 
around the room. There were two guards at the base 
of the throne, and two at the entrance. 
With his head bowed, sweat mixed with blood 
dripping from his forehead, Ful told his king 
something no orken in his kingdom had ever 
reported. 
“Madness!” the king exclaimed in the Orken 
language, his red skin burning with rage. “You were 
defeated?” He stood, the tips of his sharp horns 
almost reaching the top of the throne. 
“Kill this failure!” he roared to the two guards at 
the base of the throne. The elders gasped and the two 
guards hesitated for a brief moment. They prepared 
themselves for the slaying of their commander, whom 
they revered and respected. Ful looked up at them and 
nodded, indicating his acceptance of his fate. Merely 
seconds later, the two orken stepped forward raising 
their axes. 

 
 30 
The king roared again and jumped down the 
steps. In one swift, yet brutal moment, he seized the 
two guards by their heads and crushed them in 
between his massive hands and the cold floor. He 
then, whilst perfecting his posture, hoisted Ful off the 
ground by his neck. The king stood there, surrounded 
by anxious orken who had not known fear outside of 
the great Kul’drak for some time. 
“How…” he began in his deep, thundering voice, 
“did you, my greatest warrior, the only one I could 
ever see succeeding me as chief, fail?” He gazed into 
the eyes of his loyal commander with burning rage 
and desperate confusion. 
“My great king,” Ful began in reply, squeezing the 
words out of his collapsing throat, “they were unlike 
any foe I have faced.” 
The king released his grip, causing Ful to fall three 
feet to the ground. He steadied himself and stood 
before his king. 
“How?” the king asked, turning away from his 
soldier. “What made those forest-dwellers different?” 
“My great king, as you know, in the past we have 
crushed the Hagronen swiftly and with very little loss. 
They fight like pathetic orklings, without armour or 
weapon. However, my great king, this time they had 
great strength.” He paused, recalling the battle and his 
fallen troops. “They tore the limbs off my draken and 

 
 31 
bit into them like animals. At first, it seemed as 
though we had the advantage and the victory; I can 
recall ten orken I had brought to the ground with my 
axe within the first few seconds. Yet, the Hagronen 
rose from the ground and…” He stopped. “My great 
king… Their wounds healed moments after I made 
them.” 
Kul’drak paused for a moment. “This report,” the 
king rumbled, “is disturbing… But it will not strike 
fear in the heart of your great king, Kul’drak!” He 
turned to Ful and seized him by the throat again. 
“Your failure,” the king screamed, “is unacceptable!” 
The king pulled Ful closer and whispered: “I am sorry, 
Ful.” 
The great King Kul’drak threw his warrior into 
the chasm plunging from his throne room. Ful fell for 
a few moments before his body disappeared into the 
darkness. 
“Elders of the Draken!” The king stood tall with 
his arms raised. “You have besieged me for many 
moons to rid the Forest of Fal’kir of the Hagronen 
kingdom and to reclaim those woods as mine.” He 
lowered his arms and paced slowly. “As you have 
heard just now, my army was unable to defeat these 
forest-dwelling orken. Thus, I shall march to the 
woods of Fal’kir in three nights. And I will return with 
the head of Kil’hagron, the defective orken who has 

 
 32 
made for himself a rival kingdom.” He stopped and 
looked at the two bodies before him. “I also require 
new guards.” 
“My great and powerful king, may your kingdom 
be everlasting,” spoke an orken female seated on an 
elder’s balcony. “Are you not leery of their new-found 
power? They shall surely hear the clanking armour 
from your warriors and strike you dead in the Forest!” 
The surrounding elders gasped and roared in 
disbelief. They turned to their king, expecting a death 
sentence for the blasphemous suggestion. 
“The great Kul’drak fears nothing!” the king 
shouted in response. “I intend to travel into the 
Forest alone. I do not need an army to defeat those 
lars!” He glared at the orken female. “If, as you 
suggest, I do fail and am not able to bring back the 
head of Kil’hagron, I will present your head before 
this council!” He turned toward the door and 
marched forward. 
“Dismissed!” he roared as he smashed the doors 
open with his fists. He exited the chamber; unaware it 
would have been the last time he sat on his throne. 
  
*** 
  
The room was dark and cold. Ful’kag lay 
completely still in a shallow body of water, about five 

 
 33 
feet in depth. His head rested against the sharp, rocky 
wall. His breaths were slow. He could feel a throbbing 
sensation run through his leg as streams of agony 
flowed through his body. It had only been a few hours 
since his great king, Kul’drak, threw him into the pit 
he lay in. Ful presumed it was to his death, however, 
despite his severe pain, he was alive. 
A loud sound echoed through the bottom of the 
pit. It was as if a large door had been unlocked. Ful 
stared at the wall as it slowly creaked open. The light 
cast from the other room nearly blinded the orken. 
He turned his head away and covered his eyes with his 
weak arm. He looked again as the light dimmed and 
saw a large silhouette breaking the casting light. It was 
clearly of an orken. The orken was tall and large. The 
horns on his head were nearly a foot long and stuck 
out in all directions upward. Ful recognized him 
immediately; it was his king. Ful struggled to stand, 
the water made it easier for him as it bore some of his 
weight. He slammed his right fist against his chest and 
bowed his head. 
“My gr—” his voice cracked as he attempted to 
speak. “My great king,” he said, nearly choking. He 
felt a different kind of fire in his chest. It flared not 
from pride, rather, from agony. He felt as if a large 
critter was inside his lungs attempting to tear its way 

 
 34 
out. He coughed loudly, his black blood spewing into 
the water. 
“Rest, warrior,” Kul’drak said insistently. “I need 
you to be in the best of strength. For in three nights, 
you and I shall march upon the Forest of Fal’kir and 
claim it as ours. Once we control its borders, the 
centre of Kru’aka will be ours and the other Orken 
kingdoms will be easier to wage this war against. From 
there, we may reclaim my kingdom with ease,” he said 
with confidence. 
“My great king,” Ful began, the pain still flowing 
through him. “I deserve death. Do not grace me with 
this mission. Finish what you started and take my 
head,” he said with his head still bowed. 
“No greater warrior has the Draken kingdom 
than it has in you, Ful’kag. You have ascended to the 
highest rank, devoured all your enemies, and fought 
bravely for your king. I will not allow one failure to 
stain your record.” 
“I,” Ful began with confusion, “I do not 
understand, my great king. Earlier you declared my 
failure to be without excuse and you sentenced me to 
death, as I should be; for I have survived a lost battle. 
What will you gain from sparing my life, and deceiving 
the Elders of the Draken?” Ful coughed violently 
again. 

 
 35 
“Reputation, my great commander,” Kul said, 
turning around to face the open door behind him. 
“All orken must fear me, their king. If I spare the life 
of a warrior, even if you are the commander, that fear 
would diminish and my rule would come to an end.” 
“Then do not spare me!” Ful yelled in reply. The 
action caused his lungs to cease, and he fell into the 
water. Kul stepped into the water and hoisted his 
soldier out of the pool. Ful coughed out even more 
blood than before. 
“Your wounds will heal,” Kul began. “Stay here 
and rest. In three nights, I will come for you again and 
we shall march upon the Forest. Take off this heavy 
armour, it will allow your muscles to heal with more 
haste.” The king stood and walked out of the room, 
closing the large door behind him. 
Ful lay completely still in the shallow body of 
water. His head rested against the sharp, rocky wall. 
His breaths were slow. The pain he felt was so great 
it kept his mind off his dire confusion. 
  
*** 
 
The female orken who was on an elder’s balcony, 
and spoke against the king’s capability, walked slowly 
through the great Orken city of Krag-Ma’ak. She 
stepped along the high walls, surrounding the moonlit 

 
 36 
city. Through the barracks, inspecting hundreds of 
young orken males desperately training to serve their 
king in battle. Finally, she reached the Hall of 
Legends, a grand room, ranging one hundred feet in 
height, six hundred in length and three hundred in 
width. The Hall had massive pillars running all around 
it. Along the walls were statues of the great Orken 
kings from the past. 
She stopped walking. “This was the capital city for 
all orken in the whole land of Kru’aka,” she began 
saying aloud. “A rallying point for all to look upon. 
And the great kings of old ruled a united kingdom, the 
greatest in the history of the world of Teros. And 
now, since the division, this great city belongs to one 
Orken kingdom: your kingdom, Kul.” 
Kul’drak stepped out from the shadow of one of 
the pillars. “Your words should be watched. They 
could have meant the death of you earlier today,” the 
king said in an irritated tone. 
The female sharply turned to face the king. She 
was much shorter than the king and like all other 
orken was bald. However, unlike most mature orken, 
she lacked horns on her head and her skin was a very 
pale red. “And you!” she exclaimed. “Your words 
should be watched as well!” she yelled, her voice 
echoing through the Hall. She calmed herself before 
speaking further. The king shifted his stance, slightly 

 
 37 
stooping his head. “Do you not remember who made 
you king?” she asked. “It was I! You will not threaten 
me the way you did in the throne room. I will not 
stand for such speech.” She lifted her head and turned 
back to the statue she looked at before. 
“My apologies,” Kul’drak said humbly. “I shall 
concede to your demand if you hear mine: question 
not my rulings when the Elders are in session. No 
orken can ever speak down to the king or his decrees 
in front of the leaders of the Draken,” he said in reply. 
“I agree. Your sovereignty is above my immediate 
opinion,” she said. “You have my apologies, my great 
king. However, on the matter of my opinion: I do not 
see the sense in going to Kil’hagron. He is a berserker 
and has denounced you as his king, thinking of 
himself as a worthy rival of your command. He has 
now created a kingdom for himself and refused to 
hear our demand to vacate Fal’kir’s coast,” she turned 
back to face the king. 
Only a few days prior, she had suggested to 
Kul’drak that he send forth word to the Hagronen 
that their growing presence in the southern regions of 
the Forest was not to be tolerated by the Draken. 
There had been no reply and thus the Draken army 
set out to stand at Kal’ka and coerce the Hagronen to 
fight. The Draken did not know of how deep the 
Hagronen had developed into Fal’kir, but they 

 
 38 
assumed, as the depths of the Forest were so hostile, 
that their encampments were limited to the coastal 
regions of Fal’kir. This, however, presented the 
Draken with the disadvantage of not being able to 
attack the other two kingdoms in Kru’aka as easily; 
Fal’kir lay in the central northern region, therefore, it 
provided a military advantage to the kingdom that 
dominated it. 
“All that transpired in the Valley of Kal’ka,” she 
began, “is a tragedy to this great kingdom’s 
reputation. Do not try and reason with Kil’hagron. He 
has brought dishonour to your army and to you. If 
you are to go, kill him swiftly in the night,” she said in 
a demanding tone. 
“Did you not hear me in the chamber?” Kul’drak 
began in reply. “Did I not say I would bring his head 
before the council?” 
“Kul…” she began, looking up at him. “I know 
you and I know you mean to speak with him and try 
to convince him to vacate the Forest willingly. I assure 
you Kul: he will not. He will kill you if given the 
chance. I dare not see this fate fall upon you.” 
Kul’drak, the great king, stepped forward, passing 
her. He stood before the statue, almost making eye 
contact with the stone figure. He was a large orken, 
clad in full iron armour, wielding a massive axe. 

 
 39 
“I wish he were here to guide me,” Kul’drak said. 
“No king of the Orken has had his kingdom divided. 
There has always been one king and one order. Now, 
in this sovereign land, there are four orken kings. If 
he were here, he would grant me the wisdom to 
triumph over this time and unite the Orken again.” 
“Kul,” the female orken began, “the time for a 
unified Kru’aka is over. The time for a Draken 
kingdom to destroy all its rivals has come. Crush the 
other three usurpers, who have sworn themselves 
your enemies, before they march against these walls 
and crush you. And perhaps other enemies will hear 
of your defeat and come against us. Imagine a world 
where the very power of the Orken is looked down 
upon? Could you allow such a tragic end to the fearful 
reign of the Orken? Could you allow any creature in 
Teros to doubt the fear that has been instilled within 
them for countless ages?” she asked, staring at the 
kings back. She looked beyond him to the statue. 
“Your father is gone. And the only wisdom he would 
give you is this;” Kul’drak turned around and faced 
her, “fight,” she said, “kill, destroy, and crush all those 
who oppose you. You have the power.” 
She turned around and began to walk away. She 
stopped and turned her head back to the king. “Do 
you understand what you have to do, Kul?” 

 
 40 
“Yes…” the great and mighty King Kul’drak 
replied. “I understand, mother.” 

 
41 
II 
THE DARKNESS OF NIGHT HOVERED 
over the land of Kru’aka. A muscular stag-like 
creature, referred to as a truka by the Orken, stalked 
through the dark, moonlit Forest of Fal’kir. Its long 
body slowly moved forward as it gazed upon its prey: 
a small animal with white fur crouched by a red plant 
growing from the forest floor. It ate, completely 
unaware of the truka’s plan to kill it. The truka 
opened its mouth revealing long, blood-stained 
fangs. It crouched on its hind legs, readying itself for 
the pounce. A truka is capable of running faster than 
any other forest-dwelling animal and can jump great 
distances. Just before the truka leapt for its prey, it 
dropped to the forest floor, completely limp. The 
truka lay still on the ground breathing slowly, each 
breath getting further from the next. A large black 
insect, about a foot in length, sat still on the truka’s 
stomach. 

 
 42 
That insect was not known to any other kingdom 
except the Hagronen kingdom. They did not have a 
name for this creature, but it was one of the most 
dangerous in the Forest. Disguised in the shadows, 
this creature would wait until its prey, usually the 
larger animals in Fal’kir, walked into its view. As soon 
as it did, the insect leapt forward at an untraceable 
speed and lodged its venom-coated claws into the 
stomach of the prey, paralyzing it instantly. That then 
allowed the insect to siphon the still active blood from 
the prey, into its own body. 
Just before the insect had finished siphoning the 
now dead truka’s blood, a large red hand, with black 
markings, quickly grabbed the insect. The orken, 
before allowing the insect any time to react, bit the 
creature’s head off. He then put the rest of the insect 
into his mouth and chewed it vigorously before 
swallowing. 
That orken was around eleven feet tall, with four 
stubs of bone on his forehead. They were what 
remained of his horns, all broken during battles with 
other orken. His most recent battle had led him to an 
altercation with Ful’kag of the Draken kingdom. His 
newly found strength had allowed him to be 
victorious over Ful. This seasoned warrior was loyal, 
as much as he was willing to be, to his king, 
Kil’hagron. 

 
 43 
He picked up the truka carcass and continued his 
journey through the woods. About an hour later, still 
under the cover of night, he approached his 
encampment. Unlike the other Orken kingdoms, the 
Hagronen kingdom did not have a great city built of 
iron and stone. The Hagronen lived simply in the 
forest, without structures or shelters. The orklings 
were, more recently, never given names and they were 
not bound by any laws, save for the following of their 
king. All orken, despite their bloodthirsty and war-
driven predisposition, were not selfish and knew 
nothing of greed nor jealousy. This contributed to 
their being the perfect warrior. Their emotion was 
war; they lived for it and trained every day. 
That hagronen, who fought Ful’kag, had sired 
eighteen orklings with three different mates in his 
time. The Orken have no concept of love, the closest 
they can achieve is loyalty. An orkling will remain loyal 
to its parents until another calls for it: a king or a 
captain. Once their loyalty is given to this new 
prospect, all ties to the ones who sired them, are cut. 
Two orken will come together and remain mates until 
a death occurs, at that time it is in their nature and 
instinct to source another mate through which they 
may have strong offspring. That hagronen’s first mate 
was killed by one of his offspring close to two 
hundred years ago. The thought of this did not disturb 

 
 44 
the hagronen; his loyalty was not with his previous 
mate, nor his current one. It was with his king. His 
chief, the ever-living Kil’hagron. A berserker and 
brute of an orken; incapable of dying, or so he 
believed. Whatever Kil’hagron commanded, that 
hagronen would be honoured to obey, as would all 
hagronen living in the Forest of Fal’kir. 
The hagronen stepped into his camp, immediately 
being sized by other hagronen males. One, a massive 
orken with dark red skin, sat on a fallen tree, gazing 
intensely. The hagronen turned his gaze away, hoping 
to avoid conflict. Not for the reason of fear, nor from 
the thought of failure. He carried news he wished to 
give to his king, a fight to the death with one of his 
fellow hagronen would only slow down the delivery. 
Suddenly his thoughts and reasoning for avoiding 
combat changed. He dropped the truka and charged 
toward the seated orken. He violently roared as he 
leapt through the air toward his foe. With his knee 
landing on the other hagronen’s face, he grabbed his 
foe’s head with his strong hands. The two struck the 
forest floor abruptly and the hagronen, who had 
battled Ful’kag, landed on his feet and instantly took 
hold of his grounded challenge. He hoisted him 
upward and swung him back down toward the fallen 
tree on which the other orken had sat. A red film 
covered his eyes as he slammed the orken’s head 

 
 45 
against the fallen tree. The other orken now lay still 
on the ground, breathing very slowly. The hagronen 
stood, hunched over and panting. He shook his head 
and the red film disappeared. He looked around and 
realized what had happened. 
He saw his mate and his three orklings not far 
from him. He quickly grabbed the truka again and 
approached his group of orken swiftly and tossed the 
truka on the ground. “Eat,” he grunted. The three 
orklings pounced on the corpse and tore into it. They 
tore off massive chunks of flesh with their teeth and 
ate it vigorously. 
The hagronen walked away from them and made 
his way into the woods again. It was only a few 
minutes before he reached the king’s encampment. It 
was a clearing in the Forest with a large fire in the 
middle. Dozens of massive hagronen warriors filled 
the clearing. The hagronen passed through them all, 
being recognized as a close servant to the king. The 
hagronen approached the tent that was set up at the 
end of the clearing. 
“My king,” the hagronen began, “two draken are 
approaching the Forest. It is very likely they have 
already breached our borders. One bears the 
resemblance of the weak king, Kul’dr—” 
Before he could finish his statement, the tent flap 
was lifted by a massive red arm, painted with dark sap: 

 
 46 
the substance used to create the markings all 
hagronen bore on their hands and forearms. The 
hagronen dropped down on one knee and bowed his 
head. A large orken stepped out from the tent and 
stood before the hagronen. 
“At last,” Kil’hagron, the king of the Hagronen, 
said with a grin. 
 
*** 
 
Kul’drak and Ful’kag walked silently among the 
dark trees. The snow, through which they had 
previously wade, tapered off as they found shelter 
among the thick boundary of trees. Ful attempted to 
walk swiftly, limping as he went. A bone in his leg had 
cracked when he plummeted to the bottom of the pit 
below his king’s island throne. It caused him great 
pain and he was unsure if the pain would ever cease. 
Ful, unlike every day before, was not adorned 
with metal armour. He had only a few patches of 
leather armour covering his shoulders and chest. The 
rest of his body was covered in a cloth tunic and 
trousers. This made him feel exposed. Taking the 
blow of a weapon never concerned him before, now 
he would need to take caution when entering a battle. 
Fear was never something to take hold of any orken. 
However, older orken develop, through many years 

 
 47 
of experience and changes of their loyalty, a sense of 
caution. This allows elders to have an unbiased 
approach to the king’s commands and offer sound 
advice, although never an objection. 
Ful was at an age where wisdom and the sense of 
caution began to accompany the boldness that would 
lead him to die for his king, Kul’drak being the second 
king he had been loyal to. 
Ful, at least, held firmly to his large axe. He had 
every intention of using it when the opportunity 
arose. His confusion about the king’s behaviour in 
letting him live was clouded by the thrill of facing the 
Hagronen once again. 
“My wish is for all of us to depart without the 
shed of blood,” Kul’drak whispered to Ful, as if aware 
of his thoughts. 
“I am not afraid of either outcome, my king,” Ful 
replied in truth. 
The king laughed shortly, an uncommon thing for 
an orken to do. “I know you have not a drop of fear 
in your heart. I will give Kil’hagron one final 
opportunity to clear the southern regions of Fal’kir of 
his orken. I know he will hear me, but only if it was I 
who came into his presence.” 
“My king,” Ful began in reply, “if I may offer my 
opinion: why give him the opportunity? Why not 

 
 48 
strike him down? He is a lesser king with a lesser 
kingdom.” 
“I am bound to Kil’hagron in a way I cannot 
expect you to understand,” the king said, walking 
ahead of Ful. 
The confusion flooded Ful’s mind once again. He 
quickly dismissed it in order to maintain his focus. 
The two orken walked through the Forest for not 
even a quarter of an hour before reaching the 
Hagronen camp. Most of the Hagronen lived on the 
outskirts of the Forest, being ready for battle at any 
moment. However, there were a few tribes that dwelt 
deep within the woods. Many of them had not been 
seen for ages. 
Kul’drak and Ful came upon a large clearing, one 
of many wherein the majority of the Hagronen army 
dwelt. 
As soon as the two draken entered the fire-lit 
clearing, dozens of hagronen stood. They knew who 
that was: the great king of the Draken kingdom. With 
this knowledge, all the hagronen remained dormant as 
the two draken walked through the camp. A young 
female orken stood only a few feet from Kul’drak. 
“You!” he shouted while pointing at the trembling 
female. “Take me to your commander, Kil’hagron,” 
he said fiercely. 

 
 49 
She nodded, keeping her head bowed. She was no 
more than eight feet tall. She had small shoulders and 
wore a loose wool dress. She walked in front of the 
two draken as she led them through clearings and 
patches of trees. 
“By the way,” she said still walking forward, “Kil 
is not my commander. He is my king.” 
Ful’kag looked at Kul with surprise. His king 
simply grinned and kept moving forward. 
Finally, they approached a clearing with a large 
fire burning in the centre. There was only one 
hagronen in the clearing; a large male stood by the 
fire, gazing down at the flames. He wore nothing but 
a loincloth wrapped around his waist. He had no 
weapons around him and looked absolutely 
defenceless. Ful knew this was not the truth. He knew 
that hagronen needed only his massive muscles to tear 
through other orken, as he had recently witnessed. 
“Welcome,” he began in a deep, raspy voice, 
turning to face his visitors, “to my kingdom.” The 
large orken spread his arms out boastfully. 
Ful's muscles flexed as he gripped his axe. He 
stared at his foe, the commander of the army whom 
he failed to defeat. Kil’hagron was alone and could 
easily be attacked. He felt the fire in his chest blaze 
and roar as it grew, encouraging him to end his foe. 
Ful, despite his nature, stood still. For there was one 

 
 50 
thing greater than his desire to kill that orken: his 
loyalty to his great king. 
Kul’drak stood, looking at Kil’hagron. Conflict 
filled him as he spoke. “My army is the greatest army 
this land has seen in many ages. How did you, a forest-
dwelling lar, defeat me?” 
Kil'hagron laughed hysterically. “The greatest 
army?” he began loudly. “What defines greatness? 
Weapons? Armour? Numbers?” he questioned, 
“What about immortality? I would say an army that 
could not be killed would be known as the greatest 
army! Ask your failure of a commander why he could 
not defeat me!” the king in the Forest boasted. 
Ful shifted his stance, being filled with dishonour 
and confusion as he heard those words again. 
“I know of what happened,” Kul'drak began, “but 
I know not of how. That is the primary reason for my 
coming.” he said, taking a few steps in front of Ful 
and the young female. 
Kil’hagron closed his eyes slowly and his body 
hunched over revealing a jagged spine. A low growl 
surged from behind his black teeth. He opened his 
eyes and looked at the other orken. His eyes were red, 
instead of the usual black. He crouched down and 
growled even louder. A few moments passed. Kil 
stood up straight, seeming to be well, and opened his 

 
 51 
eyes. They were black. He turned to face the fire again. 
“You mad,” he said. “I not tell you!” 
Kul’drak, 
confused 
by 
his 
mannerisms, 
approached the troubled king. 
“What has happened to you in this Forest?” he 
asked. 
“Is that why you want us to leave?” Kil'hagron 
blurted in reply as he turned to face Kul’drak. “You 
want, we have!” he yelled. “You not take Fal’kir!” He 
screamed, his eyes becoming red again. 
“Brother!” Kul’drak yelled, his voice thundering 
through the trees. Ful grunted in surprise. He stared 
at his king in disbelief, replaying the word in his head: 
brother. 
“What has driven you to this state? Why are you 
frenzied so?” Kul’drak yelled, gazing intently at his 
deranged brother. 
“I not brother!” he yelled in reply. “I King of 
Fal’kir!” Kil’hagron charged Kul’drak. His eyes 
entirely the colour of red. Foam spewed from his 
mouth as he leapt toward his brother. Kul’drak swung 
his arm at Kil’hagron as he was in the air. Hit by Kul’s 
mighty arm, Kil plummeted to the forest floor. 
Kil’hagron writhed on the ground as he attempted to 
bite Kul’drak’s feet. Kul stomped on Kil’s head and 
then knelt down to seize him. He turned the flailing 
Kil’hagron over, grabbed his entire upper body and 

 
 52 
squeezed him close to his own chest. Kul’drak had 
Kil’hagron pinned to the ground, with his face in the 
dirt. 
“Enough, brother!” Kul’drak yelled. The great 
king moved so quickly, Ful did not even have the time 
to react. Kil’hagron slowly calmed down, his 
breathing lessened and his muscles eased. The red 
film over his eyes disappeared once again. 
“Kil,” Kul’drak began, “what illness has 
overtaken you?” 
“The insects…” Kil said, catching his breath. 
“They allow us to heal if we eat them. But when we 
feed, soon after the world becomes red and we lose 
ourselves. And I have consumed this insect for many 
nights now; its effect is staying with me longer and 
with more strength,” he said, closing his eyes, 
breathing heavily through the foam still in his mouth. 
“And even still, the colour of a creature’s red blood 
will fill my sight if I rage or combat.” 
Kul’drak released the strong grasp he held on his 
brother and walked toward the fire. Kil’hagron stood 
up. “You cannot ask me to leave this region of the 
Forest, Kul. My orken will suffer without—” 
Kil’hagron grunted loudly. His sentence was stopped 
due to a severe pain in his back. 
The abrupt halt in his brother’s speech caused Kul 
to turn back and look. He saw Ful holding his axe 

 
 53 
horizontally. The axe head was wedged deep within 
Kil’hagron’s spine. Ful pulled the axe out of his foe 
quickly causing black blood to spew from Kil’s back. 
Kil began to laugh as the wound started to heal. He 
turned to face Ful but before the two saw each other's 
eyes, Ful had swung his axe again. The blade cut 
smoothly through Kil's neck and his head toppled to 
the forest floor. Ful stood staring at the body as it 
soon collapsed to the ground. He looked up and saw 
Kul’drak standing still with a surprised expression on 
his face. Ful straightened his back and put the axe to 
his side. 
The young orken female stood back some ten feet 
from the scene. Her body trembled. She knew little of 
the world and that which she knew, she forgot, and 
that which she remembered, was depraved; yet in one 
moment most of what she did comprehend, changed. 
Her king, the one whom she was loyal to, was dead. 
Loyalty is not something the Orken are trained or 
raised into, it is something that lies deep within them. 
This young female had never killed before, nor had 
she ever felt rage. Her lack of experience with, and 
protection from, war and vengeance caused her to 
look not on Ful with hatred, rather, with admiration. 
He had slain the strongest figure in her life and he 
then had her loyalty. 

 
 54 
Ful stood gazing at Kul’drak as thoughts flooded 
his rage-filled mind: orken abandon the sense of 
loyalty to family when becoming loyal to a new 
commander. No orken could have felt the way the 
king felt. Unless the king, being subject to no one, 
could retain loyalty to his family? But perhaps this 
Kul’drak has compromised what gives the Orken race 
strength. Perhaps this king is not fit for his kingship, 
nor the loyalty of any orken... 
“My great king,” Ful began, “you should strike me 
where I stand for my thoughts betray you.” 
“Of what do you speak?” the king replied staring 
at his brother’s decapitated body. 
“No orken has ever spared the life of an attacker. 
No orken king has spared the life of a commander 
who has failed in battle. And yet you have done both.” 
The king turned away. “Ful,” he began slowly, “I 
felt something I cannot explain. I felt a sense of 
loyalty to Kil, therefore I could not kill him. And I 
could not kill you,” the king said quietly. 
Ful began to breathe heavily, his stomach churned 
and he started to allow his anger to take hold of him. 
“My gr—” Ful stopped himself. “My king,” he 
said, as he witnessed the greatness of Kul'drak fade 
from his mind, “I cannot return to Krag-Ma’ak with 
you,” he said. “I do not understand what madness has 
driven the Orken way from you, and for that, I cannot 

 
 55 
submit to your rule,” Ful said this with great remorse. 
He could feel the fire in his chest weaken. He felt cold 
as he stood before his once-respected king, hoping to 
be killed by him. 
“I had plans to restore you, Ful. I would give you 
a new name and you could ascend to the rank of 
commander once again.” 
“It is not the dishonour of my loss that has driven 
me to desert you. It is my lack of faith in you as my 
king. My lack of faith in you as an orken.” Ful closed 
his eyes, knelt, and presented his neck to Kul’drak. “If 
you have but a spark of the same fire I once felt in my 
chest, do me the honour in executing me,” Ful said 
loudly. 
The young orken female gasped at the sight. She 
realized Ful’s submission to Kul’drak and she 
watched as it drifted away in that cold forest. 
“I will not take your life,” Kul said in protest. “It 
is to my dishonour that I have lost your faith. I am 
lost in my soul. I feel things no orken has felt and I 
have done things no orken has done. I wish you well 
on your journeys. Travel east to the kingdom of 
Gan’marak; you will find a place there. Perhaps Gan 
will be a worthy enough king for your loyalty. And if 
not with him, go to your former commander, Dal. 
Although he is said to have left our lands long ago.” 

 
 56 
Ful felt cold at that moment. He knelt by 
Kil’hagron’s body, completely stiff. 
“Leave, my old companion,” Kul’drak said. “Take 
the female with you; for no orken within Fal’kir will 
survive the night.” 
In the Orken culture, if an orken doubted his 
king’s power, he had the right to challenge the king in 
a duel: a fight to the death. Yet, Ful stayed his weapon. 
He knew his duty and right. He, however, did not 
perform it. Ful stood and turned around to leave the 
Forest. He saw the young female standing in front of 
him, her head bowed. “Come with me,” he said 
shortly. The two of them stepped into the tree line 
and walked into the darkness. 
Kul’drak stood by the fire alone, overlooking his 
brother’s corpse. 
“The insects,” he heard his brother’s voice resound 
in his mind. He turned toward the tent at the back of 
the clearing and approached it and entered. There was 
a table with a map spread across it. A half-eaten truka 
carcass lay on the floor, next to a large wooden cage. 
Kul opened the cage slightly, yet enough to get a 
glimpse of what was inside: dozens of black insects, 
about the size of his hand, wrestled at the bottom of 
the cage. He swiftly reached in and took hold of one. 
It screeched and squirmed as Kul lifted it out of the 
cage. Kul gazed at the hideous insect for a few 

 
 57 
moments before closing his eyes. He opened his 
mouth and ate the insect. Almost immediately he felt 
the effects. The conflict within him disappeared. He 
felt as if his bones had become denser and his muscles 
stronger. He clenched his fist and grinned as he 
opened his eyes. The pain he felt from the loss of his 
brother was gone and all of his thoughts, foreign to 
the orken, vanished. All he saw was red. 
 
*** 
 
Ful and the young female were not even out of 
the Forest before they heard the sound. It was of iron 
meeting flesh, flesh meeting lumber, and lumber 
meeting iron. The sound was filled with grunting, 
screaming, and yelling. The sound had the breaking of 
trees and the breaking of bones. It was not the same 
sound Ful had heard in the Valley of Kal’ka; it was the 
sound of chaos. 

 
58 
III 
THE THRONE ROOM WAS DIMLY LIT BY 
fires burning on four of nine different balconies; only 
a few members of the Council of Elders were present. 
Overlooking the island of rock on which the throne 
sat, the elders studied maps as they kept track of the 
territories their kingdom controlled. Unfortunately, 
the range of the Draken kingdom had been 
decreasing. The loss of the most recent battle in the 
Valley of Kal’ka caused them to lose an influential 
portion of the middle of Kru’aka. It was proven by 
time and record that the Orken kingdom that ruled 
the three central regions of Kru’aka: the Valley of 
Kal’ka, the Forest of Fal’kir and the Hills of Krom, 
was able to confidently declare Kru’aka as theirs. 
Being able to ambush from Fal’kir at any time, having 
the high ground and cover of the hills, and using 
Kal’ka as a strong divider for attacks on Krag-Ma’ak, 
made for easy victories in battle. The elders sighed as 
they grieved losing a place in the centre of Kru’aka, as 

 
 59 
it most likely meant they would not be able to foresee 
an attack from a rival kingdom and may lose their 
great city to those they hated. Their grievance 
vanished quickly. Word of the king’s return was 
sweeping through the streets of Krag-Ma’ak. Soon 
after, all the fires on the balconies were lit and all 
elders present. 
Kul’drak’s mother slowly crept her way onto one 
of the balconies. 
“Jul’drak,” an Orken elder whispered to her, “I 
had not expected to see you again. I presumed you 
had fled the realm in order to avoid the wrath of the 
king.” The elder was close to nine hundred years old. 
He had served as an advisor to Kul’drak’s uncle when 
he had previously been king. At this time, he served 
his king by managing the city and the Draken 
alongside the other elders. 
Jul’drak remained silent, her eyes fixed upon the 
large doors, anxiously waiting for them to burst open. 
She feared her son might not enter through those 
doors. She also feared he would. Moments later the 
doors slowly opened. It was nearly dawn and the black 
sky was beginning to brighten. Snow flew its way into 
the throne room as the doors remained open. 
A tall shadow appeared on the stone walkway that 
led to the throne. It was cast from fires behind him 
and the shadow clearly belonged to King Kul’drak. 

 
 60 
He entered through the doorway and into the throne 
room. The elders quickly scanned his body, being 
filled with wonder as they noticed he was covered in 
blood. The cloth on his body was torn, there was ice 
on his horns, and dirt spread all across his frame. He 
had something in his left hand, which he held close to 
his hip. He stiffened his neck and raised his head to 
look at each elder as he stretched his arm out to 
present the object. The elders gasped as they realized 
what he had returned with. Kul opened his hand and 
Kil’hagron’s head dropped to the floor. Something 
then occurred, which had not happened in a very long 
time. The elders stood on their feet and gave their 
king talo. 
The act of giving talo, translated into the common 
language, was best described as giving someone one's 
approval or gratitude. Often, and in this particular 
instance, talo was expressed by the elders striking 
their hands together repeatedly. Giving talo in such a 
way was invented by the Gizon; a race the Orken 
drove to near extinction some one thousand years 
ago. The Gizon would have referred to what the 
elders did as applauding. 
Kul’drak was taken aback by this response. When 
he entered that room, his intense stance was brought 
on by a whirlwind of emotions raging inside him. 
Guilt, pity, grievance, and shame were among the 

 
 61 
emotions an orken would normally not feel; yet he, 
indeed, had felt. Anger, pride, and courage were 
among the wrestling emotions an orken would feel, 
and the conflicting emotions beat strongly inside 
Kul’s chest. The talo he received caused them to 
quickly vacate his mind. Only pride remained; an 
accumulating amount of it as the elders continued to 
give him talo. 
Jul’drak looked around her, perplexed by the 
scene. She was some six hundred years old and had 
never, not once, witnessed such an expression of talo. 
Many of the elders, however, had. Some eight 
hundred, some nine hundred years of age, the elders 
had gained their titles, not from their status amongst 
the Orken, rather, from their age. An orken living 
beyond three hundred years of age was unusual. 
Achieving nine hundred was all the more rare. None 
present had seen a gizon, but the memories and tales 
of them were still very active when these select elders 
were orklings. 
The elders stood in unison giving that rare 
expression of talo. This was brought on by a deep 
emotion: pride. That emotion brought forth the 
memory of that expression, thus they gave it to their 
king, Kul’drak. They too, as the king had, felt pride. 
They were proud, not of their king but to be under 
the king’s great rule. 

 
 62 
“Hail, the mighty Kul’drak!” one of the elders 
shouted. 
“The greatest living Orken king!” another 
cheered. 
“May his kingdom be everlasting!” yet another 
elder exclaimed. 
“Defeater of his enemies, and slayer of the weak,” 
the elder, whom Jul’drak had sat with, said. His speech 
brought silence to the room as all longed to hear what 
he, a highly revered orken, had to say. “You have, yet 
again, proven your kingship over us. You have 
protected our borders and increased our lands. You 
have our loyalty!” The elders began applauding again. 
“You have our axes!” he yelled as the applause filled 
the room. “You have our lives!” the revered elder 
yelled in finality and let out a roar. 
Kul’drak stood still, recalling his slaughter in 
Fal’kir. He was torn into, bitten, scratched, and hit 
with logs more than he could ever have imagined. 
And yet he sustained no injuries. The blood dripping 
from his hands and running down his body was not 
his own. He recalled what Kil’hagron had told him 
about the insect. The previous night had proven its 
validity; the consumption of the insect brought 
incredible strength and the ability to heal. Only by 
being beheaded, did the Hagronen, who also 
consumed the insect, perish. And for Kul’drak, it also 

 
 63 
allowed him to have his mind cleared of all his 
troubles and emotional wrestling. He was an orken, 
driven by rage and ready to kill, with nothing to stop 
him. 
“This is my victory!” the king shouted boastfully, 
silencing the applauding elders. “I alone brought the 
Hagronen to their knees and ended their pitiful 
kingdom. Too long have we been carefully waging our 
wars against our foe.” He slowly paced along the 
walkway glaring at each elder as he spoke, never 
stepping onto the throne. “Considering borders, 
consulting maps, taking censuses of our troops: 
vanity!” He yelled so loud the flames on the balconies 
flickered. 
His voice rang throughout the room and down 
the dark pit below the throne. “We are the strongest 
kingdom in all of Kru’aka! I am the strongest king in 
these lands! I am declaring a state of total war against 
all surrounding nations! We will attack the Geerum 
first. Elder Kag’jun!” The king turned toward a 
balcony, on it was the highly revered elder who had 
just previously addressed Kul’s victory. “Your age has 
not deterred your ferocity in battle. I will see that 
power unleashed. March north and begin an assault 
on the Geerum’s border immediately. We will storm 
their mountainous stronghold and destroy those who 

 
 64 
have opposed the Orken rule and shared our land for 
far too many years.” 
“Yes, my great king,” Kag’jun replied. 
“You are dismissed, Kag!” the king stated loudly. 
“I will convene with you in the War Hall shortly.” 
Kag turned around and exited the balcony 
immediately. Jul’drak remained on the balcony, her 
gaze fixed on the king. Kul’drak looked at her shortly, 
he knew of her disapproval; however, that time he did 
not care for it. 
“The rest of you,” he said resuming his pace and 
address to the remaining eight elders, “send word to 
all those loyal to Kul’drak: their time to fight for their 
king has come.” 
“My great king,” another elder began, “do you 
mean to involve orken who are not members of the 
Draken army in this battle?” 
The king met the sight of the elder. He grinned as 
he began. “Every orken capable of wielding an axe 
will fight. Females and orklings too. You Elders have 
sat here, all these two hundred years, plotting and 
planning on how to preserve the kingdom’s way, 
whilst those who have sworn themselves our enemies 
have been allowed to establish themselves! I am doing 
what I should have done long ago when I first became 
king. I will personally kill the king of the Geerum.” 

 
 65 
The king felt a hot flame burn in his chest as he 
spoke. “In fact,” he began again, “this Council has 
done nothing to bring us forward in this time of war. 
You have acted as if we are not at war! I hereby 
disband this Council until all those who live in our 
lands, and are not subject to my rule, are dead!” The 
king roared in triumph and finality. 
The elders gasped in disbelief. The Draken 
kingdom, even before Kul had become its king, had 
never known a time without the Council of Elders. 
“Go!” the king yelled. “Reclaim our lands and 
make known to all draken that we are at war!” 
Kul’drak marched toward the doors and shoved them 
open. He walked tall into the icy winds that blew 
about. The doors did not shut, and snow poured onto 
the walkway. The wind rushed in and the fires on the 
elders’ balconies, lighting the grand room, went out. 
 
*** 
 
It was an early morning on one of the final days 
in winter, the season referred to by the Orken as the 
season of ice. Every tree was whitened with frost and 
the leaves on the ground were a colourless grey, stung 
by the cold night they previously endured. Snow 
heaped up against every boulder and the Hills of 
Krom were laden with layers of white. Beyond the icy 

 
 66 
clouds, shone a grand sun, its heat barely giving 
warmth to the orken female travelling with Ful’kag. 
She shivered violently and slowly walked behind her 
leader. 
Ful felt the cold as well. Under normal 
circumstances, the stinging chill of the wind would 
offer him no discomfort. That prideful fire within his 
chest had always kept him ablaze with courage. 
However, since his loyalty was shattered in the Forest 
of Fal’kir, that flame had diminished, and the cold had 
made itself known to him. 
The two orken had been walking eastward since 
they left the Forest. Ful’s limp, caused by the fall that 
he presumed would kill him, seemed to have faded. 
He was evenly distributing his weight amongst both 
legs and no longer felt the pain in each step. If Ful had 
thought of it, he would speculate the lack of pain was 
from his leg being partly frozen due to the severe cold 
during their walk at night. Since the beginning of their 
trek, they had not spoken a word to one another. 
Suddenly, the young female stumbled to her 
knees, gasping for air. 
“Hunger…” she mumbled with a small, weak 
voice. 
Ful turned around and looked at the female. She 
was small to him and had very little muscle. Ful 
guessed her age to be near twenty years; merely 

 
 67 
nothing compared his three hundred. He scanned the 
immediate area for a place to rest. He saw a large grey 
tree standing atop a small hill. A small series of large 
rocks formed a mound at the foot of the hill. The tree 
swayed in the direction of the pile of rocks, proving 
to Ful the rocks would give shelter from the wind. 
“This way,” he said shortly. He began walking 
toward the tree. However, he did not hear the sound 
of the young female's feet pressing into the snow 
behind him. He turned his head and noticed she was 
still kneeling in the snow, shivering. Her small red 
hands tightly clasped her shoulders. He noticed the 
black markings that she bore, putting a distasteful 
feeling in his mind as he recalled her origins. She had 
grown up in the Forest where there was always a fire 
nearby to offer warmth. And unlike Ful once had, she 
had not the passionate flame inside her chest to offer 
her any sense of warmth. 
Ful stepped toward her and knelt on one knee 
beside her, his massive frame encompassing hers as 
he hoisted her from the snow-laden ground with his 
arms. He carried her to the pile of rocks and placed 
her on one of the larger boulders. He knew that all the 
lumber he could possibly find near them would be 
frozen and beyond the ability to burn. He climbed the 
rocks and reached the top of the hill. The tree stood 
next to him, five times his size. He took hold of its 

 
 68 
branches and pulled himself up. He climbed the trunk 
of the tree in an attempt to gauge the landscape ahead. 
Beyond a vast number of hills, the snow seemed to 
taper off. He could see a settlement of some sort too. 
Tents and fires littered across a grassy plain. And in 
the far distance, far enough he could barely see the 
form of it, lay his supposed destination: the city of 
Maraka. 
In the orken language, maraka, translated best into 
the common tongue, meant refuge or spared. The city 
was certainly not as grand as Krag-Ma’ak. It seemed 
to Ful, although the distance could not give him 
assurance, to be less than a third of the size. He 
grunted. He was still filled with regret from Fal’kir and 
he knew not of what he would gain from joining that 
lesser kingdom. He simply knew not of how to 
proceed. For most of his life, his loyalty was pledged 
to Kul’drak, and before him, it was Dal’drak, presently 
called Dal’torr: Kul’s kin and the former commander 
of the Draken army. Ful had thought perhaps Dal was 
better to go to, for he knew him well and better than 
Gan’marak. Yet Dal had usurped from Kul’drak and 
Ful had not departed with him all those years ago. Ful 
knew not of any bitterness held toward him for not 
choosing to follow Dal unto his new kingdom. 
Perhaps death would await him, or a kind of shame 
an orken could not fathom nor describe.  

 
 69 
Thus, presently in those icy hills, his loyalty lay 
with no orken. He felt lost and purposeless and an 
unsurety that could not be cured. He looked down at 
the base of the hill he was on and saw the young orken 
female sitting on the rock. She seemed to be in a 
better state than previous moments. He realized his 
new task, a momentary one, close enough to act upon 
and forget the larger concerns of his life: feeding the 
female. 
Orken males have a tendency to provide 
protection and sustenance for their females and 
orklings. This tendency is commonly present in orken 
males who have chosen a mate; Ful, however, had 
not. He had served in the Draken army relentlessly for 
the majority of his years in maturity. Ful was like most 
other orken: loyal, brutal, and true to his nature even 
if not required of him. 
“We are only an hour’s walk away from a 
settlement,” Ful spouted down to his follower below. 
“You will find food and a fire there.” He jumped off 
the tree, past the pile of rocks, and landed on the 
ground at the foot of the hill. His landing instantly 
reminded him of the brokenness within his leg. He 
could feel all the healing his body had done shatter. 
He winced and grinned his teeth, clamping his jaw 
tightly, as he attempted to mask the pain. 

 
 70 
“Have you a name?” he asked, attempting to 
distract himself from his pain and her from the 
intense hunger and cold she felt. She looked at him 
puzzled, shivering as she sat. 
“Name,” Ful began again. “What is your name?” 
The young female simply shook her bald head and 
kept staring at him in silence. 
“My name is Ful’kag; Ful is my name,” he said 
slowly, flustered and confused. He gestured toward 
himself and then pointed at her. “What is your 
name?” he asked again, hoping the signing would 
help. 
“No,” she said, shaking her head. 
“No? No name?” Ful asked, soon recalling the 
berserk and savage kingdom from whence she came. 
“Lar… I will call you Lar, then.” Ful stepped toward 
her, grabbed her arm and brought her to her feet. He 
started walking in the direction of the settlement he 
saw. Lar was not following him. She had barely the 
strength to stand and no way to communicate with 
him. All she had was her desire to follow him. 
Ful grabbed her by the waist and slung her over 
his shoulder. He marched on, limping with each step, 
knowing once she was fed, he could leave her behind. 
 
*** 
 

 
 71 
Kag’jun walked briskly through the streets of the 
Draken city Krag-Ma’ak, on his way to the War Hall. 
The War Hall was a grand building near the centre of 
Krag-Ma’ak, dedicated to, as its name suggests, war. 
It held several armouries filled with thousands of 
massive axes and fearsome metal armour. It was 
attached to the barracks, where young orken would 
prepare themselves for the glory of battle. The War 
Hall was in the shape of a circle and had a massive 
arena in the centre of it. That arena was used as a place 
for orken to spar and fight in great numbers, often for 
training, and to the death. Surrounding the arena were 
seats, lined on an ascending angle, for orken to 
spectate battles. Behind and above the rows of seats, 
on the north-east side, was a massive room that 
overlooked the arena. This room, called the war 
chamber, was Kag’jun’s destination. All planning, 
mapping, and details pertaining to the Draken’s 
warring took place in that room. Only an elder, a 
captain, the commander of the Draken army, and the 
king could enter this room. As war was the focus and 
crux of the orken lifestyle, the contents of that room 
were sacred to them. 
Kag’jun took the east road from the king’s throne 
room to the War Hall. He was just outside the Hall of 
Legends, merely a few minutes south of the War Hall, 
when he was intercepted by another elder. 

 
 72 
“Hail, Kag’jun,” the elder said. 
“You heard of my task, I have little time to spare, 
Du’kan,” Kag’jun replied shortly. 
Du’kan was an elder who had served Darg’drak, 
Kul’drak’s uncle, along with Kag’jun, as the king’s 
advisor: a prestigious position amongst the elders. 
Du’kan was smaller and younger than Kag. He was 
close to seven and a half centuries old and, some two 
hundred years ago, was demoted from being an elder 
to being a captain in the Draken army, after Kul’drak 
became king. Kul required Du’kan to prove himself 
worthy of being an elder. Thus, fifty years ago, Du’kan 
led his regime of elite warriors into the Valley of 
Kal’ka, which had been heavily populated by Maraken 
forces. He slew all of them, pushing back the Maraken 
territory vastly. That victory caused Du’kan to earn 
respect from Kul’drak, and he returned to his position 
as an elder. 
“I will get to the reason for my speaking with you 
if you follow me, it will only take a moment.” 
Kag’jun reluctantly followed; he was eager to 
fulfill his duty to the king and make ready the plans 
for invading the Geerum border. However, his 
respect for Du’kan gave him the allowance to follow 
him behind a nearby building. 
“I am appreciative of your hearing me,” Du’kan 
said. 

 
 73 
“Speak.” 
“Kag, you are highly revered amongst all draken. 
Many orken within the Draken army have placed their 
loyalty with you. You are well beyond Kul’drak in age 
and might and could easily overthrow him as king.” 
Kag was stunned by Du’s statement. “What is the 
meaning of this?” 
“No king has ever disbanded the Council of 
Elders!” Du’kan shouted at first but quickly lowered 
his voice again. “Kul’drak is making decisions that 
compromise the Orken way. He is marching against 
the Geerum when our kingdom has been weakened 
by the Hagronen.” 
“The Hagronen are dead. Kil’hagron was 
beheaded by the king you so easily are speaking 
treason against. I should kill you where you stand!” 
Kag exclaimed ferociously. 
“The holocaust of the Hagronen is a great victory 
for the Draken and Kul has my respect for that. But 
moving north, to attack an enemy whom we have not 
current strife with, when we ought to focus our 
efforts on reclaiming the centre of Kru’aka, is absurd. 
The king is clearly enraged and has not the ability to 
think about what is best for his orken! The disbanding 
of the Elders gives proof to his madness! Who will 
rule the orken and keep this great city functioning?” 

 
 74 
“This great city will not be populated, nor will 
need ruling,” Kag began in reply. “Do you not recall? 
The king, your king, declared all orken to ready 
themselves for this state of war. All orken; meaning 
we will all bear arms under the leadership of our great 
king and crush our enemies. All of our enemies.” 
“Kag… Why do you not see reason? I have briefly 
spoken with a few of the other elders, and they agree. 
Kil’ron, Dem’ku, Kon’kra, and even Krom’jun are in 
accord with this plea. Challenge the king, kill him, and 
take his place as king of Krag-Ma’ak. Begin a strong 
Junen kingdom.” 
Kag knew he would prosper the kingdom if he 
were at the head. “Du’kan… You remember the great 
King Darg’drak. He remains to be the mightiest orken 
I have known. I sparred with him regularly and was 
never able to defeat him. His kingship was true and 
he was far stronger than I could ever be. Do you 
remember?” 
“I do,” Du’kan replied. 
“Then you would do best to remember that it was 
Kul’drak who killed him. Kul’drak took the throne 
from Darg and became our king. If I could not defeat 
Darg: I certainly could not defeat his killer.” 
“Kul’drak assassinated Darg in the shadows like a 
coward. No orken witnessed the battle. You have 
heard the tales of an assassin running on the rooftops 

 
 75 
of this city. Perhaps Darg’s death was not by the hand 
of Kul but by a mysterious force we have yet to 
confront. Kul could have stepped in and claimed the 
king’s death to have been caused by him.” 
“That orken just slaughtered an entire kingdom. 
Hundreds of enemy orken killed. And Kul had not 
but a scratch on him. He has earned his kingship and 
he will keep it,” Kag’jun replied in finality. He walked 
back onto the road and headed toward the War Hall. 
However, he greatly contemplated Du’s suggestion as 
he walked. 
 

 
76 
 
IV 
THE ICY WINDS THAT SWEPT THROUGH 
the centre of Kru’aka calmed in severity as Ful, 
carrying Lar on his shoulder and struggling to balance 
his own weight due to his injury, made his way 
through the Hills of Krom. 
The Hills were named after a legendary orken: 
Krom’jun. Like most of southern Kru’aka, the region 
was once flat, save for a few slopes and minor inclines. 
In his youth, some eight hundred years ago, Krom led 
a rebellion against Hal’drak, a mighty orken and the 
first of the Draken kings. Krom rivalled Hal’drak in 
strength and vigour. Hal’drak ruled a united Kru’aka. 
Unlike the present time, almost all orken were loyal to 
Hal’drak as their king and he ruled a prosperous 
kingdom from Krag-Ma’ak. Krom attempted to 
challenge Hal’drak’s kingship and called for a fight to 
the death in the arena at the centre of the War Hall. 
That challenge caused outrage amongst all orken in 
the city. Krom was attacked and chased out of the city 

 
 77 
before he could fight Hal’drak. However, despite his 
exile, his desire to overthrow Hal’drak’s reign did not 
stop. He travelled south-east and found that after the 
Valley of Kal’ka, there was a vast plain. This was 
where Krom decided to build. He gathered outcasts, 
rebels, and mercenaries, those who were not loyal to 
Hal’drak, from throughout the land of Kru’aka. He 
piled hundreds of heaps of large stones in the plain. 
However, he piled these rocks to form structures: 
buildings he and his orken could dwell in, yet the 
structures looked simply like mounds of boulders. 
Krom sent spies into Krag-Ma’ak who told tales 
to the Draken of Krom building for himself a fine 
city; one that rivalled the glory of Krag-Ma’ak. This 
rumour spread its way into the throne room and into 
the ears of Hal’drak. The news infuriated him. Hal 
intended on disrupting the building of that rebellious 
city by destroying Krom and his followers. Hal 
assembled a great army of his loyal warriors. His 
orken count was close to thirty-four thousand, 
whereas Krom merely had an army of two thousand. 
However, Hal marched to the plain in hopes of 
crushing his opponent and was, himself, defeated. 
Once Hal’s troops were deep within the hills, 
Krom and his forces attacked. The surprise was great 
and each of Krom’s orken had slain five of Hal’s 
troops before the Draken were able to retaliate. The 

 
 78 
battle went on for two days. Krom’s orken scurried 
their way through the hills; entering and exiting at 
opportune moments, giving them the advantage to 
move through the battlefield, at little risk to 
themselves. The Draken forces dwindled slowly, but 
they dwindled nonetheless. The Draken knew not of 
how many of Krom’s orken there were at the 
beginning of the battle, nor at the end of it. When the 
last enemy fell, only four, aside from Krom himself, 
remained. Hal’drak did not die in the battle but was 
severely wounded and thought to be dead. Due to the 
vast number of orken, Krom never faced Hal in the 
battle and believed him to be dead. The final casualties 
of the battle were: twenty-four thousand draken dead 
and ten thousand wounded. Most of the ten thousand 
eventually found their way back to Krag-Ma’ak, while 
some succumbed to their wounds and bled out over 
the course of a few days. 
Hal found his way back to the city and never 
ventured out to attack Krom again. The news of the 
battle in the Hills of Krom spread throughout 
Kru’aka and Krom’jun became a revered orken. Tales 
were told that Krom commanded an army of one 
hundred thousand elite orken and that was how he 
defeated the Draken army. Krom lived in the Hills for 
many decades after the battle. He intentionally did not 
accumulate another army in order to maintain the 

 
 79 
rumours of him having a great force. As time went on, 
Hal’drak’s kingship was doubted and eventually 
challenged by his own offspring: Kal’drak. Kal 
defeated Hal in a duel in the arena in the city of Krag-
Ma’ak and was made the next king. Kal admired 
Krom and journeyed to the Hills of Krom. He invited 
Krom to return to the orken city and join the Council 
of Elders. 
Ful, formerly being the captain of the Draken 
army, knew Krom’jun well. He revered him and had 
sparred with him on many occasions, however, he had 
never won. As he recalled the history of the Hills 
through which he walked, he spotted the settlement 
he had seen earlier. He was relieved the Maraken did 
not inhabit the Hills at that time; due to his state, he 
may have been killed. Ful was so deep in thought he 
had not noticed he was walking on brown grass. He 
looked behind him, turning slowly so as not to lose 
his balance, and saw that he was well beyond the 
snowy hills and had passed into the eastern region of 
Kru’aka. He frowned. The East had been the 
harbourer of his enemies for a very long time. And 
now, to those he had sworn to fight against, he would 
look for refuge. 
Ful limped his way toward the settlement. The 
sun was sinking behind him and in the sky glimmered 
a pink light, drowning in dark clouds. Ful could see 

 
 80 
movement in the settlement but he could not decide 
what it was from. As Ful closed in on the settlement, 
the movement tapered off and everything became 
still. Ful was then close enough to see the details of 
the settlement. Many small fires burned underneath 
pots of various smelling foods. One of which, he 
recognized and admired as he drew near. Tents 
scattered their way throughout the settlement in a 
seemingly unorganized manner. Ful knelt beside one 
of the fires and placed Lar next to it, her head 
smashing against the ground as he released her. The 
jolt awoke Lar from a slumber brought on by her 
hunger and exhaustion. She shivered violently as the 
fire thawed her icy body. Ful struggled to his feet, 
feeling the sting of his injury. He looked at a tent 
nearby but as soon as his gaze met the door of the 
tent, the ragged structure shifted and the opening was 
closed. Ful felt a chill run from his lower back to his 
neck. He quickly turned to face another tent and 
before the opening was closed, he met the glance of a 
pair of large green eyes. Ful knew immediately these 
creatures were not orken. 
Ful roared in challenge. “Come out!” 
“Yes, master. My apologies, master,” said a small 
voice from behind him. Ful swung around, his fist 
clenched tightly to his axe. He saw before him a small 
greenish-yellow creature kneeling with its head bowed 

 
 81 
to the ground. The creature’s neck swelled and 
expanded, only to quickly deflate while letting out a 
loud croaking sound. Ful recognized this being. It was 
a troagan. 
The Troagan species are small in size, averaging 
around four feet in height. They have a nimble bone 
structure but are covered in fatty flesh. Their strength 
lies within their thick thighs allowing them to quickly 
leap short distances, giving them a speed advantage. 
They have webbed hands and feet, which enable them 
to swim quickly underwater as well. They are 
intelligent creatures but are practically unable to fight. 
Their species has been used for cooking, planting and 
harvesting crops, and gathering materials. 
“Troag! Why are you camped here?” Ful 
demanded. 
“We are your servants, master,” the troagan 
replied seeming to speak the Orken language 
flawlessly. 
“How many are you?” 
“We are many... This pod has close to fifty of us. 
Additionally, there are dozens like it around the city.” 
Ful looked up from the short creature and glanced 
at the city before him. It was small and ragged and 
completely unlike the glory of Krag-Ma’ak. 
“This 
female 
requires 
sustenance,” 
Ful 
demanded. 

 
 82 
The troagan looked down at a limp Lar. “What 
illness has befallen her?” 
“No illness, she froze during the night and I know 
not of when she last ate.” 
The troagan, confused by Ful’s diagnostic, quickly 
scurried toward a large pot resting on hot coals. 
Another troagan, without being spoken to, ran toward 
him with a wooden bowl in hand. The first troagan’s 
two green hands with yellowish palms and webbed 
fingers took hold of the bowl. He then dipped it into 
the pot and scooped up some hot broth. “If you 
could,” the troagan said, gesturing with his head for 
Ful to bring Lar to him. 
Ful carefully balanced his weight as he bent down. 
He grabbed Lar by the arm and dragged her toward 
the troagan. The troagan squat next to Lar and with 
one hand lifted her head and with another, he gently 
poured the broth into Lar’s mouth. A croak left the 
squatting troagan again. The second troagan ran over, 
took the bowl from the first and continued the 
process. The first troagan stood up and stepped 
toward Ful. “Her hands bear the mark of the 
Hagronen, however, you do not,” he said as if asking 
a question. 
“I am from the Draken kingdom. I have come 
seeking refuge amongst the Maraken. Nurse the 
female until she is well and then send her to the city. 

 
 83 
Her fate will be the same as mine, whatever that is,” 
Ful began to walk on toward the city. 
“Master,” the troagan interrupted, “I think our 
meeting is not a coincidence.” Ful turned and met the 
green eyes of the troagan. “If you are not a maraken 
then you will not know the terrible conditions my 
kind are in. We are slaves and have been treated as 
worse. Our kind is not like the Orken; we barely 
survive the winter. As the ice crept its way down from 
the north, we could not perform our duties as well 
and have not been able to meet the quotas Gan’marak 
has placed on us... Please be our protector and guide 
us out of the land of Kru’aka.” 
Ful snarled. “Your cares are not my own!” he 
yelled as he turned toward the city again. “You may 
keep the female lar,” he said in finality. 
 
*** 
 
Kag’jun entered the magnificent War Hall. He 
was met with many bows of respect from training 
orken as he walked swiftly through its corridors. He 
ascended many flights of grand steps on his way to 
the war chamber. Once outside, he was recognized 
immediately by the four guards posted by the large 
metal door. Normally, there would only be two guards 
outside the chamber; the additional two were the 

 
 84 
king’s new personal guards. Kag spotted them 
instantly and found amusement in their nervous state. 
He recalled what happened to the previous two in the 
throne room; he served a fearsome king indeed. 
The guards opened the door and Kag entered the 
chamber. It was a grand room, rivalling that of the 
throne room. The ceiling was close to twice the height 
of any orken and the vast width of the room seemed 
unnecessary when considering its contents. A series 
of shelves ran across one of the walls. The shelves 
contained many scrolls, intentionally picked from the 
city’s library. The scrolls were previous war accounts 
and battle tactics. The Draken frequently referred to 
these scrolls for inspiration. The only other content 
of the large room was a massive table situated deeper 
into the chamber, closer to the window overlooking 
the arena. At the table stood the great King Kul’drak 
peering down at a map spread across the table. 
Another orken stood across from him. That orken 
was a captain in the Draken army and oversaw all 
training and he specialized in military tactics. When he 
saw Kag enter the room, he bowed his horned head. 
“Hail, King Kul’drak. Hail, Grom’tul,” Kag said 
as he approached the table. 
“Kag,” the king began, “I gather you did not make 
haste. Grom’tul has devised a plan of battle for our 

 
 85 
raid on the Geerum.” The king gestured to Grom as 
if inviting him to continue. 
“Yes, my king,” he spoke in growling voice. “The 
Geerum, as you have experienced in the past, win 
their battles by hiding in their mountainous fortress 
and drawing their enemy in. The fortress, with the 
Geerum waiting inside, is impenetrable. However, 
due to the war we have been in with the traitorous 
Orken kingdoms in the east, they have stretched their 
reach south. They have set up an encampment on our 
border, right next to the north-western reaches of 
Fal’kir.” Grom pointed to the place on the map. 
“Kag’jun, my suggestion is you take a few hundred 
orken and get close to the encampment. Kul’drak will 
then sound the call of a horn. At that moment you 
and your orken will attack the encampment. Be sure 
to sound your war horn, drawing the attention of the 
fortress. They will send out a retaliation force to 
defend the encampment. Allow your forces to be 
beaten back slightly. Once they see you are but a few 
hundred, they will send out a smaller force. At this 
time Kul’drak will have reached you. He and his 
armada of two thousand will join the battle from 
behind and, due to his recent victory over the 
Hagronen, will burst forth from the tree line of 
Fal’kir, circling the Geerum forces. If they send more 
of their forces out at that time, we will be able to 

 
 86 
defeat them. Because their defences at the entrance of 
their city will be destroyed, we can surge through their 
gate.” 
“That is a mighty, yet bold plan Grom,” Kag 
began in reply, “however, do we have twenty-three 
hundred Draken warriors at the ready?” 
“I have five hundred warriors in the city. The loss 
of Ful’kag’s garrison in the Valley of Kal’ka has spread 
us thin. However, if I have until this time tomorrow, 
I will have the remainder of the forces ready,” Grom 
replied looking at the king. 
“You have until tomorrow,” Kul’drak replied. 
“Grom,” Kag began, “are we aware of the 
number of Geerum that are battle-ready?” 
“No. However, we know their numbers are 
similar to our own. Based on an extended scouting 
from a few moons ago, their city is within the 
mountain and there is another entrance on the north 
side of the mountain. The entrance leads to what 
seems to be a network of roads leading toward other 
mountains in the distance. It is assumed these 
mountains are also other cities. But it is unlikely their 
full army will be able to mobilize due to the harsh 
winter we have endured. The snow is melting in 
Kru’aka but their country will take a longer time to 
thaw.” 

 
 87 
“Due to the scale of the mountain itself,” 
Kul’drak began in addition, “I would be very 
surprised if they could get the northern defences at 
their south entrance before we had entered the 
mountain.” 
“Very well,” Kag agreed. “I will leave the city with 
my warriors in the darkness of this coming night. We 
will hide in the Forest of Fal’kir until we here the blow 
of your horn, Kul.” 
“Good,” Kul'drak replied. “Grom’tul, have those 
forces ready by dawn. Kag will leave as darkness falls 
and I will leave at the sound of the horn at first light. 
We will see the end of equality in strength between 
the Orken and the Geerum at last. And Grom, leave 
the raid to Kag and I.” 
“My king?” Grom questioned. 
“I have lost trust in the Elders and I will need you 
to ensure the city is properly being prepared for war. 
See to it the Draken villages to the west are readied as 
well. Once we have crippled the Geerum we will 
move eastward and reclaim Kru'aka.” 
“Yes, my king.” 
“Kag, send for Du’kan. Have him join your forces 
tonight. Go and prepare your three hundred.” 
“Yes, king,” Kag said. 
 
*** 

 
 88 
 
Without a cloud in the sky, the warmth of the sun 
soothed Lar’s red skin. Ful had not been gone for 
more than a few hours before she had recovered from 
the freeze of the previous night. Having now 
consumed a large portion of the Troagan’s broth, she 
slowly gained in strength and awareness as she lay 
next to the fire. 
“I have never heard of an orken freezing,” the 
first troagan, who had spoken with Ful’kag, said. 
Lar stared back at him with a blank expression. 
The troagan took the opportunity to study her face; 
he had never seen an orken that young before, though 
she was twice his own age. Despite her age she still 
had sharp bones piercing through her cheeks and 
small horns on her bald head. “I suppose you are too 
young to have killed,” the troagan said aloud but 
continued the rest in thought. He was always told the 
orken had a fire burning in their chest, which caused 
them to kill. And the more they killed the hotter the 
fire burned. That myth persisted for so long: some 
believed the Orken did not even have a physical heart, 
rather, just an open flame that ignites when they have 
shed blood for the first time. 
“Perhaps she is the one,” he thought. Lar lay before 
him still, as if unaware of his question. “Perhaps being 

 
 89 
raised in that forest has led to her being of a lesser mind,” he 
thought. 
The Orken were an incredibly astute race. Their 
broad selection of words and sentence structure 
allowed for very little misunderstandings amongst 
their ranks. More recently and for reasons unknown 
to most, the sect of orken led by Kil’hagron did not 
educate their young as extensively as other Orken 
kingdoms. The savagery brought on by the 
consumption of the black insect, found in the Forest 
of Fal’kir, led the Hagronen to apathy toward such 
things. The consumption gradually led one’s mind to 
sheer madness. 
“What is your name?” the troagan asked, breaking 
the silence. 
Lar perked her head. “My name is Lar,” she said 
for the first time. Identifying herself brought a feeling 
of content to her. She sat up quickly. “Where is 
Ful’kag?” she pressed the troagan. 
“He left a few hours ago. He is on his way to the 
city.” 
“Which way?” 
The troagan pointed east toward the city. 
“Please,” he began, “I do not think our paths crossing 
is a coincidence. My name is Noma and I need your 
help.” 

 
 90 
“Your cares are not my own!” she yelled as she 
frantically scrambled to her feet and ran off in the 
direction of her leader. 
Her muscles were weak and sore but she pushed 
herself forward. Her bare feet were incredibly callused 
from the harsh terrain inside the Forest of Fal’kir. 
With the combination of Ful’s limp and her 
determined sprint, she caught up with him within less 
than half an hour. 
She saw his silhouette in the distance, the city gate 
but a mile in front of him. “Ful’kag!” she shouted as 
she began her final sprint toward him. 
Ful turned around and growled with anger as he 
saw Lar approach. “Go back!” he shouted. 
Lar toppled before his feet and bowed her head 
low to the ground. “Please,” she began panting 
heavily, “I am your servant; you have my loyalty.” She 
continued panting, taking deep breaths as she knelt 
before him. “I wish to follow you,” she said. 
“No!” Ful yelled furiously. “I refuse your loyalty. 
You shall not be loyal to any except to your own 
survival. You shall exhaust your life doing deeds for 
those to whom you have given your loyalty. And 
sometime after you have given all you can give, you 
will discover this: no one is worth your loyalty. Not 
the mightiest of kings and not me!” 

 
 91 
Lar gazed up at him; she felt a shattering wave 
flow through her chest. 
“Go back to those troagan. They require your 
help and I have given you to them.” Ful stooped 
down, took hold of Lar’s arm and hoisted her to her 
feet. She was still and looked up at him, standing three 
feet below him. 
“Will I see you again?” she asked. 
“Never,” he replied fiercely. “Now leave.” 
The command brought forth conflict within Lar. 
As she despairingly watched her leader walk away 
from her, she felt a strong urge to turn the other way 
and head back to the troagan, and she did, not out of 
kindness for them, rather, in obedience to Ful. 
The long walk had taken its toll on Ful’s leg. He 
felt the burning sensation of blood pumping toward 
where his bones were broken. And at the same time, 
he felt the icy chills of pain thrust their way up his 
spine. 
He found a place to rest for the remainder of the 
day in a small patch of trees with a series of large rocks 
mingling within. It was only midday, but he was 
limping so severely he would not dare present himself 
that weak before the Maraken. He would wait until 
the next morning, allowing his leg adequate time to 
continue its healing. 
 

 
 92 
*** 
 
The clouds had made their appearance offering 
Lar some shade from the beating of the midday sun. 
She was not used to experiencing it in such force as 
the Forest of Fal’kir had always offered protection 
from all the extremes Kru’aka had to offer. When a 
severe wind swept in and smashed against the land, 
Lar was never moved. When heavy snow or rain 
poured down relentlessly upon other Orken 
kingdoms, Lar found shelter under the thick canopy 
of leaves. And when freezing air murdered all possible 
comfort for those dwelling in cities, the vast network 
of fires kept Lar warm. She had now faced only a few 
of the elements and longed for the Forest. Her 
longing was drowned by the shattering truth of her 
abandonment. Her abandonment was triumphed by 
her new command: to aid the troagan. 
When Lar had found her way back to the Troagan 
camp, the pots of broth were still bubbling over the 
fire. She caught wind of the smell and only then did 
she realize her hunger. She found a bowl and helped 
herself. 
“It is interesting such an uncultured orken, like 
yourself, would still have a taste for broanta,” Noma’s 
voice softly sounded from behind her. 

 
 93 
Lar turned and faced him, still sipping the broth. 
“Broanta?” she managed to ask. 
“It is a broth made from the bones of truka. You 
must know that word.” 
“Yes, I do,” Lar replied gently. 
“This broth is favoured by most orken. It must be 
something of an instinct if even you enjoy it.” The 
troagan gestured for her to sit down with him. “But I 
suppose you would have eaten your fair share of truka 
meat while being raised. You have probably even 
killed one before.” 
“I have never actually spilled the blood of 
anything yet,” Lar replied. 
“Never? You truly are a different orken, indeed.” 
Noma stood up swiftly. “Perhaps you are exactly the 
way you are for a purpose: to lend your aid to my kind. 
For which other reason would you have returned?” 
Lar was taken aback. Did Ful speak with this 
troagan and inform him of his command for her? 
“What kind of aid do you require?” While she asked, 
a murmur broke out amongst the camp. Troagan 
spilled from and ran into different tents. Vast 
amounts of croaking accompanied the rush as well. 
“You must come with me immediately,” Noma 
said while taking hold of Lar’s hand. When she rose 
she towered over the small Troagan and almost had 
to bend over to keep holding his webbed hand. 

 
 94 
“What is happening?” 
“The broth,” Noma began, “it was never meant 
for you. We have been expecting a visit from the 
Maraken all day. It is only now that they are arriving.” 
He led her quickly to a nearby tent. “If they found 
you, they would either kill you or take you from us.” 
Lar got on her knees and crawled into the tent. 
Noma closed the flap and whispered, “Please stay 
here and do not make a sound. I cannot afford to lose 
you. I will explain everything to you once the 
inspection team is gone.” 
The croaking immediately stopped. Noma ran 
toward a pot of broth and waited. 
Seven orken, all close to eleven feet tall, marched 
into the camp. They were wearing full metal armour 
like the Draken; they were, however, from the 
Maraken kingdom. 
“Report, troag,” the head of the group gnarled to 
Noma. 
“Yes, my master,” Noma said bowing his head 
low to the ground. “We have harvested the crops 
from last quarter. Our yield is far greater than that of 
last year’s. In fact, it seems the winter has not affected 
our production.” 
“Is this the truth?” another orken spouted. 

 
 95 
“Yes, master. The early winter caused for an 
earlier melt, which saw an increase in moisture for our 
crops.” 
“I wish to see the stores of yurka,” the first 
maraken demanded. 
“Yes, master, of course. But first, you must know: 
an orken was here not long ago. He seemed to be of 
the Draken military.” 
“What?” the first orken shouted. “Where is he 
now?” 
Lar overheard the conversation. She cringed as 
she mourned the secrecy of Ful’s approach. She 
feared for his safety, knowing these orken could take 
advantage of his injured state and kill him. She didn’t 
know of the political differences between the 
kingdoms, she just knew they were all enemies. 
“He left for Gan’marak half a day ago. He came 
with news from the Forest of Fal’kir regarding the 
Hagronen.” Noma knew exactly which strings to pull 
when it came to the tensions between the Orken. He 
was old, for a troagan, and wise and knew his way 
around the truth. “He was injured; he could not have 
ventured very far.” 
With that, the seven orken were off, charging in 
the direction of Ful’kag. 
The croaking broke out again. Lar crawled out of 
the small tent she hid in and stood to her feet. She saw 

 
 96 
dozens of troagan scattering off in all directions, 
leaping great distances as opposed to running. 
“What is happening?” she asked Noma, who had 
just made his way to find her. “I have lied,” he began. 
“We have not yielded a very good crop this year; no 
Troagan pod has. It is likely this very team has 
slaughtered many troagan today because of it. I could 
not see the same fate befall my pod. As I mentioned, 
I need your help. We are slaves of the Orken and until 
now, have not had a way of freedom. But now our 
way is you! You are an orken and you can guide us to 
a land of peace, where those who seek refuge from 
war are said to find it!” 
“Guide?” she replied. “You must be mistaken for 
I know nothing beyond those woods over there.” She 
pointed to Fal’kir. 
“You do not need to know where it is, Lar. Krag-
Ma’ak is the oldest Orken city. It has a library of sorts, 
which will contain not only a map of Kru’aka but of 
all the lands surrounding it. Because you are an orken 
you can enter the city and steal such a map and with 
it, we can find our way to the peaceful land.” 
Lar gazed into the green eyes of the being before 
her. She had previously been of no importance to 
anyone. She was merely another mouth to feed, with 
the hope of one day becoming a hunter and a mate to 
any warrior that should choose her. Not only did she 

 
 97 
long to help out of her obedience to Ful, but now for 
her own sense of purpose. 
“I will help you Noma. Your pod’s fate will be my 
own.” 
“Lar... I could never thank you enough. However, 
it is not just my pod you will be helping. You will save 
us all. That is where those troagan went to; they are 
going to the other pods to inform them of our 
departure and to invite them.” 
“Where will everyone hide while I venture into 
Krag-Ma’ak?” 
“Depending on our numbers…” he began but 
stopped himself. “To tell you the truth, I have not 
thought of that part of the plan yet. We may have to 
answer that question when we are faced with it.” 
 
*** 
 
Winter had released its grasp upon the area where 
Ful had taken rest. The grass was dry and the breeze 
was warm. Ful had peacefully slept for close to two 
hours now. 
Under extreme circumstances an orken could go 
an entire week without resting, contributing to their 
being the perfect warrior. However, due to Ful’s 
injury, he knew the only way his body could heal itself, 
was if he slept. 

 
 98 
The clanking of metal boots stomping against the 
ground awoke him. The noise of several orken 
approaching was still far off. Ful sprung to his feet, 
his axe still in hand, and located those who were 
approaching. He counted seven orken each being of 
a smaller build. They were dressed completely in 
battle armour and carried large axes. He recognized 
the symbol engraved on their breastplates. 
“Maraken,” he whispered in disgust, his old 
allegiances still in his mind’s forefront. 
His first instinct was to climb one of the trees and 
wait until his attackers were below him. He would 
then descend upon them and end their lives before 
they were even aware of his presence. He ruled out 
that possibility, knowing the landing could very well 
cause his leg to be permanently wounded. He had hurt 
it enough that past day and any further strain could 
solidify the damage. He surveyed the area, hoping to 
find inspiration for his ambush. Nothing came to him. 
He looked back at the orken, then only half a mile 
away. Finally, the idea arrived in his mind. 
The maraken had arrived at the small patch of 
trees. They had not come across the orken they were 
searching for on their way from the Troagan camp 
and they could not see him approaching the city. They 
deduced he must have been hiding within the trees. 

 
 99 
They poised their axes and slowly walked toward the 
patch of trees, ready to attack. 
“At ease, orken,” Ful said as he stepped out from 
behind a tree. “I surrender.” 
Surrender: an act Ful had sworn he would never 
do. Yet, the past few days had been filled with actions 
and thoughts Ful would never have imagined. 
“I am Gon’mak, the lead warrior in the resource 
division of the Maraken army,” the same orken who 
had spoken with Noma said. “I demand you tell me 
who you are, where you are from, and why you are 
here.” 
“I will only speak with your king,” Ful replied. 
“Take me to him now.” 
The seven maraken moved closer, holding their 
axes tightly. 
“You dare command me?” Gon’mak yelled. “You 
will die for this!” 
With that, the seven orken attacked Ful, without 
care for keeping him alive.  

 
 100 
 
V 
DARKNESS HAD TAKEN A DISMAL HOLD 
on the land of Kru’aka. Any advancement made by 
the approaching spring was pushed back by the cold 
that crept its way into the night. Kag’jun and his 
garrison had made it to the border of Fal’kir and were 
entering into the very Forest that once harboured 
their enemy. 
“Be on guard,” Du’kan’s voice slid its way 
through the lines of orken, “there could still be 
hagronen survivors in these woods. Not to mention 
the deadliness of anything that moves in this Forest.” 
Kag’jun led the march. “Du’kan,” he summoned, 
“draw near.” 
“Have you seen something?” Du’kan asked. 
“No. Have you still your doubts about the king?” 
“Yes, I do. Do you not? He has disbanded a 
sacred part of our culture. He being king for the past 
two hundred years does not mean he can undo what 
millennia of kings have done before him. His madness 

 
 101 
is being revealed in that, he has accused us of pouring 
over old maps when he besieged us to. We were the 
ones who set in motion the battle that brought the 
end to the Hagronen. It was our messenger who 
challenged Kil and his army to fight in the Valley.” 
“We lost that battle, remember? And we honour 
Ful'kag in his death and his contribution to the cause 
of the Draken. However, despite his faithful service, 
his garrison was destroyed. No credit for the 
Hagronen's defeat belongs to us.” 
“That does not change the fact that he has 
mocked our efforts to this war!” Du’kan raised his 
voice in anger. 
“Quiet,” Kag whispered sharply hitting his arm 
against Du’s chest to stop his movement. “Ahead. Do 
you see it?” 
“I do,” Du’kan replied, his gaze fixed ahead at a 
small fire still barely lit. It was weak as it sent bright 
red light against the surrounding trees. 
“A Hagronen camp,” Du’kan whispered. 
They slowly approached the small clearing 
wherein the fading fire lay. 
“Or what is left of it,” Kag said as he came into 
the clearing. Dozens of hagronen lay scattered across 
the forest floor, their bodies beheaded and 
dismembered in every way imaginable. “The wrath of 
the great King Kul’drak manifested,” Kag declared 

 
 102 
loudly so as to encourage the loyalty of the draken he 
led. 
“Or, rather, the chaos...” Du’kan’s voice drifted 
away as he stared in bewilderment at the corpses 
before him. 
“We keep moving! We must be ready to attack by 
dawn!” Kag commanded his garrison as he marched 
past the bodies and headed north toward the Geerum. 
 
*** 
 
“A few dozen? That is all willing to join us?” 
Noma frantically asked. 
“Yes; the rest fear the risks are too great,” another 
troagan replied. That troagan had just returned from 
speaking with all those who ventured to the other 
pods around Maraka. 
“Risks? We will die if we stay. The Orken are even 
more unforgiving than this winter has been!” Noma 
looked up at Lar. “It matters not. The important thing 
is that we gave them the opportunity to save 
themselves. It grieves me to ponder that so many 
troagan will perish, but the arrival of these few dozen 
marks our time to depart.” 
“I think it would be best if we ventured to the 
Forest of Fal’kir,” Lar said to Noma. “My orken are 
dead and that leaves the coasts of the Forest a good 

 
 103 
enough place for you and the rest of the pod to hide 
while I get the map.” 
“That may work. However, is the Forest not a 
dangerous place even without the Hagronen threat?” 
“Because of our presence,” Lar began, “not many 
of the dangerous creatures have ventured toward the 
tree line. It has only been a day so I imagine the coastal 
region will be safe for you.” 
“Very good… very good,” Noma walked passed 
Lar and began croaking loudly to all the other troagan 
in the camp. They stopped what they were doing and 
watched him as he croaked on. He raised his small 
green arms and paced as if giving a grand speech. Lar 
stood behind him, completely oblivious to what he 
was saying. 
Noma’s croaking came to a halt and was followed 
by one loud, unified croak from the pod. With that, 
they all started on their way. A few finished packing 
their belongings into small bags and a few began to 
leap in the direction of Fal’kir. 
Troagan survive off of insects and due to the 
winter’s melt, there would soon be an abundance of 
insects cultivating in the pools of melted snow. The 
Troagan were able to journey with only minimal 
supplies brought, as they required very little. 
Lar was amazed at how the troagan travelled. 
They were not bound to the two legs she was. They 

 
 104 
crouched down and sprang forward travelling many 
feet through the air. The Troagan pod, with Lar 
running next to Noma as best she could, hopped 
along at a steady pace on their way to the southern 
reaches of Fal’kir. 
 
*** 
 
Ful 
walked through 
Maraka’s 
gate 
with 
confidence. He knew what he carried meant no one 
would challenge him. The layout of the city was 
similar to that of Krag-Ma’ak, yet it lacked in detail 
and grandeur. Krag-Ma’ak was engraved with 
history’s markings brought forth from thousands of 
years. Maraka had not even aged itself two hundred 
and that was easily seen by Ful. The structures were 
mainly made from wood, not stone, and when they 
were, it was of compiled bricks as opposed to being 
carved. 
Ful saw a larger structure that resembled that of 
the king's throne room. Krag-Ma’ak featured a large 
pillar that rose above the city’s walls. The natural hill 
Krag-Ma’ak was fashioned on allowed for an inclined 
walkway to lead to the base of the pillar. That pillar 
housed the throne room wherein the king and the 
elders sat. Maraka’s mimic was a tall, square, wooden 

 
 105 
building and, because the city was built on a plain, had 
not the grand slope to bring forth any anticipation. 
Ful’kag found his way to the entrance and faced 
two guards. Their fate was similar to that of the 
inspection team that had been searching for him. Ful 
did not feel it necessary to explain himself to the 
guards. They also were not fond of what they saw him 
dragging. 
Ful kicked the doors open. He was met with a 
dozen or so orken gazing at him in surprise. One of 
them, sitting on a throne, was Gan’marak. 
“Ful’kag, formerly of the Draken military,” Ful 
began in an introduction. He threw seven breastplates 
on the floor before the king’s throne, each chest piece 
bearing the mark of the Maraken. “At your service,” 
he said with a sort of grin as he bowed his head. 
“What is this?” Gan’marak exclaimed, standing 
up from his throne. “Ful’kag, why have you come 
here? Surely you are foolish for thinking I will let you 
live after killing seven of my orken!” Gan took a few 
steps toward Ful. 
“Nine, my king. You require new guards.” 
“Outrageous! Kill this orken!” The king turned 
around and walked back to his throne. As the king 
commanded that, several other maraken began to 
approximate themselves to Ful. 

 
 106 
“Gan’marak, do you wish for the count to rise? 
You know who I am and you know that I am a far 
greater warrior than anyone in your military,” Ful said 
this as he raised his bloodied axe. 
The maraken threatening Ful stopped. Gan 
turned to face him once again. “Why have you 
come?” 
“I have abandoned Kul’drak and have come to 
you for refuge.” 
“I imagine your abandoning had something to do 
with your failure in the Valley of Kal’ka. I believe Kul 
would have killed you had he known you survived.” 
“That is not entirely how events have occurred,” 
Ful replied. “Yet, you may ponder what you wish. The 
truth beheld is that I need a king to serve, and you 
need more military members. Or should I remind you 
that you just lost nine of them?” Gan growled at Ful. 
“I was commander of the Draken army,” Ful 
continued. “You know your warriors would benefit 
from my training. I am not requesting a position of 
command. Simply, I ask that you take advantage of 
my experience and give me purpose once again.” 
“Agreed,” Gan said quietly. “But I will need time 
to consider your offer. Prove your sincerity by going 
to the stockade. You will stay there until I have 
decided.” 
 

 
 107 
*** 
 
The light of the morning was in full illumination 
causing a pink glow to tangle itself within the blue 
canopy of sky. Kag’jun and his regime had reached 
their destination. They crouched amongst the thick 
brush in the tree line of the western reaches of Fal’kir, 
a quarter of a mile from where the snowy grass began. 
Kag, ready to charge at any moment, stared at his foe: 
the Geerum. 
The Geerum are a stout and hearty race who dwell 
within fortresses carved into and within mountains. 
On average, they are nine feet tall with long red hair 
usually tied into knots. Their skin is laced with thick, 
onyx-coloured scales that offer them protection from 
the blows of weapons. Their eyes are a vibrant orange 
and they have large tusks protruding from the sides of 
their mouths. Their weapons of choice are often large 
hammers that, with their incredible strength, are used 
to crush their enemies. 
There were close to two hundred Geerum lined 
up against the north-western border of Kru’aka. They 
had set up large wooden structures to form 
barricades. Their goal was not to attack the Orken just 
yet, rather, push against their borders and develop a 
series of such encampments, before mounting a larger 

 
 108 
strike. That encampment was situated close to the 
entrance of their fortress. 
“The call should come any time now,” Du’kan 
whispered to Kag. “Remind me again of Grom’s plan? 
“Once the horn blows, we attack. At that time 
Kul’drak and two legions of Draken warriors will 
charge from the city. The Geerum will also send their 
reinforcements, however, due to the small size of our 
group, they will only send enough to counteract. They 
would not risk leaving their fortress vulnerable. But 
they will do just that for Kul’drak will arrive before 
our battle is done. The sheer force of our numbers 
will overwhelm them, and we will be able to storm the 
fortress.” 
“Do you believe this will work?” 
“I have my doubts about the plan,” Kag said. 
“However, should the Geerum respond the way we 
anticipate, and based on previous battles they will, 
then we should be able to achieve victory.” 
“How long will it take Kul’drak to arrive?” 
Du’kan asked. 
“Close to half of an hour at a full sprint.” 
“That is a very long time when in battle, Kag.” 
“I know,” Kag’jun replied. “We ought to do what 
we must to serve our king and better his kingdom. For 
if we do not, Du’kan, are we better than him?” 
 

 
 109 
*** 
 
The blackness of night had faded, and dawn lit the 
Hall of Legends. The vast series of windows crowning 
the perimeter of the structure allowed for luminous 
cascades of light to dance through the grand Hall. 
Kul’drak stood facing a king’s statue. It featured 
the king who reigned before him, Darg’drak. 
Kul, at one time, revered Darg and served in his 
military. Darg was a brute of an orken; he stood 
fifteen feet tall and was a fierce warrior. He was the 
younger brother of Kal’drak, Kul’s father. Darg, 
having no regard for family ties as an orken should, 
challenged and killed his brother, taking his place as 
king. He also took his brother’s mate Jul’drak as his 
own. From that relationship came Gan and Dal; both 
of whom previously carried the clan name of Drak. 
Upon Darg’drak’s unforeseen death, Kul took the 
place of king and, being encouraged to do so, his half-
brothers challenged his claim to the throne. They 
usurped from his kingdom, taking their loyal orken 
with them. Kil’drak abandoned his clan name and 
adopted Hagron, the orken word for hunter. 
Gan’drak abandoned his clan name and adopted 
Marak, the orken word for refuge. And Dal’drak too 
abandoned the clan name Drak and adopted Torr, the 
orken word for victory. Each of these three built for 

 
 110 
themselves rival kingdoms in opposition to Kul’drak’s 
reign. The Orken of Kru’aka had been at war with 
themselves since the death of the king, Darg’drak. 
Kul’drak mournfully recalled the event when the 
unity of the Orken shattered. He felt rage burn within 
him as he considered the thousands of orken who 
lived throughout Kru’aka and refused to serve him. 
His thoughts stretched north toward the Geerum 
country: an entire country resting upon the border of 
Kru’aka. It was a country filled with weak beings who 
thought themselves above the power of the Orken. It 
was a kingdom whose king’s very breath defied the 
strength of Kul’drak. 
He felt his thoughts thicken as if they were wading 
through mud. The maddening rage swelling within his 
mind imprisoned all that may have granted Kul 
rationality. 
“How dare you, Kul,” a voice stabbed through 
the bustle of the king’s mind. He turned around to see 
Jul’drak approaching him. “I told you to destroy the 
orken usurpers who are challenging your rule. Yet you 
have sent a regime of Draken north to fight the 
Geerum! And I have heard you intend to take two 
legions more with you this very morning!” She yelled 
at Kul, furious and confused. 
“Silence!” Kul yelled. He stepped toward her and 
hit her with the back of his massive red hand. The 

 
 111 
force of his strike sent her to the stone floor. She 
gasped in utter surprise. 
“How dare I?” Kul began. “How dare you! I am 
the king! Yet you have spoken to me as if I were still 
your orkling!” He towered over her, filling the grand 
hall with his thundering voice. “None of these great 
kings would have ever stood for such blasphemous 
behaviour toward them, even from their mothers. 
Even yet, Orken have not the care for any bond 
beyond that of their loyalty to the king. And a king to 
his kingdom! How is it that you have loosened my 
mind to be pliable to your suggestions?” 
He gazed at her and even if her skin were as white 
as snow he would have seen it as red for the swelling 
madness had returned. Kul’drak had kept his late 
brother’s crate of black insects and had continued to 
consume them regularly. 
Jul’drak stared at her son and king’s now red eyes. 
She felt her schemes and plots crumble as she faced 
the impending reality of her coming death. The rage 
she saw in Kul was unlike anything she had ever seen. 
Kul bent down and grabbed her by the neck. He 
hoisted her high into the air, well off her feet, and held 
tightly. The light that danced its way into the Hall 
began to fade from Jul’s vision. Her eyes closed as she 
felt the last measures of life fight to stay within her. 

 
 112 
At that very moment, the echoing sound of the 
city’s horn filled the air. It was a sharp call, deep in 
nature but thundering in effect. It filled the entire Hall 
and paused every activity in Krag-Ma’ak. 
Kul released his grip on Jul, causing her to 
collapse back to the stone floor where she lay gasping 
for air as Kul ran toward the sound of the horn. 
 
*** 
 
It was still dark when Lar, Noma, and the rest of 
the Troagan pod reached the Forest of Fal’kir. No one 
perished but some came close to it on the journey 
through the night. The freezing air caused many 
troagan to begin freezing. The cold blood within them 
became layered with ice and caused their limbs to stop 
functioning. Most of the larger troagan were still able 
to travel and carried the disabled the rest of the way. 
For the majority of the journey, Lar carried four 
tadlings, young troagan, in her arms. The very 
moment they were able to find refuge in Fal’kir’s 
trees, Lar began building fires. She was well seasoned 
in this ability, having been a hagronen. She created 
dozens of fires offering warmth and salvation to the 
entire pod. Their plan to have Lar travel alone into the 
city of Krag-Ma’ak then became the only possibility 
as, even Noma, required rest from the tasking night. 

 
 113 
“I shall waste no time,” Lar whispered to Noma. 
“I fear we will not survive another night; we must 
travel south as soon as we can.” 
“Agreed,” Noma replied shivering as he 
attempted to smile. 
Lar, unfamiliar with the facial expression of 
smiling, copied him. Noma laughed at her humorous 
attempt. “Where is the library you spoke of?” she 
asked. 
“I have never actually been in the city; thus, I am 
not sure. You speak the same language they do. Once 
you are inside, find an orken who does not look like 
they wish to kill you and ask them.” 
Lar scowled at Noma. “And how will I get passed 
those guarding the entrance to the city?” 
“You are a clever girl,” Noma replied. “You will 
think of something.” 
“Girl?” Lar asked, unfamiliar with the word. 
Noma laughed again. “It means young female. As 
in yourself. Now go, Lar. It will be light soon.” 
Lar nodded at Noma and then ran off. They had 
entered the south side of the Forest, north of the Hills 
of Krom. A mile to the west plunged the Valley of 
Kal’ka and half a mile passed there, sat Krag-Ma’ak. 
The spiked hill that composed the west side of the 
Valley blocked the sight of the city from Lar. But once 
she had run through the Valley, she saw the city for 

 
 114 
the first time. It was unlike anything she could have 
imagined and grand beyond her ability to describe. 
She narrowed her view down to the gate; a grand 
entrance with large iron doors which seemed to be 
attached to either side of a massive, hollowed boulder. 
The outer sides of the boulder were attached to the 
large wall. The wall ran as far around the city as Lar 
could see. 
She saw, at the foot of the gates, a large crowd of 
orken entering the city. She quickly ran toward the 
crowd. They had all made their way into the city by 
the time Lar had gotten there. The doors were still 
open, however, two dozen Draken soldiers stood 
guarding the entrance. 
“Have you answered the king’s call to join the 
fight?” one of them bellowed to Lar. 
“The fight?” she asked as she quickly put her 
hands behind her back. She remembered Noma 
mentioning the black markings on her hands being an 
identifier for those of the Hagronen kingdom. She did 
not want to risk them learning of her being an enemy. 
“Kul’drak has called all those loyal to him to join 
in a fight that will end our war between the Geerum 
and the pathetic orken in the east.” 
Lar immediately thought of Ful and how he 
planned on joining the Maraken, if he were still alive, 
he would soon not be if that kingdom was attacked. 

 
 115 
“Yes, I have,” she replied confidently. She had never 
told a lie before that day. 
The Orken know nothing of lying. It is against 
their nature to avoid honesty. Honesty amongst the 
military ranks of the Orken leads to clear 
communication, which in turn, creates a more unified 
army. 
Lar, however, had observed Noma lying to the 
Maraken patrol and in turn, they did not kill the entire 
pod. She was able to disobey her instinct and listen to 
her experience. 
“Enter,” the draken said as he stepped aside. 
Lar walked past the guards and into the city. As 
she entered through the gateway she looked at the 
thickness of the doors. They were almost two feet 
thick. 
She continued on, the feeling of guilt haunting her 
as she realized she had doubted Ful’s ability to protect 
himself. The distance she had from him began to 
contribute to her decathecting from him. 
After the entrance of the city, there lay a large 
courtyard with a dozen or so roads leading from it. 
The courtyard was lit by several large fires burning in 
large metal baskets throughout the area. The place 
was filled with orken who had journeyed from the 
western reaches of the kingdom to join the war. The 
centre of the courtyard featured a massive stone 

 
 116 
statue of an orken, about forty feet tall. Orange light 
from the fires displayed the bottom of the statue while 
the dim light from the coming dawn revealed the top 
of the statue. A large plaque at the foot of the statue 
read: 
 
THE GREAT AND MIGHTY KING MA’AK, 
NOBLE FOUNDER OF THIS GLORIOUS CITY. 
A MONUMENT TO REMIND ALL OF THE 
UNITY FOUND IN WAR AND UNDER OUR 
SOVEREIGN KING. 
 
Lar gazed in wonder at the magnificence of the 
statue and the city beyond. She stood still for a few 
moments, captivated by the grandeur. 
With her mind back on its path, she took hold of 
the bottom of her dress and tore two wide strips off. 
She used these strips of wool to wrap around her 
hands and forearms, covering the markings. 
She scanned the courtyard looking for someone 
who may be able to direct her to the library. After a 
few minutes, she spotted someone wearing clothing 
that was different from the others. All the other orken 
were wearing armour and holding weapons but that 
one was not. That orken was wearing a long brown 
cloak with a blue sash draped over his shoulder. 

 
 117 
Lar made her way to the orken. “Hail,” she said. 
“Are you able to direct me to the library?” 
The orken turned to face her. He had an old face 
that was wrinkled and faded. He was certainly the 
oldest orken Lar had ever seen. “And why would an 
orkling like yourself find interest in the old library at 
such a time as this?” 
“I am interested in finding a map of Kru’aka, to 
better familiarize myself with the land… This will aid 
me as I join the war.” 
“It is indeed a different age if female orken are 
joining the ranks of warriors. However, this is by the 
order of the king,” he replied gazing at the crowd of 
orken in the courtyard. “The second road to the right 
of the gate will lead you to the library. It is one of the 
buildings attached to the War Hall.” 
Lar nodded and turned toward the direction of 
the road. 
“Orkling,” the elder said. Lar turned her head to 
face him. 
“What is your name and clan?” 
“My name is Lar and I have not a clan. What is 
yours?” 
The elder, puzzled by her response replied, “My 
name is Krom and I am of the Jun clan.” He said this 
as if it were to be of meaning to Lar. And it would, to 
almost any orken, except her. She turned back in the 

 
 118 
direction of the library and quickly walked through 
the courtyard and onto the second road. 
It was a strange fate that brought Lar and Krom’s 
paths to cross that day, for Krom’jun himself was 
about to depart on a very long journey. One that 
would, in many years to come, have a devastating 
effect on Lar. 
Lar made her way up the road with haste. She 
gained a broad understanding of the breadth of the 
city as she journeyed deeper within it. She was 
stopped by no orken and did not seem to raise any 
attention. Noma's plan was proceeding smoothly. 
By the time she reached the library, the sun had 
risen over the land of Kru’aka, offering its guidance. 
She stood before the massive arena stretching a mile 
in either direction. The large structure had many 
buildings attached to the outside of it, one of them 
being the library. Lar found it almost effortlessly for 
it had a large image of a scroll carved into its wooden 
doors. The building was of medium size and 
accessible from the road and from within the Hall 
itself. 
“You are different, are you not?” a small voice asked 
from behind her. 
Lar turned around and saw a male orkling, half 
her size approaching her. His stance was bold, and he 
had his hands were behind his back. 

 
 119 
“How do you mean?” she asked in return. 
“Take the cloth tied around your hands off,” he 
demanded. 
“No,” she replied. “Why should I?” 
“I am almost ten years of age and have not killed. 
If I am to please the king, I must spill blood soon,” 
he said, stepping closer. “And you behave differently 
from other draken orklings. I have followed you since 
you left the courtyard, and you look at this city as if 
you have never been here before.” 
“Many of us from all over have come to answer 
the king's call to fight.” 
“All of whom would have ventured to this city 
before,” he replied. Lar started to take steps 
backward. She felt anxious as the orkling continued to 
walk toward her. “The cloth around your hands,” he 
began, “are they hiding your Hagronen markings?” 
Lar gasped. 
“I knew thus! Imagine how proud the king will be 
when he learns of my killing a hagronen!” The orkling 
pulled his hands from behind his back revealing a 
large stone. He charged at Lar and leapt on top of her. 
She fell to the ground beneath him as he mounted his 
legs on top of her, pinning her down. With one hand 
he held the stone and with the other, he tore the cloth 
from her wrists revealing the Hagronen markings. He 

 
 120 
raised his arms, preparing to crush her skull with the 
large rock. 
Suddenly, a whistling sound pierced through the 
air and the orkling fell backward onto the ground. The 
stone dropped next to Lar’s head, cutting into her 
bony cheek. 
The orkling had a black metallic object Lar had 
never seen before, lodged in his chest. Lar could tell 
immediately the orkling was dead. She quickly looked 
behind her to see who sent the object. She saw a black 
figure standing on top of the arena, far in the distance. 
The figure vanished suddenly; Lar was shocked for it 
did not seem like they had moved. They simply 
disappeared from her sight. 
She turned back to the orkling and crawled 
toward him. She took hold of the black object and 
pulled it out of the orkling’s chest causing black blood 
to spit out and sprinkle on her dress. She held the 
object in her two hands; it was three feet long and 
seemed to her to be like a metal stick. It had feathers 
on one end and a sharp blade on the other. She knew 
not of what it was but gathered it was able to soar 
through the air and travel great distances and it was 
the black figure who had sent it. 
She sat next to the corpse for a few minutes, 
disturbed by all that had transpired. Orklings killing 

 
 121 
orklings for the sake of bringing pride to their king 
did not seem right to Lar. 
It was not long before a patrol passed by her. 
“Female,” one of the two draken began, “for what 
purpose did you kill this orkling?” He began to walk 
toward the scene. 
“He attacked me. I merely defended myself,” she 
replied, standing up slowly. 
“What form of weapon is that and where did you 
get it?” 
“That is of no concern to you.” 
The draken looked closer at the weapon, only to 
notice the markings on Lar’s hands. “Hagronen!” he 
yelled in a surprised fury. 
Lar wasted no time finding out what he intended 
to do with her and ran toward the library. The draken, 
who had been questioning her, charged in pursuit. 
The other ran off in a different direction, with the 
intent of alerting more draken of her presence. 
Lar burst through the library doors and slammed 
them shut behind her. A metal bracket was fixed to 
each of the doors and a large wooden beam sat in the 
entryway. Lar lifted the beam and placed it into the 
brackets, locking the door from within. Not even a 
moment later, a large crash shook the entire door, 
startling Lar. She stepped back and only a moment 
went by before the same crash occurred again. She 

 
 122 
could hear the wood beginning to crack as this draken 
repeatedly slammed his body against the door. 
She knew she did not have any time to waste. She 
turned around and scanned the library. Shelves ran 
through the room, stretching forty feet, however, it 
was not as she expected. As she hurried through the 
room, she found a few scrolls and books scattered on 
the shelves. The entire room was laced with dust and 
thick insect webs. It was clear no orken had been 
inside for a very long time. 
As the smashing against the door continued, she 
quickly made her way to the other end of the room 
and had not found a map. One of the shelves had a 
book on it with what seemed to be a small map on the 
cover. She was sure this was not what Noma would 
want; however, she dreaded the idea of returning with 
nothing. 
She found another door in the room that led into 
the arena’s inner hallway. As she was leaving the 
library, she passed a small table with a satchel on it. 
She took the satchel, placed the book and one end of 
the black stick inside, and left the library. 
She ran down the hall for a few moments before 
she heard the door in the library shatter. She ran even 
faster then, ecstatic fear and excitement pumping 
through her body. She happened upon another door 
and entered the room. The room was small and 

 
 123 
housed some supplies, however, it did not have 
another door. Lar noticed a ladder attached to one of 
the walls, she looked up and saw the sky. She could 
hear the draken running down the hall, his metal 
armour clanking with each step. She knew her only 
option now was to climb. 
She reached the top of the ladder and realized she 
was atop the boundary wall of the arena. She climbed 
up from the ladder and was taken aback for a moment 
at the sights that lay before her. She had never seen 
such a view, nor been at such a height. She did not 
have the time she wished to study the view before her; 
she knew the Draken would soon learn of her 
whereabouts. 
Suddenly, she heard it; an echoing sound that 
filled the air. It was a sharp call, deep in nature but 
thundering in effect. It filled the entire arena and 
paused every activity in Krag-Ma’ak. 
“There!” She heard a shout in the distance amidst 
the sound of the city’s horn. “The hagronen!” 

 
124 
VI 
A GOLDEN SUN HOVERED HIGH IN THE 
sky as the late morning heat beat upon the Forest of 
Fal’kir. Kag’jun, Du’kan, and the regime of three 
hundred draken crouched in great anticipation. Their 
axes were wielded and their muscles were tensed. Kag, 
positioned a hundred feet from Du’kan, looked over 
and gave him a nod signifying his readiness for battle. 
At that very moment, the distant sound of the city’s 
horn filled the air. It was a sharp call, deep in nature 
yet thundering in effect. It pierced the Geerum 
barricades and bounced off the Forest’s trees. 
Kag’jun roared for all to hear and charged. The 
draken burst through the tree line, plummeting 
toward the Geerum encampment ferociously. The 
sound of the horn stopped but the air was filled with 
roaring and battle as the draken collided with their 
foe. 
 
*** 

 
 125 
 
     Lar ran atop the arena’s wall looking for a place 
she could climb down. She hoped to find another 
ladder like the one she had ascended on. However, 
she had not been successful in finding one. She 
looked to the city’s wall. It was clear she would not be 
able to leave the same way she came. The wall was 
about sixty feet tall: a boundary impossible to scale 
from the outside. Yet Lar noticed, on the inside, the 
wall was connected to a series of buildings. She 
continued to run along the wall as she studied the 
rooftops below. There was a connecting point from 
the War Hall to the wall itself. The rooftops of the 
building attached to the arena and the parallel building 
attached to the wall, were close enough for her to 
climb up and escape. She supposed the drop from the 
top of the wall to the ground would damage her 
severely, however, in her mind, she had no other 
option. 
She could hear the rustling and clanking of draken 
below on the road and in the arena as they followed 
her progress. She made her way to the building that 
connected to the city’s wall. However, she remained 
on the arena’s wall, thirty feet above the rooftop 
below. 
She heard a roar from behind her. A shivering 
chill ran up her spine. She turned around and saw an 

 
 126 
orken she never thought she would see again: 
Kul’drak. 
“Hagronen!” he yelled. “I suppose one escaped 
my holocaust!” 
“It was you who allowed me to live,” Lar replied, 
desperately hoping for him to allow it again. 
“You…” Kul said as he began to recognize her. 
“Has Ful’kag sent you here? Has he joined my enemy 
only to betray me by sending a spy?” he bellowed at 
her as rage filled him. 
Lar stepped back, completely unable to respond. 
She wished Noma were there for he knew of the 
struggle between the Orken kingdoms and he may 
have been able to persuade the king. 
“He will die for this!” Kul yelled. “Gan will die for 
this! You will die for this!” he roared as he charged 
toward her. 
Lar knew she had one option; she jumped. She 
fell for a few seconds before striking the rooftop 
below. Her legs were not able to absorb the fall and 
her torso and head smashed against the stone surface. 
She crawled for a few seconds and then rose to her 
feet. She knew she had not the time to care for how 
much pain she felt or how, with each step she took, 
more pain arrived. Her will to live was strong and it 
drove her to keep running. She had a command to 

 
 127 
obey and more than that: she had a friend who needed 
her help. 
She limped her way along the rooftops until she 
arrived at the city’s wall. It was six feet up from where 
she stood. She hoisted herself onto it, barely having 
the strength to do so. She rolled onto her back and 
groaned in pain. She started to hear yelling in the 
distance. It was the deep, thundering voice of 
Kul’drak. She knew she did not have the time to rest. 
She dragged herself to the edge of the wall and used 
the thick stone railing to lift herself up. She quickly 
looked over the edge of the wall to brace herself for 
the next fall she would have to endure. It plunged 
twice as far down as her last jump. Just as she doubted 
her survival, she saw in the corner of her eye a blue 
surface at the foot of the wall, half a mile north-west 
of her. As she grew closer, limping and pushing 
herself against the stone railing, she realized the 
surface was as she hoped: water. Perhaps it would be 
deep enough to catch her fall and save her life. 
She had not realized no one was chasing her and 
that Kul’drak had let her go. She was in too much of 
a panic to try and find another way out of the city. She 
rolled onto the railing, closed her eyes and rolled off. 
She plunged through the air, flipping and 
spinning. The clap from the sound of her limp body 

 
 128 
hitting the frozen water was loud and echoed across 
the plain leading to Fal’kir. 
Her plummeting body broke through the ice and 
sank into the small body of water. It was deep enough 
for her to survive the fall. Pain and aching consumed 
her body but the weightlessness brought on by the 
water caused slight relief from the wounds she 
acquired. 
She began to gasp for air as she sank further 
down. She reached the bottom and began pulling 
herself up the slope of the pool. She reached the top 
but was still underneath a layer of ice. She struck the 
ice with her trembling fist until it broke and she could 
pull herself out. Once she emerged onto the shore she 
coughed, allowing the water she had swallowed to 
leave her lungs. 
She breathed heavy breaths as she laid half in the 
icy water and half in the mud. She saw her blood 
streaming from her and leaving trails in the water. Her 
whole body stung as it attempted to recover from her 
traumatic falls. 
She gazed with disdain at her arms. She managed 
to let out a cry while she quickly covered her markings 
with the mud she was lying in. She attempted to lift 
her body with her arms, only for them to collapse, 
causing her face to sink into the mud. She rolled over 
and lay there for a few minutes, desperately trying to 

 
 129 
let her body heal so she could continue her journey. 
She began to cry, a thing she had never done before. 
But in her pain and shame, she could not help but 
gasp and weep. 
 
*** 
 
Kul’drak watched as Lar jumped off the arena’s 
wall. He charged toward her and just as he was to 
jump down after her, a fall that would have had little 
effect on him, he stopped. He stood watching Lar 
crawl from the spot where she had poorly landed. 
They were on the north-west side of the city at that 
time. He turned around and ran along the top of the 
arena wall to where he could overlook most of the 
city. 
“Draken!” he yelled at all his followers below. His 
voice charged its way through the courtyard, ran its 
way up the streets, and pierced the doors of every 
living quarters. “Gan’marak has marked his own 
destruction by sending a scout to the city. If he wishes 
to know the breadth of our forces: he shall. We march 
for Maraka now!” 
The orken below roared in agreeance; yet some 
had a seed of doubt planted in their minds as they 
considered the scout he spoke of possibly being, as 
the rumours had already spread through the city, a 

 
 130 
hagronen: the very sect of orken Kul’drak claimed to 
have destroyed. 
Kul’drak leapt into the arena and made his way to 
the war chamber. Grom’tul was inside waiting for 
him. “Hail, my great king,” he said, so as to report to 
the king. 
“Grom, take all who are at the city’s gate and the 
two legions of draken ready for battle; begin the 
march toward Maraka. I will muster the rest of our 
forces and join you in the fight tomorrow.” 
“Of course, my king,” Grom replied. “What of 
Kag’jun? His regime may have engaged the Geerum 
by now and will require our reinforcement.” 
“A necessary loss toward a greater victory,” the 
king stated. “The Geerum will know that we are not 
idle and Kag’jun will be remembered as being a great 
service to his king. Enough talk of this. Go now and 
march toward Maraka.” 
“Yes, king, and what of the hagronen?” Grom 
said, aware of Lar’s origin. 
“Send a small brigade to kill her. Once she is dead, 
I will not hear of the matter again.” 
“Yes… my king,” Grom said with hesitation, 
confusion creeping its way into his mind as it had with 
Ful'kag and Du’kan. A confusion toward the king’s 
actions and intent. 

 
 131 
Grom exited the chamber, closing the large 
wooden door behind him. 
“Hunt down the intruder,” he said to the four 
guards at the door. “Bring her to my quarters in the 
barracks. Kill her if she resists.” 
“Yes, captain.” The four draken beat their fists 
against their chests and ran out of the hall. 
“Hud’mak,” Grom shouted. One of the draken 
stopped his running and looked at Grom. “Go 
appoint another guard for this post. I will remain until 
you arrive. The intruder is wounded; the three of them 
will not struggle with the task.” 
Hud’mak nodded and then ran out of the hall. 
Grom stood in front of the closed door, his axe 
held in his hands. The clanking of the draken running 
from his position faded and he was left alone. Not a 
moment later, a black figure slowly entered the hall. 
They were less than six feet tall and held a weapon 
Grom had never seen before. The weapon was a 
bowed rod with a single string attached to each tip. 
The string was flexed back by the black figure’s right 
hand, which was also holding a three-foot long black 
metallic stick. The stick had feathers on one end and 
a sharp blade on the other. 
Grom studied it quickly and knew not of what it 
was, but knew of what it was designed for. “You 
would kill your enemy with a cowardly ranged weapon 

 
 132 
instead of fighting like a true warrior?” he taunted in 
challenge as he studied them. 
The black figure lowered their weapon. They were 
fully dressed in lightweight ebony armour. A black 
hood covered their head and a dark mask hid their 
face. 
“I know what you are,” Grom said. “You are an 
assassin. I have never believed the tales until now.” 
“The best of deaths,” a soft, feminine voice slowly 
crawled into Grom’s ears, “is the one birthed from 
belief.” 
Grom jerked his head in surprise. “And a female 
at that. This will not prove to be a challenge.” 
The assassin unclipped a buckle that strapped a 
quiver of the sticks to her back. She laid the bowed 
rod and the quiver on the ground. The assassin also 
had two swords strapped to her back, one about three 
feet long and a shorter one to compliment it, about 
two feet in length. The assassin unbuckled the sheaths 
and laid the swords down. Her objective was not the 
killing of Grom’tul, however, she was confident she 
could defeat him in a duel without weapons. 
Grom grinned and laid his axe down on the 
ground as well. He walked toward the centre of the 
hallway. “Let us begin,” he said as he roared and 
charged toward her. 

 
 133 
The assassin stood as the massive orken barrelled 
toward her in a rage. She began running toward him 
as well. When he was about to make his first strike, 
she quickly slid on the ground and intercepted his 
planted foot. The orken lost his balance and fell to the 
ground, grunting loudly. As he began lifting himself 
off the ground, the assassin jumped toward the wall, 
pushed off with one heel and stuck Grom’s face with 
the other as she flipped in the air. The kick caused 
Grom to hit the ground again. He roared and quickly 
rolled away from her. Grom gained his footing and 
stared at her in rage. He charged her again, swinging 
his massive arm at her. She dove and rolled under the 
arm. Using the momentum from her roll, she 
pounced up onto the opposite wall and launched 
herself toward the orken. She flew a few feet in the air 
and planted a firm kick against the side of the orken’s 
leg. His leg bent inward at the joint and a loud 
popping sound occurred. He roared and fell to his 
knees. The assassin landed closer than she had wished 
and was struck by Grom’s fist. She flew backward and 
slammed up against the wall. She toppled to the 
ground and looked up at Grom, still kneeling and 
groaning from her previous attack. On all four limbs, 
she stalked around him, awaiting his next move. She 
knew with a creature that size she was to be 

 
 134 
successful, not in an initial attack, but only by 
counteracting his. 
Grom suddenly launched himself toward her, 
pushing off the ground with his still able leg. He 
extended his massive fist once again in an attempt to 
deliver another gruelling blow. She was not prepared 
for the sudden charge and was not able to dive away 
in time. She spun to her left dodging his attack and 
taking hold of the massive arm, and then she struck 
Grom in his face. Grom, barely flinching from the hit, 
lifted his arm, to which she clung, and launched her 
across the room. Her body slammed against the war 
chamber door. She lay on the ground, her breathing 
strained; she realized she had broken bones within her 
chest. She looked past the orken toward her weapons; 
she was not to let her pride interfere with her mission. 
“There is no sense in my dying here,” she thought, as she 
stood. 
Grom laughed and roared, thinking he had 
defeated his foe. He slowly limped toward her. 
However, he was suddenly unable to see her. She had 
stepped into darkness and was hidden beyond the 
eye’s ability to see. 
The assassin, cloaked by her stealth ability, dove 
and rolled past the orken. She ended her roll by 
landing her feet and leaping onto the wall. She 
pounced off the wall and sent her body upwards 

 
 135 
toward Grom’s shoulders. The assassin mounted the 
orken and squeezed his neck with her legs. She pulled 
a dagger from her boot and plunged the blade into the 
orken’s neck. Grom tried to reach up and pull the 
assassin off him; however, he lost blood too quickly 
and fell to his knees. As the light in the hall began to 
fade and the sting of death crept its way into 
Grom’tul’s chest, he fell face-first toward the floor 
and lay still. 
The assassin leapt forward, off the corpse and 
reached her weapons. She re-equipped herself in 
preparation for the battle that lay ahead. She slowly 
walked past the orken corpse, catching her breath 
from her victorious battle with the beast. She reserved 
her ability to stealth for specific occasions. It required 
incredible focus and energy and she felt as if she had 
to hold her breath in order to maintain it. 
She approached the door that led to the war 
chamber, wherein her target lay. She opened the door 
slowly, knowing Kul’drak had heard the fight and 
would be waiting. She calmly counted down in her 
mind: “Five, four, three, two…” she entered stealth and 
quickly ran through the doorway. She was invisible 
and incredibly light on her feet, making absolutely no 
sound. She, still unable to be seen, put her back 
against the wall to the left of the doorway. She 
crouched as she searched the room for the orken king. 

 
 136 
Yet, he was nowhere to be found. She slowly crept 
toward the table in the centre of the room; the late 
morning sun was blessing it with light. 
Moments passed and not a sound could be heard 
nor a movement seen. She realized he was not in the 
room; she let out a sigh as the air fled her lungs, 
scraping against her broken ribs. The shadowy cloak 
dissipated and she placed her visible, paw-like hand 
on the table. 
And then she heard it: a sound so loud it nearly 
deafened her. Her spine curved at first but not a 
moment passed before she identified the sound and 
leapt across the table. She looked behind her and saw 
Kul’drak descend from the ceiling and a great thud 
was heard amongst his piercing roar. 
He began his charge. Seven hundred pounds of 
sheer strength lunged toward her. She quickly took 
hold of her ranged weapon, which she referred to as 
a bow, and shot three consecutive times at the orken’s 
chest. The attack did not slow the charging orken at 
all. She pulled the string back once again and, as the 
orken dove through the air roaring, she fired an arrow 
into his mouth. The blade sunk into the back of his 
throat and he lost control of his attack. The assassin 
dashed out of the way and Kul’drak toppled to the 
ground. 

 
 137 
She was still feeling the pain from her previous 
battle but she knew in order to complete her mission 
she had to silence the pain. She leapt onto the table in 
the chamber and stood over the orken. She prepared 
one last arrow and just as she was about to fire, 
Kul’drak erupted from the floor, jolting upward and 
flipping the table backwards. The assassin fell onto 
the floor, landing on her damaged back. She brought 
her feet over her head and flipping backwards, she 
stood up. She looked and saw Kul’drak pulling the 
arrow from his mouth. 
The assassin drew her two swords, for her bow 
lay out of reach. Kul’drak leapt over the table and 
swung his fist at her. She quickly inhaled, vanished 
from sight and rolled away. She marvelled as she 
noticed the wounds she had caused him were having 
no effect on the orken. She, still out of sight, ran 
behind her foe. She released her breath, reappeared 
and slashed the back of Kul’s legs with her two blades. 
He roared and fell to the ground once more. She did 
not understand his healing ability, but she guessed 
him losing his head would suffice. She still had to 
jump to reach his neck, but just as she was about to 
swing, Kul’s massive arm swatted her away. She flew 
back toward the window in the war chamber, 
shattered through the glass and flew through the crisp 
air. She tumbled down the rows of benches 

 
 138 
surrounding the arena, finally coming to a halt in one 
of the pews. She lay completely still as brokenness 
consumed her body. She shook from the shock, 
covered in her own blood. The glass had torn into her 
clothing all over her body, revealing patches of orange 
fur. 
Kul’drak screamed as he soared into the arena 
from above. He scanned all the rows of benches but 
there was nothing to be seen of the assassin. She had 
used what little strength she had left to slip into 
darkness and crawl away. She dragged herself into a 
small room in one of the arena’s hallways. She closed 
the door and lay there, knowing she had failed her 
mission. As the now un-silenced pain flooded her 
entire body, she gasped for breath and began to weep, 
allowing the fullness of the pain to take over. 
  
*** 
  
Lar lay still on the coast of the small pool of water 
at the foot of Krag-Ma’ak’s wall. She was awoken, 
from the slumber forced upon her, by Noma. 
“Lar,” he desperately pleaded, “are well? I gather 
you fell. You truly are a remarkable young orken.” Lar 
was lifted by three larger troagan and placed onto a 
bed made from cloth and branches. “We must not 
stay here, it is no doubt you will be hunted,” Noma 

 
 139 
said as they began to carry Lar across the plain toward 
the valley of Kal’ka. 
The small party heard the roar of three draken 
warriors running toward them. They were still far 
from them, however, they were approaching from the 
eastern gate of Krag-Ma’ak, blocking the way to 
Kal’ka. The troagan team turned around and began to 
run north. 
“What of the others?” Lar shouted to Noma. 
“We will have to reunite with them by travelling 
through Fal’kir.” 
“And the orken?” she said looking behind at their 
heavily armoured pursuers. 
“I do not know yet,” Noma said as his mind 
raced, attempting to solve their problem. The troagan 
would normally be able to outrun the orken but with 
an immobile Lar, the orken were gaining ground. 
“Noma,” Lar said, “let me run; there is no sense 
in all of us dying.” The brief rest she had in the pool 
allowed for minor healing to be done by her body; not 
much, but enough for her to feel confident she could 
travel on her own. 
“Lar…” Noma began in objection, but Lar had 
already rolled over onto the ground and stood up. She 
began running alongside the four troagan. She limped 
as she ran but she pushed herself beyond what she 

 
 140 
had even thought possible. Noma marvelled at her 
resilience. 
They kept running north along the ridge of 
Kal’ka, toward the western reaches of Fal’kir. From 
there, they would be able to enter the forest, pass the 
ridge, and head south toward where the rest of the 
pod was waiting. However, their problem was the 
pursuing orken. The three troagan who had 
accompanied Noma had reached the tree line before 
him and Lar. Noma stayed back with the limping Lar 
and hopped alongside her. Lar was quick, but not 
quick enough; the draken had almost reached them by 
the time they entered Fal’kir. 
Lar felt a surge of confidence enter her once she 
was in the Forest. It was her home and all she knew. 
“We cannot go back,” she said to Noma as they ran 
through the trees. “If they follow us, they will discover 
the pod. You turn back and I will lead them away.” 
“Lar, no!” Noma yelled in objection. 
“It is the only way! Take this,” she replied and 
threw the wet satchel toward him. “I could not find a 
map but hopefully that book will help.” 
She kept running, slowing down with each step as 
pain fired through her body. Noma, despite Lar’s 
persistence, remained by her side. 
The density of the forest slowed the draken 
pursuers as they were in unknown territory. Their 

 
 141 
sprint lasted close to half of an hour. However, they 
eventually caught up with Lar and Noma. They used 
the handle end of their axes to strike Lar and Noma 
at their legs, causing the two of them to collapse on 
the forest floor. 
The very moment the commotion from the 
pursuit came to a lull, before the draken could poise 
their axes, they heard the sound of battle. The three 
of them immediately looked to find from whence the 
noise came and just beyond the tree line, a small 
distance north, they saw a Draken brigade fighting 
against a Geerum encampment. They struck Noma 
and Lar on their heads, hard enough to leave them 
unconscious for a few hours, and ran toward the 
battle to join the fight. 
 
*** 
 
Kul’drak stood growling in the arena as he 
continued to search for the assassin, without any sight 
of her. After some time, he decided to give up his 
search and focus on the more pressing matter: the 
destruction of the Maraken kingdom that housed the 
traitor, Ful’kag. 
He felt extreme hatred toward himself for 
allowing Ful’kag to live. It was a part of himself that 
he wished no longer existed, and with the help of 

 
 142 
consuming the black insect found in the Forest of 
Fal’kir, he could suppress that dreaded side of himself. 
He could suppress the emotions he felt that 
compromised his orkenhood and kingship. The 
mercy he felt toward Ful after his failure, the 
compassion he felt toward his brother, Kil’hagron, 
and the submission he felt toward his mother, 
Jul’drak; all emotions he then no longer dealt with. He 
knew, as long as he continued to consume the insect, 
he could be saved from his inner conflict. 
He entered the hallway that surrounded the arena 
and made his way to the attached barracks. With 
Grom’tul dead, he needed to select a new leader for 
the Draken army. With Ful’kag as commander, 
directly below him were four captains: Grom’tul, 
Hud’val, Keg’mak, and Sil’grum. At all times, one 
captain was to be in the barracks supervising the 
training Draken. With the city being in a status of war 
preparation, he remained hopeful that one captain 
would be in the barracks and ready to lead the first 
wave of troops against the city of Maraka. 
Kul entered the barracks: a room that, like most 
orken structures, was grand and had a high ceiling. 
Every inch of the four walls was covered with 
weapons, armour, and training equipment. There 
were twenty small arenas in the room for sparring, 
several dozen large wooden figures to be used in hand 

 
 143 
to hand combat training, and there was a sectioned 
off part of the room that contained dozens of bunks 
that would house new members of the Draken 
military. 
After turning fifteen years of age, or after their 
first kill, an orkling was to report to the barracks 
where they would spend the next few years living. 
They would train every waking second in preparation 
for being stationed somewhere. 
Kul’drak’s presence silenced the entire barracks. 
All sparring sessions stopped, all slumbering orken 
woke, and all eyes were gazing upon their king. 
“Have you not heard?” he yelled in question, his 
roaring voicing shaking the floor. “Where is your 
captain?” 
Sil’grum emerged from one of the sparring arenas 
where a young orken lay unconscious on the sand 
floor. 
“Here, my king,” he reported. 
“We are at war!” Kul thundered. “Armour 
yourselves and get to the eastern gate!” 
The orken scurried around in the barracks; each 
draken frantically running to take hold of a weapon 
and put on their armour. After a few minutes, every 
orken was fully equipped and running out of the 
barracks toward the gate. 

 
 144 
“Sil!” Kul yelled over the sound of the 
preparation. 
Sil’grum dodged the racing orken as he ran toward 
his king. “Yes, king?” 
“Captain Grom is dead. You must lead the 
primary charge against Maraka.” 
Sil’grum, like most orken, but unlike some, did 
not bother himself with having to understand details. 
He cared not for how Grom’tul died or why they were 
now attacking the Maraken instead of the Geerum. 
Kul’drak, having been his first king, allowed for him 
to have unwavering loyalty; provided his king 
remained the strong and honourable orken so many 
believed him to be. “Yes, my king,” he replied. 
“Grom had prepared two legions of draken,” Kul 
continued. “They should be stationed south of the 
city. Take those draken and all who are at the eastern 
gate and attack Maraka. I will muster the rest of our 
forces and join you in half a day. And I will also send 
for Krom’jun, he will aid you in navigating the hills.” 
“My king,” Sil began, “I have heard that Elder 
Krom has left the city, he was seen leaving by way of 
the eastern gate not even an hour ago.” 
The king paused for a moment. “This is of no 
concern to me. That orken is old and feeble. Go 
through the hills without him. We will not allow 

 
 145 
Gan’marak to live any longer. The time for our 
enemies to burn has come.” 
 
*** 
 
Ful sat in a dark and damp cell. Three walls were 
of rock and one was of thick iron bars. There was a 
torch burning outside his cell in the stockade’s hall. 
Snow had previously swept in and had since melted, 
leaving the entire floor flooded with a few inches of 
icy water. Ful had been in that dungeon since the 
previous night. It was then midday and as the door 
creaked open, the light shone into the stockade. The 
door closed, returning Ful’s cell to its dim state. 
Gan’marak walked into Ful’s view; his red and bony 
face lit by the nearby torch. 
“Word has reached my kingdom of a Draken 
army marching our way,” Gan said in question. 
“I suppose after killing the Hagronen, Kul’drak 
wishes to claim the rest of Kru’aka,” Ful retorted. 
“I suspect the timing of your arrival and 
Kul’drak’s sudden attack are too near for me to 
ignore.” 
“I ensure you,” Ful began, “as a warrior, I knew 
nothing of his coming.” 
The king grunted. “You may yet prove your 
loyalty. I task you north unto Dal’torr to deliver him 

 
 146 
this.” Gan extended his hand through the bars and 
gave Ful a small scroll that had been sealed. “Once 
you deliver my message and return, I will know you 
are to be trusted.” 
Dal’torr. Ful’kag was to travel to him after all. The 
orken began to dread the task given him. He would 
face that which he had longed not to. “Very well, King 
Gan’marak,” Ful said while bowing; doing so out of 
obligation rather than respect. 
Gan unlocked the door that led into Ful’s cell. 
“Make haste, Ful’kag of the Draken. Your army is 
approaching and I will need you to fight for me when 
they arrive.” 
Gan and Ful left the stockade. Two orken stood, 
waiting outside. “This is Dun’ogg and Yur’drid,” Gan 
said in introduction, “they will accompany you to 
ensure you are successful in completing your task.” 
Dun’ogg carried Ful’s axe on his back and was 
wielding his own. Ful’kag suspected the reality of his 
task to be beyond what Gan had shared. He, however, 
did not think he had a choice. His drive to regain a 
loyalty and make right with himself allowed for him 
to obediently embark on that delivery. Perhaps, if Dal 
spared him, the Torren king could have his loyalty. He 
knew the vigour of Dal’torr, but Ful had one thought 
that projected him onward, regardless of the danger 
and the unknown. The thought came to him amidst 

 
 147 
the wrestling and dangerous thoughts of to whom his 
loyalty belonged and for what he existed for. In order 
for his confidence and strength to be reborn, he must 
kill Kul’drak. 

 
149 
VII 
THE MOUNTAINOUS CITY THAT WAS OF 
stone built the Geerum, wherein Lar and Noma 
awoke, was not designed for aesthetics. It featured 
large stone bricks composing the walls and columns 
within. Those bricks mingled with the actual 
mountain itself. Jagged rock pointed down from the 
low ceiling and the floor was a hybrid of smooth stone 
and sharp rock. Despite having no access to the 
golden sun, every corner of the city was lit by a nearby 
torch. The vast network of burning fires allowed for 
a warm glow to resound throughout the mountain. 
The reach of the city extended far underground, and 
tunnels led throughout the mountain. The Geerum 
were a hardy race and over the course of decades 
carved the chasms they dwelt in with tools they 
fashioned themselves. In order to maintain the 
structural integrity of the mountain: every room was 
small and every corridor tight. It was not like the 
grandeur of Krag-Ma’ak, however, its beauty lay 

 
 149 
within the very fact that it was made by and for the 
Geerum and had served as a safe dwelling place for 
many millennia. 
Lar slowly opened her eyes and saw glimpses of 
the rocky ceiling. She could feel a swelling ache in her 
mind and a pounding on her forehead. She slowly 
rose to her feet and as she stood she remembered her 
recent fall. The pain had almost left her and a stiff 
soreness gripped her entire body; despite that, she felt 
well. Noma lay still on the other side of the small 
room. His neck slowly inflated and deflated as he took 
slumbering breaths. 
Lar’s thoughts quickly traced their way backward, 
recalling what had happened to them. As she 
remembered the orken pursuing them, her thoughts 
found the pod. She panicked as she wondered about 
their safety. If she and Noma had been asleep for a 
whole day, the pod may have been discovered. 
She ran over to Noma and shook him. “Noma, 
you must awaken.” 
Noma slowly opened his large green eyes. At the 
sight of Lar, he smiled but at that of his surroundings, 
a similar panic Lar experienced plagued him. 
“Where are we?” he exclaimed. 
“I know not,” Lar said as she looked around the 
room. Three walls were that of the rocky mountain 

 
 150 
and one was made of stone bricks with a wooden 
door closing off an opening. 
“Ee grun tuhh.” 
Lar heard the foreign words, uttered by a strange 
voice, come from behind the door. Noma quickly 
turned his head to where the voice could be heard. 
“We are not alone.” 
“Someone must have brought us here,” Lar 
began. “But it could not have been the Draken for 
that was not the Orken tongue we just heard. Whose 
words were they then?” 
“In all honesty, Lar, I have never heard them 
before.” 
A loud clank interrupted them. The door swung 
open and smashed against the wall. Two geerum 
stormed into the room and seized Lar and Noma. Lar 
tried to struggle her way out of the geerum’s grasp. 
“No, Lar!” Noma yelled. “If we are alive, then we 
must go with them. To struggle would be to die.” 
The two of them steadied themselves and began 
to walk out of the room with the geerum tightly 
holding onto one of their arms. They walked for 
several minutes through the mountain’s small tunnels 
and Lar, being some eight feet tall, had to constantly 
bow her head to avoid the jagged ceiling. 
Upon exiting the tunnel, they entered a large 
cavern-like hall. It was composed of, like most of the 

 
 151 
city, a hybrid of Geerum-made stone bricks and the 
natural rock. A path led from where the four of them 
stood over a black chasm. From the chasm rose hot 
steam that was comforting to Lar’s red skin. They 
walked across and reached the other side where the 
floor was of designed stones and led toward a pedestal 
on which the king of the Geerum sat. The pedestal 
was a large rock with a seat carved into it, serving as 
his throne. Lar looked around in underwhelmed awe 
at the dark hall and its architecture. 
“Un hai gemba?” the king, a thick and scale-
covered male, yelled. Lar was startled by his outburst. 
She looked down at Noma, unsure how she should 
react. 
“Na…” Noma began in another foreign language. 
“Na hjee cannu Teera bah?” he asked the king. Lar 
looked intently to see if the king understood what 
sounded like nonsense to her. 
The king stared at Noma with a surprised look on 
his face. He slowly smiled and then thundering 
laughter burst forth from his mouth. 
 
*** 
 
The horn in Krag-Ma’ak sounded again. It pierced 
the early evening air three times: the third blast 
signifying a call for all Draken to fill the arena. It was 

 
 152 
a strange call to be heard, for the kingdom was 
preparing for war. 
Kul’drak had returned to the war chamber when 
he heard it. Furious, he gazed out the broken window 
at the arena below as it filled with orken. 
“Who dares to call for a challenge in this time of 
war?” Kul'drak roared at all his subjects below. He 
looked to the centre of the arena and saw an orken 
standing in the sand; it was Kag’jun. 
Kul leapt down onto one of the stairways and 
walked into the arena. 
“Kul’drak,” Kag began, “I challenge you for 
kingship. You deserted us, leaving three hundred of 
your loyal draken and two elders to die! You have 
called for a war that is rash and the sense of which is 
unfounded! You have disbanded the very leadership 
of this great Orken kingdom!” 
“I am the leadership! I am the king!” Kul yelled in 
response. “I accept your challenge.” 
“As the only survivor of the attack on the 
Geerum,” Kag continued, “I will kill you in vengeance 
for those who have senselessly given their lives to 
you!” Kag charged the king with his axe poised. He 
was older and more experienced than Kul, but not as 
strong. He limped as he ran, due to injuries he 
incurred from his recent battle. Kul’drak met his axe 
with a fearsome strike from his own weapon. The two 

 
 153 
blades sparked and deflected off each other. They 
continued to swing their axes at each other, parrying 
and dodging each blow as the duel grew in intensity. 
Finally, Kag swung his axe hard enough to hit Kul’s 
axe away from his chest. Kag, rather than swinging, 
stabbed the tip of his axe into Kul’s chest. Blood 
continued to spew out as Kag drove his axe deeper 
into the king. Kul grunted and then grinned. He 
quickly grabbed Kag’s axe and took a long step 
backward. Kag attempted to maintain his grip, 
however, Kul’s strength ripped the axe from his 
hands. The king removed the blade from his chest and 
continued to grin as he stared at his foe. Kag 
marvelled as the gaping wound he had just caused, 
healed over. The bleeding ceased and the gap in the 
king's flesh closed. 
“What is—” Kag began in wonder, but was 
interrupted by the two axes Kul wielded landing on 
each of his shoulders. Kul had swung them down in a 
swift chop. The rods to which the axe blades were 
attached, sat on Kag’s shoulders, while the actual 
blades were just behind his back. The king jerked the 
axes toward him, pulling his arms back and driving 
the blades into the back of Kag’s chest. The elder’s 
black eyes widened as he was pulled toward the king. 
Kul lifted his knee and planted it on Kag’s chest. Kag 

 
 154 
stood, dazed as his life drained out of him, his black 
blood covering the sand below. 
“Know this, Kag’jun:” the king whispered, “as 
you enter into the abyss, I wish for you to remember 
that you die without honour. You die in rebellion to 
your king and your kind.” 
Kag slowly sank to his knees. He could not 
breathe and the pain he felt was excruciating. “I—” 
he began, every word barely exiting his blood-filled 
mouth, “I lied.” Kul’drak gazed at him in confusion. 
“I was not—” he gasped for air, though he found 
none, “the only survivor.” 
In his aged strength, Kag’jun’s final act was letting 
out a roar. Despite being on the verge of death the 
roar filled the arena, thus proving his might. He had, 
over nine hundred years of living, served many kings 
and won many wars. He was indeed a wise and strong 
orken and the roar heard by those around, proved 
only that. 
Several roars followed. Kul'drak looked up and 
saw close to two dozen orken charging toward him; 
all survivors of the failed ambush on the Geerum. 
Kul ripped the axes from Kag’s corpse and started 
swinging. He had many blades take chunks of his 
flesh, but he ultimately defeated all of those who had 
attacked him. The bodies lay scattered on the arena 

 
 155 
floor. The wounds he incurred healed as he looked at 
all the orken in the arena. 
“Blasphemy!” he yelled. “You all stand witness to 
the very cowardice that plagues our city! We are at war 
and I will not stand for such mutiny. Are there any 
others who wish to die?” The arena was silent, the 
echo of the king's shouting was all to be heard. “So be 
it. Prove your loyalty and march for Maraka!” 
 
*** 
 
“You, young troagan, speak the common 
tongue?” the king of the Geerum asked, in the same 
language Noma had spoken, as he gathered himself 
after his outburst of laughter. The laughter was not in 
mockery of Noma, rather, it sprouted from absolute 
surprise toward Noma’s ability to speak the common 
language. 
“As is clear about yours; my kind has preserved 
the law of the Grand Alliance: that all officials and 
leaders should know the common tongue,” Noma 
said. 
“My kind has done the same.” 
“This proves we are still allies!” Noma exclaimed. 
“I have a duty to your people and you to my pod!” 

 
 156 
“Pod?” the Geerum king began in reply. “I 
thought a group of troagan was referred to as an 
army?” 
“We were… however, we found that term to be 
misleading,” Noma said with a sort of chuckle. “You 
see; we have no use for fighting.” 
“Then what have you use for?” the king asked. 
“Until recently we were slave farmers for the 
Orken. But Lar here has freed us! She is going to lead 
us to a land of peace.” 
“Peace? Where shall you possibly find such a 
thing?” the king asked almost rhetorically. 
“I believe it's called: the Kingdom of Peace.” 
The king burst into laughter once again. “You do 
not believe in that place do you?” 
“I do! For the very sake of my pod’s survival I 
must! I request your help in releasing us. And perhaps 
we could have a map that would lead us there?” 
“You have no means of finding this mythical 
place? You surely are doomed!” the king shouted. “I 
desire information. This female here,” he said 
gesturing at Lar, “is an orken. If she can tell me 
something about the Orken: defences, numbers, 
tactics, or anything of use, then I will let you go. But 
if she cannot, I will kill you right now.” 
“Please, my lord! We require your help and we 
have nothing to offer you!” Noma replied. 

 
 157 
“Why should I?” 
“To encourage kindness in your heart perhaps?” 
The king laughed once more. “I have a heart of 
stone! And this is a time of chaos and war. Not 
charity!” 
“Gru mak tel nee!” Lar shouted in the orken 
language at the king. 
He looked at Noma. “Do you speak this?” 
“I do.” And then turning to Lar, he said: “Tua kan 
Orken, Lar.” 
Lar began to speak in the orken tongue while 
Noma translated her words into the common 
language. “The Hagronen are dead,” he said, carefully 
watching Lar’s lips. “Fal'kir lies empty and the Draken 
are assembling their army to attack the Maraken… 
they are in a state of civil war! If you attack Krag-
Ma’ak, their defences will be low and you may be able 
to crush them!” 
Lar stopped, anxiously awaiting the king's 
response. She had learned a lot in the short time she 
had known Noma, including the ability to point out a 
kingdom’s weakness. 
“Is this true?” the king asked Noma. 
“I swear by my life it is!” he replied. 
“This pleases me. I know not of where the 
Kingdom of Peace is said to be. However, I know the 
direction of the great city of the Alliance. Journey 

 
 158 
south for two months and you will see a large 
mountain. Go toward this mountain and you will find 
the city. From there, you may be able to find a map 
that will lead you to peace.” 
“O great lord of the Geerum,” Noma said bowing 
his head in honour, “we are in your debt. But may I 
plead just one last request?” 
“Speak it, troagan.” 
“My pod awaits our return in the Forest of Fal’kir 
and with the great army of draken heading into the 
centre of Kru’aka: I know not of how we will leave 
this land.” 
“Go retrieve your pod. Return here and I will 
grant you lodging for a night. In the morning take the 
west exit from this mountain. You will find a path that 
will lead you through the western farmlands of the 
Orken. If this war you speak of is true, it will be 
uninhabited.” 
“Your grace is as an honour to receive,” Noma 
said, bowing his head once again. 
 
*** 
 
The evening was cold and brought the reminder 
that, though southern Kru’aka was free from winter, 
the northern part of the country was not. Ful 
experienced this as he walked up snow-covered hills 

 
 159 
and had a blasting wind throw ice at him from all 
directions. It was almost dark by the time he and his 
maraken escorts reached viewing distance of the 
Torren city. And to Ful’s surprise, it was no city at all. 
Rather, a plain wooden building stood alone in the 
rocky landscape. It was of medium size and could not 
house more than a few dozen orken. 
Ful’kag knew Dal’torr well enough, as his former 
military commander, to know: there was more to his 
kingdom than that. When fighting in a war, a kingdom 
was not to care for grandeur but for subterfuge. And 
Dal knew, when fighting the likes of the Draken 
kingdom, he would have to utilize any tactical 
advantage he could. 
“That is it?” Yur’drid yelled over the howling 
wind as the three of them knelt in the snow. 
“Do not be deceived!” Ful'kag replied. “I have no 
doubt a larger structure is hidden.” 
“Approach and deliver the message!” Dun’ogg 
ordered with a grin. He knew Dal’torr was as 
merciless as his king and would kill whomever 
delivered a message. That was the reason Ful’kag was 
selected for that mission; it meant no risk would come 
to a maraken. 
“My axe?” Ful retorted. 
“Indeed.” Dun gave Ful his axe and Ful went on 
his way. He stepped through the shallow snow toward 

 
 160 
the Torren structure. He thought of Dal’torr, his 
former commander. He was skilled in battle and— 
Ful'kag’s thoughts were interrupted by the sound 
of an orken roaring and another creature’s howl. He 
turned around and saw only a glimpse of the battle 
between Yur and Dun’s attackers. He stared through 
the blowing snow and saw the two large beings 
collapse. A few moments of silence went by but were 
ended by a creature that appeared in the snow. He 
stood on all four limbs, unlike Ful, and was covered 
in white fur. He was about three feet tall and had large 
teeth showing at the end of his narrow snout. He 
glared at Ful with his squinted blue eyes. The creature 
opened his mouth and began yelling at Ful in his 
language. It sounded to Ful like nothing more than 
growling and deep yelping. 
Ful'kag knew then that his chance of survival was 
slim. He could attempt to fight that creature, but he 
knew there were a few who had attacked the two 
maraken. If he were to go before the Torren, he 
would need all his strength. He slowly backed away 
from the creature, and to his surprise, was allowed to. 
He turned and walked toward the small wooden 
building. As he approached, the door to the building 
swung open and six large orken burst forth toward 
Ful. They were wearing metal armour and held large 
axes. They surrounded Ful. Unlike the Maraken patrol 

 
 161 
he had easily beaten, these orken were strong and 
thick, having trained their entire lives for battle. Not 
only that, but they had also trained under one of the 
best warriors Ful’kag had ever known. Ful put his axe 
on the ground and placed his hands behind his back. 
“I have a message for your chief.” 
“Tell me now,” a prominent torren spoke, “and I 
will make your death swift.” 
“We have not the time for this!” Ful yelled. 
“You dare—” the torren stepped forward as he 
began to rebuke Ful for his insolence; he was, 
however, interrupted by an attack from Ful’kag. 
Despite his original desire to avoid confrontation, 
Ful realized that if he had been in their position, an 
audience with Kul’drak would never have been 
granted. Thus, he would have to fight his way in. 
Ful’kag’s foot kicked his axe upward in the air. He 
caught it and spun, allowing the blade to glide above 
and below the axes that were pointed at him, tearing 
through the metal and flesh on his enemies’ chests. 
And before those who held the axes could retaliate; a 
large cut across each of their chests and upper arms 
caused them to drop their weapons and fall backward. 
Some were struck at the waist and legs, for Ful had 
crouched amidst his spinning. Those he approached 
swiftly to drive the blade of his axe in their necks. 

 
 162 
Some swung in defence, but before long, all six torren 
were disarmed and defeated. 
Ful'kag walked into the small building where he 
found a few bunks and a pot of broanta cooking. And 
in the centre of the room, there was a large stone 
opening with an iron door that lay horizontally. Ful 
unlocked the latch and lifted it open. The heavy door 
slammed against the ground while still attached to the 
opening with hinges. 
“Dal’torr!” he yelled down the dark chute. He 
could see the flicker of orange candlelight dance 
across the bottom of the ladder that descended. He 
could hear murmuring and the slow approaching of 
footsteps. Dark faces showed themselves in the 
depths and more scurrying occurred. Before long, a 
response came forth. 
“Who beckons for me?” a deep and raspy voice 
called. 
Ful’s chest tightened for he recognized the voice, 
despite it being centuries since last he heard it. The 
time he had dreaded and wondered about had come. 
“It is I,” he began, “Ful'kag. The former commander 
of the Draken army.” 
A laugh ran up the iron ladder and into the Ful’s 
ears. “You may enter.” 
The words came to Ful not just in welcome but 
as a warning too; he understood his decent could 

 
 163 
mean his death. When Ful reached the bottom of the 
ladder he was met by several orken who seized him. 
They threw him on the ground and beat him. After a 
few moments, they ceased and Ful’kag was brought 
to his feet. He barely stood and was dragged into 
another room with nothing but a large table in it. The 
torren released him and he landed on his knees. 
“Ful’kag,” Dal’torr began, his black eyes wide and 
fixed, “it has been some time.” Dal’torr said such as 
he circled the bloodied Ful. “Wherever shall I begin?” 
he asked. 
“I bring a message,” Ful said as he looked up at 
his captor. “But I suppose I also come to inquire of 
you and how you fare.” 
“Leave us, warriors,” Dal said to his torren. “I fare 
better Kil’hagron, I should think.” A smile came upon 
his face as his subjects left Ful’kag and the king alone. 
“A message? As a deserter of the Draken, whom 
could this message be from?” Dal asked sharply. 
The realization of Ful’s ill quest came to him fully 
then and he felt regret for having formely been a 
servant of Dal’s chief enemy and was again serving 
another. Alas, he whispered, “Gan’marak.” 
“Gan?” Dal exclaimed. “You are here from 
Gan?” 
“My allegiance is not with him. I am without a 
kingdom. I am simply delivering this.” Ful pulled the 

 
 164 
scroll out from inside his tunic and handed it to Dal. 
He opened it, his eyes quickly reading over its words. 
“Summarize it for me, captain.” 
Ful twitched from hearing a title he had not been 
referred to as in some two hundred years. And yet his 
mind fogged from it for he could have felt reinstated. 
He squelched his hopes so as not to desire things 
beyond possible. 
“I do not know the letter’s contents.” 
“Then read it!” Dal threw the open scroll at him. 
Ful spent a few moments reading the letter. He 
understood Dal’s ferocity. “He requests your help,” 
Ful said confused. 
“Have you known an orken to ask for such?” Dal 
began in question. 
“It is indeed unlike a king to do so,” Ful said; the 
phrase brought the memory of Kul’drak and 
Kil’hagron’s confrontation in the Forest of Fal’kir. 
“Brother,” the word once again echoed in Ful’s 
troubled mind. 
Dal took a deep breath. “With regard to this 
subject, I have been meaning to ask you a question, 
Ful.” 
Ful looked up at him. “And what would that be?” 
“I am…” Dal paused and said the next word in 
the common language, for it was not a word found in 
the orken language. “Curious. You were once a captain 

 
 165 
under my command,” Dal continued. “You were the 
strongest and most loyal draken there was. Once I left 
the kingdom, you naturally succeeded me as the 
military commander. That was some two hundred 
years ago. And it all came to an end only a few days 
ago with the battle at Kal’ka. My question is this: why 
did you not die in battle?” Ful continued to stare at 
Dal, confused. “You could have died an honourable 
death. And yet here you are, a dishonourable deserter 
of your king.”  
Ful wished to launch upward to attack his accuser. 
Yet he knew Dal’s prowess and he felt subdued in his 
presence. Relief did come over him for he felt for all 
their conversing and the question asked of him meant 
Dal would not slay him. Perhaps this king would even 
have him again. 
“Why did you go back to Krag-Ma’ak, and not do 
your duty by dying in battle?” 
“I was…” Ful began slowly. “I was—” 
“Curious?” Dal said the word in again the common 
tongue. He laughed and then knelt beside Ful. “If the 
word is not in the orken language,” he whispered, 
“why are you and I experiencing it?” He laughed 
again, stood up, and walked back to the table.  “And 
Ful’kag, what were you curious about?” 
Ful stared at the stone floor. Confusion raced 
through his mind as he pondered all that his former 

 
 166 
commander had just said. “The Hagronen could heal 
themselves.” 
“As can all orken, Ful.” 
“This was different. Their wounds healed 
moments after my draken and I made them.” 
“And you wished to report this because you did 
not understand it.” 
“Yes.” 
“Long ago, during Hal’drak’s reign, the first of the 
Draken king's, a foreign enemy came upon the land 
and made war with the Orken. They were very few in 
number and all had incredible power. After many 
battles, with no surviving orken, the enemy relented 
and left the land. To this day, we know not of who 
they were, why they attacked, and what their power 
was.” 
Ful glared at Dal. “I have never heard this tale.” 
“It is reserved only for the kings of the Orken, 
along with many other historical tales. But is it not 
interesting that no orken reported back from the 
battles? None tried to escape and tell of the enemy’s 
power.” Ful continued to stare at Dal, anger 
beginning to swell within him. “The reason is, and it 
is depicted by our language not even holding the 
word; they were not curious. Unlike you, they died 
without care for an understanding of their foe, only 
the drive to honour their king.” 

 
 167 
Ful growled as he resented the subtle accusations 
made against him. “Speak your mind!” he yelled at 
Dal. 
Dal grinned. “I too, am curious. Orken should not 
be, yet here we are. Why does the unknown have 
appeal, Ful’kag?” 
“I care not for this!” Ful yelled. “You have 
received Gan’s message. If you intend on aiding him, 
allow me the opportunity to kill Kul’drak as it is my 
duty.” 
“I will not aid Gan. Orken!” Several orken, all 
captains within Dal’s ranks, spilled into the room. 
They circled around the table and looked at Dal with 
anticipation. Ful’kag stood and joined the group 
around the table. “The Draken are moving east to 
attack Maraka. And I have heard word of the 
Hagronen being dead. Tuk’den, Hur’kol,” Dal 
addressed two orken standing at the table, “you are to 
lead a third of our army and travel through the Forest. 
Seize Krag-Ma’ak and claim it for the Torren 
kingdom. Ful’kag here has joined our ranks and will 
lead a strike force into Maraka and assassinate 
Gan’marak. The rest of us will meet Kul’drak in battle. 
Aim only to kill him. Enough orken blood has been 
shed in this civil war. What is the purpose of 
becoming king if there are no orken left in your 
kingdom?” Dal saw no sense in the killing of the other 

 
 168 
orken kingdoms; he wished only to kill their kings. 
“March!” he yelled in dismissal. 
The captains left the room and ran into hallways 
that led away from the main chamber Ful had first 
entered into. Those hallways connected the bunker to 
a vast network of large rooms and armouries. The 
kingdom Dal’torr had built was not one of display, 
but truly of secrecy. He had, with the help of an 
eastern sect of geerum, built an underground city of 
sorts that ranged close to a third of Krag-Ma’ak itself. 
“Dal,” Ful said, still standing at the table. “I 
believe I made my intentions apparent. I wish to kill 
Kul, yet you are sending me to Gan!” 
“The Draken are, as we speak, marching toward 
Maraka. Gan, as the poor ruler he is, has no doubt 
failed to amass his small army and awaits my 
assistance. If you leave now, along with my best 
soldiers, you will arrive at Maraka before the sun rises. 
Assassinate Gan and then join me in the plain south 
from here, east of Fal’kir. We will march out to 
confront Kul’drak together. Perhaps you will have the 
opportunity to slay him.” 
“Yet you have instructed your captains to kill 
Kul!” 
“Your defiance is disturbing! When did you lose 
your loyalty?” Dal yelled in reply. 

 
 169 
“When the very truths that define the Orken were 
shattered! Within you, within Kul, within Kil, Gan 
and myself! Shattered! We feel and act in ways we 
ought not!” Ful exploded in panic; the overwhelming 
confusion clouding his mind. Dal reached out and 
seized Ful by the throat. He hoisted him off the 
ground, causing Ful to dangle in the air as he struggled 
to breathe. He thought back to when all of his 
confusion and struggle began: when Kul’drak held 
him in that very position. 
“Follow my order. If you are he who slays 
Kul’drak, so be it. But he must die at all costs and I 
care not for your redemption!” Dal finished his 
statement and dropped Ful. “Now leave. I will see you 
next on the battlefield. Take the six orken standing 
watch on the surface. They are among the best in my 
ranks.” 
“They are dead,” Ful whispered as he strained to 
breathe. 
Upon hearing of his slain soldiers, Dal’torr, unlike 
Gan’marak, grinned. Although he saw no sense in the 
war between the orken, he still enforced the Orken 
rite of succession: if one slew an orken of higher rank, 
the victor then assumed the position. 
“Choose another six to accompany you,” he said. 
“Go now.” 

 
 170 
Ful was proud to not have been arrested as he was 
by Gan. His respect for Dal grew as his former 
commander still enforced Orken law. As Ful was 
leaving the room he brushed past a hooded orken. 
Their shoulders collided and the hood fell down 
revealing the orken’s face. To Ful’kag’s surprise, it was 
the one who birthed his former king; Jul’drak. 

 
171 
VIII 
CANDLELIGHT WARRED AGAINST THE 
cold night that plagued the underground bunker 
wherein Dal’torr and his army lived. A warmth from 
the conflict in the chamber Jul’drak entered struck her 
and her presence did not aid in soothing the tension. 
“I bring you news, Dal,” she said as she charged into 
the room. 
“And hail to you too, mother. Does this news 
concern Kul’drak?” Dal replied. 
“Hail. It does; he is—” 
“I am aware, and I have already responded,” Dal 
said, interrupting her. 
“Will you thus meet him in battle?” 
“I will. I am also sending warriors to assassinate 
Gan and retake Krag-Ma’ak. My warriors and I will 
target Kul, kill him, and reunite the Orken of 
Kru’aka.” 
“No!” she yelled, her voice jolting through the 
compound. “That is not acceptable!” 

 
 172 
Dal slowly breathed, soothing the anger that 
swelled within him. It was not for anyone to speak to 
a king in such a way. “I care not for this warring 
against our kind,” he began. “Too long have our 
numbers dwindled by our own hands, while our true 
enemies regain their strength. We will be facing a 
greater war soon. One, which, if Kru’aka is not united, 
will be lost.” 
“You know nothing of kingship,” Jul’drak 
snarled. 
“Perhaps, yet I know of command. Once my 
brothers are dead, I will have you rule. I have no 
desire to be the king.” 
“Our desires are not the same. You will kill all 
those who have not sworn allegiance to your name!” 
she shouted the command in hopes to place her son 
in submission. 
“Allegiance? Loyalty? What good is the pride of 
dead orken?” 
“The Orken are a—” 
“Enough!” Dal shouted, bringing an end to their 
conversation. He stormed out of the room and down 
one of the halls to aid in the gathering of his army. 
 
*** 
 

 
 173 
The trek to retrieve the rest of Noma’s pod 
proved to be of extreme ease for Lar. She had grown 
accustomed to each of her journeys having been quite 
gruelling. During her first one with Ful'kag, she barely 
endured the freezing night. Her second one was with 
Noma and the pod. She had maintained a moderate 
temperature but had to carry a few young troagan to 
ensure their survival. And her most recent one had 
involved her body falling off the wall of Krag-Ma’ak. 
She was also attacked by the Orken and captured by 
the Geerum. However, with the accompaniment of a 
few geerum soldiers, she and Noma were able to 
reach the pod and bring them safely to the mountain 
before the freezing temperatures of night had 
returned. She now lay on a comfortable mat in the 
guest quarters of the Geerum mountain. Her room 
was small but well heated. There was a vent on the 
ground that had small billows of steam rising from it. 
She pondered the previous few days and all that had 
transpired. 
Her thoughts were interrupted by the door to her 
room slowly opening. She rose to her feet and 
hunched so she would not hit the ceiling with her 
head. She watched as the large Geerum king entered. 
“Hail, Lar,” he said in the Orken language. 
She was surprised to see him and hear him speak 
her tongue. She could not think of any words to say 

 
 174 
in reply. Noma walked into the room from behind the 
king. “Hello Lar,” he said. Lar smiled again, that time 
seeming more natural than her first attempt. “If it 
does not bother you, the king seeks more 
information.” 
“What may I answer?” she asked in the hope she 
indeed had the answer. 
“The king looked through the satchel you brought 
back from Krag-Ma’ak and found this,” he pointed to 
an object in the king’s hand. It was the black stick that 
killed the orkling that attacked her. “He asked me how 
I obtained it, however, I do not know what it is. Do 
you?” 
Lar remembered her disturbing altercation with 
the orkling. “It came from a dark figure in the city. It 
protected me.” 
Noma translated what she said into the foreign 
language he and the king had spoken earlier that day. 
The king responded in the same language. “He says,” 
Noma began, “the object is called an arrow and he has 
seen it once before.” 
The king continued to speak, pausing after each 
sentence allowing Noma adequate time to translate 
for Lar. “Many decades ago, when another geerum 
was king, he served as the king's army chieftain. The 
Geerum amassed their army in an attempt to attack 
the Orken. As the king exited the mountain he was 

 
 175 
killed by a single black arrow. The battle was forfeit 
and the Geerum retreated. He still has the arrow that 
killed his predecessor.” 
Lar watched as the king held out another black 
arrow, which was indeed identical to the one she had. 
The king began speaking again. “Whoever did 
this,” Noma translated, “is a protector of the Orken 
and is of the highest enemies of the Geerum.” 
Lar stood gazing plainly at Noma and the king. 
She had no idea what to say and she hoped Noma did. 
And to her delight, Noma began speaking to the king. 
They exchanged a few phrases with each other and 
shortly after a few moments of silence, the king left. 
“What did you say?” she asked. 
“I apologized for any offence we may have caused 
and allowed him to keep the arrow. I also said that if 
we come across this individual in our travels, we will 
attempt to apprehend them and deliver them to face 
Geerum justice.” 
“Noma—” 
“Lar! We are dead if we ally ourselves with the 
Geerum’s enemies. Any friend of the Orken is no 
friend of ours. Understood?” 
“Yes…” Lar said as she lay down and returned to 
her thoughts. Noma understood that as a goodbye for 
the evening. He left the room and closed the door 
behind him. 

 
 176 
She lay still, staring at the jagged ceiling above her. 
Orken loyalty was a simple trait and yet brought forth 
much conflict within her. Her distance from Ful 
allowed for the loyalty to waver and decathect. She 
felt it slightly for the figure who had protected her 
from the orkling. She knew not of who they were, 
however, she understood that were it not for the 
mysterious individual, she would be dead. 
“Why was I attacked? ” she thought. She continued 
to ponder and recall her former life in the Forest. For 
as long as she could remember, her kind, the 
Hagronen, were always savage. The mature orken 
hunted and fought. That was the extent of their 
society. She always believed the orken who dwelt in 
cities to be of sophistication and not of savagery. 
However, her altercation with the orkling in Krag-
Ma’ak changed her thinking. He tried to kill her even 
though he was an orkling. He looked at her as if she 
were an animal and she felt that way. The markings 
she had on her hands and arms brought great shame 
to her. She had never felt that way before and was 
greatly confused by it. She truly wished she was not 
what she was: an orken. She had no interest in the 
violence and hate that was found in every corner of 
Kru’aka. 
“I get to leave,” she thought. Excitement filled her 
as she realized she no longer had to interact with the 

 
 177 
orken. Her aiding Noma had led her to live a life apart 
from the orken. She would not need to be an orken. 
She felt gratitude toward Noma for allowing her 
to go alongside him and journey far from Kru’aka. A 
sinking feeling waved through her chest. She felt a 
thing a normal orken would not feel: guilt. She had 
undoubtedly made Noma feel uncomfortable or 
unwanted by her previous conversation with him. 
She got to her feet and left the room. The hall she 
walked down was like all the others in the mountain: 
short and rocky. She finally found another room; it 
was a larger room filled with Noma’s pod. She 
scanned the warm room and saw Noma speaking with 
a few tadlings. 
“Noma,” she said as she approached him, “may I 
speak with you?” 
Noma dismissed the young troagan and faced Lar. 
“What is it, Lar?” 
“I am…” she started but could not think of a 
word to express how she felt. “I wish to apologize for 
my actions earlier, but I feel more than that.” 
Noma looked at her puzzled. He knew she was an 
uncultured orken, but could she be proving the orken 
are capable of feelings beyond that of hatred and 
loyalty? He wondered this as he stared at a speechless 
Lar. “It is fine,” he said. “I understand your desire to 
be loyal to the one who saved you.” 

 
 178 
“It is not just that,” she replied. “This being killed 
an orkling who was attacking me. I am confused, for 
they were not protecting the Draken or being a friend 
to the orken like the Geerum claim. They saved me.” 
“Lar, much from these past few days has been 
very confusing to me as well. I have met beings, like 
yourself, who seem to defy the—” Noma paused as 
he pondered for the appropriate word. “Rules,” he 
said. 
“Rules?” Lar questioned. 
“We have not the time for this, we must rest for 
we have a large journey ahead of us. Go back to your 
quarters and sleep.” 
“May I sleep here?” Lar asked. 
Noma smiled. “Yes, Lar,” he said, reaching up 
and taking hold of her hand. “You may.” 
 
*** 
 
Blackness had covered Kru’aka for several hours. 
The distant light reflecting from the moon was 
shrouded by thick, water-filled clouds. The spring rain 
poured down heavily on Ful’kag and his six torren 
troops. They were just within viewing range of 
Maraka, on their way to infiltrate and kill Gan’marak. 
That battle tactic was seldom used amongst the 
Orken. An orken would rather fight face-to-face and 

 
 179 
force-to-force. They were not beings of subterfuge or 
schemes; rather, they used their sheer brute force to 
win battles. However, the recent war between the 
orken kingdoms of Kru’aka had led Dal’torr to 
employ other, more foreign, tactics toward the war. 
Ful'kag thought back to his many battles; that one 
was indeed the first of its kind. He and his team came 
to a halt as they saw the city. It was surrounded by 
heavily armoured maraken; their armour reflected the 
many hundreds of torches that were lit and wielded. 
The glorious sound of Draken war drums could 
be heard close by. Ful looked to his right and 
witnessed, emerging from the Hills of Krom, a legion 
of draken. The clanging of rain against the armour of 
the few thousand orken that were about to meet in 
battle resounded even to Ful’s position. 
“This presents a problem,” one of the orken with 
Ful said. 
“The weak King Gan will undoubtedly be within 
his city,” Ful began, “heavily guarded as opposed to 
on the frontline of battle. We will simply have to wait 
until the fighting begins before we can attack him.” 
“Is this all of Gan’s army?” another orken asked. 
“There must be more in the city and many 
thousands more in the eastern villages,” another 
replied. 

 
 180 
“And what of the Draken army, Ful’kag?” one of 
the orken asked. 
“This legion is likely the first of many to come. 
We often send a fraction of our forces in to draw the 
enemy out. Kul’drak will likely be half a day behind 
and will arrive with the rest of the Draken army.” 
Once Ful had finished saying this, he spotted a 
figure he recognized at the frontline of the Draken. It 
was a captain formerly under his command, Sil’grum. 
His red face was lit by the surrounding torchlight. He 
lifted a horn that was strapped to his chest and 
sounded the call that would begin the battle. 
All the heads of the maraken turned and faced the 
fearsome sound piercing the air. Both forces poised 
their weapons, roared, and charged. 
It was near ten minutes before the two enemies 
engaged in battle as they surged across the plain. The 
colliding forces rendered that familiar sound to Ful: 
the sound of battle. With the chaos of battle raging in 
front of the city, he and his team ran toward the gate. 
They went unchallenged and undetected as the 
Maraken, unseasoned in battle, attempted to hold off 
the skilled Draken. 
The wooden city was in a state of disarray. 
Females and orklings ran into homes and males were 
running toward the scene of the fighting. Ful’kag 
knew exactly where the king would be. The team 

 
 181 
hurried toward the throne room, outside of which 
stood a dozen heavily armoured maraken. Ful 
remembered the previous time he approached that 
particular building. Pride surged within him as he 
recognized his strength and unmatched ability in 
combat. 
However, in that instance, he knew the more 
important battle lay behind the closed door. If he 
succeeded in his mission to kill Gan, he would have 
gained the respect of his former commander and 
might even consider Dal as his king. 
“Attack the guards,” Ful told half his team. “Draw 
them away from the building.” 
As if he were still a commander, he watched as the 
three torren charged toward the guards. He and the 
rest ran alongside another building and behind the 
battle. Ful kicked through the wooden door and 
stepped into the room. Their entrance was 
immediately welcomed by several orken charging 
toward them. The three remaining torren engaged the 
maraken in battle while Ful slipped passed them and 
looked toward the throne. Gan had already stood and 
gripped his axe in anticipation of fighting the 
intruders. 
The fight between Ful and Gan was swift. Ful was 
certainly the stronger and more determined of the 
two. Gan’s body lay still on the ground when the 

 
 182 
other torren finished their battles. Although having 
the lesser number, they prevailed against their foe. 
The six of them stood at attention before Ful’kag as 
they awaited his order. Despite him having just joined 
the torren kingdom, they understood their king had 
appointed him the leader of this task. 
At that very moment, a large orken barrelled into 
the room. With one brutal swing, he killed three of 
the torren. The other three attempted to fight back 
but were easily brought down by another strike. The 
sheer power of that orken did not cause Ful to marvel 
as he knew him well. Ful had indeed trained that 
orken: Sil’grum. 
Sil paused, mid-sprint, the moment he recognized 
his former commander. He stood still, lowering his 
axe in shock. “Ful?” 
“It is I.” 
“You are dead. Kul’drak executed you in front of 
the Elders.” 
“The king had mercy on me,” Ful said, “to my 
shame, he allowed me to live.” 
“Kul’drak is far to glor—” 
“He has deceived us!” Ful yelled. “I begged him 
to kill me but he did not. He is weak and he is no king 
of mine!” 
Sil’grum’s unwavering loyalty wavered. The one 
exception to his respect had been made: Kul’drak 

 
 183 
proved himself unworthy. “Whom, then, do you 
serve?” he asked Ful. 
“Dal’torr. As we speak, his forces are moving to 
capture Krag-Ma’ak. I have just killed Gan and will 
now go to kill Kul’drak. Should you oppose me; I will 
kill you. We know who is the stronger. But should you 
join me: my victory is assured.” 
Sil’grum hated Ful’kag and what he was hearing. 
It was absolute blasphemy, but he did not know if it 
were the truth. He stood, stilled from the shock of 
Ful’s survival. Sil allowed Ful, whom he would 
normally kill on sight for being an enemy of his king, 
to walk past him. 
“Ful…” said the troubled orken. “What can 
explain the king and his actions?” 
“I know not,” Ful answered from behind him. 
“But if even doubt has been cast on you, does that 
not prove the truth? I am alive. And for my own 
honour: Kul’drak must die. Join Dal and I as we aim 
to duel him. Dal only wishes for our efforts, as Orken, 
to be directed outward at our enemies. We will be in 
the plains north of here, should you decide to aid us.” 
Ful left the building and entered the chaos that 
consumed the streets of Maraka. 
Sil’grum’s arrival at the throne room meant the 
Draken had breached the city, and they had indeed. 
The slaughter was gruesome. The Draken had plowed 

 
 184 
through the Maraken and would have soon taken hold 
of the entire city. Ful’kag knew the battle would still 
rage on for another few days as the Draken forces 
attacked the Maraken countryside and the villages 
outside the city. He was fortunate enough to still be 
wearing his Draken tunic and easily slipped through 
the battle. He exited the city and headed north-west 
toward the eastern side of Fal’kir. From there, he 
would await the arrival of Dal’torr and his garrison 
and join the attack on Kul’drak. 
 
*** 
 
Of all the landscapes and areas in the world of 
Teros, the Forest of Fal’kir proved to be one of the 
harshest. And it would need to be if even the Orken 
were endangered by what lay within. Named after one 
of Kru’aka’s famed kings, Fal’kir was an unexplored 
and uncharted region. Its expanse of trees reached far 
into the northern parts of Kru’aka and housed some 
of the most dangerous creatures in all of Teros. Yet 
some creatures that dwelt within were not as 
dangerous, such as the truka. 
However, deep within the forest, savage creatures 
lay. No orken who had previously witnessed such 
creatures had survived. Fal’kir himself was believed to 

 
 185 
have been killed and torn apart by those savages. That 
took place long before the Hagronen settled there. 
Fal’kir had briefly reigned over a united Kru’aka. 
The Orken had recently settled in the country and 
they had not discovered any surrounding enemies. 
Fal’kir was intrigued by the depth of the forest and 
made a homestead for himself there. He would not be 
seen for months at a time and naturally, a new king 
stepped into power. That new king, in an attempt to 
secure his throne, hunted Fal'kir down. He, however, 
found only his shredded remains. 
The two regimes of torren, one thousand strong, 
led by Tuk’den and Hur’kol, ventured through the 
Forest on their way to Krag-Ma’ak. Their goal was to 
arrive at the city before sunrise. In order to do so and 
abating the superstitions, they travelled through a 
deeper section of the Forest, intending on covering 
more ground. Never before had such a number of 
orken travelled through the Forest. The number of 
their group led the captains to believe they would be 
safe from the dangers that lay within. 
Dawn had not even arrived before the creatures 
attacked. The light of the moon could not pierce the 
thick clouds that lay overhead. Heavy rain fell but was 
dampened by the thick canopy of leaves. 
Tuk’den ordered all his orken to stop after he 
heard the first scream. A high-pitched howl that 

 
 186 
bounced off the tree trunks. It sounded distant and 
yet near at the same time. Hur’kol paused his regiment 
as well. 
The second scream was even louder than the first. 
The silence that followed brought great discomfort to 
the torren. They gripped their axes and stood listening 
for even the slightest ruffle of a leaf, but no such 
sound could be heard. 
The third scream was followed by dozens more 
and as the noise got louder and closer it turned into 
growling and shrieking. Suddenly the branches of the 
trees began to shake and large, dark figures burst forth 
from the brush. They attacked the orken without 
restraint. Hur’kol managed to view a glimpse of his 
foe in the light of a torch that had fallen to the ground. 
It was not much shorter than he was and had just 
as much brawn. It was covered in thick, black fur and 
its hands and face were of black, leathery skin. Its eyes 
were a piercing red and the creature was truly savage 
in nature. It swung its long arms at Hur while 
shrieking. Hur cut its flailing arms off and slashed its 
chest. A wound that would have normally killed an 
orken merely caused this creature to cower slowly 
back into the trees. 
The assault lasted several minutes and close to 
two hundred orken died. They were able to wound 

 
 187 
enough of the creatures to cause the savages to 
retreat, dragging the dead orken along the forest floor. 
Tuk and Hur led their regiments in a full sprint 
through the Forest to avoid another attack. They 
veered slightly in the direction of the tree line to try 
and get away from the deep parts of Fal’kir. 
Tuk’den knew the Orken were a strong race. For 
the sake of his pride, he convinced himself they were 
fleeing to serve their king and that by pursuing the 
savages; he would not have followed the orders he 
had been given. 
The clouds had dissipated, and the sun had risen 
by the time Tuk and Hur arrived at the tree line of 
Fal’kir. Hur looked up and noticed the sun was sitting 
in the middle of the sky indicating it was midday. They 
exited the forest, bringing great ease to the torren, and 
ran through the Valley of Kal’ka. Upon seeing the 
great city of Krag-Ma’ak, and to their abhorrence, 
they saw the city already under siege. 
The eastern gate had been torn down and they 
could see an army of warriors attacking the city. Only 
a few of the torren present had seen those warriors 
before, including Tuk’den. “The Geerum!” he yelled. 
 
*** 
 
      The army was grand. The fullness of the Draken 

 
 188 
military, combined with every matured orken under 
his reign, was behind the great king, Kul’drak. He and 
his captains, Hud’val and Keg’mak, rode large grey 
beasts signifying their leadership. The beasts were 
three times the size of an orken, walked on four limbs 
as thick as trees and had a large horn at the end of 
their snouts. Unlike his two captains, who were fully 
clad in their armour, Kul only had a cloth covering his 
waist and upper legs. His chest and arms fully exposed 
his red skin. The confidence he placed in his ability to 
heal led to him appearing incredibly intimating. 
Thousands of orken marched through the Hills of 
Krom on their way to Maraka. Kul did not know if 
the city had already been captured by his preliminary 
attack and if so, he would march through the 
countryside and slaughter the rest of the Maraken. He 
left behind only a few hundred orken to stay in Krag-
Ma’ak. With the massive force he had gathered, he 
also planned to find Dal’torr’s city and destroy them 
too; once and for all claiming the kingdom that was 
rightfully his. 
The march had been slow and the first portion of 
the army had exited the Hills of Krom at midday. In 
the distance, they could see the usurper city. Kul 
grinned as he noticed the pillars of smoke rising from 
the city and into the cloud-filled sky. 

 
 189 
“Well done, Sil’grum,” he said. He turned to 
another of his captains. “The city has already fallen, 
now we—” Kul’drak was interrupted by the piercing 
sound of an Orken horn. It was not the tone that 
belonged to the Draken, but that of the Torren. 
“Look to the north!” a call came from an orken 
nearby. Kul looked and saw a large force approaching 
from the north; they had just cleared the edge of 
Fal’kir and came into sight. 
Hud’val rode his beast, called by the Orken: a 
rhunka, up the side of a rocky hill nearby. He reached 
the top and thus, was able to see much better. “A 
small group is approaching apart from the army,” he 
reported. “At this moment, their army seems to be 
only two legions.” 
“Keg’mak,” the king began, “you, Hud’val and 
myself will approach. Grek!” he called for a militant 
named Grek’hid. “You are now a captain in place of 
Grom’tul. Stay with the army and be prepared to 
attack on my command.” 
The king started forward accompanied by Keg. 
Hud charged down the hill and joined them in the 
gallop toward the Torren. Just then, a cloud drifted 
over the plain they were in and heavy rain began to 
fall. 
The entirety of the Torren army had passed into 
view by the time Kul and his captains arrived. Dal’torr 

 
 190 
stood, clad in his war armour and wielding his two 
axes. The stems were shorter than that of a regular 
two-handed axe but the blades were just as large. To 
his right, stood Sil’grum and to his left, stood Ful’kag. 
Ful poised his weapon as the three draken 
dismounted and walked closer. 
“Traitors!” Kul’drak roared at Ful and Sil. 
“You are the one who has betrayed us,” Sil’grum 
said. “Hud, Keg,” he continued, “I present to you 
Ful’kag, our former commander. He is alive only by 
the allowance of our king. He spared—” 
“Enough!” Dal’torr yelled as he stepped forward 
and walked toward Kul’drak. Kul walked forward as 
well, tightly gripping his axe. 
“I never wanted any of this,” Dal whispered to 
Kul as they neared each other. “It was our mother 
who orchestrated my rebellion. And she perhaps did 
the same for Kil and Gan, who are both dead.” 
“By my hand,” Kul responded, then but an arm’s 
stretch from him. 
“No, by Ful’s hand. I know why you did not kill 
him. I know what you are feeling.” 
Kul flexed his brow in confusion. He felt a 
pounding in his chest as he heard his brother’s words. 
He remembered back to the confusion he felt as he 
spared Ful’s life and obeyed his mother’s command. 
He recalled the moment some two hundred years ago 

 
 191 
when she came to him and handed him the king’s axe. 
“You are the king now,” she had told him. Weeks later, 
she told him his brothers had betrayed him and had 
taken hundreds of orken loyal to them and started 
their own kingdoms. 
Kul’drak looked at Dal and closed his eyes. The 
confusion left him and the chaos flooded in. He 
opened his then red eyes and took hold of Dal’torr’s 
throat. Ful’kag charged forward in response to the 
attack and chopped off Kul’s outstretched arm. 
Hud’val charged toward Dal and Keg’mak charged 
toward Sil’grum. The three duels broke out with 
intensity and the sudden battle alerted the 
surrounding armies. The Torren and the Draken 
began charging toward each other. 
Kul roared as his right forearm fell to the ground. 
He swung at Ful with brutal ferocity. Despite Ful 
being able to parry the attack, the sheer force of the 
swing caused him to fall to the ground, paining his 
bad leg. 
Hud’val leapt toward Dal and swung his axe 
horizontally. Dal used both of his axes to deflect the 
attack. While deflecting, he kicked Hud’s leg as he 
landed. Hud stumbled sideways from the blow but 
lifted his axe to swing at his foe again. 
Sil’grum ran toward his charging foe and watched 
for Keg’s attack. Keg pulled his axe behind him 

 
 192 
indicating he was about to swing. They were only a 
few feet from each other when Keg’mak swung. Sil, 
as soon as he saw the attack begin, used his 
momentum to slide on the ground, passing directly 
underneath Keg’s axe. Sil’s own axe followed behind 
him and the blade drove right into Keg’s ankle. 
Kul’drak’s axe swung toward Ful, but he leapt 
backward to dodge it. He landed and immediately 
launched himself toward Kul. Holding his axe with 
both hands, he leapt high and quickly swung at Kul. 
Kul’s arm was still extended from the previous attack 
and did not have enough time to deflect Ful’s swing. 
Ful’s axe sliced into Kul’s chest. He landed and turned 
to see if he had killed Kul. Ful had barely noticed the 
axe swinging up toward his face. He quickly leaned 
back but the tip of Kul’s axe sliced up his entire torso 
and through his lower jaw. The axe blade exited 
through Ful’s cheek, and he fell backward. 
Dal put his two axes together and absorbed Hud’s 
chop. With one axe, he pushed his foe’s weapon away, 
and with the other axe, while spinning, he cut into 
Hud’s side. The attack made Hud’val lean and lose his 
balance. He sank to the ground and Dal finished him 
by chopping his other axe into Hud’s shoulder. 
Keg’mak flew forward and landed on his side. Sil 
got up from the ground and beheaded his fellow 
captain. He looked over just in time to see Ful’kag fall 

 
 193 
to the ground. And before Kul'drak had the chance to 
kill him, Sil charged. He took advantage of Kul’s one 
arm and, after deflecting an attack, stepped to the side 
and drove the tip of his axe into Kul’s chest. Seeming 
as if nothing had happened, Kul swung his axe back 
toward Sil. He chopped into Sil’s side, the ferocity of 
his swing piercing Sil’s armour. Kul stepped back, 
pulling Sil’s axe out of him and then kicked Sil to the 
ground. Sil’grum was dead before his body landed. 
Kul’drak turned back to Ful’kag who writhed in 
pain on the ground, still gripping his axe. Kul lifted 
his axe over his head, his right half-arm rose 
instinctually as if holding the axe, and just as he was 
about to chop downward, Dal threw both his axes at 
him. The short axes soared through the air and lodged 
themselves into Kul’s back. He then stood there, 
paralyzed by the weapons wedged into his spine. 
Ful’kag stood as quickly as he could, ignoring pain 
in his face and leg, and plunged his axe up into Kul’s 
chest. The blade pierced right through him and exited 
behind his shoulder. Kul’s arm swung back down, but 
Ful caught the king’s axe. He released his grip on his 
own axe and let the king's body fall backward. 
The rain ceased pouring. The roaring and 
charging orken from the two armies suddenly stopped 
shop, and many stumbled and fell, but the sight of the 
slain King Kul’drak was bewildering. It was as if all of 

 
 194 
Kru’aka stood still for a moment. The Draken and 
Torren armies were only a hundred feet from each 
other by that time and Ful’kag and Dal’torr then stood 
in between them, the duel having ended. 
Ful slowly limped toward Dal. He looked ahead 
at the orken who, until recently, had been his enemy, 
but before then was dear to him. Dal stood without a 
weapon in his hand and Ful could easily kill him. By 
doing so he would become the new king of Kru’aka. 
He had previously thought himself unworthy to live, 
for he could not find it within himself to kill Kul’drak 
in the Forest of Fal’kir. But presently, he had proven 
himself to himself. He had slain Kil’hagron, 
Gan’marak, and now Kul’drak himself. 
He reached Dal and looked him in the eye, blood 
streaming from his gouged face. As if pondering the 
same, Dal stood still, gazing intently. Ful held out 
Kul’drak’s axe and thus fell to his knees. With his head 
bowed he said to Dal’torr, “Claim your kingdom.” 
Ful’s action of submission and their slaying of 
Kul’drak, not by a single duel but by the combined 
strength and effort of the two orken, served as a 
monumental moment for the Orken; reminding all of 
the unity found in war and under a sovereign king. 
Dal’torr reached out and took hold of the axe. He 
turned and looked at his army and then at the Draken 
army. He raised the axe into the air.  

 
 195 
“Kul’drak is dead!” he shouted. “And I claim your 
loyalty as the new king of a united Kru’aka.” 
The Torren army all knelt before him and placed 
their right arms against their chests signifying their 
continued allegiance. 
Dal turned to the Draken. “What say you?” 
Grek’hid stepped forward from the clamouring 
line and, putting his right arm against his chest, he 
knelt down too. The immediate lines of the Draken 
army did the same and the news of their new king 
spread quickly down the ranks until every orken had 
heard and was kneeling. Amazement at the lack of 
warring, bloodshed, and widespread battle came upon 
all and most wondered how the day was won so 
swiftly for the other side. But to be called draken or 
torren, most cared not of the name; for it was strength 
that earned loyalty and pride. And if Kul’drak was 
dead, even such a fierce and terrible orken, his slayer 
ought to be of the greatest kings. Many would not see 
the remains of the duel, nor Dal for some time, but 
the doubt they had toward Kul’drak and yet the fear 
they had felt for him allowed their loyalty to be swiftly 
given to Dal’torr, their new king. 

 
 196 
 
IX 
BLUE SKY COVERED THE CENTRE OF 
Kru’aka. Dal’torr had given his first orders as king of 
the entire country. The orders were given to secure 
his kingship; many villages to the east of Maraka were 
inhabited by loyal maraken. 
“Fet’kan, Gur’val, and Tul’nuk,” he summoned 
his Torren captains, “you will take one legion of 
Draken and a legion of Torren and travel east to the 
Maraken villages. In addition, take with you Sil’grum’s 
two legions that, as he informed me when he joined 
my ranks, is stationed in the ruins of Maraka. Inform 
them and the Maraken villages of their new king and 
summon them to Krag-Ma’ak in one moon from 
today. On that day, I shall address all orken in Kru’aka 
and claim their loyalty.” 
“Yes, king,” they replied and ran, with a perfect 
understanding of their orders, in different directions 
to muster their troops. 

 
 197 
“Ful’kag,” Dal said, turning to his captain. “I will 
be leading the rest of these orken to Krag-Ma’ak to 
take the city. You will join me soon, but first, you 
must do something to ensure my kingship: burn that 
body,” he said pointing at Kul’drak. “I know not of 
how he can heal the way he has and I will not see him 
rise again.” 
“Yes,” Ful said placing his fist against his chest, 
“my king.” 
Dal’torr turned to Grek’hid. “You were one of 
Kul’s captains?” 
“Yes, king,” he replied. 
“You are now a Torren captain. We will march to 
Kra—” 
“Dal!” a frantic voice interrupted the king. He 
turned to see Hur’kol running toward him. Hur 
collapsed on his knees before his king. “The Geerum, 
sire,” he began while panting, “they have sieged Krag-
Ma’ak! Tuk’den has engaged them in battle, but I 
thought it best you should know. Their numbers are 
great.” 
Dal looked at Ful’kag and grinned. “Curious?” he 
asked Ful rhetorically, reminding him of their 
conversation during the previous evening. “I am 
appreciative, Hur. The time for reckless honour has 
ended. We Orken must adapt to the intelligence of 
our enemies. Your fellow captains, Fet, Gur and Tul 

 
 198 
are heading east. Go inform them: their orders have 
changed. Ful’kag,” he said turning to Ful once again, 
“your orders have not changed. Go now.” 
Ful walked toward Kul’s body, grabbed him by 
the ankles and began dragging him to Maraka. He 
hoped to find a fire still burning, despite the heavy 
rain that had fallen. 
“What are your new orders for the other 
captains?” Hur asked his king. 
  
*** 
  
The villages in western Kru’aka, just beyond 
Krag-Ma’ak, were all but inhabited. The remnants of 
living remained, yet not a life was found for all had 
answered the demanding call of Kul’drak to fight in 
the Orken civil war. 
Lar, Noma, and the pod of troagan had left the 
Geerum mountain by way of a western exit. Lar and 
Noma had never been so far from their places of 
birth, even though where they had gone would have 
been within eyesight if not for the rocks and ridges 
that ran through Kru’aka. The road was barely 
travelled and was quite swamp-like, due to the rapid 
melt. They had a three day journey in front of them, 
just to simply leave the land of Kru’aka, for the 
western plain was vast and stretched far. From there, 

 
 199 
they would be safe from the Orken; but they knew 
not of what trials and foreign races lay ahead. Yet still, 
the pressed on, knowing whatever lay before them 
ought to be greater than whatever lay behind. 
“Noma,” Lar said, breaking a long period of 
silence, “what did you mean when you said: ‘beings 
who seem to defy the rules?’” 
“Well, dear girl,” the troagan leader began in 
reply, “every race is bound by rules; laws instituted. I 
am a troagan. Thus, I am clever and resourceful, but 
extremely submissive. I may be the leader of my pod, 
but I could never command another group of any 
race. That is what made my ancestors so susceptible 
to the slavery imposed on them by the Orken when 
they migrated to the eastern land of Echrum one 
hundred years ago. And, as I mentioned to the 
Geerum king, we cannot fight. Yet, in an almost 
humorous contrast, the Orken were made for war. 
They were designed to be a perfect warrior. You do 
not need to eat or sleep as often as other races, you 
can heal with great haste, and you are strong. You are 
of the larger species in Teros and, like the Troagan, 
were labelled a…” Noma struggled to think of the 
Orken word. He knew the word as class in the 
common tongue, but such a word, meaning what he 
purposed it to mean, existed in the Orken tongue. 

 
 200 
Finally, thinking of an appropriate translation, he said, 
“Rank two species.” 
“Rank two?” Lar asked. 
“Perhaps another story for a different day. But in 
short: rank two species are capable of a limited 
number of emotions. Orken hold to hatred, anger, 
pride, and loyalty. Greed, dishonesty, shame, and love 
are emotions found in many other races that cannot 
be found in an orken. But, as I mentioned in the 
mountain, I have seen many things that stand against 
these rules.” 
“Like me?” 
“Yes, Lar.” Noma laughed. “Like you. You are 
kind and gentle and I could not imagine witnessing 
hatred inside you. That is why I am honoured you 
have joined my quest. I am honoured to be a part of 
your extraordinary life. There is an exciting future that 
awaits you.” 
“Noma…” Lar could not think of any word valid 
enough to convey her thoughts and feelings. 
“Do not worry, Lar. I know.” 
Lar walked alongside him, blushing for his kind 
words. “Would you also be an exception to the 
Troagan rule?” she asked. 
“How do you mean?” 
“Well, you have not submitted to your former 
masters. And you did not tell the truth on a few 

 
 201 
occasions. You even used the weaknesses of those 
stronger than you for the benefit of your pod. This 
does not seem like a submissive one to me.” 
Noma pondered her observations for a few 
moments and then smiled. “I suppose you are right,” 
he said with a sort of chuckle. “We have both worked 
against our laws. I suppose what we are does not 
define who we can become.” And after saying such, 
Noma felt a flush come upon him, as if becoming 
aware of something he had never pondered of. 
Suddenly he felt eyes watching him, as if the very wind 
was a presence. He wondered, if such laws existed, 
was there a lawgiver? And if there was such a thing or 
such a one in existence, was Noma working against 
that very thing? Or did whatever, or whomever, set 
forth all things into being contain the kind of heart 
and will that took pleasure in calling lesser beings out 
of darkness and into light? The questions surged in 
his thoughtful mind, but he found no answer within 
himself. Thus, he continued on, further though the 
last stretch of Orken land. 
  
*** 
  
Nightfall covered Kru’aka with a dark shroud. 
Cold air staled the grass and the white light of the 
moon overhead shone down on the leafless trees. The 

 
 202 
darkness stretched east, beyond Kru’aka and into the 
neighbouring land: Echrum. A vast plainland that still 
harboured snow from the winter. Echrum housed 
many creatures, few of which lived in the southern 
mountain range that shouldered the land.  In that 
mountain range there were, carved by history, many 
caves; some small and some grand. One cave was 
home to a dark and twisted being. That was the being 
to whom the assassin, who failed to kill the Orken 
king, Kul’drak, would have to report. 
It had been a few weeks since the altercation with 
the king. She had received her assignment and 
foolishly underestimated the power of the Orken. 
She had stayed in the small storage room for 
nearly an entire day. She knew it would take some 
time for her wounds to fully heal. If a patrol came by, 
she would hold her breath and remain stealthed until 
they were out of sight. 
She heard the Draken leave the city, toward the 
battle, and knew her chance to escape had come. She 
slowly found her way to the war chamber, retrieved 
her weapons and gathered her arrows. She searched 
through the scrolls and books on the bookshelf in the 
chamber in hopes to find something: a name. She 
quickly read through all the lists of names that were 
registered militants of the Draken army. Yet the name 
she hoped to find, was not there. 

 
 203 
She held her breath as she slowly crawled through 
the city gates and every broken bone in her body sent 
waves of pain. By the end of that day, she had arrived 
only at the Valley of Kal’ka. Her progress was 
discouraging for her and she knew it would take a 
while until she recovered properly. She found a small 
inlet in the rocky walls of the Valley that offered her 
shelter and concealment for a few days. 
When well enough to walk properly, she started 
her trek toward Echrum. She dreaded reporting that 
she had failed, but she knew no other option. She 
depended on the one she served: Sylderus. 
Her heart was beating violently as she looked at 
the cave from below. She used her wide paws to climb 
up the rocky mountainside. Once she reached the 
ledge, she crawled into the cave. 
A sharp hissing sound echoed as she entered. She 
cautiously stood still, the hood from her cloak 
concealing her face. 
“Talerim, you are foolish if you have come to face 
me,” a raspy voice slithered its way into her ears. 
“You have heard.” 
“I know most of what occurs on Teros. And how 
do you expect this is possible when fools like you are 
killed before they even engage their target?” Sylderus’ 
voice thundered in rage. “You have proven yourself 
not ready to oversee the Orken of Kru’aka.” 

 
 204 
Slowly, in the black cave, two yellow eyes 
appeared, glaring at Talerim. 
“Please, Sylderus,” she began, “do not reassign 
me. I will not allow for this to happen again.” 
“I will not allow for this to happen again.” he 
replied. “I am not reassigning you.” As he said this, 
two shadowed figures appeared behind Talerim with 
their swords drawn. She had soon realized the fate 
that had supposedly been assigned to her. But there 
was a passion driving her that would not allow her to 
submit to death. 
She quickly drew her two swords and flipped 
them in her hands so they pointed behind her. As she 
leapt into the air and flipped backward, she drove the 
blades into the chests of the beings. Her momentum 
caused them to fall backward as she flipped. Just 
before she landed, she let go of her swords and took 
hold of her bow. Her two feet landed on the ground 
just as she drew the arrow and launched it at the pair 
of eyes in the darkness. A small whirlwind composed 
of black mist manifested in the cave and the pair of 
eyes disappeared. 
Talerim grunted as she looked into the empty 
cave. She sheathed her swords, retrieved the arrow 
she had fired, and left the cave. She stood on the ledge 
and overlooked the moonlit plain before her. She 
yelled in frustration as she realized the danger she now 

 
 205 
faced: she would undoubtedly be hunted by her fellow 
assassins. She knew she had to get far away from the 
cave, as Sylderus would, most likely, have already 
dispatched the nearest assassin to the area. She 
carefully lowered herself down the mountainside and 
began her journey back to Kru’aka for her business 
with the Orken was not finished. 
 
*** 
  
Dal’torr, mounted on the grey beast the former 
king, Kul’drak, had ridden, rushed to the back of the 
Draken army toward Krag-Ma’ak. When he arrived, 
Hur’kol’s claims were confirmed: the Geerum had 
taken the city. By the time Dal had arrived, Tuk’den 
and the two legions he had with him were dead. Near 
the pile of bodies, there was a flock of large reptilian 
mounts known as eendwin. Those eendwin served the 
Geerum by granting them extremely swift travel over 
most terrain. 
Dal looked at the downed city gate, growling at 
his new city’s state. He cursed his brother for allowing 
that sacred and ancient city to be captured. If Kul 
were in his position, he would have roared and led his 
new subjects in a frontward assault on the city. He 
would have foolishly assumed the grand army at his 

 
 206 
disposal would easily overwhelm whatever numbers 
the Geerum had scraped together. 
However, Dal valued wisdom and tact. He 
dismounted from his rhunka and began to advise the 
surrounding militants of his plan. 
 
*** 
  
Maraka sat still and empty as pillars of smoke rose 
from the burned down wooden buildings. All of the 
stone structures still stood, as did a few of the wooden 
structures. As a whole, the city was in a salvageable 
state. 
Ful'kag walked, dragging his former king behind 
him. Dal’torr’s axes had been collected from the body, 
but Ful’s large axe remained buried in Kul’s chest. Ful 
pondered deeply about the previous few days. 
He had a military mind and deduced his way to a 
conclusion: Kul’drak had been eating the insects 
Kil’hagron had accredited his healing powers to. 
When Ful leapt over Kul and slashed at his chest, 
there seemed to have been little impact. Ful’s face and 
chest stung as he recalled the event that led to his own 
wound. The rapid healing ability Kul possessed 
reminded Ful of his most recent battle with the 
Hagronen in the Valley of Kal’ka. His thoughts led 
him back to the throne room and down into the pit 

 
 207 
he had been cast. He remembered the confusion and 
frustration he had in the Forest of Fal’kir as he lost 
his Draken citizenship and his loyalty to Kul.  
His thoughts then arrived at Lar. He had carried 
her through the Hills of Krom and left her with the 
Troagan. Curiosity found itself in his mind as he 
wondered where she had gone and if she was still 
alive. 
Ful’s thoughts and pondering were interrupted by 
a groan. It was not that of an injured maraken nearby 
or of a torren searching through the rubble; it was that 
of Kul’drak. Ful quickly turned to assess the noise. 
Kul’s remaining arm twitched. And Ful witnessed, 
frozen from awe, Kul’s leg slowly bend and his knee 
lift off the ground. Ful had severed Kul’s right 
forearm and the stub that remained lifted off the 
ground as well as if the arm was trying to reach for 
something. 
Kul grunted again. Ful realized he was still alive, 
yet disabled by the axe wedged into his chest. Ful 
quickly dragged him to the stockade and brought him 
down the steps. He passed the cell that he had stayed 
in the other night and dragged Kul as far down the 
hall as he could. He brought him into the last cell and 
propped him against the rock wall. He found the 
bracelet and chain, meant to hold down the prisoner, 

 
 208 
and fastened it to Kul’s left wrist. Ful, to his dismay, 
removed his axe from the former king. 
A few minutes passed before Kul’drak awoke. 
The wound in his chest remained and did not heal as 
quickly as the other one had. 
“The effect must have worn off,” Ful whispered 
to himself. 
“You…” his voice was strained and distant as if 
having been imprisoned for a long time. “Ful?” the 
former king asked. 
“It is I.” Ful quickly rushed toward Kul and struck 
him in the head with his fist. “Why?” he yelled in rage. 
“Why can I not kill you?” 
Kul groaned and let out a sigh. It was a few 
moments before he took another breath. Ful realized 
the injury Kul had would take some time to heal. He 
left the cell and locked the door behind him. With 
rage and confusion firing through his mind, he left the 
stockade and placed a large stone in front of the door. 
Every moment that passed filled him with more 
rage toward himself. He was perplexed as to why, 
after all that he thought he had accomplished, he 
indeed could not kill Kul’drak. 
  
*** 
  

 
 209 
The Geerum king stood in the war chamber 
overlooking the turned over table.  The moon in the 
clear night sky let down its silver light, illuminating the 
contents of the room. He hoped to have gained some 
knowledge by viewing the Orken’s status of warring 
with one another: weaknesses and strengths. But the 
maps were scattered across the room, caused by what 
seemed like a violent duel. 
The Geerum are vengeful and do not easily 
release the bitterness they feel toward others. When 
the Orken had first arrived in Kru’aka, they were 
unaware of the Geerum’s presence. The Orken had 
come from the southern Fire Lands: a place scorched 
by the intensity of the sun on that particular part of 
Teros. Kru’aka, unnamed at the time, was the first 
viable land they found. Their king, Ma’ak, had begun 
building his great city almost immediately. A few 
weeks after their arrival, an orken hunting party and a 
geerum hunting party crossed paths. Having a 
naturally aggressive nature, the orken attacked and 
killed the geerum hunters. They then sent scouts to 
locate the Geerum’s city, but the scouts could not find 
it. 
The Geerum, at that time, dwelt far in the 
northern reaches of the mountains that bordered 
Kru’aka. Only as they grew in population, over the 
many thousands of years, did they draw near to Orken 

 
 210 
territory. But as they drew near over the ages, more 
and more altercations between the two factions 
occurred. Finally, their contention led to war. 
The Geerum amassed their army and assaulted 
Krag-Ma’ak. They defeated a great number of the 
Orken in their assault and then retreated as more 
orken flooded in from the western villages to aid in 
the defence. The Orken king’s authority was 
challenged by Hal’drak, the first of the Draken kings, 
and the Orken kingship was taken. 
Hal’drak responded to the Geerum’s assault and, 
with the full force of his army, attacked and 
slaughtered thousands of Geerum in several 
mountains they had carved into. The Geerum stayed 
dormant for many years and did not have any 
interactions with the Orken until a great Alliance was 
formed. They joined the Grand Alliance along with 
dozens of other races, seeing the benefit of common 
trade between them. 
When the Alliance broke apart and ended in war, 
the bitterness harboured by the Geerum toward the 
Orken returned and festered for centuries, before 
rounds of attacks resumed.  
The Geerum king stood, gazing out into the 
arena, the sound of battle having faded, and recalled 
the history between the Orken and the Geerum. That 
attack was his first attack as king and he knew he 

 
 211 
needed to flee the city within a few days as the entirety 
of the Draken army would likely have conquered 
Kru’aka by then. He hoped to exact vengeance by 
ravaging the Orken’s prided city. He had instructed 
his troops to destroy, but not to burn; he knew the 
smoke would raise the army’s attention. 
Suddenly, he heard the blast of an Orken horn. 
He ran out into the street below to hear word from 
those guarding the gate. He quickly made his way to 
the east gate, where they had entered.  “What do you 
see?” 
“Nothing, 
sire!” 
a 
guard 
reported; 
and 
immediately after, another call was sounded. It 
originated from a small metallic flute; one which all 
geerum carry. The high-pitched sound echoed from 
the western side of the city. When the call faded, the 
sound of fighting vaguely reached the Geerum king’s 
ears. 
Confused, 
he 
ran 
toward 
the 
sound. 
Unfortunately, he had only just captured the city and 
had not the time to establish a perimeter of scouts on 
the city’s walls. “How could they have come back so soon? ” 
he wondered to himself. 
His sprint was intercepted by a group of geerum. 
“The Draken have returned! Their numbers are in the 
thousands!” one of them said as they blocked the 
king’s path. 

 
 212 
“And they shall be like smoke to us!” the king 
replied. “Sound the call to retreat!” 
With that, the group ran toward the east gate. 
Four long calls from the Geerum flute sounded, 
besieging all to flee. Numbers of geerum amassed at 
the gate. They mounted their eendwins and fled north 
toward their mountain. Krag-Ma’ak was soon 
swarmed; all remaining geerum were pummelled and 
slaughtered. 
As the geerum assault team fled, a few hundred 
mounted warriors, they were pursued on foot by an 
equal amount of Torren that had emerged from 
Kal’ka. The pathetic pursuers were simply a rouse; 
Dal’torr had delivered, through Hur’kol, orders for 
his three captains, along with the two legions they 
commanded and Sil’grum’s two legions, to sprint 
toward the Geerum mountain. Along the way, as they 
were instructed, each orken, Draken and Torren alike, 
picked up as many stones they could carry or as heavy 
of a boulder they could bear. Maintaining their sprint 
throughout the late evening and into the night, they 
had finally reached the mountain. 
The Geerum king led the charge of fleeing 
geerum. To his dismay and bewilderment, as he 
approached the mountain he knew as home, he 
noticed the entire entrance was buried under rock. 

 
 213 
And in front, stood some four thousand united orken 
waiting. 
To his left stood a steep and jagged ridge and to 
the Geerum king’s right: the Forest of Fal’kir. As his 
gallop slowed and his gaze set toward Fal’kir, he 
noticed the trees began to sway. However, it was not 
from a spring breeze sweeping by. Fear gripped his 
heart of stone and sent its tremors upward. He felt it 
in his eyes as he watched his enemy burst through the 
treeline. 
“A truly powerful and united kingdom they are,” the 
Geerum king thought; he had fled the city from 
Draken and now was ambushed by Torren, led by the 
Orken king, Dal’torr. 
“To the ridge! Climb! Climb! Climb!” he shouted, 
turning toward the wall of rock. The king hoped his 
eendwin could scale the ridge with its agile and 
powerful body. Dozens of the creatures, with geerum 
atop, leapt up onto the wall. Despite their efforts, the 
ridge was too steep and its rocks were loose causing 
many to fall and crash against the cruel plain. Those 
who landed were met by the charging orken. 
When his eendwin’s webbed feet finally gave in, 
the Geerum king leapt off and soared. He gripped his 
massive hammer and struck the heads of a few orken 
as he landed. He smashed his way through many 

 
 214 
more; most of his own troops, however, not having 
such luck. 
Orken fell, as did geerum. The numbers staggered 
down on both sides, but the horde of orken eventually 
won. Dal’torr approached the Geerum king, who had 
made for himself a clearing in the chaos, and Dal, with 
a roar, raised his two axes. 
The duel broke out in intensity as the last of the 
other geerum fell. Dal was unable to parry the strikes 
of the fierce geerum. He threw his axes from a short 
distance only as a distraction. As the Geerum king 
deflected the soaring blades, Dal stepped in and took 
hold of the hammer’s shaft. He kicked off of the 
geerum’s chest and side flipped through the air. He 
landed on one hand and his two feet as his other hand 
then held his foe’s weapon. 
The Geerum king yelled but before he could take 
hold of his enemy’s grounded axes, his own hammer 
struck his head. The blow was so sharp and powerful 
that the snapping of his neck looked as though a twig 
was tossed in a prairie wind. His body sank to the 
ground and remained motionless. Some five hundred 
lay dead in the plain that separated the two kingdoms. 
Dal’torr raised the Geerum king’s hammer in the 
air and let out a roar. And though his victory there 
could warrant an assault on those in the mountain, 
although Dal knew not of how else to enter, he cared 

 
 215 
only for the restoration of his own city; the one he 
had just made claim to as its king. 
  
*** 
 
The red sun began to descend in the sky as the 
afternoon waned. It had been three days since, as 
Ful’kag had named and popularized, the battle of the 
Plains of Dal. Ful hastily rode on a rhunka, headed 
south. He had long since left Kru’aka and was 
sprinting through the southern forestlands. That vast 
forest housed many creatures and made up the 
majority of the Thralnan country. There would have 
been many safer routes for an orken to travel as 
Thralnan’s inhabitants once warred against the Orken 
of Kru’aka. 
When the war with the Geerum had come to a 
halt, the bloodthirsty Orken set south and harassed a 
race called the Felnir. The Felnir were segregated into 
different tribal species, but their combined numbers 
proved much larger than that of the Orken. 
Nonetheless, the Orken were stronger and slew 
countless thousands in the centuries of their warring. 
When the four factions of Kru’aka were formed, 
shortly after Kul’drak became king, the Felnir were 
allowed to repopulate and recover in peace. But the 

 
 216 
hatred for the Orken remained thick in the hearts of 
the remaining felnir in Thralnan. 
Ful’kag knew this and even expected an ambush 
along the way, but he had less than a month before 
Dal’torr addressed the entirety of the Orken of 
Kru’aka and Ful was personally requested to be in 
attendance. Yet he needed to go where he had set off 
to and he knew, if he pushed his rhunka’s speed, the 
goal could be achieved. 
He was, in fact, travelling to the very place Lar and 
Noma were also venturing to; the city of the Grand 
Alliance. He navigated through the southern lands, to 
which he had seldom been, with the aid of maps he 
had found in Elder Krom’jun’s chambers. Although 
the city to which he was set would undoubtedly be in 
ruins, he was led to believe there remained an 
extensive library of documents. He hoped to find an 
explanation for all his confusion. 
He had come upon this information and theory 
of the city after returning to Krag-Ma’ak. His 
reappearance was not as he expected but near what he 
hoped; as all the orken were focussed on the repairing 
of the city, he was able to enter the city undetected. 
He still felt as though he were a fugitive and he likely 
would never be able to call the place his home again. 
He sought out an elder in the hopes of gaining 
guidance for his feelings. Krom’jun was the orken he 

 
 217 
sought specifically as he was the oldest and wisest of 
the elders. However, he happened upon Kon’kra who 
informed him of Kul’s disbanding of the Council, of 
Du’kan and Kag’jun’s deaths, and of Krom’jun having 
left the city. There remained six elders in the city, yet 
their status had not been changed. Ful’kag, with this 
new information, pondered to himself where a wise 
and truly loyal orken such as Krom’jun would have 
gone. Krom was loyal, not singularly to a king but, 
having served many kings in his time, he was loyal to 
the Orken as a whole. Thus, his decisions and 
thoughts were toward the welfare of the Orken. Ful 
took it upon himself to investigate and he hoped to 
find Krom in order to question him. 
Ful had entered Krom’s unguarded quarters and 
searched the room. Aside from a suit of armour 
strung up on the wall and the two pegs that held 
Krom’s mighty axe, there was only a long wooden bed 
and a table in the room. Ful examined the contents of 
the table: a few maps and a scroll labelled: “Lineages of 
the Orken.” 
Ful considered it interesting, quickly looked upon 
it, and searched for his name. He found his family 
name: Kag, but neither his name nor his father’s, were 
present. He presumed the scroll was out-dated and 
grouped the maps in as well. One showed a Kru’aka 
that did not have the city of Maraka labelled, dating it 

 
 218 
back some two hundred years. Another map was of a 
country named Shatheria. The map showed the 
country immediately north to it was Thralnan and Ful 
knew Thralnan was just south of Kru’aka. On the map 
that displayed Shatheria, a city stood in the centre. It 
seemed to be quite large and had the words hovering 
above it: “the city of the Grand Alliance.” Ful found this 
intriguing and saw that the city itself was outlined by 
a circle of black charcoal. He looked to his right and 
found a charcoal pencil on the table. 
From his observations, Ful deduced that Krom 
went on a journey where he expected to have no 
conflict and he was heading south for the grand city 
in order to search their records for Orken lineages. He 
felt confident enough to pursue Krom, yet some 
things lacked their logic: the country to his south, 
Thralnan, was hostile to Orken and Krom would 
likely have needed to equip his axe. Yet it remained 
on the wall. 
“Why would a dead city be of use to Krom? ” Ful 
thought. “Not a soul has been there for a thousand years. Or 
perhaps so...”  
Ful’s pondering continued as he galloped through 
the forests of Thralnan; travelling to the very place 
Lar had already begun her journey to. 
  
*** 

 
 219 
  
The days were getting warmer, and the sun stood 
in the sky longer, bringing much relief to the troagan 
Lar travelled with. She wondered how they ever, even 
if in the southern regions, survived the harsh winters 
Kru’aka had to offer. Yet presently, they were nearing 
the end of that dreadful country. The villages ended 
and a marshy stretch was trudged, and at last, the sight 
of a tapered treeline came into view. The land 
declined slightly as they proceeded south, so the 
moisture of the melted winter followed them, and the 
first row of short trees stood in shallow water. The 
sunlight and blue sky above reflected off the water 
and each tree looked twice as tall, standing as they did 
and being reflected at their feet, so the forthcoming 
land looked erroneously beautiful. And it was. For all 
the unknown terrors it beheld, nothing seemed worse 
than what had preceded the pod and the orken girl.  
Upon passing a short tree, Lar looked to Noma in 
question. “Is it a good time for you to explain more 
about my being a rank two species?” 
Noma smiled, as was becoming his custom 
whenever Lar spoke. “Yes, it is. I will start by saying 
that I care not for such designations. However, as you 
may have gathered, long ago there was an alliance of 
kinds. The Geerum, Troagan, and even the Orken 
were all unified. Many other kinds too! Yet there 

 
 220 
remained obvious tensions. The time of peace 
brought forth many innovations: a common language, 
measurement, and even a form of currency. But one 
race, unlovingly referred to by the Orken as the 
Gizon, invented a ranking system to determine a 
kind’s standing in the Alliance. The Gizon, as well as 
the Geerum and others, were considered rank three 
races due to their range of intellect and emotion. The 
Orken and the Troagan were considered rank two. 
For we are limited to only a handful of emotions, or 
at least we should be. Beasts such as the truka and the 
rhunka and hares and other sorts were referred to as 
rank one species.” 
“Are rank three races better than those of rank 
two?” Lar began in question. “It seems rank two 
would be of higher ability than rank one if you were 
to compare us to hares.” 
“That was the thought behind the ranks.” 
Lar crossed her bare brow. “That seems… I fail 
to think of the word.” 
“Rude, malicious, and…” Noma himself paused 
as he recalled the word, “arrogant.” 
“How is it you know all you do, Noma?” 
Noma laughed. “We rank two species,” he began 
mockingly, “are gifted with the memories of our 
ancestors.” 
“How do you mean?” 

 
 221 
Noma’s head perked up. He enjoyed the many 
questions of Lar; never had he met such an inquisitive 
orken. “When I seed an egg, my memories and the 
memories of the mother are carried down into the 
tadling. It is the same with you; those who sired you 
have passed knowledge to you. Therefore, an orken 
may awaken from birth and not require meticulous 
training like other races need, such as the Gizon.” 
“That seems a great advantage for building a 
species,” Lar said. 
“I agree. It is merely a difference in design, I 
suppose. And the Orken agreed too. They were 
outraged by the claim that they were lesser than all 
gizon. So, in a show of their strength, the Orken 
slaughtered every single gizon. And it proved easy as 
the Orken were twice in size and four times in 
strength. And not only the Gizon; the Orken attacked 
many kinds in this land. Thus, the Alliance was 
shattered.” 
“Did not other kinds wish to keep peaceful 
relations and the common things founded?” 
“Yes,” Noma replied, “but the Gizon were 
natural leaders, and they were the ones who initiated 
and funded the Alliance.” 
“Do many other races hate the Orken now?” 
“It would be difficult to find a place in Teros 
where the Orken are not hated,” Noma quipped. 

 
 222 
Lar focused her eyes on the ground, being quieted 
for a while. She noticed the markings on her arms and 
thought back to the horror they had brought her in 
Krag-Ma’ak. 
Noma realized his comment had downcast her 
and spoke to comfort her. “Fret not, my dear child,” 
he said as he took her hand again. “You are no orken 
and anyone could see that.” 
The two laughed at his statement. They thought it 
such a foolish and childish thing to say for it was 
plainly false, but never truer to the pair. 
Then the trees were taller, coming above Noma’s 
height and reaching Lar’s chest so that she could see 
well behind her, but her view was limited ahead for 
the heights continued and leaves were thickening and 
the green of the foreland was beginning its 
encompassing display. There was no clear beginning 
to the next country, Thralnan, as there was no clear 
end to Kru’aka. The rising trees were the border and 
soon a dense treeline was before them, and then they 
knew they were out of their former country.  
Passing through the forest, Lar grinned with each 
step in Thralnan. Though she did not know the name 
of the land she was in, she rejoiced in it. For her 
twenty years of life, she had spent every day, except 
for the last few, protected by trees. The thickness of 
the Thralnan forests reminded her of her old home. 

 
 223 
She thought of Noma and how he was brave enough 
to leave his home and seek a better one. She had 
remained beside Noma the entire journey so far. And 
thinking of her old home, brought her mind to 
wonder of things that had happened to her in the 
previous weeks. Life had changed entirely for her. 
And as if some shroud was lifted off her, leaving 
Kru’aka allowed much to occur within her mind. One 
thing of which was worth inquiring of: the symbols 
upon her arms. She remembered when she had 
received them and was forced to the forest floor, 
degraded like property. She remembered loving them 
then for what they meant of her, although she knew 
not their literal meaning. And then she remembered 
something that was bleak to her: a blackness in her 
mind of memories she was not allowed to ponder of. 
Feelings she was disallowed from feeling for some 
purpose she knew not. But standing at the door of her 
heart, were things she wished to recall.  
Alas, she spoke again to her troagan companion. 
“What even do these cursed symbols mean?” she 
asked holding out her arms, ripping her hand out of 
Noma’s. 
“They are Orken. An older writing to be sure, but 
they are Orken still. The symbols on your right arm 
read: Hagron, the Orken word for hunter and the 

 
 224 
name of the king. And the symbols on your left arm 
are derogatory for one who is enslaved.” 
“I hate—” Lar began but was stopped. As she 
spoke, thoughts flooded. In a moment she was filled 
with the memories of a life she once lived. Not prior 
to her birth, for nothing of the sort could ever occur, 
but prior to the grip of depravity wrought her. 
Somehow, somewhere, somewhen, there was a time 
when she clung yet to innocence, clinging not by her 
own will or anything of herself, but by something 
external. Someone. Now came to her the memory of 
a being who sought her in the woods of her youth. 
Such a one had come to her and sheltered her from 
the darkness that reigned about her and such a one 
had done for her things too wonderful for her to 
fathom then. And thus, despite the flooding 
memories, all such light was then hidden neath the 
shadows that still covered her. But feelings welled up 
within her from the sealed memories. Finally, she 
continued softly and in a whisper, “I think I hate 
them.” 
“And you have reason to,” said Noma quickly, 
thinking nothing of her sudden quieting. “But I 
admire them a little. They will always remind me of 
how you came to save my pod from certain death, 
being a slave yourself. Now the both of us, and all 
those about us, can say surely we were once slaves. 

 
 225 
Now free. Unto what? Ha! Peace is what I hope. But 
even death in the pursuit of liberty is sweeter than life 
in slavery, I should think.” 
Lar let out a small smile, supressing further the 
strangeness that had come upon her. Curiosity of her 
sudden light heart and soft mind barely bothered her. 
For the grace that had been bestowed upon her found 
its home within her again. Not for its departure, but 
for Lar’s deep realizing of it, so far buried that it was 
not a thing to ponder of. “We are not there yet,” she 
said softly, knowing the phrase was neither crass nor 
lovely. 
“True,” Noma began, “but every step we take in 
the direction away from Kru’aka, is a step further 
down the path of our freedom.” 
Noma took Lar’s hand once again, and that time 
she held on. The two marched forward as their pod 
followed behind. 
“Journey south for two months,” thought Lar, recalling 
the king of the Geerum’s words to her, “and you will 
see a large mountain. Go toward this mountain and you will 
find the city. From there, you may be able to find a map that 
will lead you to peace.”  
Peace. She wondered if she had ever felt it, or if 
even she deserved it. And yet, for all her wondering, 
and for the grace that was then hidden within her, she 
knew she had felt it and that she did not deserve it, 

 
 226 
but her unworthiness did not make anything of the 
sort beyond reach. For she knew, although she did not 
know presently, but could remember at least the 
feeling of what it was to know such, that if grace was 
a gift, the only act of the receiver was to receive.

 
227 
X 
A FORTNIGHT HAD PASSED SINCE FUL’S 
departure from Kru’aka. The forestry of Thralnan 
proved to be as hostile as he had suspected. He rode 
through every night and, despite the hostile threats of 
lurking creatures, he arrived at the city of the Alliance 
unharmed. On occasion, his rhunka halted for a few 
hours of rest or because some fearsome creature 
stood in their path. But none were more fearsome and 
ferocious than Ful’kag. With determination birthed 
from confusion and anger, he raced through the 
forest, hacking at anyone who wished to see an orken 
fall by their hand. 
When he arrived at the city he was underwhelmed 
by its lack of splendour and glory. Huge stone 
columns lay in pieces and what remained of the 
structures were covered in centuries of weed growth. 
Not a single corner of the city seemed as if it had been 
useful for any purpose, other than housing critters, for 
a millennium. 

 
 228 
Ful dismounted his exhausted rhunka and walked 
toward the scathed city. He had arrived at a northern 
entrance where the wall surrounding the city was 
crumbled as far as his eye could see. He entered into 
a sort of bush-filled courtyard and walked amongst 
tall grass and atop a thick layer of moss, covering what 
once was a grand marble floor. He arrived at a 
staircase that, from many years of sweeping wind, had 
almost become a subtle ramp as opposed to having 
defined steps. He reached the top of the steps and 
gazed upon a shattered door. The door remained 
massive in size, stretching up four times his height, yet 
it had been splintered down the middle and rotted 
wood had made several holes in it. He walked through 
one of the holes and into the large structure. It was 
hollow and without a single piece of furniture or 
decoration. There was a foul stench that filled the air 
from ages of critters taking shelter in the city’s 
abandoned halls. 
Ful’kag walked on in hopes of finding the library. 
Every sign barely remained legible and was written in 
the common language, which he was fortunate to 
have been taught by Krom’jun. 
It had been only a few hours when Ful spotted 
the first one: a small brown creature that ran along the 
floor. The creature was about the size of his fist and 
quickly scurried away from him when he noticed its 

 
 229 
presence. Thinking very little of it, Ful searched on. 
However, as another hour passed, a small group of 
the creatures approached him. In the common 
language, one of them said, “Welcome, orken.” 
Ful, startled and puzzled replied, “Who are you? 
Where might I find the…” Ful struggled for a 
moment as he attempted to recall the word; he had 
not spoken the common tongue frequently since he 
learned it after becoming a commander. “Library?” 
“We are gophelian. Who are you?” the same 
gophelian who had welcomed him earlier said with a 
soft and squeaky voice. 
“My name is Ful’kag, I am of the Torren kingdom 
in Kru’aka.” 
“Ah yes, yes! Kru’aka has been very busy as of 
late. Dal’torr has just become king, yes?” 
“Yes… how do you know this?” Ful replied 
curiously. 
“We are gophelian and I am Gerh. We are to 
record all that takes place in Teros.” 
“Record?” 
“Yes! Surely that is why you have arrived here 
today? You have come seeking information like the 
orken before you.” 
“Yes, I am here for information. Was the orken 
you speak of Krom’jun?” 

 
 230 
“Ful’kag of the Torren kingdom in Kru’aka, 
everyone’s affairs are our affairs. But we do not let 
others know of another’s affairs. If this Krom’jun was 
here, you will need to ask that of him. Is this the 
information you have come to seek?” 
“No, I wish to see any recent documents you have 
on Orken lineages.” 
“Recent documents?” the small gophelian said in 
a surprised tone. “Now Ful’kag, do you truly not 
know who we are?” 
“Should I?” 
“I would give you a tour and show you the 
‘library,’ as you so call it, but you would never fit… 
explaining will have to do! Come with me!” The 
gophelian, along with the few others with him, ran off 
down the hall they were in. Ful’kag walked behind 
them. “We record everything that happens in Teros. 
Our reach of recorders stretches as far as any map 
could lead you. Every week the recorder is replaced 
with a new gophelian and the other travels back to file 
their findings.” 
“File?” Ful asked. 
“This city is on top of our city! Every path leading 
to and from other countries leads here and our entire 
operation is beneath the surface! This ensures we do 
not need to interfere with the happenings of a country 
or village in order to observe.” 

 
 231 
They turned down a few halls and finally arrived 
at a room with a large table in it. “Now, Ful’kag, you 
have come seeking information. But I must ask that 
you offer me something in return. If you give me 
some information I do not know, I will give you some 
information you do not know.” 
Ful’s chest flared as annoyance built up in him. 
“What do you want to know?” 
“Well, you see, Ful’kag. Dal’torr has lived in an 
underground bunker that was created by the Geerum 
and finished with iron by the Orken. Thus, we have 
not been able to penetrate it. If you could give me 
some information on those living there, I would 
greatly appreciate being able to update their lineage 
scrolls.” 
“I only know the names of a few captains in his 
army.” 
“You told me you were of the Torren kingdom… 
surely you must know more than a few names?” Gerh 
asked accusingly. 
“Until recently I was of the Draken kingdom.” 
Just as Ful said this, a gophelian ran out of a hole 
in the wall and entered the room with a small scroll in 
his mouth. The gophelian Ful was conversing with 
took the scroll, opened it, and read it. “Ful’kag of the 
Draken! You fought the recent battle in the valley of 
Kal’ka?” he asked in excitement. 

 
 232 
Ful grunted with discomfort. “Yes.” 
“What can you tell me of the Hagronen and their 
king? They were victorious in the battle but there are 
tales not a single Hagronen remains alive! We have no 
information on them and what happened to them. If 
you are able to tell us about how they all died we will 
gladly give you any information you need!” 
Ful grinned and felt as though he too had just 
been victorious in a battle. He began to tell Gerh all 
that had happened to him in the previous week; 
starting with the battle in Kal’ka, Kul’drak’s slaughter 
of the Hagronen, and the battle in the Plains of Dal. 
Being a weaker species, the Gophelian were unable to 
venture into Fal’kir on foot for fear of death and 
neither underground due to the thick network of 
roots. They were delighted to hear Ful’kag’s 
knowledge of the matter. 
When he finished detailing the recent events in 
Kru’aka, Gerh, the gophelian he had been speaking 
to, asked, “You have requested recent documents 
pertaining to Orken lineages; are there specific clans 
you wish to follow?” 
“Kag,” Ful said. “I wish to see the lineage of my 
clan.” 
“Of course,” Gerh bowed and then ran off into a 
hole in the wall. A few others remained in the room 
and simply stood on their hind legs and stared at Ful. 

 
 233 
After a few minutes of the uncomfortable scene, 
Gerh returned along with several others holding 
scrolls in their mouths. “Here are our records for the 
Kag clan, starting with the most recent: Gun’kag, 
birthed five years ago,” he said. 
Ful opened the first scroll; it contained hundreds 
of names with lines connecting them in sequence of 
birth. At last, he found his: Ful’kag, with lines 
stretching upward connecting him to those who sired 
him: Ful’kag and Har’jun and from there, upward 
stretched the lines that connected them to many other 
orken. However, as his eyes ran up the scroll, he 
spotted a name that was different from the rest. 
About six generations before him, there was the 
name: Jamnon. That Jamnon was connected via a 
horizontal line to a Nul’kag suggested the two were 
joined and produced offspring, Ful’kag being a 
descendant of them. Ful looked up and met eyes with 
Gerh. 
“Who is this Jamnon?” he asked, showing the 
gophelian the name on the scroll. 
“I do not know offhand,” he replied. “May I take 
this scroll and reference the name Jamnon? My search 
should not take more than an hour.”  
“You may.” Ful gazed upon the other scrolls of 
the Kag clan while the gophelian was searching. No 

 
 234 
such similar name was found. All the names were that 
of an orken. 
The hour passed but felt like an entire day to Ful. 
To his impatient relief, the gophelian returned with a 
few more scrolls. “Jamnon, male, commonly used 
exclusively by the Gizon, as you have called them.” 
Ful’s neck jerked as he heard the astonishing 
words. “The Gizon are dead…” 
“Perhaps. But this Jamnon in your clan’s lineage 
lived close to a millennium ago. Around the time the 
Gizon were slaughtered by the Orken.” 
“This Jamnon,” Ful said slowly and softly, “was a 
Gizon?” 
“It seems as such. Nothing else of him I know.” 
Ful’kag felt his legs weaken. He braced himself 
against the table. His weight caused it to slide a little. 
“Then I am not—” 
“Fully Orken. Correct,” Gerh interrupted, 
himself being shocked by the news. 
Ful’s mind ran faster than the rhunka had taken 
to get to the city. He ran through his life and his 
thoughts lingered on his experience in the Forest of 
Fal’kir. 
“My great king...” Ful had said to Kul’drak. “You 
should strike me where I stand for my thoughts betray you… 
No orken has ever spared the life of an attacker. No orken 

 
 235 
king has spared the life of a commander who has failed in battle. 
And yet you have done both.” 
He remembered Kul’drak’s response: “Ful… I felt 
something I cannot explain… I could not kill you. I feel things 
no orken has felt and I have done things no orken has done.” 
The confusion that had filled Ful then, seemed to 
be distant now as clarity began to reveal the truth. 
“I do not understand what madness has driven the Orken 
way from you, and for that, I cannot submit to your rule… It 
is not the shame of my loss that has driven me to desert you. It 
is my lack of faith in you as my king. My lack of faith in you 
as an orken… If you have but a spark of the same fire I once 
felt in my chest, do me the honour of executing me.” 
The shame he felt drifted away as his thoughts 
stretched toward Dal’torr. He recalled the scroll 
Gan’marak had sent to Dal with Ful. 
“He requests your help…” Ful had said in confusion. 
“Have you known an orken to ask for such? ” Dal had 
begun in question. “It is indeed unlike a king to do so… 
Why did you go back to Krag-Ma’ak, and not do your duty by 
dying in battle? ” 
“I was…”  
“Curious?” Dal had said the word in the common 
tongue. “If the word is not in the orken language, why are you 
and I experiencing it ? ” 

 
 236 
The anger Ful had felt swiftly fled as he came to 
the conclusion his thoughts were leading to: he was 
not a full-blooded orken. 
“May I see the lineage for Kul’drak? For the clan 
of Drak?” 
“These records,” Gerh said in reply while running 
toward the hole in the wall, “were recently accessed 
and have not been refiled. I will return momentarily!” 
Ful stood in absolute silence as Gerh was 
retrieving the scroll. He returned with several scrolls 
and gave Ful the one in which the kingly line was 
recorded. Ful read the scroll; the same structure 
applied to that scroll as his clan’s. He read through the 
names of the Draken clan. He found Kul’drak’s name 
and next to his was Kil’drak, later renamed 
Kil’hagron. Another name was connected to the pair: 
Gur’drak, killed by Kul at a young age. The three 
orken kin were linked by vertical lines to the mated 
pair: Kal’drak and Jul’drak. However, to Ful’s 
surprise, Jul’drak was also connected by a horizontal 
line to Darg’drak, and the scroll suggested their 
offspring were Dal’drak, renamed Dal’torr, and 
Gan’drak, renamed Gan’marak. Ful curiously read 
upward in great anticipation. Kal’drak and Darg’drak 
were the offspring of the same two orken. He read on 
and stretched back to almost a dozen generations but 
did not find any name that was unusual. He had 

 
 237 
expected, based on the similar peculiar behaviour of 
all four kings he had recently experienced, to find a 
name belonging to a gizon in the Draken lineage. 
He paused for a few moments and then his mind 
led him back to his conversation with Dal’torr, 
particularly when he had left the room; he had passed 
Jul’drak. He knew that female to be the one who 
birthed Kul’drak. However, he had just learned she 
was the mother of all four kings in Kru’aka. 
“This female,” he said to Gerh, “Jul’drak. Do you 
have the section of the Draken lineage her birth is 
recorded in?” 
“It will most likely be one of the scrolls I have 
already brought out,” Gerh said this and then began 
to squeak and chirp to the other gophelian in the 
room. As though they had understood the sounds, 
they began opening the scrolls and scouring through 
them. One of them raised their arm, ran to Gerh, and 
handed him the scroll. 
Gerh approached Ful and showed him Jul’drak’s 
name on the scroll. Ful crouched down, took it and 
quickly read upward. To his surprise, even though it 
was what he searched for, he found the name: Sulos. 
Sulos and a female named Val’drak had mated and 
produced Rag’drak, who sired Jul’drak. 
“Sulos,” Ful said cautiously. “What form of a 
name is that?” 

 
 238 
“Sulos…” Gerh began thoughtfully. “It is 
structured the same as most Gizon names. And look,” 
he said as he examined the scroll, “his appearance is 
near the same time as Jamnon’s in the Kagen lineage. 
Ful’kag! It is clear to me now! At this time, a 
millennium ago, there was the Grand Alliance. Two 
of the races in that Alliance were the Orken and the 
Gizon. It must have been that for a period in history, 
during that time of peace, the two races joined 
together and mingled!” 
“You suggest there are more orken with Gizon 
blood in them?” Ful questioned. 
“There is but one way to learn.” Gerh began 
chirping to his fellow gophelian. The several others in 
the room ran through the hole and went 
underground. 
“To where are they going?” Ful asked. 
“They are going to search the Orken lineages that 
date back one thousand years for any names that are 
of the Gizon. Oh, how have we never known of this?” 
“I suppose this is the reason for which Krom 
sought this place,” Ful said to himself. “Yet what has he 
done with this information? ” he thought. “Does he intend 
on returning to Kru’aka? If so, what would be his intent? ” 
“I suppose you have a lot of pondering to do, 
Ful’kag of the Torren kingdom in Kru’aka,” Gerh 
began. “My gophelian will require several hours to go 

 
 239 
through all of the records. I suggest you breathe some 
of the wondrous Shatherian air while you wait. Do 
you need me to show you the way?” 
“I will find it on my own,” he replied and then left 
the room. He slowly walked down the halls he had 
journeyed before. The questions he had been asking 
himself and raging for lack of an answer, no longer 
plagued him. And though he had learned the truth of 
himself, he had never felt more displaced. 
 
*** 
 
One month had passed since Dal’torr became the 
king of Kru’aka. The warm sun commanded the 
season of awakening in the land. Green covered the 
land as life bloomed. A crisp breeze brushed across 
southern Kru’aka as Ful gazed upon the grand city of 
Krag-Ma’ak. Dal had restored its glory and revived the 
war-struck city. Ful entered through the gates; 
wooden replacements hung as the thick iron originals 
were still being repaired. He looked at the large statue 
of King Ma’ak: it still stood despite the Geerum’s 
assault. Ful admired the grandeur of the city; he had 
been their countless times and had explored every 
corner. Yet he looked at each stone on the ground, 
each outline of the buildings and the great arena in the 
War Hall as if he were exploring a foreign place. His 

 
 240 
newfound clarity set upon him eyes with which to see 
old things in a new light. 
Ful found the king where he was expected to be: 
on the throne. Thousands of orken had been arriving 
at the city from all across Kru’aka in the previous few 
days and Dal was, for most of the days, situated on 
his throne to accept greetings from each village’s 
respective leader. 
“Ful’kag,” Dal said as Ful walked through the 
throne room’s tall doors, “with but one day left to 
spare, you have returned.” 
“Yes, my king,” Ful said as he kneeled in a familiar 
spot. He looked up and saw six of nine fires burning 
on the elder’s balconies. Dal had restored their 
positions, yet Krom’jun had not yet returned. 
“Rise, Ful,” Dal said. “Was your quest 
successful?” he asked. 
“It indeed was, my king. I have this to return to 
you.” Ful stood up and approached the throne. He 
extended his arm and in his hand he held a small 
scroll. Dal gestured with two of his fingers for Ful to 
hand it to him personally. Ful walked up two steps 
and placed the scroll in the king’s hand. 
“Its contents are for you alone, my king,” Ful 
whispered and then walked back down the path and 
out of the building. 
Dal opened the scroll and read its words: 

 
 241 
 
MY GREAT KING, DAL’TORR. I REQUEST 
THAT YOU MEET ME AFTER THE SUN’S 
SETTING IN THE WAR CHAMBER. I WILL 
ARRANGE FOR OUR PRIVACY. PLEASE 
ENSURE YOU DO THE SAME AS I HAVE 
DISCOVERED 
A 
MATTER 
OF 
GREAT 
IMPORTANCE 
PERTAINING 
TO 
THE 
ORKEN. 
 
*** 
  
Blackness swallowed Kru’aka. The sun had set 
and Ful awaited his king’s arrival in the war chamber. 
He had an adequate amount of time to ponder the 
life-altering information he had discovered. He had 
yet to find his purpose or an answer about Krom but 
his mind did piece together certain things concerning 
Jul’drak. 
Orken do not hold the ties to a mother or a father 
as another race may. Their sole loyalty is to their king, 
a more powerful orken. The only time this loyalty 
wanes is in the case of an elder or in a weak king. 
Elders serve many kings in their time and thus their 
loyalty is drawn toward that of the orken beneath 
them, as is the king’s. The exception to having 
unbroken ties to one’s family, and Ful had never 

 
 242 
considered this possibility before, was not being 
entirely of the Orken. 
Kul’drak displayed loyalties to his brother 
Kil’hagron and even, as Ful had realized, to Dal and 
Gan: they had been allowed to flourish and grow 
under his reign. Ful had never witnessed any dealings 
between Kul and Jul’drak, yet her appearing to 
Dal’torr was proof of her connection to the conflict 
in Kru’aka. He did not know of how any proof of 
such a suspicion could come about, but his discovery 
of her having a large portion of Gizon blood in her 
led him to guess her own struggles were much more 
severe than his. And he wished for such struggles to 
not plague the Orken as Kul’drak’s and his own 
struggles had plagued him. 
The darkness had seized the sky, yet Krag-Ma’ak 
remained lit by the many torches and fires that 
burned. It was a sign of strength to have an ever-
awake city. Dal walked its streets on his way to the 
war chamber. 
He had recently rebuilt the damaged areas of the 
city and had been meeting with the village leaders, 
previously from both the Draken and Maraken 
kingdoms. He ensured them that him having the 
loyalty of all orken rested not only on his strength, but 
also on their allegiance. He boldly reminded them that 
if their loyalty was not given, he would take their lives. 

 
 243 
He had also reinstated the Council of Elders. Upon 
discovering two members were dead and one had left 
the kingdom, he met with each elder to gain insight 
on recent dealings in the city and whom they might 
see as successors for the definite two empty balconies 
and the possible third. Each member voiced their 
impression of Kul’drak. Although they were 
impressed with Kul’s apparent victory over 
Kil’hagron, their frustration for his decisions 
remained. None of them could explain his recent 
erratic behaviour and his ability to heal. However, all 
six informed Dal of Jul’drak’s appearances in their 
sessions. Kul frequently allowed her access to the 
throne room and even allowed the voicing of her 
opinions. She almost held the status of an elder, 
despite her being female. 
Dal recalled the day, some two hundred years 
before, when he was approached by Jul and she 
coerced him to abandon the Draken line and form a 
kingdom of orken under his leadership; it was no 
more than a week after Kul had declared kingship. He 
had obeyed her then, but his thoughts led him to 
when he had not. It was just before the battle of the 
Plains of Dal. The rage he had felt toward her began 
to swell within him again as he recalled her words: 
“Our desires are not the same. You will kill all those who have 
not sworn allegiance to your name.” 

 
 244 
Her words had angered him then and they 
continued to anger him as he pondered her dealings 
with his and Kul’s former kingdoms. 
The door to the chamber creaked open and 
Dal’torr walked through. Ful’kag awaited his arrival, 
overlooking the arena below. He turned and greeted 
his king. “Hail, Dal’torr.” 
“Hail, Ful. What is the meaning of such secrecy?” 
Dal asked. 
“I have discovered a truth about the Orken in 
Kru’aka. Kul’drak, Kil’hagron, Gan’marak, myself, 
thousands of orken, and you, are partial descendants 
of the Gizon.” 
“Madness!” Dal yelled after a single moment of 
pondering. 
“A few generations ago,” Ful began, “about a 
millennium of time, the Gizon and the Orken 
produced offspring and we are of such offspring.” 
“How… how can you know this?” Dal asked. 
“The city of the Grand Alliance is where I 
ventured. I met those who trace the lineages of all 
races. Upon requesting my own, I discovered a gizon 
six generations before my birth. I then requested 
Kul’drak’s and found your name, along with Gan’s 
and Kil’s, listed as Kul’s kin. The grandsire of Jul’drak, 
the one who birthed you, mated with a female of the 
Gizon.” 

 
 245 
“This is an outrage, Ful!” 
“This is indeed the truth! It is the reason for our 
being plagued with confusion and feelings that are 
foreign! Additionally, I have been pondering, my king, 
about this to great extent and have a suggestion: has 
Jul’drak incited you, at any time, to consider thoughts 
an orken would not?” 
“Speak clearly.” 
“I am suspicious of Jul’drak’s role in this war. I 
was present when she visited you and I am curious if 
she had an influence on Kul’s kingship as well. If this 
were so, I would advise you, as a captain under your 
command, to expel her.” 
“Your words should be watched, Ful’kag. But it is 
our near equality that allows you to speak as such. 
Regardless, I have not the time for this care. I have 
the loyalty of a kingdom to command and declaring 
myself as anything less than an orken would surely be 
my undoing. Pursue what you may and ponder what 
you wish; but this is your affair, not mine.” 
Dal turned and just before he exited the chamber 
he looked back and said, “And with regard to your 
being a captain under my command; I have plans to 
change that status tomorrow before my kingdom. 
Stand by my side when I speak.” 
He walked down the hall and out of sight. Ful’s 
words, however, brought forth a similar clarity. His 

 
 246 
own struggles and confusion, regarding his mind, 
were explained. Yet he attempted to suppress the 
clarity in order to maintain his firm grip on Kru’aka. 
However, the elders’ mention of Jul’drak’s dealings 
with the Council and Kul remained on his mind’s 
forefront. His conclusion, after all the information 
gathered, was that Jul’drak was responsible for the 
usurping of the tetrarchs: Kil, Gan, and himself. She 
thus was responsible for the war that had been waged 
for two centuries causing many deaths of orken. His 
loyalty to his kingdom triumphed over any Gizon-like 
feelings toward his mother. He knew what action he 
had to take: Jul’drak must die. 
 
*** 
 
The midnight hour brought forth a cold wind in 
the land of Echrum. Jul’drak had journeyed there to 
seek one she had only heard whispers of in her several 
hundred years of life. One whose shadow stretched 
over the land of Kru’aka in an undetectable way. Yet 
one she had never seen nor knew of to be real. 
She had, at one time, witnessed the strike of an 
assassin and, being intrigued to learn of its origin, she 
investigated. And only by whisper and rumour did she 
learn of Echrum being from whence they had come. 

 
 247 
She walked then, having done so since her 
meeting with Dal’torr, deep into Echrum along its 
southern mountain range. Her time spent wandering 
there had been alerted to the attention of the one she 
sought: Sylderus. 
A thick fog poured down from the slopes and 
surrounded Jul’drak on that cold and dark night. She 
heard a distasteful whisper and a quiet hiss that slid its 
way around her. 
“Jul’drak,” a cruel voice crept out from the fog, 
“the queen of the Orken. To what do I owe this 
pleasure?” As he finished his saying, he appeared. 
From behind the fog and uncloaked, he revealed 
himself to her. She gasped and shuttered at his sight. 
He was long and narrow. His skin was pale and 
clothed with dark scales. He had a tail that seemed to 
seamlessly form into his peculiar body. He stood on 
two thick legs like that of an orken and had thin arms 
that bore three claws at the end serving as his hands. 
His body thickened at his chest but narrowed again 
for his long, tubular neck. And finally, he had the head 
of a snake and small, glowing eyes peered at Jul’drak 
as she marvelled in terror. 
“I have come to seek your aid,” she said as she 
trembled. The warmth orken carry with them fled 
from her in his presence. 

 
 248 
They stood, gazing at each other in the midst of 
that foggy plain. 
“What may I aid you with? And what do you have 
to offer in return?” he said as he slithered around her. 
When he moved, he lay down and used his hind legs, 
arms, and muscular stomach to maneuver. 
“The Orken,” she replied. “I want them dead.” 
“Dead?” he screeched. “My darling, you know 
not of the effort I have invested to keep the Orken 
alive! Do you suppose a kingdom divided could stand 
warring against each other for two hundred years 
without a superior guardian?” he yelled ferociously. 
“The Orken will live only until my purpose for them 
has been fulfilled.” He halted his slither and stared her 
in the eye. “And why do you wish for the Orken to 
die, being one yourself?” 
“I…” she hesitated from revealing the greatest 
secret she kept. 
“Or perhaps,” Sylderus said, slithering around her 
again, “you are not an orken. You may look like an 
orken but I know what lies within you.” 
“Of what do you speak?” Jul’drak was unaware of 
her being partially of the Gizon. 
“It matters not. I have decided to aid you, Jul’drak 
of the Orken.” Jul’drak was relieved, but before she 
could say anything more, he spoke again. “In 

 
 249 
exchange for my killing the Orken; you must help me 
with something.” 
Jul’drak was confused as to what she had to offer 
such a powerful being. “What must I do?” 
Sylderus continued to look into her eyes. He 
slowly smiled, revealing a few dozen sharp teeth and 
four large fangs at the end of his mouth. A long, black, 
forked tongue left his mouth along with a dreadful 
hissing sound. 
 
*** 
 
The assembly was grand. Every street in Krag-
Ma’ak was filled and every seat in the arena had an 
orken. Even outside the city, camps of Draken from 
the west and Maraken from the east had standing 
orken listening for every word that would fill the air. 
Dal’torr stood on the wall of the arena, to be seen 
by as many as possible. With him were the six 
remaining elders and Ful’kag. 
“Kil’hagron is dead!” Dal yelled. “Gan’marak is 
dead! Kul’drak is dead! All those who thought 
themselves worthy enough to be called king of 
Kru’aka, are dead! But I remain, as your king! And I 
command your loyalty and denounce you Draken and 
Maraken! We are all the Orken in Kru’aka! We are all 
Torren! As per the rite, any who wish to challenge me 

 
 250 
may step forth on this day. But know this: you will 
die. 
“Here with me are the six elders. They will 
enforce my will by the way they govern our land. And 
I present to you Ful’kag. Many of you may have 
known him as the commander of the Draken army. 
But today I elect him an Elder of the Torren! He will 
not live here in Krag-Ma’ak, but the city that was once 
home to our common enemy, Maraka, will be his 
home. From this day forth Maraka will be renamed, 
to honour this loyal servant of mine: Krag-Ful! All 
those who are of the eastern realm will report to him 
as if he were their king! And I wish a new age for the 
Orken to rise: an age where we do not rival each other 
as we have done in the past. We will rise in unity 
against the Geerum who have so fearlessly assaulted 
this city! We will destroy any who dare challenge our 
kingdom! I will destroy any who challenge my 
kingdom! The Orken have a single mindset: war. We 
are born into it, raised by it, and led by it. War rules 
our society. And now we will war against each other 
no more!” 
Dal raised Kul’drak’s massive axe into the air as a 
sign of his leadership and dominance. Ful’kag roared 
in acceptance of his claims and the six elders joined 
him soon after. In but a few moments, the entirety of 
the Orken in Kru’aka were roaring and the sound 

 
 251 
filled the air. The trees of Fal’kir shook and the roar 
was heard by the Geerum in the north and by 
thousands of creatures in the southern country, 
Thralnan. The ferocity of the Orken was reminded to 
all who had forgotten. 
 
*** 
 
The land of Der’grah was warm and lush. A great 
network of green hills connected a towering mountain 
range to a long and dense forest. Within that forest, 
about a day’s journey in depth, there was a sequence 
of thick trees. These trees stretched high into the air 
but massive branches began early along the trunk and 
created a vast canopy of green leaves. Through the 
leaves of one tree shone a few beams of the midday 
sun. And on that tree, there was a thick rope tied 
around one of its lowest branches. The rope dropped 
just a few feet and at the end of the rope, bound by 
his ankles, there hung an orken. All he wore was 
leather pants, boots, and a belt around his waist. His 
exposed, muscular chest revealed his green skin. 
He awoke from a slumber forced by a strong 
strike to his head. He jerked his body but there was 
no response. He slowly opened his eyes and noticed 
his feet and hands were bound. As his mind cleared 

 
 252 
from being unconscious, he recalled what had led him 
there. 
“You must give me your loyalty,” an old, raspy voice 
echoed in his mind as his memory returned. 
“There is a dagger next to the rope on the tree 
branch,” the same voice said again. “Free yourself and 
attack me.” 
The upside-down orken bent his neck and saw the 
dagger stabbed into the large branch. With incredible 
strength, he raised his body upward so his hands 
could reach the dagger. He freed his hands and then 
cut the rope from his ankles. He began to fall from 
the branch, but he rotated himself and landed on his 
feet. 
He quickly looked at his surroundings; he was in 
a small clearing in the forest and nearby there sat a 
red-skinned orken: Krom’jun. He was dressed in a 
brown robe and had a piece of cloth tried around his 
head, blocking his sight. 
“Remember, Tehoram,” Krom began, “I may not 
have my sight, yet that does not warrant a successful 
frontal attack.” 
“I would be weak if I attacked any other way!” 
Tehoram yelled. “I am no coward!” He charged Krom 
with the dagger poised. 
Krom, waiting until the precise moment, quickly 
stood and used the staff he had behind his body to 

 
 253 
stab forward and strike Tehoram in the face. 
Tehoram’s charge and the force from Krom’s attack 
caused Tehoram to fall backward and twist, landing 
face-first on the ground. The dagger landed a few feet 
from him. Krom spun his staff in the air and swung it 
in a downward motion, brutally striking Tehoram’s 
back. 
“Listen, you foolish orken!” Krom yelled as he 
took off the cloth around his eyes. “I have lived for 
over nine centuries! I possess more knowledge than 
you could ever hope to and I have fought more battles 
than there are trees in this forest! If you are to surpass 
me in strength and wisdom, if you are to liberate a 
kingdom: you must submit to me!” 
“No!” Tehoram roared. 
Krom struck the back of his head. “Surrender 
your loyalty to me! Submit to me as your master and 
you will become the greatest orken in this age!” Krom 
struck his head and back three times. He then kicked 
Tehoram in the head, causing him to roll onto his 
back. 
“How long must I continue to prove I am your 
superior?” Krom continued. “You cannot defeat me 
for I am stronger than you!” 
Tehoram growled as he looked up at Krom in 
defiance. 

 
 254 
“You disagree? Then strike me!” Krom taunted as 
he backed away. “Go on; rise! Strike me!” 
Tehoram ferociously got to his feet and charged 
the elder. Krom swung his staff behind his head to 
gain momentum and then swung his arm out. The 
staff whistled through the air as it circled around 
Krom and struck Tehoram’s face. Tehoram 
plummeted to the ground, landing on his side. 
“Again!” Krom yelled. “And here,” he said as he 
tossed Tehoram his staff. Tehoram caught the staff 
and rose. He lifted it and ran toward Krom again. In 
a quick and brutal motion, he chopped the staff down, 
but Krom stepped out of the way. Tehoram’s 
momentum caused him to run past Krom, who then 
struck the back of Tehoram’s leg with his foot. 
Tehoram stumbled slightly but was able to steady 
himself. 
Tehoram turned and began another charge. Krom 
had stepped near the dagger and he used his foot to 
fling it upward and catch it. As he dodged Tehoram’s 
next assault, he drove the dagger into Tehoram’s side. 
Tehoram roared and fell down again. Krom had taken 
hold of the staff as Tehoram fell and ripped the 
dagger out of him. Krom stood over the enraged 
orken holding both the dagger and the staff. 
“Enough!” Krom yelled. He struck Tehoram with 
his staff again and then rolled him onto his back. He 

 
 255 
stepped closer to him and stomped his foot on 
Tehoram’s chest. “I demand your loyalty!” 
As Krom continued to press his foot down on 
Tehoram’s chest, a word escaped the young orken’s 
mouth. “Yes,” he whispered. 
“Yes, what?” 
“Yes… master.” 
Krom stepped off his chest and looked down at 
the submitted orken. “Good,” he said. “Now I can 
make a king of you.” 
 
 
 
 
THE 
END 
 
 
 

 
 256 
Thanks for reading! I hope you enjoyed this and 
feel free to share this with friends or link them to my 
sign-up page.  
Writing is my hobby, but I also want to share 
these stories with anyone who cares for clean fantasy. 
I only write in my spare time (which is not very often) 
so book releases don’t happen very often. 
The paperback version of this book has loads of 
bonus content that adds to the richness of this 
fantastical world. My desire was for you to sample this 
book series without paying any money. If you’ve 
enjoyed this first book, check out my amazon page to 
see what else I’ve written. 
Blessings, 
Elijah M. Buchan 
 
 
 
Click here to shop 

