Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
www.elsevier.com/locate/artint
Resolving crises through automated bilateral negotiations ✩
Sarit Kraus a,c,∗, Penina Hoz-Weiss a, Jonathan Wilkenfeld b,c,d, David R. Andersen e,
Amy Pate b
a Department of Computer Science, Bar Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel 52900
b Department of Government and Politics, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
c Institute of Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
d Center for International Development and Conﬂict Management, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
e Department of Political Science, California State Univ. at Sacramento, Sacramento, CA, USA
Received 23 September 2002; received in revised form 7 May 2007; accepted 16 May 2007
Available online 2 June 2007
Abstract
We describe the development of an automated agent that can negotiate efﬁciently with people in crises. The environment is
characterized by two negotiators, time constraints, deadlines, full information, and the possibility of opting out. The agent can
play either role, with communications via a pre-deﬁned language. The model used in constructing the agent is based on a formal
analysis of the crises scenario using game-theoretic methods and heuristics for bargaining. The agent receives messages sent by
its opponent, analyzes them and responds. It also initiates discussion on one or more parameters of an agreement. Experimental
results of simulations of a ﬁshing dispute between Canada and Spain indicate that the agent played at least as well as, and in the
case of Spain, signiﬁcantly better than a human player.
© 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Bilateral negotiation; Bounded rationality; Automated agent
1. Introduction
Negotiation is an important mechanism for resolving conﬂicts between agents [21]. Our goal is the development
of automated agents that can negotiate efﬁciently with people in crises. Such agents may be used, for example, in
electronic commerce and for training negotiators [15,18,32]. We focus on bilateral negotiations in simulated crises
characterized by time constraints, deadlines, full information, and the possibility of opting out.
The automated agent can play the role of either side in such negotiations. The model used on which the automated
agent is based is a formal analysis of a scenario using game-theoretic methods and heuristics for bargaining. The
formal analysis applies a deﬁnition of a crisis that models various aspects of such situations. In particular, a crisis is
a conﬂict between two agents that threatens core values, where time is short, and that requires urgent negotiation to
reach an agreement. The crisis can end with the negotiators signing an agreement or with one of the sides opting out
✩This work was supported in part by NSF Grant IIS0208608.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: sarit@cs.biu.ac.il (S. Kraus), jwilkenf@gvpt.umd.edu (J. Wilkenfeld).
0004-3702/$ – see front matter © 2007 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.artint.2007.05.007

2
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
of the negotiations. Opting out is a stochastic action and thus the agents are uncertain about the result. If the crisis
does not end within a pre-speciﬁed deadline then the status quo is implemented. In addition to the main issue of
the negotiation or opting out, there are various other parameters of an agent’s action. These parameters inﬂuence the
utility of the negotiators from the crisis. Time plays an important role in the crisis. We focused on crises for which
there is at least one agreement that both sides prefer over opting out or the status quo. If there is no such agreement,
there is no reason to even begin negotiations. We also assume that agents have dominant actions both with respect to
opting out and reaching agreements and that at least one of the sides prefers to opt out rather than allow its opponent
to opt out.
Given the formal model of a crisis, a subgame-perfect equilibrium is identiﬁed and is used as a basis for the
automated agent. In addition, various heuristics are presented, to make the agent more ﬂexible when negotiating with
people.
The speciﬁc scenario that we used to test our model is based on a historical crisis between Spain and Canada
in 1995 over access to a turbot ﬁshery in the North Atlantic. Simulation results based on the Canada–Spain ﬁshing
dispute indicate that utility outcomes for agents playing Spain are signiﬁcantly higher than for humans playing Spain,
while the agents playing Canada generate similar outcomes to humans playing Canada. The sum of the utilities of both
players is signiﬁcantly higher in simulations with agents participating than in simulations with two humans. These
ﬁndings provide a test of the reliability of the agent, and open up important possibilities for the employment of these
techniques for both training and in domains such as e-commerce. This agent can be generalized to situations with
similar characteristics: time constraints, deadlines, full information, and opting out.
In Section 2 we present the formal model that is used as the basis for the construction of the automated agent.
Section 3 presents the simulation environment that implements the formal model. Section 4 presents the design of the
agent’s model and in Section 5 we discuss our experimental results. In Section 6 we compare our results with related
work. Our major conclusions are reviewed in Section 7.
2. A formal model of the negotiation environment
In this section we will present a formal model of the general type of situations that we consider.
2.1. A crisis
We begin with the presentation of the formal framework of a crisis. An example of a crisis can be found in
Section 5.1. First, we formally deﬁne the elements of the crisis.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Crisis). A crisis is a tuple C = ⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,T ,dl,O,Oo,p,
Res,U1,U2⟩where
Agents: Ag = {1,2} is a set of two agents.
Main negotiation issue: S ⊂IN is the set of all possible agreements with respect to the main negotiation issue.
k is the number of parameters of an agent’s action.
Domains of Actions’ parameters: Ai
j, i ∈Ag, 1 ⩽j ⩽k, is the domain of parameter j of an action of agent i such
that
• ∀j, 1 ⩽j ⩽k, Null ∈Ai
j. Intuitively, Null indicates that this parameter is not relevant in a given action.
• Ai
1 includes the following items:
– For any s ∈S, SA(s) ∈Ai
1, intuitively indicating signing an agreement s, and
– OPTi indicating opting out of the negotiation.
Intuitively, Ai
1 includes the part of i’s actions that may lead to the termination of the crisis.
Actions: Aci, i ∈Ag is a set of actions such that for all ai ∈Aci, ai = ⟨ai
1,...,ai
k⟩where ai
j ∈Ai
j.
Aci
o ⊂Aci, i ∈Ag, denotes the set of actions such that if ai ∈Aci
o then ai
1 = OPTi.
Time: Agents can take actions only at pre speciﬁed times in the set T = {0,1,2,...}. dl ∈T . Intuitively, dl is the
deadline by which the crisis will end.
Outcomes: O is a set of possible outcomes of the performance of two actions by the agents. There are a few special
outcomes in O:

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
3
• SQ ∈O intuitively indicating the status quo;
• CC ∈O intuitively indicating that the crisis continues.
Results of actions: Res is a function, Res:Ac1 × Ac2 × t →O, such that
1. Agreement: If a1
1 = a2
1 = SA(s), s ∈S, then Res(a1,a2,t) ̸= CC and intuitively the crisis ends with the
agreement s being implemented. The speciﬁc outcome depends also on the other values of ai
j, i ∈Ag, j ̸= 1.
2. Opting out: If ai ∈Aci
o then the result is in Oo (note that CC /∈Oo) and is chosen according to the probability
function p →Ac1 × Ac2 × Oo × T →[0,1] such that for any pair of actions a1 ∈Ac1 and a2 ∈Ac2 where
there is i ∈Ag such that ai ∈Aci
o, and a time period t, 
o∈Oo p(ai,aj,o,t) = 1. Intuitively p associates with
each possible action, ai ∈ACi
o, an action aj ∈Acj, a time period t ∈T and a possible outcome of Oo, the
probability that the result of the performance of ai and aj at time t will be the speciﬁed outcome.
3. Status quo: For any t ⩾dl, Res(a1,a2,t) = SQ, intuitively namely, if the crisis does not end by dl then the
status quo (SQ) is implemented.1
4. Negotiations continue: If none of the conditions of 1–4 are satisﬁed then Res(a1,a2,t) = CC, i.e., the crisis
does not terminate.
Utility functions: U1, U2 are functions, Ui :O × T →R.
We will refer to the action ⟨Null,Null,...,Null⟩as the Null action in which the agent does not do anything. We
will denote the expected utility of agent i ∈Ag, from taking a stochastic action ai at time t ∈T when the other agent
is taking aj by EUi. For example, for a1 ∈Ac1
o, a2 ∈Ac2 and t ∈T , EU1(a1,a2,t) = 
o∈Oo U1(o,t)p(a1,a2,o,t).
2.2. The negotiation language
We consider situations in which agents negotiate in order to resolve the crisis. Thus, in addition to an agen-
t’s ability to perform actions that change the world, it can send messages, using a predeﬁned negotiation lan-
guage, in an effort to inﬂuence its opponent’s actions. The negotiation language N with respect to a crisis C =
⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,T ,O,Oo,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,p,Res,U1,U2⟩consists of the following messages:
Offers: An offer is a triple ⟨O,a1,a2⟩, where ai ∈Aci.
Conditional offers: A conditional offer is a triple ⟨C,a1,a2⟩, where ai ∈Aci. Intuitively a conditional offer sent by
agent i to agent j means that agent i will do ai if j will do aj.
Response to an offer: A response to an offer or to a conditional offer can be either Yes or No. We assume that
accepting an offer by saying “Yes” does not commit the agent to actually signing the agreement. However,
agreeing on the details of an agreement is necessary for signing an agreement (see additional explanations
below).
Requests: A request is a pair, ⟨R,ai⟩where ai ∈Aci. Intuitively, a request sent by agent j to agent i means that
agent j asks agent i to do ai.
Threats: A threat is a triple ⟨T,a1,a2⟩, where ai ∈Aci. Intuitively a threat sent by agent i to agent j means that if j
does not do aj, i will do ai.
Comments on the negotiations: A comment is any sequence of characters.
2.3. The negotiation protocol
Consider a crisis
C =

Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,T ,O,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,Oo,p,Res,U1,U2
.
Each time period in T is divided into two steps, a negotiation step (Step 1) and an action step (Step 2). In a negotiation
step of any time period t < dl of the negotiation, if the negotiation has not terminated earlier, any agent in the set Ag
can send a message. If the two agents send messages simultaneously, only one of these messages is considered. Each
1 There may be other possibilities for ending the crisis, e.g., a third party might enforce an outcome. For simplicity, only the two most common
options are included in the deﬁnition.

4
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
message has equal probability to be considered. If the considered message consists of an offer or a conditional offer,
the other agent can accept the offer, i.e., send “Yes”, or can reject the offer, i.e., send “No”.
Accepting an offer or a counter offer by saying “Yes” does not commit the agent to actually signing an agreement.
However, according to the protocol signing an agreement should be agreed upon during the negotiation period. If no
agreement has been proposed and accepted, the agent can opt out or do nothing. In particular, let s ∈S, a1 ∈Ac1 a2 ∈
Ac2, where a1
1 = a2
1 = SA(s). If an offer ⟨O,a1,a2⟩or a conditional offer ⟨C,a1,a2⟩is accepted in the negotiation
step of time period t ∈T , then agent i ∈Ag can take action ai′ ∈ACi where ai′
1 = SA(s) at the action step of time
period t. That is, only the details speciﬁed in s are enforceable. In addition each agent can always take an action
ai ∈Aci
o (i.e., opting out) or the Null action. If Res(a1,a2,t) ̸= CC then the negotiation will end and the result is
as determined by Res. Otherwise, the negotiation proceeds to period t + 1. In contrast to other negotiation protocols
(e.g., the model of alternating offers [12,19]) our protocol does not place any restrictions on the time periods in which
an agent can make an offer or opt out.
2.4. Assumptions
We consider crises C = ⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,T ,dl,O,Oo,p,Res,U1,U2⟩that
satisfy the following constraints.
A1. Dominant agreement actions: For each possible agreement an agent has an action that includes reaching that
speciﬁc agreement which dominates all the other actions that include that agreement.
For any i ∈Ag, s ∈S and t ∈T
there is as,t,i ∈Aci such that: (1) as,t,i
1
= SA(s); (2) for any a1 ∈
Ac1 such that a1
1 = SA(s), and a2 ∈Ac2 where a2
1 = SA(s), U1(Res(as,t,1,a2),t) ⩾U1(Res(a1,a2),t) and
U2(Res(a1,as,t,2),t) ⩾U2(Res(a1,a2),t).
A2. Dominant opting out actions: Each agent has an opting out action that dominates all the other opting out ac-
tions.
For any t ∈T , there is opt,1 ∈Ac1
o and opt,2 ∈Ac2
o such that for any a2 ∈Ac2, and a1 ∈Ac1
o, EU1(opt,1,a2,t) ⩾
EU1(a1,a2,t) and for any a1 ∈Ac1 and a2 ∈Ac2, EU2(a1,opt,2,t) ⩾EU2(a1,a2,t).
In the next assumption we will use the following notation. The best response of agent 1 to agent 2 opting out at
time t is action bt,1 ∈Ac1 such that for every a1 ∈Ac1, EU1(b1,t,opt,1) ⩾EU1(a1,opt,2). Similarly, the best response
of agent 2 to agent 1 opting out is bt,2 ∈Ac2 such that for every a2 ∈Ac2, EU2(opt,1,b2,t) ⩾EU2(opt,2,a2).
A3. Preferences for opting out: In each time period there is at least one agent that prefers to opt out rather than
allow its opponent to opt out.
For any t ∈T , either bt,1 = opt,1 or bt,2 = opt,2.
A4. Possible agreements: In time periods prior to dl there is at least one agreement that is preferred by both players
over opting out. Furthermore, in dl −1 one of these agreements is preferred by both players over the status quo
at dl.
For any t ∈T , t < dl there is s ∈S and as,1,t ∈Ac1, as,2,t ∈Ac2, such that for any a2 ∈Ac2, U1(Res(as,1,t,
as,2,t,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt,1,a2,t) and for any a1 ∈Ac1, U2(Res(as,1,t,as,2,t),t) ⩾EU2(a1′,opt,2,t); and for t =
dl −1, U1(Res(as,1,t,as,2,t,t),t) ⩾U1(SQ,dl) and U2(Res(as,1,t,as,2,t,t),t) ⩾U2(SQ,dl).
Crises where assumption A4 is true are ones where the agents have agreements that both prefer over opting out
or over maintaining the status quo. If this assumption is not true, there is no place for negotiations. However, A4 is
not true when opting out or the status quo yield a high utility for one of the sides. The assumptions that agents have
dominant actions both with respect to opting out and reaching agreements (A2 and A3) is always true when the utility
functions are additive functions and have a maximum with respect to each attribute. Additive utility functions are very
common since they are easy to compute and make the elicitation of the utility from a person much easier to perform
[39]. However, if the preferences are dependent this assumption may not be true. The assumption is that at least one of
the sides prefers to opt out rather than its opponent opting out is true in crises where taking the initiative is beneﬁcial.
However, this may not be true, for example, in crises where being attacked ﬁrst may gain public support.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
5
There is literature on international relations concerning offense versus defense, which deals with situations, partic-
ularly where military technology is concerned, where some parties may do better in conﬂict situations if they launch
the ﬁrst attack (offense), while other parties may beneﬁt if they are initially on the defensive. In part, this depends on
their force structure at the time of the crisis [20].
2.5. Equilibrium
The negotiation protocol provides a framework for the negotiation process and speciﬁes the termination condition.
However, each agent needs to decide on its negotiation strategy. A strategy of an agent in an extensive game speciﬁes
the action to be chosen by the player for every history. A strategy proﬁle is a collection of strategies, one for each
agent.
In the following section we will present the deﬁnition of the concept of Nash equilibrium and a subgame-perfect
equilibrium, which will be used in order to analyze the negotiation.
Nash equilibrium is the most commonly used solution concept in game theory. This notion deﬁnes a stable state of
a game. It does not attempt to examine the process by which this state is reached.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Nash equilibrium). A strategy proﬁle (f1,f2) is a Nash equilibrium if each agent i does not have an
alternative strategy yielding an outcome that it prefers to that generated when it chooses fi, given that the other player
j chooses fj [17].
Thus, if both agents use the strategies speciﬁed in the strategy proﬁle of the Nash equilibrium, then no agent
is motivated to deviate and use another strategy. However, the use of the Nash equilibrium is not an effective way
of analyzing the outcomes of our negotiation model since it evaluates the desirability of a strategy only from the
viewpoint of the agents at the start of the game. In view of the fact that in our negotiation model agents know the
history up until their move, there may be some point in the negotiation where one or more agents prefer to diverge
from their Nash equilibrium strategies. That is, Nash equilibrium strategies may be in equilibrium only in the ﬁrst step
of the negotiation, but may be unstable in intermediate stages.
Motivated by these arguments we now present the concept of subgame-perfect equilibrium [19,23], which is a
stronger concept, and will be used in order to analyze the negotiation.
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Subgame perfect equilibrium). A strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium of our strategic
model if the strategy proﬁle induced in every subgame is Nash equilibrium of that subgame.
That is, at any step the negotiation process, no matter what the history is, no agent is motivated to deviate and use
any another strategy other than that deﬁned in the strategy proﬁle.
2.6. Model analysis
We analyze the model to ﬁnd the strategy that is in perfect equilibrium for a crisis C = ⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,
...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,T ,dl,O,Oo,p,Res,U1,U2⟩, where the negotiation language N is as deﬁned in Sec-
tion 2.2, the protocol as deﬁned in Section 2.3, and the crisis satisﬁes assumptions A1–A4 above. The identiﬁcation
of the perfect equilibrium is accomplished by backward induction. The following lemma is the basis of the induction.
It claims that an agreement will be reached prior to the time period in which the status quo is implemented.
Lemma 2.1. Assuming the agents use their perfect equilibrium strategies and the negotiation process has not ended
by time period dl −1. At time period dl −1, agent i will offer ⟨O,ai1,ai2⟩, ai1 ∈Ac1, ai2 ∈Ac2 such that
(1) Proposing a dominant agreement: ai1 = as,dl−1,1, ai2 = as,dl−1,2, s ∈S.
(2) The agreement’s utility is higher than the expected utility from opting out: For all i ∈Ag, U1(Res(ai1,ai2,
dl −1),dl −1) ⩾EU1(opdl−1,1,bdl−1,2,dl −1) and U2(Res(ai1,ai2,dl −1),dl −1) ⩾EU2(bdl−1,1,opdl−1,2,
dl −1).

6
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
(3) The agreement’s utility is higher than the utility from the SQ in the next time period: Ui(Res(ai1,ai2,dl −1),
dl −1) ⩾Ui(SQ,dl).
(4) For any a1 ∈Ac1, a2 ∈Ac2 that satisfy conditions (1)–(3) Ui(Res(ai1,ai2,dl −1),dl −1) ⩾Ui(Res(a1,a2,
dl −1),dl −1).
If ⟨O,ai1,ai2⟩will actually be considered then agent j ̸= i will accept the offer (sending “yes”), and in the action
step, agent 1 will perform ai1 and agent 2 will perform ai2.
Proof. If the negotiations do not end at dl −1, then there will be a status quo at time period dl. According to as-
sumption A4 there is at least one agreement that the players prefer over the status quo in time period dl. One of these
agreements is also preferred by both players over opting out. The players should consider only dominant actions since
other actions will not be performed. Such agreements exist according to assumption A1.
Among these possible agreements, i should prefer the one that is best for him, i.e., condition (3).
2
Next we deﬁne a set of acceptable agreements for each time period by backward induction.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Acceptable agreements for agents 1 and 2). The basis for the induction, Adl−1
1
and Adl−1
2
are the
agreements deﬁned in Lemma 2.1.
For 0 ⩽t < dl −1 we deﬁne the sets of possible acceptable agreements Pt and the proposed ones At
1 and At
2.
There may be a time period t such that Pt = ∅and At
1 and At
2 will not be deﬁned.
• Pt is the set of offers of the form ⟨O,a1,a2⟩, a1 ∈Ac1, a2 ∈Ac2 satisfying the following conditions:
(1) Only dominant agreements should be considered: a1 = as,t,1, a2 = as,t,2, s ∈S.
(2) The utility of the agents from the acceptable agreements should be at least as high as the utility from future
agreements:
Let t′ ∈T , t′ > t the smallest t′ such that At′
1 = ⟨O,at′,1,1,at′,1,2⟩and At′
2 = ⟨O,at′,2,1
2
,at′,2,2⟩are deﬁned.
Denote by EAt
i 0.5Ui(Res(at′,1,1,at′,1,2,t′),t′) + 0.5Ui(Res(at′,2,1,at′,2,2,t′),t′) and t′ by ˆt. For any i ∈Ag,
Ui(Res(a1,a2,t),t) ⩾EAt
i.
(3) The utility for the agents from the acceptable agreements should be at least as high as the utility from opting out:
for any t < t′ < ˆt, U1(Res(a1,a2,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt′,1,bt′,2,t′) and U2(Res(a1,a2,t),t) ⩾EU2(bt′,1,opt′,2,t′).
• If Pt ̸= ∅then for any i ∈Ag, At
i = argmax{Ui(Res(a1,a2,t),t) | ⟨O,a1,a2⟩∈Pt}.
• Otherwise, At
i is not deﬁned.
Intuitively, the agent that makes an offer at time period t, say agent i, should consider the agreements in Pt and
offer the one that is the best for him. Pt consists of agreements that are better for both agents than the expected utility
from opting out and better than any possible future agreements. The choice of dominant actions is possible due to
assumption A1.
Theorem 2.1. The proﬁle that consists of the following strategy for both agents is in perfect equilibrium if the crisis
satisﬁes assumptions A1–A4.
Agent 1’s strategy (time t):
• Step 1:
(1) Agent 1 makes an offer: If At
1 is deﬁned offer At
1.
(2) Agent 1 needs to respond to a message m:
– if m = ⟨O,a1,a2⟩or m = ⟨C,a1,a2⟩where a1
1 = a2
1 = SA(s), s ∈S then if 2
2 Other strategies that are in equilibrium are those in which the agent says “Yes” to any agreement, but actually signs only those agreements that
satisfy the condition speciﬁed here. We have presented a strategy in which an agent that has accepted an agreement during the negotiation phase
will actually sign it.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
7
(i) U1(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) and
(ii) U2(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU2(bt,1,opt,2,t) and
(iii) if t ̸= dl −1 then
for any i ∈Ag, Ui(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EAt
i and
for any t < t′ < ˆt, U1(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt′,1,bt′,2,t′) and
U2(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU2(bt′,1,opt′,2,t′) and
(iv) if t = dl −1 then for any i ∈Ag, Ui(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾Ui(SQ,dl) then say “Yes”.
– If m is of any other form (including threats) do not respond.
• Step 2: Agent 1 chooses what action to take:
(1) If an offer ⟨O,a1,a2⟩or a conditional offer ⟨C,a1,a2⟩where a1
1 = a2
1 = SA(s), s ∈S was made and accepted in
the negotiation step and
(i) U1(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) and
(ii) U2(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU2(bt,1,opt,2,t) and
(iii) if t ̸= dl −1 then for any i ∈Ag, Ui(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EAt
i and for any t < t′ < ˆt, U1(Res(as,t,1,
as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU1(opt′,1,bt′,2,t′) and U2(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾EU2(bt′,1,opt′,2,t′) and
(iv) if t = dl −1 then for any i ∈Ag, Ui(Res(as,t,1,as,t,2,t),t) ⩾Ui(SQ,dl) then do as,t,1.
(2) Else if t = dl −1, then
if EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) ⩾U1(SQ,dl) then do opdl−1,1.
Else if EU2(bt,1,opt,2,t) ⩾U2(SQ,dl) then do bdl−1,1.
(3) Else if EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) > EAt
1
and for any t < t′ < ˆt, EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) ⩾EU1(opt′,1,bt′,2,t′)
then do opt,1.
(4) Else, if EU2(bt,1,opt,2,t) > EAt
2 and for any t < t′ < ˆt, EU2(bt,1,opt,2,t) > EU2(bt′,1,opt′,2,t′) then do bt,1
(5) else do nothing.
The strategy for agent 2 is similar to that of agent 1.
Proof. We will prove that the above strategy proﬁle is a perfect equilibrium by backward induction on the time
periods. We will consider agent 1. The proof for agent 2 is similar.
Base case (the last period before the deadline): According to Lemma 1, at dl −1 agent 1 should offer Adl−1
1
when
making an offer (1 of step 1) and accept any offer that yields it and its opponent a utility that is at least as good as
the utility from opting out (conditions (i) and (ii) of 2 of Step 1) and at least as good as the utility from the status quo
(condition (iv) of 2 of Step 1).
If the agents do not reach an agreement that is at least as good as opting out and the status quo to both agents and
opting out is better than the status quo then it should opt out (2 of Step 2).
Inductive case (0 ⩽t < dl −1): We will examine the strategy backward starting from the action step (Step 2).
• Step 2: Agent 1 chooses what action to take:
(1) If an offer ⟨O,a1,a2⟩or a conditional offer ⟨C,a1,a2⟩where a1
1 = a2
1 = SA(s), s ∈S was made and accepted
in the negotiation stage, then ﬁrst, agent 1 should consider the associated dominant action. According to agent
2’s strategy, it will do the same. Such an action exists according to assumption A1. The agent can deviate by
opting out now or waiting and either opting out or signing an agreement in the future. Conditions (i) and (ii) of
Step 2 of the strategy states that the agent will sign an agreement if it is not worse for both sides than opting out
now and it is not worse for both than the best expected utility from signing an agreement in the future according
to the induction hypothesis (e.g., EAt
i). Furthermore, according to condition (iii) it is also not worse than opting
out before it is possible to reach an agreement in the future, i.e., before ˆt. Thus, when conditions (i)–(iii) are
true no deviation from signing the agreement will improve the agent’s expected utility.
(2) If an agreement has not been reached, or if signing the accepted agreement is not proﬁtable for one of the agents,
agent 1 should decide whether opting out would be better for it than its expected utility from any possible future

8
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
agreements. Thus, if EU1(opt,1,bt,2,t) > EAt
1 it should consider opting out since it would be better than what
it could gain in the future from signing agreements. Another requirement for opting out at time t is that it would
better than opting out at any time before ˆt.
(3) If opting out is not beneﬁcial for agent 1, it should check whether it would be beneﬁcial for agent 2. If so,
perform bt,1 which is the best response to agent 2 opting out. Note that due to assumption A3 it is not possible
that both players would prefer that their opponent opt out.
• Step 1:
(1) Agent 1 makes an offer: First, the offered agreement should be a dominant one since according to agent 2’s
strategy it will only perform dominant actions, regardless of what has been agreed upon. Similarly, agent 2 will
know that agent 1 will deviate and perform only a dominant action with respect to the signed agreement.
Second, according to the inductive hypothesis, the agents will follow a strategy based on the theorems in the
future and the best expected utility that agent 1 can expect in the future is Et
1. Thus, it should offer only
agreements that yield it a utility at least equivalent to Et
1. Similarly, the proposed agreement should yield agent
2 a utility at least equivalent to Et
2. In addition, it should prevent 2 from opting out, and thus 2’s utility should be
at least equivalent to the utility that it would gain from opting out now or until ˆt where Et
2 is expected. Similarly,
the utility of agent 1 should be at least equivalent to the utility that it would gain from opting out. From all these
possible agreements agent 1 should choose the one that yields it the highest utility. This agreement is exactly
At
1 as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.4.
(2) Agent 1 needs to respond to a message:
– Saying “Yes” to all offers will yield the highest utility possible since agreements are not enforceable and the
agent can sign an agreement only if it was agreed upon. However, in the theorem we stated a strategy that if
the agent says “Yes” it will really sign the agreement according to its strategy of Step 2.
– While there are several types of messages that are available to the agents, there is a need to respond only to
offers and counter offers. This is due to the protocol which states that any other message exchange will not
lead to a change in utility.
2
The theorem provides the agent with a speciﬁc strategy for negotiations if all the agents are fully rational agents
and follow the equilibrium strategies. It serves as the basis for the design of the automated negotiator presented in the
next sections.
3. Simulation environment
We developed a simulation tool that enables simulating a crisis C = ⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,
Ac1
o,Ac2
o,T ,dl,O,Oo,p,Res,U1,U2⟩, deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.1. The negotiation language that is used for exchang-
ing messages between the players is N as presented in Section 2.2. The simulation tool is able to support the
negotiation of both people and automated agents.
The negotiation protocol of the simulation is more ﬂexible than that deﬁned in Section 2.3. This was done to make
the simulations more realistic. First, time periods were not divided explicitly into 2 steps. Actions could be taken at
any time during a time period. Second, we allowed the negotiators to send more than one message during each time
period. Since only signed agreements can be implemented, and an agent prefers that its message will be considered,
it will attempt to send a message as late as possible before the end of the time period. Modeling such strategies would
have required information on the time it takes a message to reach its destination. For simplicity, this was modeled in
Section 2.3 via the speciﬁcation that if the two agents send messages simultaneously, only one of these messages is
considered with equal probability.
In addition, the effects of actions that do not terminate the crisis are assumed to remain true unless they have
been explicitly changed. In particular, suppose ai ∈Aci, ai = ⟨ai
1,...,ai
k⟩where ai
1 = Null and ai
j ̸= Null j ̸= 1 was
performed during time period t and suppose no other non-terminated action in which j’s parameter is not equal to
Null was performed later. Then, if at a later time the action that was performed, ai′ = ⟨ai′
1 ,...,ai′
k ⟩, terminates the
negotiation for which ai′
j = Null, it is considered as ai′
j = ai
j. This change does not modify the equilibrium strategies,

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
9
since the agent can always cancel the effect of its earlier action by setting ai′
j ̸= Null. However, this possibility was
used by people for signaling, as we will explain below.
Human players participating in the simulations were provided with a Generalized Decision Support System (GDSS)
for the speciﬁc crisis in which they took part. Using the GDSS allowed them to evaluate different outcomes in terms
of utility values. They also were introduced to a special menu based editor used to compose messages.
4. Agent design
The automated agent is a software agent that can participate in the bilateral negotiation simulations described
above. During the simulations the agent receives messages sent by the opponent, analyzes them and responds. It also
initiates a discussion on one or more parameters of the agreement. The strategy of the negotiations that was adapted is
based on the equilibrium of the model with some modiﬁcations of the heuristics, which will be discussed later in this
section.
4.1. Negotiation strategy
At the beginning of the crisis the agent can compute by backward induction the subgame-perfect equilibrium of
Theorem 1. If the agent were to play against a rational opponent, with the ability to identify the subgame-perfect
equilibrium, this would be sufﬁcient. However, people do not necessarily follow equilibrium strategies, and in prelim-
inary experiments when the automated agent followed its equilibrium strategy the human negotiators who negotiated
with it became frustrated and the negotiation often ended with no agreement. Note that the complexity of ﬁnding the
equilibrium is low, the players have full information, and the automated agent is able to ﬁnd it quickly. Nevertheless,
we observed that people do not follow equilibrium strategies. Such behavior has been observed by other researchers
(e.g., [6,8,9,24,31,35–37]). In particular, this phenomenon has been observed in laboratory experiments on bargaining
(e.g., [2,26,31].) Therefore, the formal theory is insufﬁcient and we added heuristics and argumentation to complete
the formal model and make the agent an effective negotiator with people.
The ﬁrst heuristic that the agent uses is motivated by the assumption that many people keep their promises even
when agreements are not enforceable [5,34,38]. Therefore, instead of considering only dominant agreement actions,
the agent considers all possible agreement actions. At the beginning of the crisis the agent computes by backward
induction the subgame-perfect equilibrium similar to that of Theorem 1, but under the assumption that once an agree-
ment is accepted, it will be kept (non-dominant agreement actions are also considered, however the agreements must
satisfy the conditions of the theorem’s strategies, e.g., it is not worse than opting out or any future acceptable agree-
ments). It stores the offers that it should make during each time period according to the “equilibrium” strategy in an
array, referred to as the strategy array.
Another heuristic concerns opting out. Given our assumptions, while rational agents will not opt out, people may
opt out. If the agent’s expected utility from opting out is higher than its expected utility from its opponent opting out,
it will try to predict whether its opponent is going to opt out. If so, it will opt out ﬁrst. The heuristic for the prediction
of whether an opponent will opt out is based on the messages sent by the opponent. For example, when a threatening
message is received, or when a comment message indicating that the negotiations are heading in a dangerous direction
is received, the estimation that the opponent may opt out increases.
There are two main activities that the agent performs during negotiations: sends messages and responds to incoming
messages. The agent’s heuristics for these activities were inﬂuenced by a set of parameters we present in the next
section.
4.2. The agent’s parameters
We allow the owner of the agent to determine the way the agent will deviate from the equilibrium strategies by
determining parameters that inﬂuence the agent’s behavior. They are instantiated before the beginning of negotiations.
In order to provide the agent with some ﬂexibility when playing against people we allowed the agent to agree to
agreements that have a lower utility than it would have obtained according to the relevant strategy array agreement.
Therefore we added the margin parameter that determines the largest number of points lower than the desired utility
value that the agent will agree to.

10
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
An additional parameter is the number of negotiation units by which the agent will increase or decrease its ﬁrst
offer from the agreement speciﬁed in its strategy array. Human negotiators usually begin negotiations with an offer
higher (or lower, depending on the negotiator’s role) than the value they would eventually like to reach at the end of
negotiations. This leaves bargaining space and our agent uses this type of strategy.
Another parameter indicates whether the agent will send the ﬁrst message in the negotiation or will wait for its
opponent to make the ﬁrst offer. We did not ﬁnd any reference to this issue in the literature. The default value of this
parameter is that the agent will send the ﬁrst offer, since we wanted a trigger to initiate negotiations with the other
agent.
The last parameter determines whether the agent will make a full offer, or will only make partial offers to nego-
tiate each issue separately. That is, instead of sending a message with an action in which each action’s parameter is
speciﬁed, it will replace some of the action’s parameters with Null. Note that the negotiation on other parameters, in
addition to the main one, is possible because of the main heuristic of considering non-dominant agreement actions.
The dilemma is between bargaining on a complete agreement that speciﬁes the values of all the negotiation issues or
bargaining in stages: ﬁrst agree on one parameter and then move to the other. Since, again, we did not ﬁnd an answer
to this dilemma in the literature, we added a special parameter to the agent.
4.3. Responding to incoming messages and sending messages
The following describes the way agent i responds to incoming messages according to their categories. In each
category we ﬁrst consider messages that consist of fully speciﬁed actions and then ones that consider only some of the
action parameters. We assume that the agent maintains two arrays of length k named agreed1 and agreed2 in which
it stores the currently agreed partial actions. Originally agreed1[l] and agreed2[l], 1 ⩽l ⩽k, are set to Null. In the
following discussion, if the time period is t, we will refer to the agreement that is stored in t’s object of the agent’s
strategy array as the array agreement. Agent i below is the role the agent plays and j is the other role.
Response to an offer or to a conditional offer: Suppose the agent receives a message of the form ⟨O,a1,a2⟩or
⟨C,a1,a2⟩,where ai ∈Aci.
• If a1 and a2 are fully speciﬁed actions (i.e., without any Null) and the expected utility for i of the proposed
agreement is higher than that of the array agreement or worse than the array agreement by only the margin
parameter, then the offer is accepted, the relevant message is sent and the appropriate actions will be taken.
• If a1 and a2 are not fully speciﬁed actions and all the values of ai and aj that are not Null are the same as those
of the actions of the array agreement then
– If all the Null values are speciﬁed in the agreedj and agreedi arrays, then the agent accepts the offer, the
relevant message is sent and the appropriate actions will be taken.
– Otherwise, it chooses a parameter of j that is not speciﬁed in both aj and in agreedj and sends a conditional
offer (C,ai,aj′) where aj′ consists of the non-null parameters of aj and agreedj and the value of the
chosen parameter according to the array agreement. If the opponent accepts the conditional offer, the agent
will update agreed1 and agreed2 accordingly and will take the necessary actions if needed.
• Otherwise, the agent sends an offer specifying its array agreement.
Response to requests and threats: Suppose the agent receives a message of the form ⟨R,ai⟩where ai ∈Aci or
⟨T,a1,a2⟩, where ai ∈Aci.
• If the requested action ai matches the array agreement the agent will send a conditional offer saying it will do
ai if the opponent will do aj′ where aj′ is the opponent’s action according to the array agreement.
• Otherwise, the agent will send a comment message saying: Your demands have not been made in the spirit of
fairness. i would like j to be more considerate of i’s interests during these negotiations.
For example, if the agent receives the following message: “These negotiations are taking too long. I am losing
patience and considering other alternatives”, the agent, playing the opponent’s role will reply: “I urge that you be
more patient during these negotiations as I need more time to consider your offer”.
Whenever the other player promises to take an action that does not terminate the crisis (i.e., ai = ⟨ai
1,...,ai
k⟩where
ai
1 = Null and ai
j ̸= Null), the agent initiates a timer, and when the time has expired the agent checks if the other side
has taken the action it said it would take. If the action has not been taken, a message regarding the issue is sent.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
11
Another activity taken by the agent is sending a message regarding action parameters that have not yet been agreed
upon. Every 3 minutes the agent randomly chooses one of the parameters that has a Null value according to agreedj
and that does not appear in the last few messages. It sends an offer regarding that parameter proposing the array
agreement value. The development of more complex heuristics for this activity is left for future work.
5. Experiments
On March 9, 1995, one of Canada’s Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) vessels, the Cape Roger, ﬁred
on and captured the Estai, a Spanish trawler, on the grounds that the Estai had been ﬁshing turbot illegally. Spain
responded by sending one of its naval vessels to the Grand Banks to protect other ﬁshing vessels. During the ensuing
weeks, Spain and Canada sparred with each other, each ﬁrmly believing that they were right and the other country was
wrong. It was a period of accusation, rhetoric, name-calling, paciﬁcation, and ultimately negotiation. A settlement
was reached on April 18, 1995, and the worst part of the Turbot War was over [29]. See also [30] and [20]. We applied
our model to a speciﬁc scenario based on the ﬁshing dispute between Canada and Spain and conducted simulations in
which human players and our agent attempted to negotiate an agreement. A brief description of the scenario follows.
5.1. The scenario
A stock of ﬂatﬁsh straddles the Canadian exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and international waters. This stock
has been severely over-ﬁshed in recent years, and Canada has taken measures to conserve this stock while allowing
minimal ﬁshing in order to maintain some level of employment for its ﬁshing ﬂeet. Spain has ﬁshed this same stock
of ﬂatﬁsh for many years, and has respected Canada’s EEZ by not attempting to ﬁsh within it. Spain is also dependent
on ﬁshing in the area outside the EEZ for both employment and trade.
The crisis is initiated by Canada’s seizing one of Spain’s ships in international waters adjacent to its EEZ, enforcing
Canada’s legislation regarding the conservation of the ﬂatﬁsh ﬁshery. Canada claims to have found ﬁshing gear aboard
Spain’s ship that is in violation of previous agreements (such as ﬁne mesh nets). Canada maintains that continued over-
ﬁshing of the ﬂatﬁsh stock, even at the edges of the EEZ, will eliminate the stock completely within a short period of
time. Spain claims, however, that her ﬁshing is done in international waters, and therefore occurs outside of Canada’s
jurisdiction.
Canada and Spain have agreed to meet in an attempt to negotiate an agreement regarding the ﬁshery dispute,
according to procedures outlined in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Each party
must consider four possible ways of ending the crisis:
(1) An agreement on Total Allowable Catch for the season. The Total Allowable Catch can be between 1 ton and
54 tons.
(2) Canada enforces conservation measures with military force against Spain (i.e., Canada opts out of the negotiation).
This can result in either success, partial success or failure.
(3) Spain enforces its right to ﬁsh throughout the ﬁshery with military force against Canada (i.e., Spain opts out of
the negotiation). This can result in either success, partial success or failure.
(4) Status quo.
Other parameters associated with Canada’s actions:
(1) Canada can subsidize the removal of Spain’s ships. The possible values of this action parameter are: 0, 5, 10, 15,
and 20 ships.
(2) Canada can impose trade sanctions on Spain. The possible values of this action parameter are yes and no.
Other parameters of the actions of Spain are:
(1) Spain can reduce the amount of pollution caused by the ﬁshing ﬂeet. The possible values of this action parameter
are: 0%, 15%, 25% and 50%.
(2) Spain can impose trade sanctions on Canada. The possible values of this action parameter are yes and no.

12
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
The negotiation takes time and is divided into time periods. If the negotiation does not end by the beginning of the
ﬁshing season (i.e., the deadline), then the status quo will be implemented.
The utility points used in the simulations are presented in Appendix A. They satisfy the assumptions A1–A4 and
therefore are an example of the environment that we are analyzing. In particular, there is always an agreement that is
better for both sides than the expected utility associated with opting out. Canada prefers the Total Allowable Catch
to be as low as possible, since it is determined to preserve the ﬁshery. On the other hand Spain has no concern about
the ﬁsh lasting in this speciﬁc area since it can move to another location. When an agreement is reached on the Total
Allowable Catch, the quota is divided equally between the two countries.
Each country beneﬁts from imposing trade sanctions, but each loses when trade sanctions are imposed against
it. The pollution parameter is under Spain’s control. Spain has old ﬁshing vessels that cause a high percentage of
pollution, polluting the area near Canada. Increasing the pollution reduction by improving the ships is costly to Spain
but Canada will gain from it, as pollution will decrease. The ship subsidization parameter is under the control of
Canada. Both Canada and Spain gain from increasing the number of ships subsidized by Canada. Spain will receive
the subsidy and will compensate Canada by ﬁshing less.
Formalizing the ﬁshing dispute scenario as a crisis C = ⟨Ag,S,k,A1
1,...,A1
k,A2
1,...,A2
k,Ac1,Ac2,Ac1
o,Ac2
o,T ,
dl,O,Oo,p,Res,U1,U2⟩can be done as follows:
Agents: Without loss of generality we will refer to the player playing the role of Canada as agent 1 and the one
playing the role of Spain as agent 2.
Main negotiation issue: The main negotiation issue between Canada and Spain is the Total Allowable Catch for the
season. Thus, S = {1,...,54}.
k = 3.
Domains of actions’ parameters: For i ∈{1,2}, Ai
1 = {Null,SA(1),...,SA(54),OPTi}.
For Canada, the second attribute of an action has to do with subsidizing the removal of Spain’s ships. Thus,
A1
2 = {Null,0,5,10,15,20}.
For Spain, the second attribute of an action has to do with Spain reducing the amount of pollution caused by the
ﬁshing ﬂeet. Thus, A2
2 = {Null,0%,15%,25%,50%}.
The third parameter of an action of both Canada and Spain is associated with imposing trade sanctions on the
opponent. Thus, A1
3 = A2
3 = {Null,Yes,No}.
The Null value in all the actions indicates that no decision has been made with respect to this attribute. Thus, it is
open for negotiation.
Actions: Ac1 includes all possible combinations of the three attributes. For example, (SA(34),15,Yes) which means
that Canada (agent 1) signs an agreement where the Total Allowable Catch is set to 34 while subsidizing the
removal of 15 of Spain’s ships and imposing trade sanctions on Spain.
Ac1
o includes all possible combinations of actions for which the ﬁrst attribute is OPT1. For example (OPT1,0,No)
which means that Canada enforces conservation measures with military force against Spain while not subsidizing
the removal of any of Spain’s ship and not imposing trade sanctions on Spain. Ac2 and Ac2
o are deﬁned similarly.
Outcomes:
• SQ ∈O indicating the status quo; This can occur when one or both sides impose trade sanctions.
• CC ∈O indicating that the crisis continues.
• Canada succeeds in enforcing conservation measures with military force against Spain, Canada fails to do it,
or has partial success. This can occur when one or both sides impose trade sanctions.
• Spain succeeds in enforcing its right to ﬁsh throughout the ﬁshery with military force against Canada, Spain
fails to do so, or has partial success. This can occur when one or both sides impose trade sanctions.
• An agreement is signed with the value of 1−54. This can occur when one or both sides impose trade sanctions,
and when Spain possibly reduces ﬁshing related pollution and Canada subsidizes the removal of some of
Spain’s ships.
Results of actions: We will demonstrate the probability function. For example, p((OPT1,5,No),(Null,15%,Yes),
Success,1) = 0.1.
Utility functions: We will demonstrate a few values of the utility functions calculated based on Appendix A:
U1(Res((SA(34),10,Yes),(SA(34),25%,No),4),4) = 565.
EU1(Res((OPT1,5,No),(Null,15%,Yes),1),1) = 415.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
13
5.2. Experimental results
In order to evaluate the agent’s performance in negotiation situations we conducted two sets of simulations. One
set of simulations was performed with Computer Science students at Bar Ilan University in Israel. This set was
performed in order to compare the agent’s performance to the performance of people. The second set of simulations
was conducted with Government and Politics students at the University of Maryland. While the Maryland simulations
were designed to test hypotheses relating to foreign policy decision-making, they will be presented here as a reliability
check of the main Bar Ilan results. Each student was told his/her role in the simulation and they had ﬁfteen minutes to
work out a strategy and check their options by means of the GDSS.
5.2.1. Comparison
In the Bar Ilan experiments, the negotiation was divided into ten seven-minute periods. Students were motivated to
play seriously by the possibility of receiving one to ﬁve extra points on their ﬁnal grade, depending upon their ﬁnal
utility point total. Our hypothesis was that the agent would do at least as well as the human players in the negotiations.
A total of 45 simulations were run at Bar Ilan: 15 simulations were humans against humans, and 30 simulations
were humans against agents. In 14 simulations the agents played Spain and in 16 simulations the agents played
Canada.
According to assumption A4 there is always an agreement that yields a higher utility for both sides than the ex-
pected utility associated with opting out. Therefore, opting out in this simulation is not a wise step to take. The
expected utility from opting out was much lower than the agreements’ values. Therefore, when presenting the simu-
lation results we provide three types of results: the results of the simulations ending with an agreement, the results of
simulations ending with opting out, and the results of all the simulations.
Table 1 presents the average utility outcomes of the experiments. It is divided into three columns. The ﬁrst is a list
of results for all simulations in which two humans played against each other (‘C’ stands for Canada and ‘S’ stands for
Spain). The second and third columns report on the simulations where the agent played Canada’s and Spain’s roles.
For the simulations that ended with one of the players opting out, there are separate lines for the cases where Canada
or Spain opted out. There were ﬁve cases in which a human player opted out and one case where the agent opted out.
In these cases the table speciﬁes the average of the expected outcomes. If we compare the results of the humans to
those of the agents for those simulations that ended with an agreement, we can see that the agent that played Spain’s
role did signiﬁcantly better than the human (t = −5.957,p < 0.01) while the agent that played the role of Canada did
just as well as the human. When looking at the results that include all the outcomes, again, the agent playing Spain
played signiﬁcantly better than the human playing Spain (t = −2.51,p < 0.05). The results for Canada did not show
a signiﬁcant difference between the agent and human players.
The average sum of the utility points in simulations where agreements were reached with only humans is 1336,
the average sum of the simulations where an agent was involved is 1445 and 1434, and the average of both is 1440.
We can conclude that when an agent participates in a negotiation the sum of the utilities is signiﬁcantly higher than
when two humans play (t = −4.916,p < 0.01). This can be explained by looking closely at the agreements that were
reached in the simulations.
Table 2 presents all the details of the agreements that were reached. The average Total Allowable Catch in the
all-human simulations is 23.6. Note that Canada would like the Total Allowable Catch to be as low as possible,
Table 1
The average utility of the players in the BIU simulations
2 humans
Canada human
Spain human
and Spain agent
and Canada agent
C
S
SUM
C
Ag–S
SUM
S
Ag–C
SUM
Agreements
612
723
1336
599
845
1445
827
607
1434
Opt(C)
433
295
728
445
327
772
388
407
796
Opt(S)
530
335
865
502
385
887
Opt
481
315
796
445
327
772
445
396
841
Total:
595
669
1246
588
808
1397
731
554
1286
Opt(C) indicates Canada opting out and Opt(S) indicates Spain opting out.

14
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
Table 2
Details of the agreements of the BIU simulations
TIME
TAC
SHIP
POLL
H–C H–S
4.7
23.6
13.5
30.8
Ag–S H–C
4.8
32.2
20
50
Ag–C H–S
3.8
31.2
20
45.8
TAC: the Total Allowable Catch. SHIP: the average number of ships that Canada subsidizes. POLL:
the average of the percentage by which Spain reduces ﬁshing related pollution.
while Spain would like it to be as high as possible. When the agent plays Spain, the Total Allowable Catch average
increases to 32.2. This explains why the agent playing Spain achieves a better score than a human. When the agent
plays Canada, the average Total Allowable Catch is 31.2, which is larger than 23.6. It is apparent that the agent can do
better, since the human playing Spain agrees non-rationally even to agreements where the Total Allowable Catch is
23.6. This could explain why the agent does not do better than humans when playing Canada’s role. Nonetheless the
agent playing Canada does not do worse, because the other parameters are better from its point of view. The average
POLL (i.e., the percentage by which Spain reduces ﬁshing related pollution) and SHIP (i.e., the number of ships that
Canada subsidizes) differs between simulations with and without the agent. These values are higher in the simulations
in which the agent participates. The SHIP parameter increases the utility of both players; this compensates for the
higher Total Allowable Catch value in the simulations where the agent plays the role of Canada. This also explains
the result that the sum of the utility points of simulations where the agent participates in negotiations is signiﬁcantly
higher than when two humans negotiate with one another.
5.2.2. Reliability check
At the University of Maryland, a total of 48 experimental simulations were conducted using the automated nego-
tiator in tests of hypotheses pertaining to belief change among negotiators during the course of negotiations (see [1]).
Experimental subjects were tested to assess the extent to which they held hawkish versus dovish views pertaining to
foreign policy issues. As noted above, we use some of the results of these simulations as a reliability check of the Bar
Ilan simulation results. In the University of Maryland experiments, as in the Bar Ilan simulations, the negotiation was
divided into ten seven-minute periods. Students were motivated to play seriously by the prospect of receiving extra
credits for their ﬁnal grade in the courses in which they were enrolled. Since we did not want prior knowledge of
political relationships to affect the students that played in these simulations, we changed the names of the countries
participating in the dispute: Canada was changed to Thule and Spain to Ultima.
In all 48 simulations the agent played Spain and the students played Canada. Our hypothesis is that the agent would
do as well as it did in the Bar Ilan simulations.
The results presented in Table 3 support our hypothesis. The average utility obtained by the agent in the University
of Maryland simulations when an agreement was reached is 848 (compared to an average of 845 in the Bar Ilan
simulations reported in Table 1). The results were not signiﬁcantly different than those obtained by the agent in the
Bar Ilan simulations. The average utility of simulations that ended with an agreement for the UMD students was
568 (compared to an average of 599 for the Bar Ilan students in similar simulations reported in Table 1). We found
that the Maryland students did signiﬁcantly worse than the Bar Ilan University students (t = −4.009,p < 0.01) even
though the UMD’s students were trained in negotiations. One possible explanation for these results is that the two
groups of students differed in both their nationality and their major. In addition, we believe that the Israelis majoring
in Computer Science were motivated mainly to increase their utility, while the American Government and Politics
students played according to their general understanding of how one should negotiate in such situations, and were less
concerned with the utility they would gain.
Finally, we would like to note that from our non-systematic observation we found that in both experiments the
human players who played against the agents were rarely able to reveal whether they were playing against a human
counterpart or an agent.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
15
Table 3
The average utility of the players in the UMD simulations
Canada human and Spain agent
C
Ag–S
SUM
Agreements
568
848
1426
Opt(C)
444
325
769
Opt(S)
453
470
923
Opt
447
383
830
Total:
588
808
1397
Opt(C) indicates Canada opting out and Opt(S) indicates Spain opting out.
6. Related work
Several researchers have developed models for negotiations between rational automated agents, as surveyed in [12,
22]. However, only a few attempts have been made to develop automated agents that can negotiate with people.
Sycara [33] presented a model for labor negotiations that combines case-based reasoning and optimization of multi-
parameter utilities, but she demonstrated its behavior only in simulations of automated agents which she designed all
in a similar way.
Kraus and Lehmann [13] developed an automated diplomacy player that negotiates and plays well in actual games
against human players (although the small number of runs precluded the type of statistical testing performed in the
present study). While Diplomats’ strategies were based only on heuristics, the automated negotiator model presented
here is based on a formal analysis of the crisis coupled with heuristics.
Mudgal and Vassileva [16] present an automated agent that can negotiate on behalf of a student with other auto-
mated agents in the I-Help system. I-Help is an online system that provides a student in a university course with a
matchmaking service to ﬁnd a peer-student online for assistance. When a student needs help, his agent contacts a cen-
tralized matchmaker who provides a ranked list of potential helpers. The agent of the students requesting assistance
begins negotiations about the price per unit of help time with the agent of the ﬁrst potential helper from the list. If the
agents fail to reach a deal, the agent of the student seeking help begins negotiations with the second agent on the list,
etc. Mudgal and Vassileva’s approach is based on decision theory and not on game theory as in our approach. Similar
to our work, they model the opponent’s behavior during one session, in order to better predict the opponent’s reaction.
They use inﬂuence diagrams, while we estimate the opponent’s utility function. In addition, we consider multi-issue
negotiations while they consider single-issue negotiations. Also, our agent has more information about the opponent
than their agent. Finally, while we focus on scenarios where the agents need to negotiate with people who we have no
control over, their agent negotiates with other agents that use strategies developed by the authors. Nevertheless, it will
be interesting to try to adapt their approach to our domain. We leave this for future work.
Su et al. [32] present the design and implementation of a replicable Internet-based negotiation server for conducting
bargaining-type negotiations in e-commerce. They make use of object-oriented, active database technology. They
focus on enabling the companies to specify the goods and services in which they are interested or that they are
willing to provide and to specify negotiation strategies. We focused on the development of autonomous agents that
can negotiate with people in situations where the preferences of the agents are speciﬁed via a utility function. While
they demonstrated their approach in various scenarios, we carried out carefully monitored experiments.
Sierra et al. [27] present a model of negotiation for autonomous agents to reach agreements about the provision of
a service by one agent to another. Their model deﬁnes a range of strategies and tactics, distilled from intuition about
good behavioral practice in human negotiations that agents can employ to generate offers and evaluate proposals.
We apply a formal game-theory model with a dynamic analysis. In our model an agreement is complex. It contains
different parameters that describe the state of the world. All parts of an agreement are negotiable.
Sierra et al. [28] describe a general framework for negotiation in which agents exchange proposals backed by
arguments that summarize the reasons why the proposals should be accepted. The argumentation is persuasive because
the exchanges are able to alter the mental state of the agents involved. We allow comments and requests to be passed
between the agents in addition to the agreements offered. However, agents do not attempt to persuade each other or to
explain why their proposal should be accepted. This is not necessary in domains of complete information.

16
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
Sandholm and Vulkan [25] analyze automated distributed negotiations where agents have ﬁrm deadlines that are
private information. We analyzed a case with one deadline, which is common knowledge. If no agreement is reached
prior to the deadline, a status quo is implemented.
Zhun and Tambe focus on the problem of negotiation in teamwork to resolve conﬂicts such as conﬂicting beliefs
about different aspects of the agents’ environment and resource availability. In our model, we do not deal with agents
who are members of a team, but rather we consider conﬂicting sides that have to come to an agreement. However,
both sides have complete information on the current world state and there are no conﬂicting beliefs. Thus, Zhun
and Tambe’s agents use argumentation to convince their teammates to adopt their beliefs and plans, while our agent
bargains with its adversary. Similarly, Jung et al. [7] study the distributed constraints satisfaction problem (DCSP) as
a computational model for investigating Negotiation via Argumentation in a cooperative multi-agent environment.
Faratin et al. [3] also consider situations where agents attempt to maximize the joint gains of the negotiating
agents. They discuss trade-offs made by agents during automated negotiations in which the agents have uncertain
information. They present an algorithm for performing trade-offs for multi-dimensional goods. Our agreements also
consist of several parameters. In their settings, however, agents care about equity and social welfare, as well as their
individual utility. This is not the case in our setting. In our settings both agents have competitive utilities. Trying to
ﬁnd similar offers for each counter-offer is not effective.
Fatima et al. [4] also consider negotiation when there is a deadline. They assert that because the negotiation has a
deadline, they assume that the agents use time-dependent tactics for generating offers (they state, for example, linear,
Boulware or Conceder tactics). They also assume that agents maximize their expected utility. Fatima et al. deﬁne six
negotiation scenarios. They assume that they have incomplete information about the other agent’s deadline. Thus,
an agent negotiates in one of six scenarios. Since they assume that the agents use time-dependent tactics, each agent
projects with some probability the deadline of the other agent. Using these facts they describe optimal strategies for the
negotiation. We consider complete information about the deadline. However, since we deal with people, we cannot
rely on the fact that the opponent maximizes her expected utility. Thus, we have to incorporate heuristics into our
formal model.
Klein et al. [11] describe a simulated annealing based approach that is appropriate for negotiating complex inter-
dependent issue contracts. It allows agents to ﬁnd ‘win–win’ contracts in intractably large multi-optima search spaces
in a reasonable amount of time. While they consider non-linear utility functions in a very large space, our utility
function is linear and we consider a small space. However, since we consider negotiations between a human and an
automated agent, even this small space causes difﬁculties for the human negotiator and our automated agent needs to
reach beneﬁcial agreements given its opponent’s limitations.
There have been various attempts to develop an agent that negotiates using learning techniques (e.g., [10,14,18]).
While these approaches seems very promising when either the agreements to be reached are relatively restricted (e.g.,
[10]) or when there is a lot of time for negotiation, they are not applicable to our situations that are characterized by
time constraints, deadlines, and the possibility of opting out.
7. Conclusions
In this paper we presented an automated negotiator that interacts with humans. The agent is based on a game
theory model, coupled with heuristics. The agent was tested in a simulation of a ﬁshing dispute with humans. The
results of the experiments revealed that the agent played at least as well as, and in the case of one of the two roles,
signiﬁcantly better than a human player. We believe that this is a good indication of the agent’s possible behavior in
other domains with similar characteristics: time constraints, deadlines, full information, and opting out. Modifying
the agent to negotiate in other domains where the assumptions of the formal model hold is straightforward: there is a
need to enter the new utility points via the agent’s interface and to change the domain speciﬁc terms in the language.
If the assumptions do not hold, then modiﬁcations based on the game theoretic analysis of the new scenario will need
to be undertaken.
An important future research direction will involve the participation of an agent in negotiations involving incom-
plete information. In this case, greater attention will need to be paid to creating mechanisms for the agent to update its
beliefs concerning the objectives and utilities of its opponent, as a result of information emerging during the course of
the negotiations.

S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
17
Appendix A. Utility points for the ﬁshing dispute
Outcomes
Canada
Spain
Agreement on Total
Allowable Catch
705
410
Point impact per ton of ﬁsh
-5
10
1–54
Canada uses military force
Success
860
115
10%
Partial success
510
345
30%
Failure
310
305
60%
Spain uses military force
Success
160
835
10%
Partial success
230
515
20%
Failure
700
155
70%
Status Quo
200
325
Non-terminal action parameters
Canada—ship subsidies
Agr*
0 Ships
0
0
5 Ships
5
30
10 Ships
20
50
15 Ships
30
70
20 Ships
45
100
Canada—trade sanctions
All*
No trade sanctions
0
0
Trade sanctions
10
−30
Spain reduces ﬁshing related pollution
Agr*
0%
0
0
15%
10
−15
25%
20
−20
50%
30
−25
Spain—trade sanctions
All*
No trade sanctions
0
0
Trade sanctions
−10
15
Time
−5
10
All*
Utility points. Agr∗—affects only agreements. All∗—affects all outcomes.
Impact of time on the probabilities of military action: Success: 2%. Partial success: −1%. Failure: −1%.
References
[1] D.R. Andersen, A. Pate, J. Wilkenfeld, Learning and foreign policy decision-making: An experimental approach, in: International Studies
Association Annual Meeting, New Orleans, March 2002.
[2] T.N.
Cason,
S.S.
Reynold,
Bounded
rationality
laboratory
bargaining
with
asymmetric
information,
http://www.mgmt.purdue.edu/faculty/cason, 2001.
[3] P. Faratin, C. Sierra, N.R. Jennings, Using similarity criteria to make negotiation trade-offs, in: Proc. 4th Int. Conf. on Multi-Agent Systems
(ICMAS-2000), Boston, 2000, pp. 119–126.
[4] S.S. Fatima, M. Wooldridge, An agenda based framework for multi-issue negotiation, Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 152 (2004) 1–45.
[5] B. Grosz, S. Kraus, S. Talman, B. Stossel, M. Havlin, The inﬂuence of social dependencies on decision-making: Initial investigations with a
new game, in: Proc. of AAMAS-2004, 2004, pp. 780–787.
[6] R.M. Hogarth, M.W. Reder (Eds.), Rational Choice: The Contrast Between Economics and Psychology, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1987.
[7] H. Jung, M. Tambe, S. Kulkarni, Argumentation as distributed constraint satisfaction: Applications and results, in: International Conference
on Autonomous Agents (Agents’01), 2001.
[8] D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press, 1982.
[9] D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Prospect theory: an analysis of decisions under risk, Econometrica 47 (1979) 263–291.
[10] R. Katz, S. Kraus, Efﬁcient agents for cliff edge environments with a large set of decision options, in: Proceeding of AAMAS 06, Japan, 2006.

18
S. Kraus et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence 172 (2008) 1–18
[11] M. Klein, P. Faratin, H. Sayama, Y. Bar-Yam, Negotiating complex contracts, in: Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, AAAI Press,
Bologna, Italy, 2002.
[12] S. Kraus, Strategic Negotiation in Multiagent Environments, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA, 2001.
[13] S. Kraus, D. Lehmann, Designing and building a negotiating automated agent, Computational Intelligence 11 (1) (1995) 132–171.
[14] R.J. Lin, S.T. Chou, Bilateral multi-issue negotiations in a dynamic environment, in: Workshop on Agent-Mediated Electronic Commerce V
(AMECV), Melbourne, Australia, 2003.
[15] P. Maes, R. Guttman, A. Moukas, Agents that buy and sell: Transforming commerce as we know it, Communications of the ACM (1999).
[16] C. Mudgal, J. Vassileva, Bilateral negotiation with incomplete and uncertain information: A decision-theoretic approach using a model of the
opponent, in: Cooperative Information Agents, 2000, pp. 107–118.
[17] J.F. Nash, The bargaining problem, Econometrica 18 (1950) 155–162.
[18] M. Oprea, An adaptive negotiation model for agent-based electronic commerce, Studies in Informatics and Control 11 (3) (September 2002).
[19] M.J. Osborne, A. Rubinstein, Bargaining and Markets, Academic Press, California, 1990.
[20] G.H. Quester, Offense and Defense in the International System, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, NJ, 2002.
[21] H. Raiffa, The Art and Science of Negotiation, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1982.
[22] J.S. Rosenschein, G. Zlotkin, Rules of Encounter: Designing Conventions for Automated Negotiation Among Computers, MIT Press, Boston,
1994.
[23] A. Rubinstein, Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model, Econometrica 50 (1982) 97–109.
[24] A. Rubinstein, Modeling Bounded Rationality, MIT Press, Boston, MA, 1998.
[25] T.W. Sandholm, N. Vulkan, Bargaining with deadlines, in: Proc. of AAAI99, Orlando, Florida, 1999.
[26] D.A. Seale, T.E. Daniel, A. Rapoport, The information advantage in two-person bargaining with incomplete information, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 44 (2001) 177–200.
[27] C. Sierra, P. Faratin, N. Jennings, A service-oriented negotiation model between autonomous agents, in: Proc. 8th European Workshop on
Modeling Autonomous Agents in a Multi-Agent World (MAAMAW-97), Ronneby, Sweden, 1997, pp. 17–35.
[28] C. Sierra, N.R. Jennings, P. Noriega, S. Parsons, A framework for argumentation-based negotiation, in: Intelligent Agents IV, Springer-Verlag,
1998.
[29] E. Sneyd, B.A. Hons, Fighting over ﬁsh: A look at the 1995 Canada–Spain turbot war, Master of Arts Candidate, Royal Military College of
Canada, http://www.cda-cdai.ca/symposia/2005/Sneyd.pdf.
[30] A.L. Springer, The Canadian turbot war with Spain: Unilateral state action in defense of environmental interests, The Journal of Environment
and Development 6 (1) (1997) 30.
[31] J. Srivastava, D. Chakravarti, A. Rapoport, Price and margin negotiations in marketing channels: An experimental study of sequential bargain-
ing under one-sided uncertainty and opportunity cost of delay, Marketing Science 19 (2) (2000) 163–184.
[32] S. Su, C. Huang, J. Hammer, Y. Huang, H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Pluempitiwiriyawe, H. Lam, An Internet-based negotiation server for
e-commerce, VLDB Journal 10 (2001) (Special Issue on E-Services).
[33] K.P. Sycara, Persuasive argumentation in negotiation, Theory and Decisions 28 (1990) 203–242.
[34] S. Talman, Y. Gal, S. Kraus, M. Hadad, Dapting to agents’ personalities in negotiation, in: Proc. of AAMAS, 2005.
[35] M.A. Tolcott, F.F. Marvin, P.E. Lehner, Expert decisionmaking in evolving situations, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernet-
ics 19 (3) (1989) 606–615.
[36] A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice, Science 211 (1981) 453–458.
[37] A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, Rational choice and the framing of decisions, Journal of Business 59 (1986) 251–278.
[38] K.L. Valley, L. Thompson, R. Gibbons, M.H. Bazerman, How communication improves efﬁciency in bargaining games, Games and Economic
Behavior 38 (1) (2002) 127–155.
[39] K.P. Yoon, C.L. Hwang, Multiple Attribute Decision Making: An Introduction, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 1995.

