The ACQDIV Database: Min(d)ing the Ambient Language
Steven Moran, Robert Schikowski, Danica Pajovi´c, Cazim Hysi and Sabine Stoll
Department of Comparative Linguistics, University of Zurich
Plattenstrasse 54, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland
{steven.moran, robert.schikowski, danica.pajovic, cazim.hysi, sabine.stoll}@uzh.ch
Abstract
One of the most pressing questions in cognitive science remains unanswered: what cognitive mechanisms enable children to learn any
of the world’s 7000 or so languages? Much discovery has been made with regard to speciﬁc learning mechanisms in speciﬁc languages,
however, given the remarkable diversity of language structures (Evans and Levinson, 2009; Bickel, 2014) the burning question remains:
what are the underlying processes that make language acquisition possible, despite substantial cross-linguistic variation in phonology,
morphology, syntax, etc.? To investigate these questions, a comprehensive cross-linguistic database of longitudinal child language
acquisition corpora from maximally diverse languages has been built.
Keywords: language acquisition, corpus, cross-linguistic, database
1.
Introduction
In this paper, we present the ACQDIV database com-
piled for the European Research Council-funded project:
Acquisition processes in maximally diverse languages:
min(d)ing the ambient language.1 During the project’s ﬁrst
year, we have compiled together a set of ten electronic cor-
pora from very linguistically diverse languages. In doing
so, we have had to solve issues including:
• Compiling disparately formatted and annotated cor-
pora and making them technologically and linguisti-
cally interoperable
• Creating workﬂows for extracting, transforming and
loading the data into standardized formats and inter-
faces for analysis
• Producing a single uniﬁed database structure that al-
lows us to mine patterns in naturally spoken language
at the utterance, word and morpheme levels
With this uniﬁed cross-linguistic resource in place, our
project is beginning to investigate questions involving lan-
guage acquisition, including:
• Are there underlying patterns in the ambient language
(i.e. child-directed speech) that children use in acquir-
ing language?
• If patterns exist, do they verify or refute current theo-
ries of child language acquisition (e.g. universalist ap-
proaches vs rule-based learning)?
• How do children, say between the ages of 2-3, acquire
language-speciﬁc features that are known to vary so
dramatically across languages in form and content?2
1Primary investigator, Prof. Sabine Stoll, Department of Com-
parative Linguistics, Psycholinguistics Lab, University of Zurich,
Switzerland. ERC award period: 2014-2019. Website: http:
//www.acqdiv.uzh.ch/.
2We focus on grammatical negation and aspect strategies.
We describe the language sample and how it was selected
in Section 2. The sample is not only geographically, cul-
turally and linguistically diverse, but the corpora are tech-
nologically and theoretically heterogeneous. Therefore we
brieﬂy explain our approaches toward interoperability and
the resulting database, which to our knowledge, is one of
the single largest spoken and uniﬁed language corpora to
date in Section 3.3 Given the uniﬁed ACQDIV database,
we are now starting phase two of the project: addressing
the pertinent research questions mentioned above. We show
some initial data explorations in Section 4. And we present
our preliminary research ﬁndings in Section 5.
2.
The Language Sample
A fuzzy clustering algorithm that takes as input a set of lan-
guages and their typological feature values (e.g. grammati-
cal case, inﬂection categories, nominal synthesis) and out-
puts clusters of maximally diverse languages is developed
in Stoll and Bickel (2013a). The algorithm is applied to lan-
guage data from thousands of languages in two broad cov-
erage typological databases – the World Atlas of Linguistic
Structures (WALS)4 and AUTOTYP5 – and to a dozen ty-
pological variables that are known to be encoded in a vari-
ety of ways cross-linguistically. Five clusters of maximally
diverse languages are identiﬁed.
To address the cross-linguistic research questions proposed
in the ACQDIV project, we identiﬁed two languages from
each of the ﬁve clusters. For nine languages there already
exists richly annotated longitudinal child language acquisi-
tion corpora.6 General information about the languages is
3The Child Language Data Exchange System (CHILDES) is
the child language acquisition component of TalkBank, a system
for sharing and studying different data sources of human and an-
imal communication (MacWhinney, 2000). CHILDES contains
transcript and media data from conversations with children from
26 languages, but each corpus is transcribed in the CHAT format
and each can only be analyzed individually with the CLAN tool
thus limiting cross-linguistic analyses.
4http://wals.info/
5http://www.autotyp.uzh.ch/
6Led by Dr. Dagmar Jung (U. Zurich), the ACQDIV project
4423

given in Table 1.
ISO 639-3
Language
Speakers
Classiﬁcation
1
cre
Cree
87K
Algic
1
chp
Dene
12K
Na-Dene
2
ind
Indonesian
23.2M
Austronesian
2
yua
Yucatec
766K
Mayan
3
ctn
Chintang
3.7K
Sino-Tibetan
3
ike
Inuktitut
34.5K
Eskimo-Aleut
4
rus
Russian
166.2M
Indo-European
4
sot
Sesotho
5.6M
Niger-Congo
5
jpn
Japanese
128M
Japanese
5
tur
Turkish
71M
Altaic
Table 1: Language sample
These languages differ to a great extent linguistically
in their number of contrastive sounds (cf. Moran et al.
(2014)), morphology (e.g. ranging from isolating to agglu-
tinating to polysynthetic) and syntactic structure (e.g. con-
stituent and word orders). For example, in some languages
words represent full phrases, in others the word and mor-
pheme are nearly synonymous. Compare utterances in In-
donesian and Cree, two languages in our dataset:
(1)
O, Ei lagi minum susu.
oh Ei more drink milk
‘Oh, Ei is drinking more milk.’
(2)
Chi-wˆap-iht-ˆa-n ˆa kˆa-pushch-ishk-iw-ˆa-t.
2-light-by.head-TR.INAN.NON3-2SG>0 Q PVB.CONJ-
put.on-by.foot-STEM-TR.ANIM-3SG>4SG
‘You see? She was putting it on.’
Indonesian is an example of a language with a fairly low
degree of synthesis, whereas Cree belongs to one of the
most genuinely polysynthetic languages of the world (and
features both noun incorporation and polypartite stems).
Clearly the frequency in which Indonesian or Cree children
hear a particular form is a function of synthesis combina-
torics.7
An overview of the corpora is given in Table 2. We brought
together these corpora, and importantly some of the expert
linguists who compiled them, to create a single syntacti-
cally and semantically interoperable database, which we
discuss below. Each corpus is a detailed multi-year longitu-
dinal study that consists of spoken language utterances by
numerous participants in culturally distinct settings. Each
corpus contains target children and child-directed speech
is investing signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and human resources into com-
pleting the ﬁfth cluster by creating, from scratch, a substantial
acquisition corpus for Dene (ISO 639-3: chp), a Athabaskan lan-
guage spoken in Canada by fewer than 12k people. Dene, along
with Cree (cre), form a ﬁfth cluster which contains polysynthetic
languages, i.e. languages in which “sentences” are composed typi-
cally of many morphemes. So far, the Dene corpus contains audio-
visual recordings of eight children (ages 2-4) and their families. It
currently consists of 200+ sessions (190 hrs+) with transcriptions
and translations in ELAN, with glossing in Toolbox.
7Another example is verbal inﬂection: English typically has
three forms, e.g. kick, kicks, kicked. But another language in our
sample, Chintang, has over 1800 inﬂectional forms per verb.
Language
Format
Kids
Sessions
Words
Chintang
Toolbox
4
419
828272
Cree
CHAT
1
10
21525
Indonesian
Toolbox
8
997
2496828
Inuktitut
CHAT-like
5
77
73302
Japanese
XML
7
341
1235364
Russian
Toolbox
5
448
2022992
Sesotho
XML
4
129
237247
Turkish
CHAT-like
8
373
1139877
Yucatec
CHAT-like
3
234
120441
Table 2: Corpora
mainly from mother-child interactions. Some corpora, like
Chintang, contain a variety of participants, including par-
ents, family members, playmates, etc.
As is standard practice in child language acquisition corpus
development, recordings are captured at regular intervals
(e.g. every two weeks) for a period of a year or more, cen-
tered around some number of target children. For example,
the Chintang corpus is nearly 1 million words in its entirety,
contains hundreds of participants, was compiled between
2004 and 2015, and is morphologically annotated, part-of-
speech tagged, and translated into English and Nepali. An
example of a conversational exchange encoded in the CLRP
Toolbox format is given in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Toolbox format
The format differs greatly, from say, conversational ex-
changes in the Sesotho corpus (Demuth, 1992)8 and the
8This example is encoded in the CHILDES CHAT standard,
4424

Japanese MiiPro corpus,9 as shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Figure 2: CHAT format
Figure 3: XML
Although each corpus is in a different encoding format,
each corpus is transcribed at the utterance, word and mor-
pheme levels and additional annotation tiers include utter-
ance timestamps, morphological analysis, part-of-speech
labels, etc.10 To bring the data together, we developed our
own ETL pipeline.
3.
Extract, Transform, Load
The ETL pipeline (Inmon, 1992; Kimball, 1996) developed
for this project is written in Python and transforms original
corpora data formats11 into a single standards-abiding dig-
ital format encoded in relational tables using SQLAlchemy
for its database ORM, SQLite for data storage, and plain
see: http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/manuals/CHAT.
pdf.
9http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
10The compiled data provide not only a platform for addressing
questions of language acquisition, but also a resource for develop-
ing data-rich NLP tasks for and with under-resourced languages
data.
11Collected between 1984-2005, hence the void of technologi-
cal incompatibility of data formats.
CSV ﬁles and R data frames for output formats. The data
formats we encountered are:
• Corpus-compiler speciﬁc speciﬁcations encoded in
SIL’s Toolbox,12 e.g. Russian (Stoll and Roland,
2008), Chintang and Indonesian13; see Example 1
above
• Various versions of the CHILDES standard called
CHAT14
• Talkbank XML
The data are transformed by:
• Converting the ﬁles into Unicode (UTF-8 NO-BOM
NFD) plain text
• Correcting legacy character codes that were lost in
translation and identiﬁed with unigram character code
and grapheme models
• Extracting annotator comments from utterance tiers
and removing punctuation
• Associating all annotations explicitly with the three
main levels utterance–word–morpheme, possibly re-
assembling conﬂicting structures in the original data
aligning word and morpheme level annotations within
an utterance explicitly
• Unifying metadata standards and data types (e.g. uni-
fying speaker role labels, age formats)
• Unifying linguistic terminology from the different an-
notations; creating terminological interoperability by
mapping linguist expert opinion of grammatical cate-
gories to a uniﬁed set15
• Inferring additional information from annotations, e.g.
determining the sentence type from punctuation in the
translation
The data are then loaded into a simple relational database,
with the tables: Sessions, Speakers, Utterances, Words and
Morphemes. Each session has multiple speakers and mul-
tiple utterances.
Each utterance is in a one-to-many re-
lationship with words and each word is in a one-to-many
relationship with morphemes. Sessions contain additional
metadata (e.g. when, where, whom). Utterances contain in-
formation like timestamps and addressee. Words and mor-
phemes contain linguistic analysis, e.g. part-of-speech tags,
morphological glosses.
12http://www-01.sil.org/computing/toolbox/
13http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/manuals/
10eastasian.pdf
14Although the CHAT standard is fairly well deﬁned, it allows
for a great deal of encoding ﬂexibility on part of the corpus com-
piler, which proved challenging in our work.
15Based on the Leipzig Glossing Rules as far as possible, how-
ever we acknowledge that lossless translation between categories
is an issue of intense debate (cf. Haspelmath (2010a), Haspelmath
(2010b), Newmeyer (2010)).
4425

From the relational tables, we output the data into differ-
ent formats, e.g. CSV ﬁles and R data frames, to provide
broad data accessibility and to allow our team to leverage
its expertise in data science, visualizations and statistics.16
4.
Exploratory Analysis
In a nutshell, our ELT process takes disparate legacy data
formats and creates a uniﬁed relational database ripe for
qualitative and quantitative analysis. An initial step towards
our research goals involves developing techniques for vi-
sual exploration of the data.
One technique that we have developed so far uses an in-
teractive sunburst visualization (Stasko and Zhang, 2000)
that we populate with language- and speaker-speciﬁc cor-
pus data from the database.17 For example, Figures 4 and
5 show the distribution of verbal categories produced by a
Russian child between the ages of 1;08.10 and 1;09.09.18
Figure 4: Distribution of imperfective verbs
These ﬁgures illustrate a Russian child’s preference for us-
ing the imperfective aspect with non-past verb forms and
the perfective aspect with past tense and imperative verb
forms. During the ﬁrst month of the recordings, the child
uses the imperfective aspect exclusively with non-past verb
16There are obviously privacy issues involved in the collec-
tion and dissemination of data on child language acquisition. The
Chintang, Inuktitut, Turkish, Yucatec and Russian corpora are un-
published but included in the sample and are available under the
ACQDIV Terms of Use; see: http://www.acqdiv.uzh.
ch/. The Cree, Sesotho, Japanese MiiPro and Miyata, and In-
donesian corpora are available under the creative commons li-
cense CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.
17We build on source code by Rodden, http://bl.ocks.
org/kerryrodden/7090426, by adding a zoom function,
drop-down menus for selecting different speakers, and a slider
button for navigating through time (not shown).
18From 1 year, 8 months and 10 days to 1 year, 9 months, 9
days.
Figure 5: Distribution of perfective verbs
forms. As expected, the child uses the perfective aspect
with past tense verb forms, but the child uses mainly the
perfective aspect with imperative forms (the segment in the
third layer) in this age range.
Similar patterns were detected for the other Russian chil-
dren and this observation supports the ﬁndings of Gagarina
(2000) and Filiouchkina (2005), both of whom investigate
the distribution of the usage of imperfective and perfective
Russian verbs with present and past forms. Gagarina (2000)
shows that children start using both aspectual forms rela-
tively early, but the occurrences of which are not evenly
distributed: verbs that are uttered in imperfective forms are
mostly used in their non-past form, and perfective verbs
mostly denote telicity and are used in their past form. A
strong correlation between the usage of the perfective as-
pect with telic verb forms is also found in other languages,
such as English, French, Italian and Greek (Stoll, 2001),
which suggests a cross-linguistic preference by children. A
ﬁrst question for exploratory analysis is whether this pat-
tern is due to the frequency distribution of verb forms in
caregiver’s speech.
In order to visualize and investigate a potential inﬂuence in
the usage of perfective and imperfective verb forms by the
adult caregivers, we add their child-directed speech utter-
ances during the same age ranges of the children.19 Figure
6 shows the comparison between the verbal morphology vi-
sualization for one Russian child and his caretaker.
The distributional bias hypothesis by Shirai and Andersen
(1995) states that children use imperfective and perfective
verb forms mostly as they hear them from their caregivers,
that is, imperfective (or progressive) verb forms are mostly
with verbs falling into Vendler’s (1957) verb class of activ-
191;08.10–1;09.09 and 2;00.26–2;01.12.
4426

Age
Child ALJ
Adults ALJ
1;08.10 - 
1;09.09
1;08.10 - 
1;09.09
2;00.22 - 
2;01.12
Figure 6: Comparison of verb forms used by ALJ and ALJ’s caregiver
ities (in the present tense), whereas perfective verb forms
are mostly used with verbs denoting achievements or ac-
complishments (in the past tense).20
In Figure 6, the ﬁrst row seems to support the distribu-
tional hypothesis because the adults use imperfective verb
20Examples include, activity: walk; achievement: understand;
accomplishment: build.
forms mostly with the present tense (the child uses perfec-
tive verbs exclusively in their present tense). However, the
pattern looks different for the perfective aspect. In the sec-
ond row, the sunburst visualization for the child shows that
he uses the perfective aspect with either past tense or im-
perative (not highlighted) verb forms, even though he also
hears the perfective aspect with non-past tense forms being
4427

uttered by the caregivers. Although the imperfective aspect
is more frequently used with present tense verb forms by
the adults, the child still hears present tense verbs mostly
being associated with the imperfective aspect, hence the
preference for using non-past verb forms with the imper-
fective aspect.
In the third row, the child (ages 2;00.26–2;01.12) starts to
use equally frequently the imperfective aspect with past
tense verb forms (most frequently in the singular masculine
form) and the imperative form. The adults, however, retain
the usage of the imperfective aspect with mostly present
tense verb forms. Figure 7 illustrates the zoom function
within our visualization, which allows us to also concen-
trate on deeper levels by zooming in to see only singu-
lar perfective past forms in their masculine form (hovering
over the black tiles will show the lemma of the verb form).
Figure 7: Zoomed in sunburst visualization
5.
Preliminary Research Results
Our ﬁrst research aim is to characterize patterns in child-
directed speech and to relate them to ﬁrst language acqui-
sition theory from a cross-linguistic perspective. In other
words, we want to identify how children can acquire any
language effortlessly, despite the remarkable diversity of
linguistic structures in the world’s 7000 or so languages.
Therefore, one area of research is to use quantitative meth-
ods to investigate patterns in child-directed speech.
In previous work, we introduce quantitative methods to
characterize language acquisition development (Stoll et al.,
2011; Stoll and Bickel, 2013b). Our current research ana-
lyzes the challenges children encounter when learning lan-
guages with different degrees of complexity. For exam-
ple, when comparing the acquisition of the verbal system
in English and Chintang (a polysynthetic Sino-Tibetan lan-
guage) we ﬁnd that children learning both languages be-
come proﬁcient at approximately the same time, despite
the differences in morphological complexity that they en-
counter (Stoll et al., Forthcoming).
In other recent work, we build on existing studies that
model language acquisition data using network theory by
comparing the child-directed speech from the nine typo-
logically diverse languages in the ACQDIV database. We
show that networks created from child-directed speech all
exhibit small-world structural characteristics even though
the networks from these morphologically very different lan-
guages reﬂect the frequency effects of what linguists con-
sider a word. Our ﬁnding is in line with network construc-
tion in child language acquisition models that have deﬁned
links in terms of semantic or grammatical relationships,
both of which exhibit convergent features in their global
structures (Ke, 2007). It has been suggested that small-
world (and free-scale) structural characteristics reﬂect self-
organization in the lexicon – a feature that may account for
universal properties like fast retrieval from the mental lex-
icon, but which may also help to account for the fact that
children can learn any language’s patterns, despite the re-
markable diversity in morphological structures.
6.
Summary
In sum, we have created a syntactically and semantically
interoperable database compiled from technologically dis-
parate and typologically maximally diverse child language
acquisition corpora. This single uniﬁed database allows us
to investigate qualitatively and quantitatively questions in
cross-linguistic child language acquisition. Although we
have just recently started the research phase of our project,
we show here brieﬂy some visualization techniques that
have been developed so far and we discuss some of our
initial research ﬁndings regarding identifying patterns in
cross-linguistic child-directed speech.21
7.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Research Council (FP7, Grant Agree-
ment no. 615988). We also thank three anonymous review-
ers for their feedback.
8.
Bibliographical References
Bickel, B. (2014). Linguistic diversity and universals. In
Nicholas J. Enﬁeld, et al., editors, The Cambridge Hand-
book of Linguistic Anthropology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Demuth, K. (1992). Acquisition of Sesotho. In D. Slobin,
editor, The Cross-Linguistic Study of Language Acquisi-
tion, volume 3, pages 557–638. Lawrence Erlbaum As-
sociates.
Evans, N. and Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of lan-
guage universals: language diversity and its importance
for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
32(05):429–448.
Filiouchkina, M. (2005). How tense and aspect are ac-
quired: a cross-linguistic analysis of child Russian and
English. Nordlyd, 32(1).
Gagarina, N. (2000). The acquisition of aspectuality by
Russian children: the early stages. ZAS Papers in Lin-
guistics, 15:232–246.
21SM & RS devised the conceptual architecture of the database.
SM was responsible for the technological realization. SM, RS, DP
& CH wrote the code. SM & DP wrote the paper. SS acquired the
funding and developed the sampling algorithm.
4428

Haspelmath, M. (2010a). Comparative concepts and de-
scriptive categories in crosslinguistic studies. Language,
86(3):663–687.
Haspelmath, M. (2010b). The interplay between com-
parative concepts and descriptive categories (reply to
newmeyer). Language, 86(3):696–699.
Inmon, W. H. (1992). Building the data warehouse. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Ke, J. (2007). Complex networks and human language.
arXiv preprint cs/0701135.
Kimball, R. (1996). The data warehouse toolkit. John Wi-
ley & Sons, Inc.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: tools for
analyzing talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah,
NJ.
Steven Moran, et al., editors. (2014). PHOIBLE Online.
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
Leipzig.
Newmeyer, F. J. (2010). On comparative concepts and de-
scriptive categories: a reply to Haspelmath. Language,
86(3):688–695.
Shirai, Y. and Andersen, R. W. (1995). The acquisition
of tense-aspect morphology: a prototype account. Lan-
guage, pages 743–762.
Stasko, J. and Zhang, E. (2000). Focus + context display
and navigation techniques for enhancing radial, space-
ﬁlling hierarchy visualizations. In IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 57–65. IEEE.
Stoll, S. and Bickel, B. (2013a). Capturing diversity in
language acquisition research. Language Typology and
Historical Contingency: In Honor of Johanna Nichols.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pages 195–216.
Stoll, S. and Bickel, B. (2013b). The acquisition of erga-
tive case in Chintang. In Edith L. Bavin et al., editors,
The acquisition of ergativity, pages 183–208. Benjamins,
Amsterdam.
Stoll, S. and Roland, M. (2008). Audio-visual longitudinal
corpus on the acquisition of russian by 5 children.
Stoll, S., Bickel, B., Lieven, E., Banjade, G., Bhatta, T. N.,
Gaenszle, M., Paudyal, N. P., Pettigrew, J., Rai, I. P., Rai,
M., and Rai, N. K. (2011). Nouns and verbs in Chintang:
children’s usage and surrounding adult speech. Journal
of Child Language, 39:284–321.
Stoll, S., Mazara, J., and Bickel, B. (Forthcoming). The ac-
quisition of polysynthetic verb forms in Chintang. To ap-
pear in Fortescue, M., Mithun, M., and Evans, N. (Eds.)
Handbook of Polysynthesis. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Stoll, S. E. (2001). The acquisition of Russian aspect.
Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Vendler, Z. (1957). Verbs and times. The philosophical
review, 66(2):143–160.
4429

