
CHANGE AND MOTION
Walter Roy Laird
Throughout the Middle Ages, motion and change were seen as the funda-
mental and immediate expressions of the innate natures of physical things.
To understand their causes and effects was to grasp the nature of physical
reality and to approach an understanding of higher realities such as spiri-
tual substances and God. Philosophical treatments of motion and change
in the Middle Ages arose out of teaching and commenting on Aristotle’s
natural works (the libri naturales) by masters in the medieval universities.
Although banned several times at Paris early in the thirteenth century, by
mid-century these works came to constitute almost the entire program in
natural philosophy (physica or philosophia naturalis), which, along with logic,
moral philosophy, and metaphysics, made up the core of the medieval arts
curriculum. Beyond the faculty of arts, theories of motion and change came
to be applied to theological problems such as grace and the sacraments, and
they were in turn inﬂuenced by theological and other considerations. Motion
and change were matters of intense interest to medieval natural philosophers,
logicians, mathematicians, and theologians alike, and the scope of their stud-
ies extended far beyond the narrow limits of what in the seventeenth century
would become dynamics and kinematics. Within medieval treatments of
motion and change, there emerged a number of scientiﬁc and mathematical
advances of great interest and lasting importance in the history of science,
including a rule on the relation between force and speed, impetus theory,
the quantiﬁcation of qualities, the mean-speed theorem, and the graphical
representation of qualities and motion. The medieval science of motion,
therefore, was not merely an imperfect foreshadowing of the physical science
of Galileo and Newton but a comprehensive program of natural philosophy,
the purpose of which was a complete understanding of the natural world –
the world of motion and change – through its principles and causes.
Aristotle’s libri naturales covered the whole of physical reality and all
the particular kinds of natural bodies, with their various motions and
changes, including the heavens, elemental bodies, atmospheric and terrestrial

use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of
in David C. Lindberg and Michael H. Shank (eds.), 
The Cambridge History of Science, vol. 2.  Medieval Science, pp. 404-435. 
Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 2013.  

Change and Motion

phenomena, and living things. Of these, by far the most important within
the medieval arts curriculum was his Physica (Physics), in which Aristotle
gave an account of the general principles of nature, motion, and change.
Here he discussed the nature of motion and change and their kinds, as
well as time, place, void, continuity, speed, the relation between movers and
moved bodies, self-movers, natural and forced motions, projectiles, and the
ﬁrst motion and ﬁrst mover. Of the books on particular branches of natural
philosophy, De caelo (On the Heavens) treated the nature and motions of the
celestial realm and contained Aristotle’s most extensive treatment of natural
and forced motions, the motions of heavy and light bodies, and the nature
and motions of celestial bodies. Together, Physics and De caelo thus provided
the framework and most of the material for medieval discussions of motion
and change.
CHANGE AND MOTION
Change and motion are as puzzling to the mind as they are obvious to the
senses. Most philosophers before Aristotle recognized their existence in the
sensible world but were unable to explain satisfactorily what they were or their
relation to other existing realities. The pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides
argued against the reality of all change on the grounds that nothing can come
from nothing and that what already exists cannot come to be. Aristotle, for
his part, dismissed such denials of the obvious and sought instead to account
for motion and change through the discovery of the general principles of
natural things. A principle of something is its source or origin, that from
which it comes or what makes or constitutes it. In the ﬁrst book of his
Physics, Aristotle concluded that three principles underlie the existence and
motion of natural things: the most general pair of contraries, called form
and privation, and the subject that underlies them, called matter. Form is
whatever qualiﬁes a thing, makes it what it actually is – for example, white or
hot. Privation, by contrast, is the exact absence of that form, what the thing
could be but is not – black or cold. And matter is the underlying subject that
receives or is subjected to different forms. The idea of form and privation
thus breaks the Parmenidean deadlock by allowing a thing both to be in
some sense (to be white or hot) and not to be in another (not to be black or
cold). Motion, then, is the transition of a subject from privation to form or
On motion and change in general in the Middle Ages, see John E. Murdoch and Edith D. Sylla,
“The Science of Motion,” in Science in the Middle Ages, ed. David C. Lindberg (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, ), pp. –; and James A. Weisheipl, The Development of Physical Theory in
the Middle Ages (; repr. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, ). Many of the original
texts are edited and translated, with commentary and introductions, in Marshall Clagett, The Science
of Mechanics in the Middle Ages (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, ), pp. –, and
Edward Grant, A Source Book in Medieval Science (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
), pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
from form to privation that occurs successively – over time – rather than all
at once.
Aristotle took it as obvious that all motion and change proceeds from
something (some condition or place) toward something. The goal to which
the motion and change of a natural thing is directed is determined precisely
by its nature. The nature of a seed is to grow into a particular sort of plant;
the nature of a heavy body is to descend. The nature of a thing is thus its
internal source or principle of change or motion toward its natural goal. This
nature is often associated with its matter (as the nature of a tree is sometimes
said to be wood), though it is more properly to be associated with the form,
which makes the thing what it is and gives it its proper propensity to move.
In addition to matter and form, which medieval commentators often
called the internal causes of a thing, Aristotle had distinguished two external
causes: the efﬁcient cause and the ﬁnal cause. The efﬁcient cause is what
effects the change or impresses a form on matter; in Aristotle’s example, the
sculptor is the efﬁcient cause of the statue. The ﬁnal cause is the purpose
or end – that for the sake of which. Thus the ﬁnal cause of the statue is to
be venerated in a temple. Natural things, as well as artiﬁcial things such as
statues, can be accounted for by all four causes, though in natural things the
formal, efﬁcient, and ﬁnal causes often coincide. The ﬁnal cause also often
determines the others in that ends often determine means, and for this reason
Aristotle considered the ﬁnal cause to be the most important in nature. As a
result, his physics is often called teleological (from the Greek telos, meaning
end or goal). According to Aristotle, nature – the internal source or principle
of motion in natural things – acts for a purpose.
Aristotle distinguished the motion and change that happens by nature
from what is forced on a body by an external agent in opposition to its
natural tendencies. Such motion was called violent or forced or compulsory,
obvious examples of which are heavy bodies forced upward and projectiles
propelled by a sling or bow. Unlike natural motions, which tend to be slower
at the beginning and faster at the end, violent motions are usually faster at
the beginning, when the external cause is strongest, and slower at the end,
when the natural tendency of the body has taken over. In addition to natural
and violent motions, Aristotle discussed motions and changes that are the
result of willed or deliberate action, which medieval commentators called
“voluntary” motions, thus distinguishing, according to cause, three kinds
of motion: natural, violent or compulsory, and voluntary.The medieval
natural philosopher sought to distinguish these kinds of motions from one
Aristotle, Physics, I..b–b; and Aristotle, Metaphysics, XI..b–a.
Aristotle, Physics, II..b–b.
Ibid., II.–.b–b.
James A. Weisheipl, “Natural and Compulsory Movement,” New Scholasticism, (), –,
reprinted in James A. Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, ed. William E. Carroll
(Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, ), pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

another and to determine their proper and immediate causes. This will
become especially apparent later in this chapter in the discussions of motion
in a void, projectiles, falling bodies, and celestial motions.
Whatever their causes, motion and change are of several different kinds,
so one must ask whether these are fundamentally different or fundamentally
the same, and whether motion itself is some reality apart from the subject in
motion, on the one hand, or the goal or terminus of the motion on the other.
For Aristotle, motion or change – both words translate his kinesis and hence-
forth will be used interchangeably – was not a reality itself but an actuality
occurring in relation to quantity, quality, and place.Thus he distinguished
three kinds or species of motion: change of size or quantity (augmentation
and diminution in the case of living things, rarefaction and condensation in
the case of nonliving things), change of quality (or alteration), and change
of place (local motion). A fourth candidate – substantial change (the trans-
formation of one kind of thing into a completely different kind of thing) –
Aristotle eliminated as a kind of motion since it occurs suddenly rather than
over time. His medieval commentators called substantial change mutation
(mutatio), and some at least included it in their discussions of motion in
general.
To confuse the matter, Aristotle had said in his Categories that being heated
and being cooled were examples of passio (being acted upon), which implied
that all motion is a single kind of thing – a passio – distinct from the body
in motion and its terminus.The eleventh-century Arabic commentator
Avicenna (Ibn S¯ın¯a, –) took up this implication, holding that motion
in general was a passio with four species or kinds (local motion and qualitative,
quantitative, and substantial change), and distinct both from the body in
motion and its terminus. Averroes (Ibn Rushd, –), who was known
in the Latin West as “The Commentator” for his exhaustive commentaries on
Aristotle, tried to resolve the apparent contradiction in Aristotle by conceding
that although motion was a passio formally, it was of four kinds materially,
and in this respect motion belongs to the same species as its terminus.
The question of the nature of motion was among the many physical
problems ﬁrst treated in a thorough, scholastic manner in the Latin West by
Albert the Great (Albertus Magnus, ca. –), in his commentary on
Physics, and his discussion largely set the terms for later debate. Albert was
especially concerned with distinguishing the truth of Aristotle’s views from
what he saw as distortions and misinterpretations introduced by Avicenna
and Averroes, whose commentaries had accompanied the works of Aristo-
tle in their reception in the Latin West. Aristotle had deﬁned motion as
Aristiotle, Physics, V.–.a–b; and Aristotle, Metaphysics, XI.–. b–a.
Aristotle, Categories, .b–.
Ernest J. McCullough, “St. Albert on Motion as Forma ﬂuens and Fluxus formae,” in Albertus Magnus
and the Sciences, ed. James A. Weisheipl (Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, ),
pp. –at pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
“the actualization of what exists potentially insofar as it is potential,” a def-
inition that gave medieval commentators far less trouble than it later gave
Ren´e Descartes (–), who famously declared it to be incomprehensi-
ble. It was obvious to Aristotle that motion was some kind of actuality since
a body in motion is actually different from one at rest. But the crucial char-
acteristic of motion is that, while it is occurring, it is incomplete. Motion is
an actuality, but an incomplete actuality (what we might call a process), for
before the motion has begun, the body is merely potentially in a new place,
and once it has arrived in that new place its actuality is complete. Only while
that potentiality is actually being realized precisely as potentiality is there
motion. Motion is thus an incomplete actuality, the actualization of what
exists potentially insofar as it is potential. Medieval commentators called this
deﬁnition the formal deﬁnition of motion to distinguish it from what they
called its material deﬁnition: that motion is the actuality of the mobile body
precisely as mobile.
For Albert, as for his student Thomas Aquinas (ca. –), motion
was not a univocal term – having exactly the same meaning in its various
applications and referring to a single kind of being – but an analogous
term, in that it is applied by analogy to more than one kind of being.
Thus each different motion is in fact the same in essence as its terminus
or end, differing from it only in perfection; for example, the motion of
becoming white is in its essence the same as whiteness – its goal and end –
except less perfect or complete (i.e., less white). According to Albert, then,
motion is the continuous going forth of a form (continuus exitus formae)
from mover to mobile, a form (e.g., whiteness) that ﬂows rather than a static
one. Thus Albert gave what he called the “total deﬁnition” of motion as
the simultaneous activity of both mover and moved body, and in this way
he encompassed the external causes – the efﬁcient and, at least implicitly,
the ﬁnal cause. Although the phrase was not used by Albert, motion under the
view that it was identical in essence or deﬁnition to its terminus came to be
called a forma ﬂuens (a form ﬂowing), the view almost universally accepted
among later commentators, in contrast to a ﬂuxus formae (the ﬂow of a
form), which later came to characterize Avicenna’s position. But the phrases
forma ﬂuens and ﬂuxus formae, however convenient for modern historians,
were not used by medieval commentators with sufﬁcient consistency and
precision to delineate accurately their various positions concerning the nature
of motion.
The view of motion as a forma ﬂuens was pushed to its extreme form by
the relentless logical analysis of terms and the spare, nominalist ontology of
the Oxford logician and theologian William of Ockham (–). For
Aristotle, Physics, III.–.b–b.
McCullough, “St. Albert on Motion as Forma ﬂuens and Fluxus formae,” pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

Ockham, there are no realities beyond absolute things (res absolutae) – indi-
vidual substances and the qualities that inhere in them. Quantity, relation,
place, time, action, passion, and the other Aristotelian categories are not
absolute things but merely convenient ways of speaking that can be reduced
to statements about absolute things. Likewise motion is not some kind of
reality beyond the mobile body and the accidents or places that the body
acquires successively without pausing in any. Although later natural philoso-
phers did not always accept this conclusion, in general they formulated the
question of the nature of motion in the same way as Ockham had.
PLACE AND TIME
The genius of Aristotle’s deﬁnition of motion is that it appeals only to
prior and more general metaphysical principles – actuality and potential-
ity – and does not depend on preexisting or subsisting space and time,
in which or through which bodies are supposed to move. Rather, three-
dimensional extension is the ﬁrst, essential, and fundamental property of
all bodies. The essence of a body is to be extended, and to be extended
is to be a body. Space, according to Aristotle and many of his medieval
commentators, was a mental abstraction of the extension of bodies, a result
of considering the three-dimensionality of a material body abstracted from
its matter and all other forms. But the three-dimensionality of a body no
more exists separately from that body than does its weight, though both
can be thought of as though they did. The science that treats weight as
separate from material bodies is statics or, as it was known in the Middle
Ages, the science of weights (scientia de ponderibus); the science that treats
extension in general as separate from material body is geometry, whereas
stereometry treats speciﬁcally three-dimensional extension. To maintain that
space is a subsisting, three-dimensional reality somehow separate from bod-
ies not only results in certain physical absurdities (for example, that each
part of space is inside another and so on to inﬁnity) but also fails to
explain how a body can move from one place to another. In Book IV
of Physics, after rejecting this naive but common idea of empty space, Aris-
totle deﬁned place (ho topos, Latin locus) in such a way as to avoid these
absurdities while allowing for local motion. The place of something, he
concluded, is the innermost, motionless surface of the body immediately
surrounding it. The immediate and proper place of Socrates, for example, is
James A. Weisheipl, “The Interpretation of Aristotle’s Physics and the Science of Motion,” in The
Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy, ed. Norman Kretzmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan
Pinborg (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –; and Anneliese Maier, “The
Nature of Motion,” in On the Threshold of Exact Science: Selected Writings of Anneliese Maier on
Late Medieval Natural Philosophy, ed. and trans. Steven D. Sargent (Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, ), pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
the surface of the air touching him and of the ground touching the soles of
his feet. Place is thus not some empty, separate three-dimensionality but the
surface of a real body, which can be left behind and subsequently be occupied
by some other body (for example, the air that ﬂows in when Socrates walks
away). Nor is place a mere mathematical abstraction; it is the real physical
relation between bodies expressed as their surfaces in contact. This is cru-
cial for Aristotle’s physical theory because it explains the natural distinction
between up and down that he attributes to place as well as the curious power
that place has in the natural motions of elemental bodies.
According to Aristotle, each of the four primary bodies or elements (earth,
water, air, and ﬁre) has its own natural place, the place to which it is naturally
moved and in which it is naturally at rest. The place of earth is at the center
of the cosmos, and that of ﬁre is immediately below the sphere of the
Moon. Between them are the concentric places of water and air. Fire has the
natural tendency, called lightness or levity, to rise to its natural place at the
circumference of the cosmos, whereas earth has the natural tendency, called
heaviness or gravity, to sink to the center. The two other elements have a
tendency either to rise or to fall depending on where they ﬁnd themselves,
as well as a certain susceptibility in general to be moved. Mixed bodies –
those composed of several elements – have the tendency of the element
predominant in them. The place of an elemental body is determined by the
body that surrounds it and determines in turn whether it will be at rest (if
it is in its natural place) or in motion (if it is not) and in which direction.
Place, then, has within itself the distinction of up and down and the power
or potency to actualize a body’s natural propensity for rest or for motion
up or down. Without place, there could be no distinction between natural
and forced motions. Aristotle’s deﬁnition of place was defended by almost
all medieval commentators against what was taken to be the unlearned view
that place was a three-dimensional reality somehow distinct from the bodies
in it – what we now call “space.”The possibility of the separate existence of
such a three-dimensional, empty space is best discussed later in the context
of arguments concerning the void.
Time, similarly, is not an existing reality in which or through which
motion occurs. For Aristotle, time was rather “the number of motion with
respect to before and after.” Time is a number or measure of motion because
Aristotle, Physics, IV.–.a–a.
Ibid., IV..b–; Aristotle, De caelo, IV.–.a–a; Pierre Duhem, Theories of Inﬁnity,
Place, Time, Void, and the Plurality of Worlds, ed. and trans. Roger Ariew (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, ), pp. –; Edward Grant, “Place and Space in Medieval Physical Thought,”
in Motion and Time, Space and Matter: Interrelations in the History of Philosophy and Science,
ed. Peter K. Machamer and Robert G. Turnbull (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, ),
pp. –, reprinted in Edward Grant, Studies in Medieval Science and Natural Philosophy (London:
Variorum, ); and Edward Grant, “The Concept of Ubi in Medieval and Renaissance Discussions
of Place,” Manuscripta, (), –, reprinted in Grant, Studies in Medieval Science and Natural
Philosophy.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

it is by time that we measure one motion to be longer or faster than another.
Unlike whiteness or heat, which are internal to the body, time is external
to the moved body, similar to distance in local motion, which is the other
external measure of motion with respect to longer and faster. But whereas
distance measures only local motion with respect to here and there (i.e., with
respect to place), time measures all motions with respect to before and after,
now and then. And just as distance or space is the metric abstraction arising
from the extension of bodies, time is the metric abstraction arising from
the motion of bodies. Motion is thus prior to and more fundamental than
time.
MOTION IN A VOID
Whether there could be motion through a void space and what its charac-
teristics might be were subjects of considerable controversy among medieval
commentators on Aristotle’s Physics. Although most followed Aristotle in
asserting that actually existing void spaces are impossible by nature, the gen-
eral belief that an omnipotent God could create a void provided the occasion
for considering hypothetical motion through such a void and for examining
the nature of motion in general, the role of the medium, and the relation
between moving powers and resistances.
The ancient atomists Democritus and Leucippus had posited the existence
of an empty space or void to allow their atoms to move rather than be ﬁxed
motionless against each other. The force of Aristotle’s arguments in Book IV
of Physics against the existence of the void was to show that positing a void
not only could not serve the purpose intended but would also result in cer-
tain absurdities concerning motion. Natural motion, he argued, requires that
there be a place in which the body is now located and a place toward which
it naturally tends. But if there were a void space, places and directions in it
would be undifferentiated, so that there could be neither natural nor violent
motion. Nor would there be any reason for a body to come to rest in any par-
ticular place, so in a void all bodies would be at rest; or, if they were moved,
having no natural tendency or any medium to counteract their motion, they
would be moved indeﬁnitely unless stopped by a more powerful body, which
Aristotle took to be self-evidently absurd. Again, since according to Aristotle
some violent motions depend on the medium (notably projectile motion,
discussed later), these also would be impossible in a void. If, as the atomists
asserted, the void were the cause of motion by drawing a body into itself,
then a body surrounded by a void would tend to be moved equally in all
directions; that is, it would not be moved at all. Furthermore, the ratio of
Aristotle, Physics, IV.–.b–a. See Duhem, Theories of Inﬁnity, Place, Time, Void, and
the Plurality of Worlds, pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
speeds of a given body moving through two different resisting media is as
the ratio of the rarity of the media, but between a medium however rare
and the void there is no ratio, which implies that the speed of motion in a
void would be inﬁnite. Finally, since bodies with greater weight divide a
medium more readily and thus move more swiftly, in a void all bodies,
whatever their weights, will move at equal speeds, which Aristotle took to
be impossible.As for interstitial voids – the supposed microscopic voids
between the atomists’ particles – they are not needed to explain conden-
sation and rarefaction. Like temperature and weight, rarity and density for
Aristotle were a kind of qualitative accident changed by alteration, though
in this case their intensity is measured by size alone rather than in degrees
or pounds. Thus, even by the atomists’ own assumptions, the void is nei-
ther sufﬁcient nor necessary to explain either local motion or increase and
decrease.
Some of Aristotle’s later commentators, however, used the hypothetical
void to analyze the nature and conditions of motion itself. In particular,
Aristotle had argued that, if the void were the sole cause of motion, there
could be no ratio between the speed of a motion in a void and that of
a motion in a medium. The implications of this – that motion in a void
would be instantaneous and consequently that the temporal successiveness
of motion depended on a resisting medium – were to have a long history
among medieval commentators. Averroes reported that Avempace (Ibn Bajja,
d. ), perhaps inﬂuenced by the sixth-century Greek commentator John
Philoponus (d. ca. ), asserted that motion does not require a resisting
medium in order to have a ﬁnite speed. As an example, Avempace cited
the motions of the celestial spheres, which despite the absence of anything
to resist their motion still move with ﬁnite speeds. Rather, he argued, the
speed of a body is determined by the ratio of the body moved to the cause
of its motion, any medium serving only to slow the motion further by
subtracting speed. This slowing or retardation, and not the speed itself, is
thus proportional to the resistance of the medium.
Aristotle, Physics, IV.–.a–b.
Ibid., IV..b–b.
Edward Grant, “Motion in the Void and the Principle of Inertia in the Middle Ages,” Isis, (),
–, reprinted in Grant, Studies in Medieval Science and Natural Philosophy; James A. Weisheipl,
“Motion in a Void: Aquinas and Averroes,” in St. Thomas Aquinas, 1274–1974: Commemorative
Studies, ed. A. A. Mauer, vols. (Toronto: Pontiﬁcal Institute of Mediaeval Studies, ), vol. ,
pp. –, reprinted in Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, pp. –. See also
Duhem, Theories of Inﬁnity, Place, Time, Void, and the Plurality of Worlds, pp. –; Ernest
A. Moody, “Ockham and Aegidius of Rome,” Franciscan Studies, (), –, reprinted
in Ernest A. Moody, Studies in Medieval Philosophy, Science, and Logic (Berkeley: University of
California Press, ), pp. –at pp. –; and Ernest A. Moody, “Galileo and Avempace:
The Dynamics of the Leaning Tower Experiment,” Journal of the History of Ideas, (), –,
–, reprinted in Moody, Studies in Medieval Philosophy, Science, and Logic, pp. –at
pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

Averroes himself advanced a different opinion regarding motion in a void.
He took Aristotle to require that every body be moved by a mover in constant
contact with it (a motor conjunctus, or conjoined mover). In the case of living
things, the soul, which is the form of a living thing, is the mover of the
matter. In nonliving things, the form is also the mover, but it cannot move
the matter directly since otherwise there would be no distinction between
living and nonliving things. Instead, Averroes argued, the form somehow
moves the medium, which in turn moves the matter of the body. Therefore,
in the absence of a medium, inanimate natural motion could not occur.
But even if it did, such motion would be instantaneous, for matter alone
is purely passive and thus can offer no resistance to form, which is pure
actuality. Nevertheless, Averroes concluded that, despite the absence of a
resisting medium, the motion of the celestial spheres is not instantaneous
because the spheres themselves offer the resistance to their movers necessary
for ﬁnite speeds.
Although Averroes’s views on motion in a void exerted considerable inﬂu-
ence through the high Middle Ages, on this point as on many others Thomas
Aquinas offered an important alternative to the Averroist interpretation.
According to Aquinas, motion in a void would not be instantaneous since a
body, even with all its other forms removed (including heaviness and light-
ness), simply by virtue of being extended, has a natural inertness (inertia) to
being moved. Note that this inertness does not arise from heaviness or some
other property of the body since these have been explicitly removed from
the body – still less does it arise from mass or quantity of matter in Newton’s
sense. Rather, it arises from the purely spatial extension of the body. Similarly,
the magnitude through which a body is moved also has spatial extension, and
since its parts are in sequence, so are the parts of the motion itself. Thus, for
Aquinas, motion takes a ﬁnite time even in the absence of a medium and all
other resistance, which would serve only to subtract from the body’s natural
speed. This argument came to be known as the “incompossibility of termini”
(incompossibilitas terminorum) or “separation of termini” (distantia termino-
rum) since the mere separation of places (termini) and the impossibility of the
same body’s occupying them simultaneously were seen to be sufﬁcient causes
of the ﬁnite successiveness of motion. Nevertheless, most natural philoso-
phers in the fourteenth century, including Aegidius of Rome, Walter Burley,
and John of Jandun, followed the opinion of Averroes against Avempace.
William of Ockham, however, saw no contradiction between the separation
of termini as the cause of the successiveness of motion and Avempace’s view
that speeds decrease in proportion to the resistance of the medium. Ockham’s
resolution of the problem in effect distinguished between motion considered
purely in terms of distance and time, and motion considered in relation to
Weisheipl, “Motion in a Void,” pp. –; and Moody, “Galileo and Avempace,” pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
its causes – a distinction that would be made explicit by later scholars at
Oxford.
Natural philosophers sometimes turned Aristotle’s arguments concerning
the void on their head, so that the absurd consequences of positing a void
were simply accepted as hypothetically true and then analyzed and explained.
In his Treatise on the Ratios of Speeds in Motions (Tractatus de proportionibus
velocitatum in motibus) of , the Oxford theologian Thomas Bradwardine
(d. ) included a theorem stating that in a void all mixed bodies of sim-
ilar composition would in fact move at equal speeds whatever their sizes,
which Aristotle had deemed absurd. A mixed body was one compounded of
several or all of the elements; because the elements are never actually found
pure and unmixed, all actual physical bodies are mixed bodies. Since each
of the elements has a natural tendency to be moved up or down, a mixed
body, according to Aristotle in De caelo, will be moved with the tendency
of the predominant element.In reﬁning these suggestions of Aristotle,
medieval commentators usually identiﬁed the predominant element as the
motive power and the elements with the contrary tendency as the resistive
power. Depending on where the body was, one element of the body could
be indifferent to motion and thus would contribute to neither motive nor
resistive power. For example, a body located in air and consisting of three
parts of ﬁre and two parts each of earth, air, and water has in air a motive
power downward since the downward power of the earth and water com-
bined overcomes the upward power of the ﬁre, whereas the air in its own
element tends neither up nor down. In water, however, the body has an
upward tendency since the upward motive power of the ﬁre and air together
exceeds the downward power of the earth, whereas the water this time has
no tendency up or down.
There was considerable debate over whether the resulting speed depended
on the excess of motive over resistive power (found by subtracting the resistive
power from the motive) or on the ratio of the motive to the resistive power.
Bradwardine, as will be shown at length in the next section, asserted that
speeds follow the ratio of motive to resistive powers. And since mixed bodies
of the same composition (that is, with the same ratio of elements) have the
same ratio of motive to resistive powers, their speeds will be the same in a
void. Bradwardine acknowledged that this conclusion was not at all obvious.
He noted that it seems to contradict the common Aristotelian opinion that
bodies move naturally at speeds in proportion to their magnitudes. But he
explained that because the intensities of the motive forces are in the same
ratio as the intensity of the resistances, they produce equal intensities of
Weisheipl, “Motion in a Void,” pp. –; Grant, “Motion in the Void and the Principle of Inertia
in the Middle Ages,” pp. –; and Moody, “Galileo and Avempace,” pp. –.
Aristotle, De caelo, I..b–a.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

motion (that is, equal speeds) despite the difference in their absolute sizes or
extensions.
This distinction between the intensity and extension of motion would
become a signiﬁcant part of the latitude of forms subsequently pursued at
Oxford and Paris in the next generation. Albert of Saxony (ca. –)
arrived at the same conclusion and went on to contrive a number of para-
doxical results concerning the speeds of mixed and pure elemental bodies
moving in various media and the void, including a case in which natural
motion would be slower at the end than at the beginning. As for a hypo-
thetical body composed of a single element moving in a void, Bradwardine
had declined to assign it any deﬁnite speed, whereas Albert asserted that its
speed would be inﬁnite.
BRADWARDINE’S RULE
In Book VII of Physics, Aristotle had treated in general the relation between
powers, moved bodies, distance, and time, but his suggestions there were
sufﬁciently ambiguous to give rise to considerable discussion and disagree-
ment among his medieval commentators. The most successful theory, as
well as the most mathematically sophisticated, was proposed by Thomas
Bradwardine in his Treatise on the Ratios of Speeds in Motions. In this tour de
force of medieval natural philosophy, Bradwardine devised a single simple
rule to govern the relationship between moving and resisting powers and
speeds that was both a brilliant application of mathematics to motion and
also a tolerable interpretation of Aristotle’s text.
In what is known as the ship-haulers argument, Aristotle had argued that
if a certain power (e.g., a certain number of men) can move a certain body
(e.g., a ship) a certain distance in a certain time, that same power can also
move half that body the same distance in half the time or twice the distance
in the same time. Similarly, twice that power can move the same body twice
the distance in the same time or the same distance in half the time. But half
the power does not necessarily move the same body half the distance in the
same time or the same distance in twice the time, for the power may be too
weak to move the body at all.
H. Lamar Crosby, Jr., ed. and trans., Thomas of Bradwardine: His Tractatus de Proportionibus,
III.2, Theorem XII (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, ), pp. –; and Edward Grant,
“Bradwardine and Galileo: Equality of Velocities in the Void,” Archive for the History of Exact
Sciences, (), –, reprinted in Grant, Studies in Medieval Science and Natural Philosophy,
pp. –.
Aristotle, Physics, VII..b–b. See Israel E. Drabkin, “Notes on the Laws of Motion in
Aristotle,” American Journal of Philology, (), –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
It was not Aristotle’s purpose here to state a precise quantitative rule
governing powers and motions. Rather, this argument was one of the pre-
liminaries leading to his proof in Book VIII of Physics that there must be
a ﬁrst mover and a ﬁrst mobile body. Medieval commentators, however,
considered the ship-haulers argument to be his deﬁnitive statement of the
relationship between movers, resistances, and speeds, and they tried to put
his rule into more deﬁnite form. They identiﬁed powers and moved bodies as
moving powers and resisting powers, which, since both were powers, could
then be put into ratios with each other. They thought of speed not in the
modern sense as a ratio of distance to time (since such dissimilar quantities
cannot form ratios) but as the intensity of motion, measured in degrees. (A
motion with two degrees of speed, for example, is twice as fast as a motion
with one degree of speed and will therefore cover twice the distance in the
same time or the same distance in half the time.) Several interpretations
of the relationship between motive and resisting powers and the resulting
speeds had been proposed by Aristotle’s ancient and medieval commentators
in order to reconcile the rules of motion in Book VII of Physics with other
passages and with common observation. The goal was to come up with a sin-
gle general rule that expressed the relationship between moving and resisting
powers and speed and at the same time precluded motion when the moving
power is less than or equal to the resisting power, a goal that Bradwardine’s
rule achieved brilliantly.
Bradwardine wrote his Treatise on the Ratios of Speeds in Motions in the
form of a deductive argument, beginning with deﬁnitions and suppositions
and proceeding to theorems and proofs. In the ﬁrst of its four chapters,
he laid the necessary mathematical groundwork – the medieval theory of
ratios and proportions, which until then had been applied mainly to music
theory. The crux of Bradwardine’s treatment is what it means for a ratio to
be a multiple of – or, in general, greater than – another ratio. A ratio is a
multiple (e.g., double or triple, in a technical sense that applies only to ratios)
of another ratio when it can be compounded from that smaller ratio. For
example, the ratio :is double :since :compounded twice with itself or
doubled – (:)(:), or (:)– yields the ratio :; similarly, :is triple :.
And in general this is what Bradwardine meant when he said that one ratio
is greater than another – that the larger is compounded from the smaller.
Before using the theory of compounded ratios in his own rule, Bradwar-
dine considered and rejected four alternative opinions on the relationship
between powers, resistances, and speeds. The ﬁrst is that speeds follow the
excesses of motive powers over resistances (V ∝[M−R], where V = speed,
M = motive power, and R = resistance), the opinion attributed to Avem-
pace and others and discussed previously in connection with motion in a
void. The second opinion, which Bradwardine attributed to Averroes, is that
Crosby, Thomas of Bradwardine, I., pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

speeds follow the ratio of the excesses of the motive over the resisting powers
to the resisting powers (V ∝[M−R]/R). The third opinion is that the speeds
follow the inverse of the resistances when the moving powers are the same
(V ∝/R when M is constant) and follow the moving powers when the
resistances are the same (V ∝M when R is constant), which was the usual
interpretation of Aristotle’s rule. The fourth opinion is that speeds do not
follow any ratio because motive and resistive powers are quantities of differ-
ent species and so cannot form ratios with each other. Bradwardine rejected
all of these because they are either inconsistent with Aristotle’s opinion or
yield results contrary to common experience.
Bradwardine’s own rule is that the ratio of speeds follows the ratios of
motive to resistive powers. This deceptively simple formulation appears at
ﬁrst to be no different from the third rejected opinion until one understands
it in the light of medieval ratio theory just explained. Speed is tripled, for
example, when the ratio of motive to resistive power is tripled – in the
technical sense that applies to ratios. For example, if a motive power of 
moves a resistance of at a certain speed, a motive power of will move
the same resistance with a speed three times the ﬁrst speed since the ratio
:is triple the ratio :; that is, :is compounded of :with itself three
times (i.e., := (:)(:)(:) or (:)). And, in general, speeds are doubled
or tripled or halved as the ratios between motive and resistive powers are
doubled or tripled or halved in the technical sense that applies to ratios.
Furthermore, Bradwardine’s rule precludes the possibility of motion when
the motive power becomes equal to or less than the resisting power because
no ratio of greater inequality of motive to resisting power (e.g., :) can be
compounded of ratios of equality (e.g., :or :) or of lesser inequality (e.g.,
:), for no matter how many times one compounds ratios like :or :with
themselves, one will never arrive at a ratio like :. This means effectively that
speed approaches zero as the ratio of motive to resisting power approaches
equality; when the motive power is less than the resisting power, there will be
no speed at all.Thus, by applying medieval ratio theory to a controversial
passage in Aristotle’s Physics, Bradwardine devised a simple, deﬁnite, and
sophisticated mathematical rule for the relation between speeds, powers, and
resistances.
The rest of the Treatise consists of a series of theorems in which Bradwar-
dine applied this rule to various combinations of motive and resistive powers.
Where the ratios were multiples, he could determine the speeds as multiples,
but in the many more cases where they were not multiples, he was content
with proving only whether the resulting speed would be greater than, less
than, or equal to some multiple of the original speed. He did not resort to
Ibid., II, pp. –.
Ibid., III., pp. –; and Anneliese Maier, “The Concept of the Function in Fourteenth-Century
Physics,” in Sargent, On the Threshold of Exact Science, pp. –.
Crosby, Thomas of Bradwardine, II, pp. –, –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
the actual measurement of powers or speeds to conﬁrm his results, beyond
his earlier appeals to common experience to disprove the alternative rules.
Nevertheless, his rule led him to the remarkable conclusion, mentioned ear-
lier, that all mixed heavy bodies of similar composition will move naturally
at equal speeds in a vacuum.
Bradwardine’s rule was widely accepted in the fourteenth century, ﬁrst
among his contemporaries at Oxford, where Richard Swineshead and John
Dumbleton applied it to solving sophisms, the logical and physical puzzles
that were just beginning to assume an important place in the undergraduate
arts curriculum (See Ashworth, Chapter , this volume.). Soon thereafter
it appeared at Paris, in the works of Jean Buridan and Albert of Saxony, and,
by mid-century, at Padua and elsewhere. It circulated not only in copies of
Bradwardine’s own work but even more widely in an abbreviated version
dating probably from the mid-fourteenth century.
In one of the more interesting applications of Bradwardine’s rule to a
physical problem, Richard Swineshead (ﬂ. –), known to posterity as
“the Calculator” from the title of his inﬂuential Book of Calculations, set out
to determine whether a natural body acts as a uniﬁed whole or as the sum of
its parts. He imagined a long, uniform, heavy body falling in a vacuum (to
eliminate the complication of a resisting medium) down a tunnel through
the center of the earth. The motive power is represented by the length of the
bar above the center and still falling, and the resisting power is represented
by the length of the bar that has already fallen past the center and so is now
rising on the other side. Using Bradwardine’s rule – that the speed of the bar
follows the ratio of motive to resisting power – he examined each successive
speed as the distance between the center of the bar and the center of the
world is successively halved. He found that the speed of the bar decreases
in such a way that its center will never reach the center of the world in any
ﬁnite time. But Swineshead in the end rejected this conclusion because of the
unacceptable consequence that the nature of the whole bar as a heavy body
would be thwarted since its center could never coincide with its natural goal,
the center of the world. Instead, he argued that all the parts of the body would
assist the whole in achieving its goal. Despite the subtlety of the analysis,
then, for Swineshead the physical argument trumped the mathematical.
Elsewhere in his Book of Calculations, Swineshead applied Bradwardine’s
rule to the analysis of motions through variously resisting media, devising
rules to compare not only speeds but the rate of change of speeds when either
Ibid., III., pp. –; the conclusion mentioned is Theorem XII, pp. –.
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –, –.
Michael A. Hoskin and A. G. Molland, “Swineshead on Falling Bodies: An Example of Fourteenth-
Century Physics,” British Journal for the History of Science, (), –; A. G. Molland, “Richard
Swineshead and Continuously Varying Quantities,” in Acts of the Twelfth International Congress on
the History of Science, Paris, 1968, vols. in (Paris: Albert Blanchard, ), vol. , pp. –;
and Molland, Chapter , this volume.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

the moving or the resisting power is continuously increased or decreased
with time. He also considered more complex cases, such as a body moved
by a constant power through a medium the resistance of which increases
uniformly with distance (rather than with time). Since the speed of the body
at any instant depends on where it is in the medium but where it is in the
medium depends in turn on its speed and the time it has traveled, to solve
this problem Swineshead effectively had to reduce the distance dependency
of speed to time dependency.
The only other signiﬁcant extension of Bradwardine’s rule – of more
interest to the history of mathematics than of the science of motion – was
by Nicole Oresme. As mentioned earlier, where the ratios were not simple
multiples of other ratios, Bradwardine could calculate only whether the result-
ing speeds were larger or smaller than some multiple. Oresme, however, gen-
eralized what he called the ratio of ratios to include improper fractional and
even irrational ratios of ratios, which extended the mathematical rigor and
generality of Bradwardine’s rule but without changing its basic application
to motion.
FALLING BODIES AND PROJECTILES
Two of the most controversial problems in the medieval science of motion
concerned the acceleration of falling bodies and the continued motion of
projectiles. The ancient commentators had already criticized Aristotle’s treat-
ments, and medieval commentators in turn tried to solve these problems in
ways that were consistent both with general Aristotelian principles and with
everyday experience. In the effort to explicate Aristotle, however, they devised
solutions that went far beyond what could reasonably be attributed to Aristo-
tle, producing some of the most interesting innovations in medieval physical
thought. And, in the process, Aristotle’s distinction between natural and
violent motions tended to become blurred, implicitly calling into question
a fundamental tenet of Aristotelian natural philosophy.
Falling bodies and projectiles came up in the course of Aristotle’s argu-
ments for a ﬁrst or prime mover in Book VIII of Physics. The main premise
of the argument was that everything that is moved is moved by another. To
establish this premise, Aristotle distinguished three classes of motion accord-
ing to the mover’s relationship to the thing moved: the motion of living
(self-moving) things, forced (compulsory or violent) motion, and natural (or
spontaneous) motion. He then showed that in each case the moved body is
distinct from its mover. This distinction is clearest in the case of forced or
John E. Murdoch and Edith Dudley Sylla, “Swineshead, Richard,” Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography,
XIII, –, especially pp. –.
Nicole Oresme, De proportionibus proportionum and Ad pauca respicientes, ed. and trans. Edward
Grant (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, ), especially pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
violent motion, for there the cause of the motion is obviously different from
the body moved. The horse moves the cart, and the bowstring moves the
arrow. Where motion is imposed on a body from without, the mover must
be in continuous contact with the body in order to endow it with motion.
The difﬁculty with violent or forced motion was not in distinguishing the
mover from the moved but rather in determining why the motion continues
once the mover is no longer in contact with the moved body. This is the
problem of projectile motion, which will be treated later in the chapter.
In the case of living things, since they are self-moving, there would seem to
be no distinction between mover and moved. But here Aristotle distinguished
self-movements proper – voluntary movements that arise from appetite –
from involuntary movements such as growth, nutrition, generation, heart-
beat, and the like that arise from the nature of the animal as a certain kind
of living thing. Properly speaking, animals move themselves by walking,
running, crawling, swimming, ﬂying, and such, motions the efﬁcient cause
of which is the animal itself but understood in the sense of “part moving
part.” That is, in every case of an animal’s moving itself, the motion is caused
by one part of the animal ﬁrst moving another part and then being moved
in turn. In this way, Aristotle preserved the distinction between mover and
moved in animals that move themselves and thus preserved the generality of
the dictum that everything that is moved is moved by another.
But the most difﬁcult cases, Aristotle admitted, are the involuntary move-
ments of living things and the natural motions of inanimate bodies. These
movements arise from the nature of the body, nature being the source of
motion in those things that tend to move by virtue of what they are. In
such cases, the immediate efﬁcient cause of the motion is the generator of
the body itself; that is, whatever brought the body into being as a heavy –
or as a living – thing in the ﬁrst place. Once a body has been endowed
by its generator with a certain nature, it acts spontaneously in accordance
with that nature, no further efﬁcient cause being necessary. A heavy body,
for example, will spontaneously fall by nature unless it is impeded by some
other body. Thus the only other efﬁcient cause that Aristotle admitted for
natural motion is the cause that removes an impediment, although this is
only an incidental rather than an essential cause of motion. For Aristotle,
inanimate elemental bodies are not to be thought of as self-moving. Since
they are homogeneous (that is, indeﬁnitely divisible into parts of similar
composition), there is in them no distinction of parts and therefore no ﬁrst
part that could move the other parts. And since they are not moved part by
part, they are not self-moving.
The nature of a body, which is the source and principle of its motion, is
expressed in its formal and ﬁnal causes; for example, the form of a heavy
Aristotle, Physics, VII..b–aand VIII..b–a; and Weisheipl, “The Principle
Omne quod movetur ab alio movetur in Medieval Physics,” Isis, (), –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

body makes it heavy and causes it to seek the center of the cosmos, its goal or
ﬁnal cause. For this reason, Avicenna identiﬁed the form of a natural body or
its natural goal as efﬁcient causes of its natural motion. Averroes, although
allowing that the generator gives a body its form and all of its characteristic
activities, including local motion, nevertheless argued that Aristotle required
a mover conjoined to the body at all times, even in natural motion. Since
only in living things can the form be the direct mover of the body, Averroes
suggested that in inanimate natural bodies the form ﬁrst moves the medium,
which in turn moves the body itself, like a man rowing a boat. Thus, for
Averroes the medium plays the same role in natural motion as it did for
Aristotle in the continuation of forced, projectile motion.
Although both Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas argued against
Averroes’s interpretation of Aristotle, the tendency to look for an efﬁcient
cause of natural motion within the moved body proved irresistible to many
subsequent thinkers. One notable exception was Duns Scotus, who denied
that everything moved is moved by another, asserting instead that all nat-
ural and voluntary motions are in fact self-motions.However, many later
commentators tended, like Averroes, to look within the naturally moving
body itself for an efﬁcient cause of its motion, similar to the cause of violent
motion, especially of projectiles. Consequently, they posited a cause of forced
motion, often called impetus, that inhered almost like an artiﬁcial, contrary
nature in a moving projectile. Impetus was also sometimes invoked to explain
the acceleration of freely falling heavy bodies. Thus, in the fourteenth cen-
tury, the causes of natural and violent motion tended to be assimilated to
each other; by the seventeenth century, the distinction between natural and
violent motions would break down entirely in the physics of Galileo and
Descartes. We shall return to the cause of the acceleration of falling bodies
after discussing impetus theory.
PROJECTILE MOTION AND THE THEORY OF IMPETUS
In the course of his argument for a ﬁrst motion and a ﬁrst mover in Book VIII
of Physics, Aristotle considered the possibility that the ﬁrst motion (which
he identiﬁed with the rotation of the outermost cosmic sphere) could be
like that of a projectile in that it might continue not through the continued
action of a ﬁrst mover but rather as a stone continues to be moved through
James A. Weisheipl, “The Specter of Motor coniunctus in Medieval Physics,” in Studi sul XIV
secolo in memoria di Anneliese Maier, ed. A. Maier`u and A. P. Bagliani (Rome: Edizioni di Storia
e Letteratura, ), pp. –, reprinted in Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages,
pp. –; and James A. Weisheipl, “Aristotle’s Concept of Nature: Avicenna and Aquinas,” in
Approaches to Nature in the Middle Ages: Papers of the Tenth Annual Conference of the Center for
Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies, ed. Lawrence D. Roberts (Medieval and Renaissance Texts
and Studies, ) (Binghamton, N.Y.: Center for Medieval and Early Renaissance Studies, ),
pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
the air after it has left the hand or the sling that has thrown it. He rejected
this possibility, however, by asserting a theory of projectile motion that
would later be accepted by few of even his most loyal followers. According
to Aristotle, the thrower imparts not only motion to the projectile and to the
medium surrounding it but also a certain power of moving to the medium
alone, either air or water, which has a natural propensity to receive such
a power of moving. Each part of the medium so affected thus becomes a
mover of the projectile by passing both motion and the power of moving
to its adjacent parts. In passing from one part of the medium to the next
and then to the projectile, both the motion and the power of moving are
weakened, in part at least by the natural tendency of the projectile as a heavy
or light body to be moved down or up. Eventually, the power of moving is
so weak that the last part of the medium can pass on motion but not the
power of moving. When this last motion of the medium ceases, so does the
forced motion of the projectile.
In Aristotle’s defense, it must be said that his main purpose was not
to explain projectile motion but rather to show that it was an unsuitable
candidate for the ﬁrst motion, for he had shown earlier that the ﬁrst motion
must be absolutely continuous, which in his theory the motion of a projectile
is not since it is caused by a succession of different movers (i.e., the different
parts of the medium). Nevertheless, his views on projectile motion received
devastating criticism from John Philoponus, who in the sixth century ﬁrst
advanced most of the arguments that would be leveled against it over the
next millennium. In general, Philoponus argued that a medium can act only
to resist the motion of a projectile; what keeps it moving is an “incorporeal
motive force” received from the projector. Although Philoponus’s criticisms
and alternative theory were not known directly in the Latin West, they
probably inﬂuenced several Islamic philosophers, including Avicenna, who
argued that projectiles receive from the projector an inclination – in Arabic,
mayl – that inheres in the body and is not a motive force but only its
instrument. But since these passages of Avicenna were not fully translated
into Latin, the theory of mayl had little inﬂuence in the Latin Middle Ages,
though it formed part of a parallel tradition in Arabic that lasted into the
seventeenth century.
In the Latin West, the ﬁrst alternative to Aristotle’s theory of projectile
motion appeared, surprisingly, in the context of sacramental theology. In his
commentary on Peter Lombard’s Sentences, the Franciscan theologian Peter
John Olivi (d. ) discussed how the sacraments could continue to be
effective long after they had been instituted by Christ. By way of analogy,
Olivi described a theory of projectile motion wherein the projector imparts
to the projectile a similitude or species of itself as mover. Olivi was apparently
Aristotle, Physics, VIII..b–a.
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

drawing on the species theory of Roger Bacon (ca. –ca. ), which
explained all causation by means of species or images of a cause imposed
on other things.In a later work, however, Olivi rejected this theory of
projectile motion on the grounds that, since motion is a real mode of being
in itself that needs nothing to sustain it, the continuation of a projectile needs
no cause besides the original projector. This later position is identical to that
taken by William of Ockham, though for exactly opposite reasons. Ockham
not only rejected all species as unnecessary in the explanation of causes and
their effects, but he also claimed that local motion was nothing over and
above a body and the places it occupies successively without stopping in any.
Since the continued motion of a projectile is not a new effect, it has no need
of a cause at all. Around the same time, another theologian, Franciscus de
Marchia, again drew the analogy between sacramental causality and projectile
motion. According to Franciscus, in his lectures on the Sentences given at Paris
in –, the mover gives to the projectile – rather than to the medium,
as Aristotle thought – a certain moving power that remains for a time in the
projectile and causes its motion to continue.
Whether informed by these theological treatments or not, the philosopher
Jean Buridan, twice rector of the University of Paris between and ,
presented the canonical version of what he called impetus in his questions
on Aristotle’s Physics and De caelo. But ﬁrst he mustered a decisive set of
arguments against the view that the medium is somehow responsible for the
continuing motion of projectiles. First, a top or a smith’s wheel will continue
to rotate in place long after it is pushed, despite the fact that air cannot get
behind it, and continues to rotate even when one obstructs the air by placing
a cloth next to its edge. Again, a lance pointed at both ends can be thrown
as far as one pointed only in front, though the point behind presents less
area for the air to push against. Moreover, air is so easily divided that it is
difﬁcult to see how it could move a thousand-pound stone thrown from a
siege engine. Furthermore, ships will continue to move without there being
any wind detected behind them, and no matter how hard one beats the air
behind a stone, little motion is produced compared with throwing it. And
ﬁnally, if the air moved projectiles, then a feather could be thrown farther
than a stone since it is more easily moved by air, but the contrary is observed.
Therefore, Buridan concluded, a projectile is not moved by the air but by
a certain impetus or motive force (vis motiva) impressed on it by the mover
in proportion to the mover’s speed and to the amount of prime matter in
the projectile. The air, along with the natural tendency of the heavy body
to move downward, serves only to diminish the impetus by resisting the
motion, so that the forced motion becomes slower and slower until it is
completely overcome. This is why larger and denser bodies can be thrown
See Lindberg and Tachau, Chapter , this volume.
Ibid.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
farther, for a greater impetus can be impressed on them by virtue of their
greater quantity of prime matter, and why a greater resistance of air and
natural tendency is necessary to overcome their motion. Buridan took pains
to point out that impetus is not the same as the motion it produces, for
motion is present only successively, one part after another, whereas impetus
is a quality or accident present all at once in its subject. Impetus is thus a
real motive power in the body it moves, impressed on it by the mover and
inhering in it in the same way that a magnet impresses a quality on a piece
of iron that causes it to be moved.Using this idea of impetus, Buridan
went on to explain a variety of physical phenomena, including the rebound
of bodies from obstacles, the vibration of strings, the swinging of bells, and,
most notably, the motion of the celestial spheres and the acceleration of
falling bodies, to which we now turn.
ACCELERATION OF FALLING BODIES
According to Aristotle, natural motion (such as the descent of a heavy body)
is faster at its end than at its beginning. He implied in Physics and De caelo that
the reason for this in the case of falling bodies is that the closer a heavy body
comes to the center of the cosmos (its natural place), the heavier it becomes
and the faster it will fall.Aristotle’s ancient commentators gave several
alternative explanations of the acceleration of falling bodies, attributing it
either to the medium through which they fall or to some power temporarily
resident in the body itself. Simplicius (sixth century), in his commentary on
De caelo, recorded that, according to the astronomer Hipparchus, whatever
power had lifted or sustained the heavy body continues to act on it as it
falls, resulting in an increase in speed as this power gradually wears off.
Others (Simplicius did not identify them) suggested that a lesser quantity of
medium beneath a falling body offers less support, so that the lower the body
gets, the faster it goes. In the end, however, Simplicius agreed with Aristotle,
although he acknowledged that Aristotle’s explanation implied that a body
should weigh more when it is in a lower place unless perhaps the difference
is insensible.
Philoponus, for his part, implicitly denied Aristotle’s explanation of the
acceleration of falling bodies when he argued in his commentary on Physics
that two different weights fall with almost the same speed and not with speeds
proportional to their weights. One medieval Arabic commentator, Abu
l-Barakat (d. ca. ), under the inﬂuence of Philoponus’s explanation of
projectile motion, argued that a projectile, after it has ceased moving upward
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –; and Maier, “The Signiﬁcance of the
Theory of Impetus for Scholastic Natural Philosophy,” in Sargent, On the Threshold of Exact Science,
pp. –at pp. –.
Aristotle, De caelo, ..a–; and Aristotle, Physics, IV..a–.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

and begins to fall, still retains some of its upward, violent inclination, or mayl,
as it begins to fall, and because this violent mayl continues to weaken while
the natural mayl increases as the body falls, the body speeds up. Averroes, in
contrast, although agreeing with Aristotle’s explanation, added that a falling
body also speeds up because as it falls it heats the air through which it passes,
which then becomes more rareﬁed and therefore offers less resistance.
Drawing on Averroes and perhaps on Simplicius, whose commentary
on De caelo had been translated by William Moerbeke in , Jean Buri-
dan offered a number of arguments against both Aristotle and those who
attributed the acceleration of falling bodies to the medium. Against Averroes,
he noted that bodies do not fall faster in the summer, when the air is hot,
than in the winter, and that a man does not feel the air heat up as he moves
his hand through it. Against Aristotle, he argued, as Philoponus had, that
a stone is not lighter the higher up it is. When dropped from a high place,
it moves much more quickly through the last foot of its fall than a stone
dropped to the same level from the height of a foot; nor does a stone dropped
from a high place through some distance fall faster than a stone dropped
from a low place through an equal distance. For similar reasons, he rejected
the opinion that the greater the amount of air beneath a falling body, the
greater the resistance, suggesting instead that the air higher up should be
rarer and thus less resistant. He also suggested that air closer to the ground
should in fact offer more resistance to a falling body, not less, because there
is less room for it to be pushed out of the way. Finally, he dismissed the
suggestion that acceleration is caused by an insensible difference in weight
between a body in a high place and one in a low place on the grounds that
since the differences in speed and impact are very sensible, they cannot result
from an insensible difference in weight.
For all of these reasons, Buridan concluded that both the weight of the
stone and the resistance of the medium are constant throughout the fall
and thus do not contribute to acceleration. He suggested instead that, as
a heavy body falls, it is moved not only by its gravity or weight (which
remains constant and thus by itself would produce only a constant speed)
but also by a certain impetus that the body acquires from its motion. At
ﬁrst, the body is moved only by its gravity, so it moves only slowly; then
it is moved both by its gravity and by the impetus acquired from its ﬁrst
motion, so it moves more swiftly; and so on, its speed continually increasing
as more and more impetus is added to its natural gravity. Buridan noted
that this impetus could properly be called “accidental gravity,” which placed
him in agreement with both Aristotle and Averroes that increasing gravity is
the cause of acceleration. Having rebutted earlier explanations with reasons
drawn from a careful analysis of the observed behavior of falling bodies,
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –.
Jean Buridan, Questions of the Four Books on the Heavens II, qu. , trans. in Clagett, Science of
Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
Buridan thus applied his theory of impetus, originally devised to explain
the continued violent motion of projectiles, to explain the acceleration of
naturally falling bodies.
Buridan’s use of impetus theory to explain the acceleration of falling bodies
was widely accepted in the late Middle Ages, by Albert of Saxony and Nicole
Oresme, among many others. Albert applied it to a body that falls through
a hole passing through the center of the earth, suggesting that its impetus
would carry it past the center of the earth until overcome by the body’s
natural tendency; it would then again descend to the center and continue to
oscillate about the center until its impetus was entirely spent. In adopting the
impetus theory of falling bodies, Oresme introduced a modiﬁcation of his
own. According to him, impetus arises not from the speed of the falling body
but from its acceleration; this impetus in turn causes more acceleration, and
so on. He also repeated the now familiar example of a body falling through
the center of the earth, which he compared to the swinging of a pendulum,
in order to argue that impetus cannot properly be weight or gravity since in
these cases it causes heavy bodies to rise, whereas weight can cause them only
to fall. All motions, Oresme concluded, whether natural or violent, possess
impetus – with the notable exception of the celestial movements.
Compared with the cause of the acceleration of falling bodies, the mathe-
matical rule that governed their actual acceleration received almost no atten-
tion in the Middle Ages. In general, medieval natural philosophers tended
to assume that the speed of falling bodies increases with the distance and
the time of fall, without distinguishing the two and without specifying the
exact relationship. Nicole Oresme, however, suggested several alternatives
for the rule governing the increase of speed of falling bodies, including the
correct one – that equal speeds are acquired in equal times – though he
did so only to determine whether the speed would increase indeﬁnitely or
approach some ﬁnite limit. Besides Oresme, only one other late scholastic
philosopher asserted what is now known to be the correct rule to describe the
acceleration of falling bodies: the sixteenth-century Spaniard Domingo de
Soto, who applied to falling bodies the mean-speed theorem for uniformly
accelerated motions, described in the next section.
THE OXFORD CALCULATORS AND
THE MEAN-SPEED THEOREM
In the fourteenth century, motion and change provided material for the
logical and physical puzzles known as sophismata, which came to assume a
Ibid., pp. –.
Ibid., pp. –, –.
Ibid., pp. –; and William A. Wallace, “The Enigma of Domingo de Soto: Uniformiter difformis
and Falling Bodies in Late Medieval Physics,” Isis, (), –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

signiﬁcant place in the arts curriculum of the medieval university. Sophismata
gave rise to an extensive body of literature in the form of handbooks for
undergraduate students, in which the quantitative treatment of qualities
and the comparison of speeds of motion resulted in a remarkable series of
theoretical insights, including the idea of instantaneous velocity, the mean-
speed theorem, the distance rule for accelerated motions, and the graphical
representation of qualities and motions.In this context, a distinction was
drawn between considering the speed of motion with respect to its causes
(that is, with respect to its powers and resistances) – as in Bradwardine’s rule
and impetus theory – and considering it with respect to its effects (that is,
with respect to distances and times). This distinction is roughly equivalent
to the modern distinction between dynamics and kinematics.
For motion considered with respect to its effects, Aristotle was again the
main starting point; in Books VI and VII of Physics, he had discussed the
comparison of speeds and the continuity and inﬁnity of magnitude, time,
and motion, partly to refute Zeno’s paradoxes of motion but ultimately to
show in Book VIII that the only possible inﬁnite motion is the rotation of a
sphere moved by an immaterial mover. In Book VI, he had deﬁned the faster
as what traverses a greater magnitude in an equal time or traverses an equal
or greater magnitude in less time.Then, in Book VII, he asked whether
every change or motion is comparable with every other change or motion.
Clearly, a change of place cannot be directly compared with an alteration,
for although their times may be compared, a distance cannot be compared
with a quality. Similarly, circular motions cannot be compared with straight
ones because, for Aristotle, circular and straight were two different species
in the genus of line, and since they are different kinds of things, they cannot
be compared with each other. Strictly speaking, then, the speeds of circular
and straight motions were for Aristotle incomparable.
Apart from Aristotle, the other possible inspiration for the earliest medieval
attempts to compare motions was On the Motion of the Sphere of Autolycus
of Pitane (ﬂ. b.c.). Translated into Latin several times in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries and circulated widely with astronomical and other
mathematical texts, On the Motion of the Sphere may have been known
to Gerard of Brussels, who wrote his Book on Motion sometime between
and . Drawing on Archimedes’ On the Measure of the Circle and a
derivative of his Sphere and Cylinder, Gerard, like Autolycus, tried to ﬁnd
the point on a rotating line (for instance) such that, if the whole line were
moved uniformly and rectilinearly at the speed of this point, its motion
would be equivalent to its motion of rotation; that is, it would sweep out
Edith Dudley Sylla, “Science for Undergraduates in Medieval Universities,” in Science and Tech-
nology in Medieval Society, ed. Pamela O. Long (Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, )
(New York: New York Academy of Sciences, ), pp. –.
Aristotle, Physics, VI..a–.
Ibid., VII..a–b.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
an equal area in the same time. The point he chose for a rotating line was
its midpoint, and he applied the same technique to the rotation of surfaces
and volumes.In a similar way, Thomas Bradwardine, in the fourth chapter
of his Treatise on the Ratios of Speeds in Motions, reduced circular motions
to their rectilinear equivalents, except that for him the speed of a rotating
line was to be measured not by its midpoint but by its fastest point.The
solution to sophismata that involved the comparison of speeds of rotating
bodies often hinged on whether the overall speed of a rotating body should
be measured by its midpoint or by its fastest point – in either case, Aristotle’s
reservations concerning the comparison of rectilinear and circular motions
came to be effectively ignored.
A number of scholars at Oxford in the s and s – notably William
Heytesbury, Richard Swineshead, and John Dumbleton – avidly took up the
study of motion with respect to its effects, developing quasi-mathematical
techniques, known as calculations (calculationes), to deal with it and its
associated problems. Since several of these masters, including Bradwardine,
were associated with Merton College, Oxford, they are often referred to as
the Merton school or the Mertonians, though the more inclusive “Oxford
calculators” is preferable.These scholars considered local motion within
the more general context of what they called the intension and remission of
forms – how formal qualities and properties in general are intensiﬁed and
diminished and how they are to be compared as they change. Duns Scotus
had suggested that a body became whiter, for example, not by exchanging
its existing form of whiteness for an entirely new form of a higher degree or
intensity but by an addition of whiteness to the existing form, resulting in a
higher degree of whiteness. In this way, qualitative forms were quantiﬁed and
their quantities expressed in degrees or intensity. Since the range of intensity
was called “latitude,” the theory concerning the quantity of qualities came
to be called the “latitude of forms.”
The mathematical techniques developed in connection with the latitude
of forms were applied to a variety of natural phenomena. For example, the
hotness of a body can be measured in two ways – by its intensity (what
we call its temperature) and by its extension (the total quantity of heat in
the body, which we measure in calories). Thus a one-pound and a two-pound
block of iron at the same temperature have the same intensity of heat, but the
larger block has twice the extension of total quantity of heat. Now motion
itself fell under the same consideration, so that among the Oxford calculators
speed came to be seen as the intensity of motion; that is, as an intensional
quality with a latitude that could be intensiﬁed or remitted (diminished).
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –.
Crosby, Thomas Bradwardine, IV, pp. –.
James A. Weisheipl, “Ockham and some Mertonians,” Mediaeval Studies, (), –; and
Edith Dudley Sylla, “The Oxford Calculators,” in Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg, Cambridge
History of Later Medieval Philosophy, pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

The intensity or speed of motion was distinguished from its extension in the
same way that the intensity of a quality was distinguished from its extension.
By analogy to hotness and other qualities, the motion of a body came to be
measured both intensively as its speed at any instant and extensively as its
total time and distance.
Building on these ideas, William Heytesbury devoted Part VI of his
comprehensive Rules for Solving Sophisms to problems concerning the three
species of change: local motion, or change of place; augmentation, or change
of size; and alteration, or change of quality. In the section on local motion, he
distinguished uniform motion, which he deﬁned as motion in which equal
distances are traversed at equal speeds in equal times, from nonuniform or
difform motion. Motion can be difform with respect to the subject, as for
example the motion of a rotating body, since various points on the body move
at various speeds; or with respect to time, as when a body is speeding up or
slowing down; or with respect to both, as when a rotating body is altering
its speed. Difform motion with respect to time can be uniformly difform
(in modern terms, uniformly accelerated or decelerated), which Heytesbury
deﬁned as motion in which equal intensities of speeds are acquired or lost
in equal times. Difformly difform (nonuniformly accelerated or decelerated)
motions can vary in an inﬁnite number of ways, which Heytesbury and his
successors attempted in part to classify. In all cases, however, the speed of a
motion, as well as its uniformity or difformity, is to be determined from the
speed of the body’s fastest-moving point. In the case of a motion difform with
respect to time, speed at any instant is measured by the distance the fastest-
moving point would have traveled if it had moved uniformly at that speed for
some period of time.Now Aristotle had insisted that there can be neither
motion nor rest in an instant because motion and rest by deﬁnition occupy
some ﬁnite time.Heytesbury has thus deﬁned, in deﬁance of Aristotle
and common sense, instantaneous speed – an important step in the abstract
treatment of motion that would culminate in the new science of Galileo and
Newton.
The concept of instantaneous speed set the stage for the most signiﬁcant
contribution of the Oxford calculators to the kinematics of local motion – the
mean-speed theorem. Its earliest known statement is found in Heytesbury’s
Rules for Solving Sophisms: a body uniformly accelerated or decelerated for a
given time covers the same distance as it would if it were to travel for the
same time uniformly with the speed of the middle instant of its motion,
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –; Edith Sylla, “Medieval Quantiﬁcations
of Qualities: The “Merton School,” Archive for History of Exact Sciences, (/), –; and
Edith Sylla, “Medieval Concepts of the Latitude of Forms: The Oxford Calculators,” Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et litt´eraire du moyen ˆage, (), –.
Curtis Wilson, William Heytesbury: Medieval Logic and the Rise of Mathematical Physics (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, ), pp. –; and Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle
Ages, pp. –.
Aristotle, Physics, VI..a–.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
which is deﬁned as its mean speed. Thus a body accelerating uniformly for
two hours will cover the same distance as would a body moving uniformly
for two hours at the speed reached by the ﬁrst body after one hour. From this
Heytesbury drew several conclusions, including what is called the distance
rule: that the distance covered in the second half of a uniformly accelerated
motion from rest is three times the distance covered in the ﬁrst half.
Heytesbury gave the mean-speed theorem without proof, but if he was
the author of a related work on motion entitled the Proofs of Conclusions, he
is responsible for a common proof repeated by a number of his successors,
including Richard Swineshead and John Dumbleton. In this proof, a uni-
formly accelerated motion is divided at its middle instant into two halves,
and each instant in the ﬁrst half corresponds to an instant in the second half.
Since the speed at each instant in the slower half is less than the mean speed
by exactly as much as the speed at the corresponding instant in the faster
half exceeds the mean speed, the same overall distance is covered as would
be covered by a uniform motion at that mean speed.
Like Bradwardine’s theorem, the methods and results of the other Oxford
calculators spread to the continent over the next generation, appearing most
notably at the University of Paris in the works of Albert of Saxony, Nicole
Oresme, and Marsilius of Inghen. The most signiﬁcant addition to the
Oxford subtleties was Nicole Oresme’s graphical representation of qualities
and speeds, including a graphical proof of the mean-speed theorem. Although
the method of representing qualities graphically perhaps occurred earliest in
Giovanni di Casali’s On the Speed of Alteration, dated in one manuscript,
Oresme, at about the same time or somewhat later, developed a graphical
method of considerable power and ﬂexibility. Whereas the Oxford calculators
had represented the intensities of qualities and speeds with lines of various
lengths, Oresme, in his On the Conﬁguration of Qualities, represented them
with ﬁgures of two or more dimensions. A horizontal line – called the subject
line – represented the subject or body, from each point of which was raised
a vertical line representing the intensity of some quality at that point (see
Figures .and .). The line joining the tops of the intensity lines – called
the line of summit or line of intensity – deﬁned what Oresme called the
conﬁguration of the quality. In the case of a quality uniform over the length
of the subject line, the conﬁguration is rectangular (Figure .); in the case
of a quality uniformly increasing from zero at one end of the subject line
to some ﬁnite intensity at the other, it is triangular (see Figure .), and so
on. Oresme also used the subject line to represent the time of a motion and
the intensity lines to represent its speed at each instant. A uniform motion
is thus represented by a rectangle, and a uniformly accelerated motion by a
right triangle. Oresme called the area of such a ﬁgure the total velocity of the
Wilson, William Heytesbury, pp. –; and Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages,
pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

Intensity Lines 
Subject or Time Line 
Line of Intensity 
Figure .. The conﬁguration of a uniform quality or motion.
motion since it is composed of all the inﬁnite number of velocity lines within
it. He also recognized that the total velocity was dimensionally equivalent to
the distance traversed by the motion.
From this the mean-speed theorem and the distance rule immediately
follow, for it is evident that the area of a right triangle, representing the total
intensity of a quality distributed uniformly difformly from zero to some
intensity, is equal to that of the rectangle on the same base with half the
altitude, representing a uniform quality at the mean degree. And since the
area of the triangle representing the slower half of the motion is one-fourth
the area of the whole triangle representing the whole motion, the distance
rule – that the distance covered in the faster half of the motion is three times
that covered in the slower – is also conﬁrmed. In his Questions on Euclid’s
Elements, Oresme in effect generalized the distance rule, showing that for
Mean Speed 
Time 
Figure .. The conﬁguration of a uniformly difform motion and the mean speed.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
qualities in a uniformly difform distribution from zero to some intensity,
the total intensity in each successive equal part of the subject follows the
sequence of the odd numbers (, , , etc.). If Oresme had demonstrated this
speciﬁcally for equal times in a uniformly accelerated motion, he would have
expressed the odd-numbers rule – that distances covered in equal times vary
as the odd numbers – which would later prove to be a central proposition in
Galileo’s new science of motion.
The main purpose of Oresme’s conﬁguration of qualities was not to
develop a kinematics, however, but rather to explain surprising and unex-
pected physical effects by appealing not simply to the intensity of a quality
in a subject but also to its conﬁguration. He explicitly recognized that these
conﬁgurations were imaginary or hypothetical, and in devising them he did
not rely on any actual measurements. His extension of conﬁguration theory
to motion seems to have been a legacy from the Oxford calculators, where
motion was one of many topics in natural philosophy that provided material
for the paradoxes and logical puzzles that made up the sophismata of the
arts curriculum. And, in general, natural philosophers from the fourteenth
century on were more concerned with classifying types of uniform and dif-
form motions and compiling solutions to various hypothetical situations
than with discovering the way things occur in nature.
CELESTIAL MOVERS
Within the Aristotelian cosmos, the sublunary realm – the spheres of the
four elements, located below the Moon – was the realm of motion and
change, augmentation and diminution, growth and decay. Above the Moon,
by contrast, was the celestial realm, occupied by bodies as far surpassing
elemental bodies in perfection and splendor as they are distant from them.
In De caelo, Aristotle suggested that the celestial spheres should be thought
of as living bodies composed of a celestial material called ether or, as it was
later known, the ﬁfth essence, or quintessence. Unlike the four elements,
which move naturally with rectilinear motions up or down, the ether moves
naturally with circular motion, as the daily rotation of the heavens reveals.
And since circular motion has no contrary, Aristotle inferred that the celestial
spheres were ungenerated and incorruptible, fully actualized and without any
potential for change beyond their natural and eternal circular motions.
The existence of motion in the cosmos as a whole implied for Aristotle
the existence of realities that lie beyond the material. From the premise that
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. –; and Marshall Clagett, Nicole Oresme
and the Medieval Geometry of Qualities and Motions: A Treatise on the Uniformity and Difformity of
Intensities known as Tractatus de conﬁgurationibus qualitatum et motuum (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, ).
Aristotle, De caelo, I.–.a–b; II..a–; and II..a–.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

everything that is moved is moved by another, he proved in Book VIII of
Physics that there must be a ﬁrst mover and a ﬁrst motion – not ﬁrst in time,
for Aristotle held that the world and its motion were eternal, but ﬁrst in
priority. This ﬁrst motion, he argued, must be the uninterrupted rotation
of a single body, the ﬁrst or prime mobile (primum mobile), moved by a
single mover, the ﬁrst or prime mover (primum movens), acting on it with
absolute uniformity. The prime mobile must be a physically real celestial
sphere, above the sphere of the ﬁxed stars, which receives its own perfectly
uniform and regular motion from the ﬁrst or prime mover and somehow
communicates that motion to the sphere of the ﬁxed stars below and from
there to the spheres of the planets, Sun, and Moon. The prime mover must
itself be immaterial and unmoved, moving the prime mobile as its ﬁnal
cause (its goal or purpose).In his Metaphysics, Aristotle suggested that the
lower planetary spheres, each of which has its own proper motion, are also
moved by unmoved movers, each acting as an external ﬁnal cause.For
Aristotle, then, the existence and persistence of motion in the world implied
the existence of an eternal and immaterial unmoved mover as its ﬁrst cause,
an argument that Aquinas adopted as the ﬁrst of his famous ﬁve proofs for
the existence of God.
How the prime mover moves the prime mobile, how that motion is passed
on to the spheres below, and how each of the lower spheres has, in addi-
tion, its own proper motion gave rise to much controversy among medieval
commentators. That the celestial spheres were living bodies possessing ani-
mating souls was greeted with skepticism, especially after the opinion was
condemned in . If, on the other hand, they were inanimate, how could
they be moved by nature, since they were already located in their natural
places? Furthermore, since their circular motion was inﬁnite (that is, without
any deﬁnite end or goal), it could not be natural since it would be incapable
of fulﬁllment and would thus be in vain; and nature, according to Aristotle,
does nothing in vain. Faced with these perplexities, many took up Aristotle’s
suggestion of an external, unmoved mover for each celestial sphere, though
there was no agreement on whether these unmoved movers – called celes-
tial intelligences and sometimes identiﬁed as angels – moved the heavenly
bodies directly or through the mediation of purely intellective (rather than
animating) souls.One alternative to celestial intelligences was to suggest,
as Buridan did, that once the celestial spheres had been created and set in
Aristotle, Physics, VIII.–.b–b; and Aristotle, Metaphysics, XII..a–a.
Aristotle, Metaphysics, XII..a–b.
Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae, prima pars, qu. , art. ; and Thomas Aquinas, Summa contra
gentiles, I..
James A. Weisheipl, “The Celestial Movers in Medieval Physics,” The Thomist, (), –,
reprinted in Weisheipl, Nature and Motion in the Middle Ages, pp. –; and Edward Grant,
Planets, Stars, and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos, 1200–1687 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
, repr. ), pp. –, –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of


Walter Roy Laird
motion by God, in the absence of any resistance their impetus would con-
tinue to move them perpetually. This alternative was taken up by very few,
however. Only Albert of Saxony seems to have adopted impetus as the mover
of the heavens, most others preferring some version of celestial intelligences.
Nicole Oresme, for one, objected that the celestial material was incapable of
receiving impetus, perhaps because it was neither heavy nor light.
The many remarkable developments that took place within medieval
treatments of motion arose mainly out of the reading and interpretation of
Aristotle’s works, although they often took very un-Aristotelian turns and
sometimes challenged fundamental tenets of Aristotelian natural philoso-
phy. At the core of that natural philosophy was the premise that motion and
change are the characteristic expressions of the natures of physical bodies,
where nature – the internal source of motion and change within natural
things – always acts for a purpose, toward a deﬁnite end or goal that fulﬁlls
or perfects the body moved. Medieval natural philosophers examined the
nature and reality of motion in the light of both Aristotelian philosophy
and newer philosophical positions, such as Ockham’s nominalism, and they
employed hypothetical cases, such as motion in a void, as a way of scruti-
nizing motion and discovering its essential characteristics. Dissatisﬁed with
Aristotle’s explanation of projectile motion, natural philosophers devised
impetus theory and then applied it to naturally falling bodies, a move that
tended to blur Aristotle’s fundamental distinction between natural and vio-
lent motions. Similarly, the suggestion that the celestial spheres could be
moved by impetus implies a blurring of the distinction between the celestial
and elemental realms.
Aristotle’s application of mathematics to motion had been rudimentary
at best. Medieval logicians and natural philosophers brought to bear on
motion new mathematical methods and techniques of great sophistication,
which in turn yielded a number of conceptual insights. The ﬁrst of these was
Bradwardine’s rule, with its application of ratio theory to motion, implying
a recognition of the idea of a functional dependence between powers, resis-
tances, and speeds. With Bradwardine and the Oxford calculators in general,
motion came to be considered in abstraction from physical bodies and their
natural tendencies, and speed came to be regarded as a magnitude that could
be measured both intensively and extensively. Once they had grasped the
paradoxical notion of instantaneous speed, the Oxford calculators and their
followers could compare the speeds of various motions, both real and hypo-
thetical, in a variety of sophisticated ways, most notably by applying the
mean-speed theorem. With Oresme’s powerful method of graphing qualities
and motions, results such as the mean-speed theorem and the distance rule
became immediately obvious. Motion and change also provided material for
Clagett, Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, pp. , , ; and Grant, Planets, Stars, and
Orbs, pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

Change and Motion

purely logical inquiries that used new quasi-mathematical methods of anal-
ysis to treat problems concerning inﬁnity, beginnings and endings, maxima
and minima, and ﬁrst and last instants, which, among other things, yielded
new mathematical insights into inﬁnity and continuity.
The study of motion in the Middle Ages, then, was not a slavish and
sterile commentary on the words of Aristotle, but neither was it a failed
attempt at the experimental science of motion that Galileo, Descartes, and
Newton would establish in the seventeenth century. Rather, from a critical
examination of the best sources available at the time, medieval logicians,
philosophers, and theologians undertook to explain motion and change and
the many puzzles surrounding them, developing in the process a series of new
insights and analytic techniques that yielded a number of notable results.
Part of the measure of their success – but only part – is that some of these
insights and results had to be rediscovered later by Galileo and others in the
course of the Scientiﬁc Revolution.
See John E. Murdoch, “Inﬁnity and Continuity,” in Kretzmann, Kenny, and Pinborg, Cambridge
History of Later Medieval Philosophy, pp. –at pp. –.
use, available at http:/www.cambridge.org/core/terms. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CHO9780511974007.019
Downloaded from http:/www.cambridge.org/core. Johns Hopkins University, on 25 Dec 2016 at 16:13:17, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of

