Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 575
Perspective
Language is primarily a tool for 
communication rather than thought
Evelina Fedorenko1,2 ✉, Steven T. Piantadosi3 & Edward A. F. Gibson1
Language is a deﬁning characteristic of our species, but the function, or functions, 
that it serves has been debated for centuries. Here we bring recent evidence from 
neuroscience and allied disciplines to argue that in modern humans, language is a  
tool for communication, contrary to a prominent view that we use language for 
thinking. We begin by introducing the brain network that supports linguistic ability  
in humans. We then review evidence for a double dissociation between language  
and thought, and discuss several properties of language that suggest that it is 
optimized for communication. We conclude that although the emergence of 
language has unquestionably transformed human culture, language does not appear 
to be a prerequisite for complex thought, including symbolic thought. Instead, 
language is a powerful tool for the transmission of cultural knowledge; it plausibly 
co-evolved with our thinking and reasoning capacities, and only reﬂects, rather than 
gives rise to, the signature sophistication of human cognition.
Language is estimated to have emerged in humans between 100,000 
and 1,000,000 years ago1. The functions of language and the causal 
drivers in its origins have long been fiercely debated across diverse 
fields, including philosophy, linguistics, cognitive science, evolutionary 
biology and anthropology. Two broad hypotheses have dominated this 
discussion, although they are not mutually exclusive. One proposal is 
that language primarily serves a communicative function—it enables us 
to share knowledge, thoughts, and feelings with one another2–7. Another 
proposal is that language mediates thinking and cognition8–13. The 
specific hypotheses about the role of language in thinking have ranged 
from strong claims that language is necessary for all forms of (at least 
propositional) thought14,15, to weaker claims that language may only be 
critical for, or can facilitate, certain aspects of thinking and reasoning9,16, 
and claims that language helps scaffold certain kinds of learning during 
development but may no longer be needed in mature brains12,17,18 (Box 1).
From an evolutionary fitness standpoint, both the communicative 
and the cognitive functions of language could provide adaptive advan-
tages. An ability to accurately transmit information would plausibly 
facilitate cooperative behaviours such as hunting, scavenging and 
long-distance travel, and enable passing of knowledge and skills to off-
spring (cultural transmission). An improved reasoning capacity would 
plausibly enable more sophisticated planning and decision making, 
creation of better tools and better problem-solving abilities. However, 
hypotheses about the evolutionary origins of cognitive traits are notori-
ously challenging to evaluate19. The primary evidence about the lives 
of early hominins comes from sparse archaeological records. Brains 
do not fossilize, and even if they did, only coarse information about 
brain function could be gleaned from brain size, shape and anatomy. 
Moreover, certain traits may evolve for one reason but subsequently 
serve a different function owing to changes in the species’ ecology:  
a phenomenon known as exaptation20. As a result of these challenges, 
we do not aspire to make strong claims about the evolutionary origins 
of language. We do, however, make an argument about the function of 
language in modern humans and discuss optimization pressures that 
have shaped language.
At least some variants of both the language-for-thought and the 
language-for-communication proposals make testable predictions 
about human cognitive and neural architecture and about the proper-
ties of human languages. Do any forms of thought—our knowledge of 
the world and ability to reason over these knowledge representations—
require language (that is, representations and computations that sup-
port our ability to generate and interpret meaningfully structured word 
sequences)? If some forms of thought require language, then linguistic 
mechanisms should be obligatorily engaged for at least those types of 
thinking and reasoning, and those types of thought should not be pos-
sible without language. If language is a tool for communication, then 
language should show hallmarks of efficient information transfer. Until 
recently, these predictions have been difficult to evaluate. However, 
over the past two decades, knowledge and tools have become available 
that have shed critical light on the function of language. First, substan-
tial advances have been made in deciphering the neural architecture 
of language, providing a clear ‘target’ for evaluating the engagement 
of language-processing mechanisms during various forms of thought. 
Second, massive corpora of diverse languages have become widely 
available, along with a suite of powerful computational tools, often 
based on information theory21, for rigorously characterizing linguistic 
systems. As a result, the time is now ripe to take stock of current evi-
dence on the big and important questions of the function of language 
and its role in human cognition.
The language network in the human brain
Our knowledge of language encompasses knowledge of regularities 
at all levels of linguistic structure, from sounds to sentences, and a 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07522-w
Received: 15 February 2023
Accepted: 3 May 2024
Published online: 19 June 2024
 Check for updates
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Speech and Hearing in Bioscience and Technology Program at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. 3University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. ✉e-mail: evelina9@mit.edu

576 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
large set of form–meaning mappings22,23 (meanings of morphemes, 
words and constructions). Using this knowledge, we can both convey 
our thoughts to others and infer others’ intended meanings from their 
utterances. Language production and language understanding are sup-
ported by an interconnected set of brain areas in the left hemisphere, 
often referred to as the ‘language network’24–27 (recently reviewed in 
ref. 28) (Fig. 1a; Box 2 describes its relationship to the ‘classic model’ 
of the neurobiology of language).
Two properties of the language network are important for the discus-
sion of the function(s) of language. First, the language areas exhibit 
independence of input and output modalities—key signatures of rep-
resentational abstractness. First, during comprehension, these brain 
areas respond to linguistic input across modalities (spoken, written 
or signed29–32). Similarly, during language generation, these areas are 
active regardless of whether we produce our messages by speaking or 
writing33. The fact that these areas support both comprehension and 
production33,34 (Fig. 1a) suggests that they are likely to store our linguis-
tic knowledge, which is needed to both encode and decode linguistic 
messages. The abstractness of the language network’s representations 
suggests that this network corresponds to what Hauser, Chomsky and 
Fitch, in an influential piece on language evolution35, referred to as “the 
faculty of language in the narrow sense” or an “abstract computational 
system” that is separate from lower-level speech perception and speech 
articulation mechanisms (Box 2).
Second, the language areas represent and process both word 
meanings and syntactic structure—two components of language that 
are important to the language-for-thought hypotheses (Box 1). In par-
ticular, evidence from diverse experimental and naturalistic paradigms 
in functional MRI (fMRI), magnetoencephalography and intracranial 
recording studies has revealed that all areas of the language network are 
sensitive to word meanings and to inter-word syntactic and semantic 
dependencies33,36–48 (Fig. 1a).
Together, the abstractness of the linguistic representations in the 
language network and the sensitivity of the network to linguistic mean-
ing and structure make it a clear target for evaluating hypotheses about 
the role of language in thought and cognition (Box 3).
Language is not necessary or sufficient for thought
The ontology of human cognition and the nature of mental represen-
tations that mediate thought (Box 3) remain active areas of research. 
Broadly, thought encompasses our knowledge of the world (includ-
ing particular domains, such as knowledge of the physical properties 
of objects or knowledge of social agents) and reasoning over these 
knowledge representations, which includes making inferences and pre-
dictions. Aside from reasoning about particular knowledge domains, 
reasoning can involve cross-domain integration of information (an 
important ingredient of analogical reasoning49) or be domain-general, 
abstracted away from any particular domain. Domain-general rea-
soning is often linked to the notion of fluid intelligence50. Because 
language-for-thought hypotheses vary in what aspects of thought 
or cognition language is supposed to be critical or helpful for (Box 1) 
and our goal is to evaluate this idea broadly, we discuss evidence from 
diverse paradigms that engage thinking and reasoning. Moreover, 
empirically, all aspects of thought tested so far behave similarly with 
respect to their recruitment of linguistic resources.
Box 1
Many flavours of the language-for-thought hypothesis
A comprehensive review of prior claims about the role of language 
in thinking is outside the scope of this Perspective (for reviews, see 
for example9,10,12,16,71,178–182). However, we emphasize the diversity of 
perspectives on this issue and the complexity of the theoretical 
landscape. Proposals about the role of language in thinking vary 
along at least four dimensions (sample quotes and reasons why the 
idea that we use language to think appeals to many are presented in 
the Supplementary Information). First, proposals vary in the scope of 
the effects of language on thought: from claims that all of thought 
(at least all propositional thought) requires linguistic representations 
to claims that only certain kinds of thinking do. The second 
dimension concerns the degree of importance of language for 
thought, from claims that linguistic representations are necessary 
for thinking (such that without access to these representations, 
thinking is not possible) to claims that they only augment or 
facilitate thinking (that is, enable faster and/or more accurate 
performance on some target thinking task). The third dimension has 
to do with the nature of linguistic representations that are at play. 
Some proposals emphasize features that are common to all natural 
languages, including words and syntactic structure. Other proposals 
instead focus on features that are specific to particular languages—
for instance, whether a language has a word for a particular concept 
or marks a particular grammatical distinction (Supplementary 
Information). Finally, proposals vary as to the timing of the effects of 
language on thought, with some proposals arguing that linguistic 
representations are necessary or helpful for the development of 
thinking abilities, and others arguing that linguistic representations 
continue to be important for thinking even in fully mature brains.
Stronger claims, such as accounts whereby all forms of thought 
require linguistic representations, are of course the easiest to 
falsify. For accounts whereby only certain kinds of thought require 
linguistic representations, it is critical to clearly define the scope 
of the relevant kinds of thought—and ideally, to suggest particular 
paradigms that engage those forms of thinking—to render the 
hypotheses empirically testable. In cases where specific proposals 
have been articulated (for example, in refs. 9,72,74), they have not 
found empirical support in neuroscientific investigations, and some 
of the behavioural effects cannot be unambiguously attributed to 
the language network for example, ref. 70). Indeed, as discussed 
in this Perspective, at least for mature brains, there is at present no 
unequivocal empirical support for any form of thinking requiring 
linguistic representations (words or syntactic structures).
Similarly, for accounts whereby linguistic representations 
facilitate thinking, it is critical to delineate the conditions under 
which such effects should be observed and to describe their 
nature and—ideally—putative neural mechanisms. Current 
bodies of evidence for potential facilitative effects of language 
on thinking and potential roles of language in the development 
of certain cognitive capacities are complex and controversial 
(further details in Supplementary Information). It seems clear that 
we can use language to compress analogue signals into symbolic 
representations (for example, reducing a visual array of nine 
objects to ‘nine’183; see ref. 173 for a recent proposal on the role 
of information compression in human thinking). However, these 
representations need not be specifically linguistic: they could 
be symbolic but non-linguistic (for example, ‘9’), and the use of 
symbolic non-linguistic representations does not engage linguistic 
resources (for example, mathematical reasoning elicits no response 
in the language brain areas and is preserved in individuals with 
severe aphasia51,77–79).

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 577
If language mediates some forms of thought, then those forms of 
thought should not be possible in the absence of language because they 
should critically depend on linguistic representations (the ‘necessity of 
language for thought’ argument). Moreover, the presence of language 
(or an intact linguistic ability) should be associated with the capacity 
for those forms of thought (the ‘sufficiency of language for thought’ 
argument). We discuss these points in turn.
 
Language is not necessary for any tested forms of thought
The classical approach for making inferences about brain–behaviour 
associations and dissociations is to examine individuals with brain 
damage or disorders. If linguistic ability mediates our ability to engage 
in certain forms of thought, then linguistic impairments should be 
associated with concomitant difficulties in those aspects of thinking 
Language network
Language network
Level of neural
response
Understanding or
producing sentences 
Understanding or
producing lists of words 
Processing or producing
lists of nonwords 
Understanding language (by listening or reading)
Producing language (by speaking or writing) 
Task: say out loud
Some networks that support thinking and reasoning
 
Multiple demand network
Multiple demand network
Theory of mind network
Theory of mind network
a
b
A girl is playing
in the sand 
a ﬂower 
a snowman 
a dog
u blunker 
o stowlaf
e bul
u blunker 
o stowlaf
e bul
Target: a ﬂower, a snowman,
a dog
Task: describe the picture
Task: name the pictures
Sample language networks in individual brains
Responses in the
language areas
Interpretation: sensitivity
to sentence structure
Interpretation: sensitivity
to word meanings
Target: A girl is playing
in the sand
>
>
>
>
Mathematics
Some forms of reasoning 
Computer code comprehension 
Executive functions 
Supported functions:
Novel problem solving
Supported functions:
Language comprehension
Language production
Social reasoning
Mentalizing
Supported functions:
Fig. 1 | The language network and its relationship to other cognitive 
networks. a, The language network in the human brain. The language network 
supports computations that are related to lexical access and syntactic structure 
building during both comprehension and production across modalities, which 
suggests that the representations that this network operates over are abstract. 
Given that access to words and syntactic structures has been argued to be 
critical for aspects of thinking, this brain network is a clear target for evaluating 
language-for-thought proposals. Top left, the language network in five sample 
individuals. These activation maps were obtained with fMRI using a language 
localizer paradigm, which contrasts language processing and a perceptually 
similar control condition30. The brain areas in these maps show more neural 
activity during the critical, language-processing condition compared with the 
control condition. Bottom left, a schematic representation of the response 
profile of the language network (for example, as measured by fMRI) to 
understanding or producing sentences, lists of unconnected words and lists  
of nonwords30,33,36,40,47. A stronger response to sentences than word lists is 
generally taken to suggest engagement of a brain region in combinatorial 
(syntactic and semantic) computations, a requirement for processing 
sentences but not lists of words; a stronger response to word lists than 
nonword lists is taken to suggest the engagement of a brain region in accessing 
word meanings, a requirement for processing real words but not nonwords. 
Right, sample stimuli used in brain imaging experiments to investigate 
responses to sentences, lists of words and lists of nonwords in comprehension 
(top row) versus production (bottom row). b, Language and thought are 
dissociated in the human brain. Left, a schematic representation of the 
response profile of the language network (for example, as measured by fMRI). 
This network responds strongly to language comprehension and production, 
but not to non-linguistic tasks that require thinking and reasoning (fer example, 
ref. 77). The core regions of the language network are shown schematically in 
red on a brain template (sample individual activation maps are shown in a). 
Right, schematic representation of the response profiles of two networks that 
support thinking and reasoning (for example, as measured by fMRI). The 
multiple demand network (shown schematically in blue on a brain template) 
responds to diverse demanding cognitive tasks, including executive function 
tasks, novel problem-solving tasks, and mathematical and logical reasoning, 
but not to language or social reasoning (for example, ref. 76). The theory of 
mind network (shown schematically in green on a brain template) responds 
during social reasoning, but not to language or demanding executive function 
tasks (for example, ref. 86).

578 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
and reasoning. The evidence is unequivocal—there are many cases of 
individuals with severe linguistic impairments, affecting both lexi-
cal and syntactic abilities, who nevertheless exhibit intact abilities 
to engage in many forms of thought—they can solve mathematical 
problems51,52, perform executive planning and follow non-verbal 
instructions53, engage in diverse forms of reasoning, including for-
mal logical reasoning, causal reasoning about the world and scientific 
reasoning54–58, to understand what another person believes or thinks 
and perform pragmatic inference53,56,59–62, to navigate in the world63, and 
to make semantic judgements about objects and events64–70 (Fig. 1b). 
Box 2
From the classic model of the neurobiology of language to where we 
are now
Many textbooks continue to use the classic model of the neural basis 
of language, which was proposed by Wernicke184 and elaborated 
and revised by Lichteim and Geschwind24,185. This model consists 
of two cortical areas—Broca’s area in the inferior frontal cortex and 
Wernicke’s area in the posterior superior temporal cortex—which 
are argued to support language production and comprehension, 
respectively, and which are connected by a dorsal fibre bundle  
(the arcuate fasciculus) (panel a). This model has received criticism 
over the years27,186,187—but, although incomplete, the classic model 
correctly captures key aspects of the neurobiology of language.  
We believe that much of the confusion about Broca’s and Wernicke’s  
areas has resulted from frequent conflation of speech (the form of  
spoken language) and language (the abstract system of 
form-to-meaning mappings) in experimental designs and 
scientific discourse, and predominant reliance in human cognitive 
neuroscience on anatomical rather than functional definitions of 
brain areas.
As described in the original sources, the brain areas that 
were discovered by Broca and Wernicke support speech motor 
(articulatory) planning and speech perception, respectively. Current 
neuroscientific evidence strongly supports the existence of an 
articulation-selective area in the inferior frontal cortex188–192 (panel b, 
red) and of an area selective for speech perception in the superior 
temporal gyrus193–197 (panel b, blue). In contrast to the language 
network areas, these areas are not sensitive to linguistic meaning, 
only to the surface properties of linguistic signals28. Adding function  
into these areas’ names (for example, ‘Broca’s articulatory planning  
area’ and ‘Wernicke’s speech perception area’) and using validated 
‘localizer’ paradigms to separate these areas from nearby functionally  
distinct areas is likely to lead to progress and alleviate confusion28.
Absent from the classic model are the ‘higher-level language 
areas’, which store abstract linguistic knowledge and support 
comprehension and production, as discussed in ‘The language 
network in the human brain’ (Fig. 1a and panel b, purple). There is a 
straightforward explanation for the absence of these areas from the 
early proposals of the neurobiology of language. The early evidence 
about brain–behaviour relationships came from reports of selective 
deficits following brain damage. Because Broca’s and Wernicke’s 
areas are relatively circumscribed and specialized for particular 
functions, their damage is more likely to lead to deficits (given 
that no other brain areas support these functions). By contrast, 
the higher-level language network is distributed across extensive 
portions of the left temporal and frontal cortex (Fig. 1a and panel b, 
purple), with different language regions exhibiting similar functional 
profiles28 (alternative proposals are described in refs. 27,198,199). As 
a result, in contrast to speech articulation and speech perception 
areas, no individual part of the high-level language network may 
be critically needed for linguistic function. Indeed, circumscribed 
lesions to the language network do not lead to severe or long-lasting 
deficits, although the posterior temporal component, which is 
adjacent to the speech perception area, may be relatively more 
important200.
Classic and current models. | a, The classic model of the 
neurobiology of language. b, A model based on the current knowledge 
of neurobiology of language (alternative proposals are described 
in refs. 27,198,199). This updated model still includes Broca’s 
(articulatory planning) area188–192 and Wernicke’s (speech perception) 
area193–197, but additionally includes a set of frontal and temporal 
areas that jointly support high-level language comprehension and 
production28 (also see Fig. 1a). For context, we also show primary 
auditory cortex, which is likely to provide input to Wernicke’s 
(speech perception) area, and sensorimotor cortex, to which Broca’s 
(articulatory planning) area is likely to provide input189,190.

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 579
Importantly, in these studies, researchers carefully and systematically 
assessed the individuals’ linguistic abilities to ensure that the deficit 
concerns linguistic ability, including lexical and syntactic processing, 
and not the lower-level perceptual or motor abilities71.
This body of evidence challenges both general claims about the 
importance of language for thought (Box 1), and a number of specific 
proposals about the critical role of language in particular kinds of think-
ing, including mathematical reasoning72, cross-domain information 
integration9,73 and categorization74. Despite losing their linguistic 
ability, some individuals with severe aphasia are able to perform all 
tested forms of thinking and reasoning, as evidenced by their intact 
performance on diverse cognitive tasks. They simply cannot map those 
thoughts onto linguistic expressions, either in language production 
(they cannot convey their thoughts to others through language) or 
in understanding (they cannot extract meaning from others’ words 
and sentences) (Fig. 1b). Of course, in some cases of brain damage, 
both linguistic and (some) thinking abilities may be affected, but this 
is to be expected given the proximity of the language system to other 
high-level cognitive systems75,76.
Neuroimaging evidence complements the evidence from individu-
als with brain damage. Using tools such as fMRI, we can identify the 
language areas in intact, healthy brains and then examine the response 
in those areas while individuals engage in tasks that require different 
forms of thought. In ‘The language network in the human brain’, we 
defined a clear target for evaluating such hypotheses: the language 
network, a set of brain areas that are ubiquitously engaged when 
we understand and produce language28 (Fig. 1a). Responses in this  
network to diverse non-linguistic inputs and tasks have been exam-
ined, and the evidence demonstrates that all regions of the lan-
guage network are largely ‘silent’ during all tested forms of thought, 
including mathematical reasoning77–79, formal logical reasoning80,81, 
performing demanding executive function tasks such as working 
memory or cognitive control tasks77, understanding computer 
code82,83, thinking about others’ mental states84–86, and making 
semantic judgments about objects or events69,70,87. Instead, these tasks 
engage other brain areas that are non-overlapping with the language 
network (Fig. 1b), although they sometimes lie in close proximity 
to the language areas75,76. It remains possible that future work will 
uncover some thinking tasks that will engage language areas and that 
will prove challenging for patients with aphasia, but no such tasks 
have been found so far.
Some language-for-thought hypotheses specifically concern cogni-
tive development (Box 1). According to these hypotheses, language 
(or, in some accounts, symbolic representations more generally) 
may be critical for the development of certain kinds or ways of think-
ing12,17,18,88,89. Some support for this idea comes from studies in which 
teaching children or non-human primates words or symbols for certain 
concepts (for example, the concept ‘same’) or assigning labels in a way 
that highlights the task-relevant dimension of the world (for example, 
drawing attention to object size by labelling a bigger object ‘daddy’ and 
a smaller one ‘baby’) can lead to success on certain relational reason-
ing tasks18. Others have argued that training young children on certain 
syntactic constructions (for example, complement clauses) can result 
in their ability to pass theory of mind tasks17,90,91. However, reasons for 
skepticism exist. First, recent evidence suggests that the dissociation 
between the language network and systems that support thinking and 
reasoning is already present in young children92,93 (Box 3), which con-
tradicts the possibility that at an early developmental stage thinking 
relies on linguistic resources. And second, some children growing up 
with no access to language can nevertheless reason in complex ways.
In particular, some deaf children who are born to hearing parents 
grow up with little or no exposure to language, sometimes for years, 
because they cannot hear speech and their parents or caregivers do 
not know sign language. Lack of access to language has harmful conse-
quences for many aspects of cognition94,95, which is to be expected given 
that language provides a critical source of information for learning 
about the world96,97. Nevertheless, individuals who experience language 
deprivation unquestionably exhibit a capacity for complex cognitive 
function: they can still learn to do mathematics, to engage in relational 
reasoning, to build causal chains, and to acquire rich and sophisticated 
knowledge of the world98,99 (also see ref. 100 for more controversial 
evidence from language deprivation in a case of child abuse). In other 
words, lack of access to linguistic representations does not make it 
fundamentally impossible to engage in complex—including symbolic—
thought, although some aspects of reasoning do show delays101,102. 
Thus, it appears that in typical development, language and reasoning 
develop in parallel (see ‘Communication and thought in humans and 
animals’ for concordant evidence from brain evolution).
Finally, it is worth mentioning that pre-verbal infants103 and many 
animal species—including non-human primates104–108, corvids109,110, 
elephants111 and cephalopods112,113—exhibit impressive inferential and 
problem-solving abilities, apparently without language, further bring-
ing into question the necessity of language or a language-like system 
for complex thinking114,115.
Intact language does not imply intact thought
The evidence discussed above suggests that all types of thought tested 
to date are possible without language. Next, we discuss the other side 
of the double dissociation between language and thought: contrary to 
the view that language mediates thinking, an intact language system 
does not appear to entail intact reasoning abilities. Evidence from both 
Box 3
Open questions
Our understanding of human linguistic and cognitive capacities 
and the relationships between them remains incomplete. Here we 
highlight a few open questions.
(1) What is the nature of linguistic representations that the 
language-selective brain network stores and the computations 
that it performs during comprehension and production? Recent 
advances in artificial intelligence—the development of neural 
network models that excel at language201—have provided language  
researchers with a suite of powerful tools to probe the neural codes  
of linguistic processing48,202–205 (reviewed in ref. 206). These tools,  
combined with the increasing sophistication of neural recording  
approaches207,208, should enable advances in our understanding  
of the human language system in the coming years.
(2) Does our thinking rely on symbolic representations209–212, 
sub-symbolic or connectionist representations213,214, or some 
combination of these? How do representations that mediate 
abstract thought arise from the biological neural networks that 
are our brains215,216? Are any thought-related computations and the 
underlying neural circuits distinctly human, or do humans simply 
have more neural and cognitive resources163,173 that lead to greater 
sophistication?
(3) How does the language network develop as children learn 
language? What cognitive functions do brain areas that are 
selective for language by age four92,93 support before language 
is acquired? Although a number of studies have investigated 
responses to speech in newborn and infant brains217–219, the 
functional changes that happen in the brain during the second 
half of the first year of life and during toddlerhood (age 6 months 
to 3 years), when children begin to link words to meanings and 
to use language communicatively, remain unknown because 
experimentation with spatially precise brain imaging approaches 
such as fMRI is challenging at this age.

580 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
developmental and acquired brain disorders suggests that intellectual 
impairments can be present even when linguistic abilities are largely 
intact. For example, several genetic disorders are characterized by 
varying degrees of intellectual disability (Down syndrome and Williams 
syndrome, among others), yet the linguistic abilities of people with 
these disorders appear to be close to typical. Even if subtle linguistic 
deficits are observed, the foundational capacities for processing word 
meanings and linguistic structure building—the capacities that figure 
in the language-for-thought hypotheses—are intact116–118. Some neu-
ropsychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, affect the ability to think 
and reason, but again spare language119. Finally, many individuals with 
acquired brain damage exhibit difficulties in reasoning and problem 
solving but appear to have full command of their linguistic abilities58. 
In other words, having an intact language system does not bring with it 
‘for free’ an ability to think: thinking capacities can be impaired in the 
presence of intact language (see ref. 120 for related arguments from 
large language models).
Language is an efficient communication code
Having reviewed the evidence against the role of language in thought, 
we next discuss evidence that communicative forces have shaped the 
form that language takes2–7. An efficient communication code should 
be easy to produce and understand, while being robust to noise21 (envi-
ronmental or resulting from imperfect processing mechanisms), and 
it must be learnable by people. As we discuss next, human languages—
both spoken and signed—exhibit all these properties, and these prop-
erties manifest at all levels of linguistic structure, including sounds, 
words and syntax.
We acknowledge that some of these properties are not uniquely 
predicted by the language-for-communication view. However, the 
supposed absence of communicative features of language has long 
been used by some advocates of the language-for-thought hypoth-
esis as evidence against the communicative function of language121, 
so it is important to summarize the now abundant evidence for 
5
10
c  
Japanese
Persian
0
10
20
30
40
50 0
10
20
30
40
50
0
50
100
150
0
50
100
150
Sentence length
Dependency length
‘Alfred said that Zoe gave pizza to monkeys who wanted bananas.’
Japanese (subject–object–verb) word order: dependency lengths = 15
Verb after objects, adpositions after object nouns (postpositions)
English (subject–verb–object) word order: dependency lengths = 13
Verb before objects, adpositions before object nouns (prepositions)
a
b
General
N
Information loss
English
Arabic
Complexity
SG/PL
SG/DUO/TRO/PL
Zoe
Zoe
Zoe
Zoe
gave
gave
gave
gave
that
that
that
Alfred
Alfred
said
said
that
Alfred
said
said
to
to
to
to
pizza
pizza
pizza
pizza
who
who
who
who
bananas
bananas
bananas
bananas
wanted
wanted
wanted
wanted
monkeys
monkeys
monkeys
monkeys
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.5
1.5
1.0
SG/DU/PAUC/GPAUC/PL
SG/DU/PAUC/PL
Name
Name
Name
Name
Name
Name
Name
Name
VComp
VComp
VComp
VComp
Comp
Comp
Comp
Comp
VN, Prep
VN, Prep
VN, Prep
VN, Prep
VN
VN
VN
VN
Prep
Prep
Prep
Prep
Wh-pro
Wh-pro
Wh-pro
Wh-pro
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Comp
Comp
Comp
Comp
SComp
SComp
SComp
SComp
Root
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Subj
Mod
Mod
Mod
Mod
Mod
Mod
Mod
Mod
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Obj
Root
Root
Root
Ind-Obj
Ind-Obj
Ind-Obj
Ind-Obj
Verb after objects, prepositions
Dependency lengths = 22
Verb before objects, postpositions
Dependency lengths = 20
Alfred
Fig. 2 | See next page for caption.

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 581
the robust presence of these features cross-linguistically. Moreo-
ver, some of the communicative features are difficult to explain 
under the view that language is used primarily for internal  
thought.
Starting from the lowest level of linguistic structure, the sounds of 
a language are spread out in phonetic space122,123, which enables them 
to carry information in a way that is robust to corruption from noise 
and facilitates perception and comprehension. Sound repertoires of 
languages appear to also be shaped by factors that affect articulatory 
ease for different sound classes, including physical environments124 and 
diet-related changes in the anatomy of the articulatory apparatus125.
With respect to word forms, languages preferentially re-use short 
and efficient words and within-word sound sequences126. Moreover, 
frequent and low-information words tend to be short127. These proper-
ties enable ease of word retrieval in production and comprehension 
(frequent words are easier to access from memory) and for articulatory 
ease (short words are less energy-costly, and repeated sound sequences 
can be stored as chunks in motor memory, reducing articulatory plan-
ning costs128).
In terms of word meanings, words optimize communicative effi-
ciency through a trade-off between complexity (the cost of acquiring 
or representing the meanings) and informativeness (how precisely and 
unambiguously the words select their meanings). One example is kin-
ship terms129: languages choose different solutions along the optimal 
frontier defined by the trade-off between having simple versus informa-
tive meanings (for example, words that pick out unique members of  
a family tree, such ‘maternal grandmother’). The efficiency that charac-
terizes natural languages means that it is typically not possible to make 
a real language’s kinship system much simpler without having it convey 
less information, or vice versa. Similar results have been reported for 
colour terms130,131 and season words132, and closed-class words and gram-
matical markers133–136 (Fig. 2a). Lexical systems also show hallmarks of 
adaptation to specific communicative needs, more densely covering 
the parts of a conceptual space that a given community needs137,138.
Syntax is the component of language that has been the most con-
troversial in the discussions about whether languages are optimized 
for efficient communication. Syntax specifies how words combine 
to enable the expression of a vast number of meanings—the ‘infinite 
use of finite means’139. The defining properties of syntax—hierarchy 
and composition—are probably the result of the very same pressures 
mentioned in the context of word meanings above: the pressure for 
simplicity (critical for learnability) and the pressure for expressiveness 
(critical for effective communication)5,140–142.
Moreover, various syntactic patterns in the world’s languages can 
also be explained by combining communicative and cognitive pres-
sures. A prime example is the tendency of languages to minimize the 
lengths of dependencies between words. In any given sentence, words 
are assembled—according to the rules of the grammar—to form a 
larger meaning. For example, the sentence ‘Lana ate five apples’, has 
a dependency between ‘five’ and ‘apples’, but there is no link between 
‘Lana’ and ‘five’ because those words are not directly related in the 
meaning. Longer-distance connections (connections with more inter-
vening words) increase difficulty of production and comprehension, 
as measured behaviourally143,144 or with brain imaging39,45. Plausibly 
owing to this cognitive cost, languages have evolved to become more 
efficient for processing—that is, use—by minimizing dependency 
lengths145,146 (Fig. 2b,c). This functional pressure in a grammar to keep 
dependencies local explains several universal tendencies in word 
orders147,148.
Other examples concern the order of basic elements—the subject (the 
agent, roughly), verb and object (the patient of the action, roughly)—
within a sentence to convey complex meanings. The subject–object–
verb order, which is the most common across the world’s languages 
(approximately 47% of languages—for example, Japanese, Persian 
and Hindi), appears to be a cognitively natural default: speakers of 
diverse languages use this order when gesturing event meanings149, 
and emergent sign languages have this order150,151. Gibson et al.152 have 
further offered a communicative explanation for the shift of some 
languages from the default (subject–object–verb) order to the sec-
ond most common order, subject–verb–object (approximately 41% of  
languages—for example, English, Ukrainian and Mandarin). In particular, 
in the subject–verb–object order, the listener can use positional cues—
whether a given noun appears before or after the verb—to reconstruct 
who is doing what to whom in the presence of information loss during  
communication153,154 (refs. 155–157 describe other word-order gener-
alizations that follow from similar pressures).
One common argument against the idea that language has evolved 
as a communication system is the prevalence of ambiguity: most words 
have multiple meanings, and many (especially longer) sentences have 
many possible dependency structures. Chomsky, for instance, has 
long argued that the existence of ambiguity implies that language 
is used primarily for thought rather than communication, because 
Fig. 2 | Human languages are shaped by communicative pressures.  
a, Words across many semantic domains trade-off between complexity and 
informativeness. This pattern is as predicted for efficient communication 
systems (here, shown for the domain of grammatical number markers135). 
Attested inventories (black dots; sizes correspond to the number of languages 
with a given inventory (N)) and unattested systems (grey dots) are plotted in 
the space of all possible grammatical systems. Systems that achieve optimal 
trade-offs lie along the Pareto frontier (solid line); the shaded region below the 
line shows trade-offs that are impossible to achieve. DU, dual; GPAUC, greater 
paucal (a bunch); PAUC, paucal (a few); PL, plural; SG, singular; TR, trial. 
Optional values are shown with the subscript ‘o’. b, Languages minimize 
syntactic dependency lengths cross-linguistically146. Observed average 
dependency lengths (black lines in each graph) for sentences of 1 to 50 words 
across four typologically diverse languages, based on analyses of large language 
corpora. For each sentence in the corpus, a single value was computed by 
summing the lengths of all dependencies as shown in c. The red dashed line 
shows a random baseline created by first scrambling the words, preserving the 
hierarchical dependency structure and disallowing crossing dependencies, and 
then recomputing dependency lengths146. All lines are fitted using a generalized 
additive model. Across languages (ref. 146 for data from 37 languages), the 
observed dependency lengths fall below the random baseline, suggesting that 
languages evolve to make dependencies shorter, presumably to facilitate 
production and comprehension. c, Examples of minimization of syntactic 
dependency lengths in different languages. Top row, syntactic dependency 
structure for a subject–verb–object word order language (for example, English). 
Verbs appear before object nouns; prepositions appear before object nouns. 
Here and in the other examples, the syntactic category of a word is shown under 
each word and the relationships between words are shown with directed arcs; 
the type of the relationship is marked above each arc. The total dependency 
length of a sentence is the sum of all dependency distances—for example, the 
dependency between ‘Alfred’ and ‘said’ is 1; for dependencies between non- 
adjacent words, the dependency length is the number of intervening words 
plus 1. For this sentence, there are 7 local dependencies of length 1 and 3 
dependencies of length 2, for a total sentence dependency length of 7 + 6 = 13. 
Second row, syntactic dependency structure for a subject–object–verb word 
order language (for example, Japanese). Verbs appear after object nouns; 
prepositions (postpositions) appear after object nouns. Two word orders that 
rarely occur in natural languages, putatively because they introduce long- 
distance dependencies: in the third row, verbs appear after object nouns, and 
prepositions appear before object nouns; in the fourth row, verbs appear 
before object nouns, and prepositions (postpositions) appear after object 
nouns. Comp, complementizer; Ind-Obj, indirect object; Mod, modifier;  
N, noun; Obj, object; root, the root of the sentence; SComp, sentence 
complement; Subj, subject; VComp, verb taking a complementizer argument; 
VN, verb taking a noun argument; VN, Prep, verb taking a noun and a preposition 
argument; Prep, preposition; Wh-pro, wh-pronoun (for example, ‘who’).

582 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
ambiguous signals would impede communication121. However, the 
existence of ambiguity in human language is actually not expected 
under the language-for-thought view, given that our thoughts do not 
seem ambiguous. By contrast, the existence of ambiguity in language 
is a natural prediction of communicative accounts of language. That 
is, ambiguity can be mathematically shown to be communicatively 
useful: not only does it allow speakers to leave out information that 
listeners already know (for example, from the context), but it enables 
the re-use of short, easy-to-produce linguistic forms158. A system that 
allows no ambiguity would require a much bigger lexicon and grammar 
than those of human linguistic systems, and such a system would need 
to use long words and sentences to convey even simple meanings. For 
example, an artificial language that was constructed to remove ambi-
guity159 proved to be so complicated as to be unlearnable by humans 
and has been undergoing rounds of revision to allow for learnability. 
Moreover, the existence of words with multiple related senses (such 
as ‘water’ used as a drink and as a verb) has been argued to support 
learning, since acquisition of one meaning will help with acquisition 
of a related one160. In this way, the capacity for multiple form–meaning 
mappings is likely to be useful for maintaining a rich lexicon.
We acknowledge that some of these properties of human languages 
may also have non-communicative explanations. For example, compo-
sitionality in language may simply reflect pre-existing compositionality 
in thought, or even in lower-level, perceptual and motor systems161—
although this idea is still contrary to the language-for-thought hypoth-
esis, as the directionality is reversed.
Communication and thought in humans and animals
Across species, interactions with conspecifics require a communication 
system—that is, mechanisms for perceiving and emitting signals and a 
store of signal-to-meaning associations. The communication system of 
humans is unquestionably complex, but did language endow us with 
a new form of reasoning (Box 1), or does language simply reflect the 
independent sophistication of human thoughts? In this Perspective, 
building on prior theorizing and bringing in evidence from the past 
two decades, we have argued that language appears to not be neces-
sary for any forms of thought tested so far, and that language is not 
sufficient for thought. Furthermore, on the basis of the evidence that 
many features of natural languages appear to be optimized for efficient 
information transfer, we have argued for communication being the 
primary function of language.
The view that language is simply a communication system aligns 
with a continuity view of human evolution162,163. In this view, the prop-
erties of human language—including its complexity—may result from 
the multifaceted landscape in which it has evolved, where the system 
must be useful (able to express the internal contents of the human 
mind) and learnable, and humans should be able to process language 
with the idiosyncratic strengths and limitations of pre-existing cogni-
tive and neural systems. The contrasting alternative—that language 
is the substrate for thinking—implies a sharp discontinuity between 
our species and others. This alternative view centres language— 
perhaps innately—as the mechanism of change, and the mechanism 
that endowed humans with a novel representational format for mental 
computations.
Why does an intimate relationship between language and thought 
have an intuitive appeal to many? Some are attached to the idea that 
humans are superior in the animal kingdom (that is, they differ quali-
tatively, not just quantitatively, from other animals164), even though 
scientific evidence suggests strong biological similarities between 
humans and non-human animals165,166. Another reason may be linked 
to the desire for parsimony in explaining differences between humans 
and non-human animals (additional reasons are provided in Supple-
mentary Information). In particular, humans differ from other animals 
in the sophistication of their communication system as well as their 
thoughts and cognition. A parsimonious account favours a single-factor 
explanation—for instance, humans evolved language, and the change 
in cognition was simply a consequence of this. However, evidence from 
human brain evolution instead suggests parallel increases in the sophis-
tication of multiple cognitive systems.
Relative to the brains of other animals, including non-human pri-
mates, the association cortex—which houses mental processes above 
and beyond perception and motor control—has expanded substan-
tially and disproportionately in the human brain167. The association 
cortex spans frontal, temporal and parietal lobes and, in humans, com-
prises multiple large-scale networks—ensembles of brain areas that 
jointly support some aspect of cognition75. The language network28  
is just one of these networks. Significant progress has been made in 
characterizing several other networks that support human cogni-
tive abilities, including those underlying the non-linguistic tasks 
discussed in ‘Language is not necessary or sufficient for thought’. For 
example, the network sometimes referred to as the ‘multiple demand’ 
network, supports diverse goal-directed behaviours, including novel 
problem solving, and damage of this network leads to impairments in 
fluid intelligence168 (Fig. 1b). Mathematical and logical reasoning and 
the processing of computer code also draw on the multiple demand 
network78–83. Other such networks include the ‘theory of mind’ net-
work, which supports social reasoning, including mentalizing or 
thinking about others’ thoughts169 (Fig. 1b) and the ‘default’ network, 
whose functions remain debated, with some linking its regions to 
episodic projection into the past or future170 and others linking them 
to spatial cognition and reasoning171. At least some of the networks 
have homologues in non-human animal brains172—the correspond-
ences in functional architecture across species is an ongoing effort 
in neuroscience. Importantly, however, multiple brain networks have 
expanded over the course of human evolution, and this expansion was 
associated with increases in diverse cognitive abilities173. Whether 
this expansion proceeded in a truly parallel fashion, or whether the 
emergence or expansion of one network critically drove the expan-
sion of other networks is not known, but the former possibility is 
perhaps more plausible given that diverse cognitive abilities probably 
increased the probability of survival—including social sophistica-
tion (being able to model the minds of others), the ability to infer 
causal structures in the world, flexible problem solving and plan-
ning for the future, and better communicative ability. Regardless of 
the exact timeline and order of the expansion of different cognitive 
networks in the brains of modern humans, the language network—
which supports our ability to communicate with conspecifics—is 
sharply distinct from the networks that support our abilities to think 
and reason, which makes the idea that language mediates thinking  
unlikely.
Conclusions
In sum, we have reviewed work from the past two decades that has 
helped to clarify the function of language in modern humans and its 
role in human cognition. Evidence from aphasia research suggests that 
all tested forms of thought are possible in the absence of language, and 
fMRI evidence suggests that engaging in diverse forms of thinking and 
reasoning does not recruit the language network—a set of brain areas 
that represent and process word meanings and syntactic structure 
during language comprehension and production. Moreover, intact 
linguistic abilities do not entail intact thinking abilities. Together, this 
evidence suggests that language is unlikely to be a critical substrate for 
any form of thought. Although access to words, syntactic structures 
or non-linguistic symbols can facilitate performance on certain cog-
nitive tasks (Box 1), language is doubly dissociated from thinking and 
reasoning (compare with Box 3 for open questions about the nature 
of linguistic and thought-mediating mental representations). We have 
also reviewed a body of work that has shown that diverse properties 

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 583
of human languages render them easy to produce, easy to learn and 
understand, concise and efficient for use, and robust to noise. Many of 
these cross-linguistic tendencies—including the tendency to minimize 
dependency lengths, the preferences for particular word orders, and 
the prevalence of ambiguity—are difficult to account for under the 
view that language is used for internal thought and without appealing 
to how language is used and processed.
Considering the evidence in tandem, we have argued that language 
serves a primarily communicative function and reflects, rather than 
gives rise to, the signature sophistication of human cognition. Instead 
of providing the key substrate for thinking and reasoning, language 
likely transformed our species by enabling cross-generational transmis-
sion of acquired knowledge. Language is uncontroversially a tremen-
dously useful tool for knowledge transmission. The cumulative effect 
of this transmission—knowledge building on knowledge—along with 
increased sophistication of our social and problem-solving abilities is 
plausibly what enabled us to create human civilizations174–177. Although 
our review shows that all tested forms of thought are apparently pos-
sible without language, it is unlikely that our species’ success would 
have been possible without the cumulative culture that was enabled 
by the external usage of language.
1. 
Barham, L. & Everett, D. Semiotics and the origin of language in the Lower Palaeolithic. 
J. Archaeol. Method Theory 28, 535–579 (2021).
2. 
Hockett, C. F. The origin of speech. Sci. Am. 203, 88–97 (1960).  
A classic overview of the relationship between key features of human language and 
communication systems found in other species, with a focus on distinctive and shared 
properties.
3. 
Jackendoff, R. & Pinker, S. The faculty of language: what’s special about it? Cognition 95, 
201–236 (2005).
4. 
Hurford, J. R. Language in the Light of Evolution: Volume 1, The Origins of Meaning (Oxford 
Univ. Press, 2007).
5. 
Kirby, S., Cornish, H. & Smith, K. Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: an 
experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 105, 10681–10686 (2008).  
This behavioural investigation introduces an experimental paradigm based on iterated 
learning of artificial languages for studying the cultural evolution of language; the 
findings suggest that languages evolve to maximize their transmissibility by becoming 
easier to learn and more structured.
6. 
Seyfarth, R. M. & Cheney, D. L. The Social Origins of Language (Princeton Univ. Press, 
2018).
7. 
Gibson, E. et al. How efficiency shapes human language. Trends Cogn. Sci. 23, 389–407 
(2019).
8. 
Chomsky, N. The Minimalist Program (MIT Press, 1995).
9. 
Carruthers, P. The cognitive functions of language. Behav. Brain Sci. 25, 657–674 (2002).  
This comprehensive review discusses diverse language-for-thought views and puts 
forward a specific proposal whereby language has a critical role in cross-domain 
integration.
10. 
Gentner, D. & Goldin-Meadow, S. Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language 
and Thought (MIT Press, 2003).
11. 
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. & Levinson, S. C. Can language restructure 
cognition? The case for space. Trends Cogn. Sci. 8, 108–114 (2004).
12. 
Vygotsky, L. S. Thought and Language (MIT Press, 2012).
13. 
Lupyan, G. The centrality of language in human cognition. Lang. Learn. 66, 516–553 
(2016).
14. 
Davidson, D. in Mind and Language (ed. Guttenplan, S.) 1975–1977 (Oxford Univ. Press, 
1975).
15. 
Dummett, M. Origins of Analytical Philosophy (Harvard Univ. Press, 1994).
16. 
Gleitman, L. & Papafragou, A. in The Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning 
(eds Holyoak, K. J. & Morrison, R. G.) 633–661 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005).
17. 
de Villiers, J. in Understanding Other Minds: Perspectives from Developmental Cognitive 
Neuroscience (eds Baron-Cohen, S. et al.) 83–123 (Oxford Univ. Press, 2000).
18. 
Gentner, D. in Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of Language and Thought (eds 
Gentner, D. & Goldin-Meadow, S.) 3–14 (MIT Press, 2003).  
This position piece articulates one version of a language-for-thought hypothesis, 
whereby human intelligence is due to a combination of our analogical reasoning 
ability, possession of symbolic representations, and the ability of relational language 
to improve analogical reasoning abilities.
19. 
Buller, D. J. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Persistent Quest for Human 
Nature (MIT Press, 2005).
20. Gould, S. J. & Vrba, E. S. Exaptation—a missing term in the science of form. Paleobiology 
8, 4–15 (1982).
21. 
Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379–423 
(1948).  
This article introduces a formal framework for systems of information transfer, with 
core concepts such as channel capacity, and lays a foundation for the field of 
information theory.
22. Goldberg, A. E. Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach to Argument Structure 
(Univ. Chicago Press, 1995).
23. Jackendoff, R. Foundations of Language: Brain, Meaning, Grammar, Evolution (Oxford 
Univ. Press, 2002).
24. Geschwind, N. The organization of language and the brain: language disorders after brain 
damage help in elucidating the neural basis of verbal behavior. Science 170, 940–944 
(1970).
25. Friederici, A. D. Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends Cogn. Sci. 
6, 78–84 (2002).
26. Bates, E. et al. Voxel-based lesion–symptom mapping. Nat. Neurosci. 6, 448–450 
(2003).
27. 
Hagoort, P. The neurobiology of language beyond single-word processing. Science 366, 
55–58 (2019).
28. Fedorenko, E., Ivanova, A. I. & Regev, T. I. The language network as a natural kind within 
the broader landscape of the human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 25, 289–312 (2024).
29. Neville, H. J. et al. Cerebral organization for language in deaf and hearing subjects: 
biological constraints and effects of experience. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 922–929 
(1998).
30. Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P.-J., Nieto-Castañon, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. & Kanwisher, N. A new 
method for fMRI investigations of language: defining ROIs functionally in individual 
subjects. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 1177–1194 (2010).
31. 
Vagharchakian, L., Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Pallier, C. & Dehaene, S. A temporal bottleneck 
in the language comprehension network. J. Neurosci. 32, 9089–9102 (2012).
32. Regev, M., Honey, C. J., Simony, E. & Hasson, U. Selective and invariant neural responses 
to spoken and written narratives. J. Neurosci. 33, 15978–15988 (2013).
33. Hu, J. et al. Precision fMRI reveals that the language-selective network supports both 
phrase-structure building and lexical access during language production. Cereb. Cortex 
33, 4384–4404 (2022).
34. Menenti, L., Gierhan, S. M. E., Segaert, K. & Hagoort, P. Shared language: overlap and 
segregation of the neuronal infrastructure for speaking and listening revealed by 
functional MRI. Psychol. Sci. 22, 1173–1182 (2011).  
This fMRI investigation establishes that language comprehension and language 
production draw on the same brain areas in the left frontal and temporal cortex.
35. Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N. & Fitch, W. T. The faculty of language: what is it, who has it, 
and how did it evolve? Science 298, 1569–1579 (2002).
36. Pallier, C., Devauchelle, A. D. & Dehaene, S. Cortical representation of the constituent 
structure of sentences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 2522–2527 (2011).
37. 
Bozic, M., Fonteneau, E., Su, L. & Marslen‐Wilson, W. D. Grammatical analysis as a 
distributed neurobiological function. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 1190–1201 (2015).
38. Rodd, J. M., Vitello, S., Woollams, A. M. & Adank, P. Localising semantic and syntactic 
processing in spoken and written language comprehension: an activation likelihood 
estimation meta-analysis. Brain Lang. 141, 89–102 (2015).
39. Blank, I., Balewski, Z., Mahowald, K. & Fedorenko, E. Syntactic processing is distributed 
across the language system. NeuroImage 127, 307–323 (2016).
40. Fedorenko, E. et al. Neural correlate of the construction of sentence meaning. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 113, E6256–E6262 (2016).
41. 
Nelson, M. J. et al. Neurophysiological dynamics of phrase-structure building during 
sentence processing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, E3669–E3678 (2017).
42. Fedorenko, E., Blank, I. A., Siegelman, M. & Mineroff, Z. Lack of selectivity for syntax 
relative to word meanings throughout the language network. Cognition 203, 104348 (2020).  
This fMRI investigation establishes that every part of the language network that is 
sensitive to syntactic structure building is also sensitive to word meanings and 
comprehensively reviews literature relevant to the syntax selectivity debate.
43. Giglio, L., Ostarek, M. O., Weber, K. & Hagoort, P. Commonalities and asymmetries in the 
neurobiological infrastructure for language production and comprehension. Cereb. 
Cortex 32, 1405–1418 (2022).
44. Heilbron, M., Armeni, K., Schoffelen, J. M., Hagoort, P. & De Lange, F. P. A hierarchy of 
linguistic predictions during natural language comprehension. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
119, e2201968119 (2022).
45. Shain, C., Blank, I. A., Fedorenko, E., Gibson, E. & Schuler, W. Robust effects of working 
memory demand during naturalistic language comprehension in language-selective 
cortex. J. Neurosci. 42, 7412–7430 (2022).
46. Desbordes, T. et al. Dimensionality and ramping: signatures of sentence integration in the 
dynamics of brains and deep language models. J. Neurosci. 43, 5350–5364 (2023).
47. 
Shain, C. et al. Distributed sensitivity to syntax and semantics throughout the language 
network. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 22, 1–43 (2024).  
This fMRI investigation establishes distributed sensitivity to cognitive demands 
associated with lexical access, syntactic structure building and semantic composition 
across the language network.
48. Tuckute, G. et al. Driving and suppressing the human language network using large 
language models. Nat. Hum. Behav. 8, 544–561 (2024).
49. Gentner, D. Structure-mapping: a theoretical framework for analogy. Cogn. Sci. 7, 155–170 
(1983).
50. Duncan, J. How Intelligence Happens (Yale Univ. Press, 2012).
51. 
Varley, R. A., Klessinger, N. J., Romanowski, C. A. & Siegal, M. Agrammatic but numerate. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 3519–3524 (2005).  
Patients with acquired damage to the language network display aphasia and linguistic 
deficits (including severe grammatical difficulties) but perform at the level of 
neurotypical control participants on diverse numerical reasoning tasks.
52. Klessinger, N., Szczerbinski, M. & Varley, R. Algebra in a man with severe aphasia. 
Neuropsychologia 45, 1642–1648 (2007).
53. Lecours, A. & Joanette, Y. Linguistic and other psychological aspects of paroxysmal 
aphasia. Brain and Language 10, 1–23 (1980).
54. Kertesz, A. in Thought Without Language (ed. Weiskrantz, L.) 451–463 (Oxford Univ. Press, 
1988).
55. Varley, R. & Siegal, M. Evidence for cognition without grammar from causal reasoning 
and ‘theory of mind’ in an agrammatic aphasic patient. Curr. Biol. 10, 723–726 (2000).
56. Siegal, M., Varley, R. & Want, S. C. Mind over grammar: reasoning in aphasia and 
development. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 296–301 (2001).

584 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
57. 
Varley, R. In Cognitive Bases of Science (eds Carruthers, P. et al.) 99–116 (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 2002).
58. Woolgar, A., Duncan, J., Manes, F. & Fedorenko, E. Fluid intelligence is supported by the 
multiple-demand system not the language system. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 200–204 (2018).
59. Dronkers, N. F., Ludy, C. A. & Redfern, B. B. Pragmatics in the absence of verbal language: 
descriptions of a severe aphasic and a language-deprived adult. J. Neurolinguistics 11, 
179–190 (1998).
60. Varley, R., Siegal, M. & Want, S. C. Severe impairment in grammar does not preclude 
theory of mind. Neurocase 7, 489–493 (2001).
61. 
Apperly, I. A., Samson, D., Carroll, N., Hussain, S. & Humphreys, G. Intact first-and 
second-order false belief reasoning in a patient with severely impaired grammar. Soc. 
Neurosci. 1, 334–348 (2006).  
A person with acquired damage to the language network and consequent aphasia 
exhibits linguistic deficits but performs at the level of neurotypical control participants 
on theory of mind tasks.
62. Willems, R. M., Benn, Y., Hagoort, P., Toni, I. & Varley, R. Communicating without a 
functioning language system: Implications for the role of language in mentalizing. 
Neuropsychologia 49, 3130–3135 (2011).
63. Bek, J., Blades, M., Siegal, M. & Varley, R. Language and spatial reorientation: evidence 
from severe aphasia. J. Exp. Psychol. 36, 646 (2010).
64. Caramazza, A., Berndt, R. S. & Brownell, H. H. The semantic deficit hypothesis: Perceptual 
parsing and object classification by aphasic patients. B. Lang. 15, 161–189 (1982).
65. Chertkow, H., Bub, D., Deaudon, C. & Whitehead, V. On the status of object concepts in 
aphasia. Brain Lang. 58, 203–232 (1997).
66. Saygın, A. P., Wilson, S. M., Dronkers, N. F. & Bates, E. Action comprehension in aphasia: 
linguistic and non-linguistic deficits and their lesion correlates. Neuropsychologia 42, 
1788–1804 (2004).
67. 
Jefferies, E. & Lambon Ralph, M. A. Semantic impairment in stroke aphasia versus 
semantic dementia: a case-series comparison. Brain 129, 2132–2147 (2006).
68. Dickey, M. W. & Warren, T. The influence of event-related knowledge on verb-argument 
processing in aphasia. Neuropsychologia 67, 63–81 (2015).
69. Ivanova, A. A. et al. The language network is recruited but not required for nonverbal 
event semantics. Neurobiol. Lang. 2, 176–201 (2021).  
In this fMRI study, semantic processing of event pictures in neurotypical individuals 
engages the language network, but less than verbal descriptions of the same events; 
however, individuals with acquired damage to the language network and consequent 
aphasia perform at the level of neurotypical control participants on a non-verbal 
semantic task.
70. Benn, Y. et al. The language network is not engaged in object categorization. Cereb. 
Cortex 33, 10380–10400 (2023).
71. 
Varley, R. Reason without much language. Lang. Sci. 46, 232–244 (2014).
72. Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., Pinel, P., Stanescu, R. & Tsivkin, S. Sources of mathematical 
thinking: behavioral and brain-imaging evidence. Science 284, 970–974 (1999).
73. Hermer, L. & Spelke, E. Modularity and development: the case of spatial reorientation. 
Cognition 61, 195–232 (1996).
74. Lupyan, G. Extracommunicative functions of language: verbal interference causes 
selective categorization impairments. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 16, 711–718 (2009).
75. Braga, R. M., DiNicola, L. M., Becker, H. C. & Buckner, R. L. Situating the left-lateralized 
language network in the broader organization of multiple specialized large-scale 
distributed networks. J. Neurophysiol. 124, 1415–1448 (2020).  
This fMRI investigation of the language network establishes this network as one of the 
intrinsic large-scale networks in the human brain, distinct from nearby cognitive 
networks.
76. Fedorenko, E. & Blank, I. A. Broca’s area is not a natural kind. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 270–284 
(2020).
77. 
Fedorenko, E., Behr, M. K. & Kanwisher, N. Functional specificity for high-level linguistic 
processing in the human brain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 16428–16433 (2011).  
This fMRI investigation finds that arithmetic addition, demanding executive function 
tasks and music processing do not engage the language areas, thus establishing their 
selectivity for linguistic input over non-linguistic inputs and tasks.
78. Monti, M. M., Parsons, L. M. & Osherson, D. N. Thought beyond language: neural 
dissociation of algebra and natural language. Psychol. Sci. 23, 914–922 (2012).
79. Amalric, M. & Dehaene, S. A distinct cortical network for mathematical knowledge in the 
human brain. NeuroImage 189, 19–31 (2019).
80. Monti, M. M., Osherson, D. N., Martinez, M. J. & Parsons, L. M. Functional neuroanatomy of 
deductive inference: a language-independent distributed network. NeuroImage 37, 
1005–1016 (2007).
81. 
Monti, M. M., Parsons, L. M. & Osherson, D. N. The boundaries of language and thought in 
deductive inference. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 12554–12559 (2009).  
This fMRI investigation finds largely non-overlapping activations of brain regions to 
language processing and logical processing, thus establishing the selectivity of 
language areas for linguistic input over logic statements.
82. Ivanova, A. A. et al. Comprehension of computer code relies primarily on domain-general 
executive brain regions. eLife 9, e58906 (2020).
83. Liu, Y. F., Kim, J., Wilson, C. & Bedny, M. Computer code comprehension shares neural 
resources with formal logical inference in the fronto-parietal network. eLife 9, e59340 (2020).
84. Paunov, A. M., Blank, I. A. & Fedorenko, E. Functionally distinct language and theory  
of mind networks are synchronized at rest and during language comprehension.  
J. Neurophysiol. 121, 1244–1265 (2019).
85. Paunov, A. M. et al. Differential tracking of linguistic vs. mental state content in 
naturalistic stimuli by language and theory of mind (ToM) brain networks. Neurobiol. 
Lang. 3, 413–440 (2022).
86. Shain, C., Paunov, A., Chen, X., Lipkin, B. & Fedorenko, E. No evidence of theory of mind 
reasoning in the human language network. Cereb. Cortex 33, 6299–6319 (2023).
87. 
Sueoka, Y., Paunov, A., Ivanova, A., Blank, I. A. & Fedorenko, E. The language network 
reliably “tracks” naturalistic meaningful non-verbal stimuli. Neurobiol. Lang. https://doi.
org/10.1162/nol_a_00135 (2024).
88. Piaget, J. The Language and Thought of the Child (Harcourt Brace, 1926).
89. Gentner, D. & Loewenstein, J. in Language, Literacy, and Cognitive Development: The 
Development and Consequences of Symbolic Communication (eds Amsel, E. & Byrnes, J. P.) 
89–126 (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002).
90. Appleton, M. & Reddy, V. Teaching three year‐olds to pass false belief tests: a 
conversational approach. Soc. Dev. 5, 275–291 (1996).
91. 
Slaughter, V. & Gopnik, A. Conceptual coherence in the child’s theory of mind: training 
children to understand belief. Child Dev. 67, 2967–2988 (1996).
92. Hiersche, K. J., Schettini, E., Li, J. & Saygin, Z. M. (2022). Functional dissociation of the 
language network and other cognition in early childhood. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/2022.08.11.503597 (2023).
93. Hiersche, K. J. Functional Organization and Modularity of the Superior Temporal Lobe in 
Children. Masters thesis, The Ohio State University (2023).
94. Hall, W. C. What you don’t know can hurt you: the risk of language deprivation by impairing 
sign language development in deaf children. Matern. Child Health J. 21, 961–965 (2017).
95. Hall, M. L., Hall, W. C. & Caselli, N. K. Deaf children need language, not (just) speech. First 
Lang. 39, 367–395 (2019).
96. Bedny, M. & Saxe, R. Insights into the origins of knowledge from the cognitive 
neuroscience of blindness. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 29, 56–84 (2012).
97. 
Grand, G., Blank, I. A., Pereira, F. & Fedorenko, E. Semantic projection recovers rich 
human knowledge of multiple object features from word embeddings. Nat. Hum. Behav. 
6, 975–987 (2022).
98. Jackendoff, R. How language helps us think. Pragmat. Cogn. 4, 1–34 (1996).
99. Jackendoff. R. The User’s Guide to Meaning (MIT Press, 2012).
100. Curtiss, S. Genie: A Psycholinguistic Study of a Modern-day Wild Child (Academic Press, 
1977).
101. Peterson, C. C. & Siegal, M. Representing inner worlds: theory of mind in autistic, deaf, 
and normal hearing children. Psychol. Sci. 10, 126–129 (1999).
102. Richardson, H. et al. Reduced neural selectivity for mental states in deaf children with 
delayed exposure to sign language. Nat. Commun. 11, 3246 (2020).
103. Spelke, E. S. What Babies Know: Core Knowledge and Composition, Vol. 1 (Oxford Univ. 
Press, 2022).
104. Cheney, D. L. & Seyfarth, R. M. How Monkeys See the World: Inside the Mind of Another 
Species (Univ. Chicago Press, 1990).
105. Herrmann, E., Call, J., Hernández-Lloreda, M. V., Hare, B. & Tomasello, M. Humans have 
evolved specialized skills of social cognition: the cultural intelligence hypothesis. 
Science 317, 1360–1366 (2007).
106. Tomasello, M. & Herrmann, E. Ape and human cognition: what’s the difference? Curr. Dir. 
Psychol. Sci. 19, 3–8 (2010).
107. Fischer, J. Monkeytalk: Inside the Worlds and Minds of Primates (Univ. Chicago Press, 2017).
108. Krupenye, C. & Call, J. Theory of mind in animals: current and future directions. Wiley 
Interdiscip. Rev. Cogn. Sci. 10, e1503 (2019).
109. Shimizu, T. Why can birds be so smart? Background, significance, and implications of the 
revised view of the avian brain. Comparat. Cogn. Behav. Rev. 4, 103–115 (2009).
110. Güntürkün, O. & Bugnyar, T. Cognition without cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 20, 291–303 
(2016).
111. Hart, B. L., Hart, L. A. & Pinter-Wollman, N. Large brains and cognition: where do 
elephants fit in? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32, 86–98 (2008).
112. Godfrey-Smith, P. Other Minds: The Octopus and the Evolution of Intelligent Life (William 
Collins, 2016).
113. Schnell, A. K., Amodio, P., Boeckle, M. & Clayton, N. S. How intelligent is a cephalopod? 
Lessons from comparative cognition. Biol. Rev. 96, 162–178 (2021).
114. Gallistel, C. R. Prelinguistic thought. Lang. Learn. Dev. 7, 253–262 (2011).
115. Fitch, W. T. Animal cognition and the evolution of human language: why we cannot focus 
solely on communication. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 375, 20190046 (2020).
116. Yamada, J. E. & Marshall, J. C. Laura: A Case Study for the Modularity of Language (MIT 
Press, 1990).
117. Rondal, J. A. Exceptional Language Development in Down Syndrome (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 1995).
118. Bellugi, U., Lichtenberger, L., Jones, W., Lai, Z. & St George, M. The neurocognitive profile 
of Williams syndrome: a complex pattern of strengths and weaknesses. J. Cogn. 
Neurosci. 12, 7–29 (2000).
119. Little, B. et al. Language in schizophrenia and aphasia: the relationship with non-verbal 
cognition and thought disorder. Cogn. Neuropsychiatry 24, 389–405 (2019).
120. Mahowald, K. et al. Dissociating language and thought in large language models. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 28, 517–540(2024).
121. Chomsky, N., Belleti, A. & Rizzi, L. in On Nature and Language (eds Belleti, A. & Rizzi, L.) 
92–161 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002).
122. Schwartz, J. L., Boë, L. J., Vallée, N. & Abry, C. The dispersion–focalization theory of vowel 
systems. J. Phonetics 25, 255–286 (1997).
123. Diehl, R. L. Acoustic and auditory phonetics: the adaptive design of speech sound 
systems. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 363, 965–978 (2008).
124. Everett, C., Blasi, D. E. & Roberts, S. G. Climate, vocal folds, and tonal languages: 
Connecting the physiological and geographic dots. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 
1322–1327 (2015).
125. Blasi, D. E. et al. Human sound systems are shaped by post-Neolithic changes in bite 
configuration. Science 363, eaav3218 (2019).
126. Dautriche, I., Mahowald, K., Gibson, E., Christophe, A. & Piantadosi, S. T. Words cluster 
phonetically beyond phonotactic regularities. Cognition 163, 128–145 (2017).
127. Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H. & Gibson, E. Word lengths are optimized for efficient 
communication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 3526–3529 (2011).
128. Levelt, W. J. Speaking: From Intention to Articulation (MIT Press, 1993).
129. Kemp, C. & Regier, T. Kinship categories across languages reflect general communicative 
principles. Science 336, 1049–1054 (2012).  
This study provides a computational demonstration that the kinship systems across 
world’s languages trade off between simplicity and informativeness in a near-optimal 
way, and argue that these principles also characterize other category systems.

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 585
130. Gibson, E. et al. Color naming across languages reflects color use. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 114, 10785–10790 (2017).
131. Zaslavsky, N., Kemp, C., Regier, T. & Tishby, N. Efficient compression in color naming and 
its evolution. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, 7937–7942 (2018).
132. Kemp, C., Gaby, A. & Regier, T. Season naming and the local environment. Proc. 41st 
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society 539–545 (2019).
133. Xu, Y., Liu, E. & Regier, T. Numeral systems across languages support efficient 
communication: From approximate numerosity to recursion. Open Mind 4, 57–70 
(2020).
134. Denić, M., Steinert-Threlkeld, S. & Szymanik, J. Complexity/informativeness trade-off in 
the domain of indefinite pronouns. Semant. Linguist. Theor. 30, 166–184 (2021).
135. Mollica, F. et al. The forms and meanings of grammatical markers support efficient 
communication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2025993118 (2021).
136. van de Pol, I., Lodder, P., van Maanen, L., Steinert-Threlkeld, S. & Szymanik, J. Quantifiers 
satisfying semantic universals have shorter minimal description length. Cognition 232, 
105150 (2023).
137. Clark, H. H. in Context in Language Learning and Language Understanding (eds Malmkj’r, 
K. & Williams, J.) 63–87) (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998).
138. Winter, B., Perlman, M. & Majid, A. Vision dominates in perceptual language: English 
sensory vocabulary is optimized for usage. Cognition 179, 213–220 (2018).
139. von Humboldt, W. Uber die Verschiedenheit des Menschlichen Sprachbaues (1836).
140. Hurford, J. R. Linguistic Evolution Through Language Acquisition: Formal and 
Computational Models (ed. Briscoe, E.) 301–344 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002).
141. Smith, K., Brighton, H. & Kirby, S. Complex systems in language evolution: the cultural 
emergence of compositional structure. Adv. Complex Syst. 6, 537–558 (2003).
142. Piantadosi, S. T. & Fedorenko, E. Infinitely productive language can arise from chance 
under communicative pressure. J. Lang. Evol. 2, 141–147 (2017).
143. Gibson, E. Linguistic complexity: locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition 68, 1–76 
(1998).
144. Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S. & Van Dyke, J. A. Computational principles of working memory in 
sentence comprehension. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 447–454 (2006).
145. Liu, H. Dependency distance as a metric of language comprehension difficulty. J. Cogn. 
Sci. 9, 151–191 (2008).
146. Futrell, R., Mahowald, K. & Gibson, E. Large-scale evidence of dependency length 
minimization in 37 languages. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 10336–10341 (2015).  
This investigation of syntactic dependency lengths across 37 diverse languages 
suggests that dependencies are predominantly local cross-linguistically, presumably 
because non-local dependencies are cognitively costly in both production and 
comprehension.
147. Dryer, M. S. The Greenbergian word order correlations. Language 68, 81–138 (1992).
148. Hahn, M., Jurafsky, D. & Futrell, R. Universals of word order reflect optimization of 
grammars for efficient communication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117, 2347–2353 (2020).
149. Goldin-Meadow, S., Wing, C. S., Özyürek, A. & Mylander, C. The natural order of events: 
how speakers of different languages represent events nonverbally. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 105, 9163–9168 (2008).
150. Senghas, A., Kita, S. & Ozyürek, A. Children creating core properties of language: 
evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science 305, 1779–1782 (2004).
151. Sandler, W., Meir, I., Padden, C. & Aronoff, M. The emergence of grammar: systematic 
structure in a new language. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 2661–2665 (2005).
152. Gibson, E. et al. A noisy-channel account of crosslinguistic word-order variation. Psychol. 
Sci. 24, 1079–1088 (2013).
153. Levy, R. A noisy-channel model of human sentence comprehension under uncertain 
input. In Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 234–243 
(2008).
154. Gibson, E., Bergen, L. & Piantadosi, S. T. Rational integration of noisy evidence and  
prior semantic expectations in sentence interpretation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 
8051–8056 (2013).  
This behavioural investigation demonstrates that language comprehension is robust to 
noise: in the presence of corrupt linguistic input, listeners and readers rely on a 
combination of prior expectations about messages that are likely to be communicated 
and knowledge of how linguistic signals can get corrupted by noise.
155. Futrell, R., Levy, R. P. & Gibson, E. Dependency locality as an explanatory principle for 
word order. Language 96, 371–412 (2020).
156. Hahn, M. & Xu, Y. Crosslinguistic word order variation reflects evolutionary pressures of 
dependency and information locality. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2122604119 (2022).
157. Hahn, M., Futrell, R., Levy, R. & Gibson, E. A resource-rational model of human processing 
of recursive linguistic structure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2122602119 (2022).
158. Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H. & Gibson, E. The communicative function of ambiguity in 
language. Cognition 122, 280–291 (2012).
159. Quijada, J. A grammar of the Ithkuil language—introduction. ithkuil.net https://ithkuil.
net/00_intro.html (accessed 27 February 2022).
160. Srinivasan, M. & Rabagliati, H. The implications of polysemy for theories of word learning. 
Child Dev. Perspect. 15, 148–153 (2021).
161. Bizzi, E. Motor control revisited: a novel view. Curr. Trends Neurol. 10, 75–80 (2016).
162. Darwin, C. On the Origin of Species–A Facsimile of the First Edition (Harvard Univ. Press, 
1964).
163. Herculano-Houzel, S. The remarkable, yet not extraordinary, human brain as a scaled-up 
primate brain and its associated cost. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 10661–10668 (2012).
164. White, L. T. The historical roots of our ecologic crisis. Science 155, 1203–1207 (1967).
165. King, M. C. & Wilson, A. C. Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science 
188, 107–116 (1975).
166. Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium. Initial sequence of the chimpanzee 
genome and comparison with the human genome. Nature 437, 69–87 (2005).
167. Buckner, R. L. & Krienen, F. M. The evolution of distributed association networks in the 
human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 648–665 (2013).  
This review presents the evidence for the disproportionate expansion of the association 
cortex relative to other brain areas in humans.
168. Duncan, J., Assem, M. & Shashidhara, S. Integrated intelligence from distributed brain 
activity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 838–852 (2020).
169. Saxe, R. & Kanwisher, N. People thinking about thinking people: the role of the 
temporo-parietal junction in “theory of mind”. NeuroImage 19, 1835–1842 (2003).
170. Buckner, R. L. & DiNicola, L. M. The brain’s default network: updated anatomy, physiology 
and evolving insights. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 20, 593–608 (2019).
171. Deen, B. & Freiwald, W. A. Parallel systems for social and spatial reasoning within the 
cortical apex. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.09.23.461550 (2021).
172. Mitchell, D. J. et al. A putative multiple-demand system in the macaque brain. J. Neurosci. 
36, 8574–8585 (2016).
173. Cantlon, J. & Piantadosi, S. Uniquely human intelligence arose from expanded 
information capacity. Nat. Rev. Psychol. 3, 275–293 (2024).
174. Tomasello, M. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition (Harvard Univ. Press, 2009).
175. Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J. & Henrich, J. The cultural niche: Why social learning is essential 
for human adaptation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10918–10925 (2011).
176. Henrich, J. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evolution, 
Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter (Princeton Univ. Press, 2016).
177. Heyes, C. Cognitive Gadgets (Harvard Univ. Press, 2018).
178. Gumperz, J. J. & Levinson, S. C. (eds). Rethinking Linguistic Relativity (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 1996).
179. Piaget, J. Language and Thought of the Child: Selected Works, Vol. 5 (Routledge, 2005).
180. Gleitman, L. R. & Papafragou, A. in Cambridge Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning (eds 
Holyoak, K. & Morrison, R.) 2nd edn (Oxford Univ. Press, 2016).
181. Fedorenko, E. & Varley, R. Language and thought are not the same thing: evidence from 
neuroimaging and neurological patients. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 1369, 132–153 (2016).
182. Gentner, D. Language as cognitive tool kit: How language supports relational thought. 
Am. Psychol. 71, 650 (2016).
183. Frank, M. C., Everett, D. L., Fedorenko, E. & Gibson, E. Number as a cognitive technology: 
Evidence from Pirahã language and cognition. Cognition 108, 819–824 (2008).
184. Wernicke, C. The aphasic symptom-complex: a psychological study on an anatomical 
basis. Arch. Neurol. 22, 280–282 (1869).
185. Lichteim, L. On aphasia. Brain 7, 433–484 (1885).
186. Poeppel, D., Emmorey, K., Hickok, G. & Pylkkänen, L. Towards a new neurobiology of 
language. J. Neurosci. 32, 14125–14131 (2012).
187. Tremblay, P. & Dick, A. S. Broca and Wernicke are dead, or moving past the classic model 
of language neurobiology. Brain Lang. 162, 60–71 (2016).
188. Hillis, A. E. et al. Re‐examining the brain regions crucial for orchestrating speech 
articulation. Brain 127, 1479–1487 (2004).
189. Flinker, A. et al. Redefining the role of Broca’s area in speech. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
112, 2871–2875 (2015).
190. Long, M. A. et al. Functional segregation of cortical regions underlying speech timing and 
articulation. Neuron 89, 1187–1193 (2016).
191. Guenther, F. H. Neural Control of Speech (MIT Press, 2016).
192. Basilakos, A., Smith, K. G., Fillmore, P., Fridriksson, J. & Fedorenko, E. Functional 
characterization of the human speech articulation network. Cereb. Cortex 28, 1816–1830 
(2018).
193. Obleser, J., Zimmermann, J., Van Meter, J. & Rauschecker, J. P. Multiple stages of 
auditory speech perception reflected in event-related fMRI. Cereb. Cortex 17, 2251–2257 
(2007).
194. Mesgarani, N., Cheung, C., Johnson, K. & Chang, E. F. Phonetic feature encoding in 
human superior temporal gyrus. Science 343, 1006–1010 (2014).
195. Norman-Haignere, S., Kanwisher, N. G. & McDermott, J. H. Distinct cortical pathways for 
music and speech revealed by hypothesis-free voxel decomposition. Neuron 88, 1281–1296 
(2015).
196. Overath, T., McDermott, J., Zarate, J. & Poeppel, D. The cortical analysis of speech-specific 
temporal structure revealed by responses to sound quilts. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 903–911 
(2015).
197. Norman-Haignere, S. V. et al. A neural population selective for song in human auditory 
cortex. Curr. Biol. 32, 1470–1484.e12 (2022).
198. Hickok, G. & Poeppel, D. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 8, 393–402 (2007).
199. Friederici, A. D. The cortical language circuit: from auditory perception to sentence 
comprehension. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16, 262–268 (2012).
200. Wilson, S. M. et al. Recovery from aphasia in the first year after stroke. Brain 146, 1021–1039 
(2023).
201. Radford, A. et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1,  
9 (2019).
202. Jain, S. & Huth, A. Incorporating context into language encoding models for fMRI. in Proc. 
32nd International Conf. Neural Information Processing Systems (eds Bengio, S. et al.) 
(Curran Associates, 2018).
203. Schrimpf, M. et al. The neural architecture of language: Integrative modeling converges 
on predictive processing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2105646118 (2021).
204. Caucheteux, C. & King, J. R. Brains and algorithms partially converge in natural language 
processing. Commun. Biol. 5, 134 (2022).
205. Goldstein, A. et al. Shared computational principles for language processing in humans 
and deep language models. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 369–380 (2022).
206. Tuckute, T., Kanwisher, N. & Fedorenko, E. Language in brains, minds, and machines. 
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-120623-101142 (2024).
207. Paulk, A. C. et al. Large-scale neural recordings with single neuron resolution using 
Neuropixels probes in human cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 25, 252–263 (2022).
208. Leonard, M. K. et al. Large-scale single-neuron speech sound encoding across the depth 
of human cortex. Nature 626, 593–602 (2024).
209. Fodor, J. A. The Language of Thought (Crowell, 1975).
210. Fodor, J. A. & Pylyshyn, Z. W. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: a critical 
analysis. Cognition 28, 3–71 (1988).
211. Rule, J. S., Tenenbaum, J. B. & Piantadosi, S. T. The child as hacker. Trends Cogn. Sci. 24, 
900–915 (2020).

586 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024
Perspective
212. Quilty-Dunn, J., Porot, N. & Mandelbaum, E. The best game in town: the reemergence of 
the language-of-thought hypothesis across the cognitive sciences. Behav. Brain Sci. 46, 
e261 (2023).
213. Rumelhart, D. E., McClelland, J. L. & PDP Research Group. Parallel Distributed Processing, 
Vol. 1: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Foundations (MIT Press, 1986).
214. Smolensky, P. & Legendre, G. The Harmonic Mind: From Neural Computation to 
Optimality–Theoretic Grammar Vol. 1: Cognitive Architecture (MIT Press, 2006).
215. Frankland, S. M. & Greene, J. D. Concepts and compositionality: in search of the brain’s 
language of thought. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 71, 273–303 (2020).
216. Lake, B. M. & Baroni, M. Human-like systematic generalization through a meta-learning 
neural network. Nature 623, 115–121 (2023).
217. Dehaene-Lambertz, G., Dehaene, S. & Hertz-Pannier, L. Functional neuroimaging of 
speech perception in infants. Science 298, 2013–2015 (2002).
218. Pena, M. et al. Sounds and silence: an optical topography study of language recognition 
at birth. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 11702–11705 (2003).
219. Cristia, A., Minagawa, Y. & Dupoux, E. Responses to vocalizations and auditory controls in 
the human newborn brain. PLoS ONE 9, e115162 (2014).
Acknowledgements The authors thank A. Ivanova, R. Jackendoff, N. Kanwisher, K. Mahowald, 
R. Seyfarth, C. Shain and N. Zaslavsky for helpful comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript; 
N. Caselli, M. Coppola, A. Hillis, L. Menn, R. Varley and S. Wilson for comments on specific 
sections; C. Casto, T. Regev, F. Mollica and R. Futrell for help with the figures; and S. Swords,  
N. Jhingan, H. S. Kim and A. Sathe for help with references. E.F. was supported by NIH awards 
DC016607 and DC016950 from NIDCD, NS121471 from NINDS, and from funds from MIT’s 
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Simons 
Center for the Social Brain, and Quest for Intelligence.
Author contributions All authors contributed equally to conceiving, writing and revising this 
piece.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07522-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Evelina Fedorenko.
Peer review information Nature thanks Angelika Kratzer and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) 
for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© Springer Nature Limited 2024

