 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Larry Bell 
Sr. Vice President for Exhibits and Programs 
Museum of Science, Boston 
 
Larry Bell has worked in Education and Exhibits at the Museum of Science in Boston in various 
roles since 1971, serving as Education Associate, Director of Exhibit Research and Planning, 
Head of Exhibits, Associate Director, Vice President for Exhibits, and Sr. Vice President for 
Research, Development, and Production.  In 1983, he was instrumental in the formation of the 
Science Museum Exhibit Collaborative, a collaboration of eight science centers throughout the 
U.S. formed to produce and share traveling exhibitions and which is still in operation today. 
Through a series of National Science Foundation grants from 1986 to 2005, he led development 
of a new model for science center exhibits employing contructivist learning experiences to 
provide visitors with practice in scientific thinking skills. Through this long-range effort, the 
Museum gained new expertise in formative evaluation as an integral component of the exhibit 
design process and in designing exhibits to include visitors with disabilities and, ultimately, in 
universal design. 
 
In 2006 he became Associate Director of the Museum’s National Center for Technological 
Literacy (NCTL).  The NCTL promotes engineering and technology education in schools for 
students in grades k-12 and in informal educational institutions, like hands-on science centers.  
Bell’s focus is on the informal educational institutions, and includes opening the public’s 
understanding of technology to include the human-made world broadly, providing visitors with 
first-hand experience with engineering design, and engaging the public in dialogue and 
deliberation around societal issues associated with new developments in science and 
technology. 
 
Bell currently heads the Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network, a major initiative 
funded by the National Science Foundation to raise public awareness, understanding, and 
engagement with nanoscale science, engineering, and technology.  The Museum of Science is 
leading a collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota and the Exploratorium, and 12 
other partners, to create exhibits and programs and a network of science museum staff and 
nanoscale researchers working together to provide the public with informal educational 
experiences about nanotechnologies and their current and potential societal implications. 
 
He received a B.S. in Physics and an M.S. in Earth and Planetary Science from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1971. 

