CHAPTER X.
LAST YEARS.
153. 
THE revival of Platonism and Pythagorean mysticism
in Alexandria and the East, perhaps also the dispersion of the
Jews and their introduction to Greek learning, led about
Ptolemy's time to the revival of the theory of number and this
in the hands of Nicomachus, Theon, Smyrnaeus and others
became a favourite study \ 
No doubt geometry continued to
be one of the most important parts of the Alexandrian course,
but no important geometer appears for 150 years or so after
Ptolemy. The sole occupant of this long gap is Sextus Julius
Afticanus, a Libyan by birth, who lived, however, most of his
life in Palestine. He flourished about A.D. 200. Africanus has
left a collection of papers similar to those of Heron, and en-
titled Kecrro/, i.e. 'Patchwork','miscellanies.' A portion of this
dealing chiefly with catapults is printed in the Mathematici
Veteres, but Chap. 31 contains some problems of strategy2, to
find the breadth of a river the opposite bank of which is oc-
cupied by the enemy, etc. Two solutions of this problem are
given, both depending on similar triangles. The first is as
follows. The point a. being on the opposite bank, take a distance
0/3, evidently greater than 0.6, 0 being on your own bank and let
6ft be at right angles to the bank. With the dioptra determine
1 Vide supra, p. 88 sq.<i. 
cent along with Heron's Dioptra above
2 This is separately printed by Vin- 
mentioned.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS.
303
fiy at right angles to 6(3. From 7 with the dioptra determine
the angle fiya. Bisect /3y in 8 and from 8 draw Be parallel
to 0fi, meeting ay in e and from e draw ef to Oft, parallel to /3y.
Then £/9 is half a/9 and £# can be determined by measurement.
The other method is as follows. The point a being on the opposite
bank, determine a/3 crossing the river at right angles and measure
/Siy parallel with the banks. At the point 8 on /S7 lay a T-square
786, so that its extremity e lies on the line 7a, as determined by
the dioptra. Then 78 : Be :: 7$ : /3a. The first three of these
distances are known and thus f3a. is obtained. This procedure,
the Roman varatio, was one of those which made the reputation
of Heron and all the grornatici of antiquity. It could be
applied of course, as Euclid applies it in the Phcenomena, to
finding heights and depths as well as horizontal distances1.
1 Chap. 76 of the Keoroi describes a
curious system of telegraphy. Three
posts were set up, each bearing 9
moveable arms. One represented units,
the next tens, the third hundreds.
The numbers thus exhibited were read
in Greek alphabetic signs and in this
manner a word was spelt out, e.g. 7 on
the second post (o = 70) and 4 on the
third (u=400) would spell ov, 'No.'
Cantor, pp. 372—374.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

304 
LAST YEARS.
154. But the end of the third century produced one of the
greatest of Greek mathematicians, Pappus of Alexandria. His
date, indeed, though he certainly lived before Proclus and
Eutocius who often mention him, is a matter of some doubt,
because the two authorities for it contradict one another. A
scholiast of the 10th century has written, in the margin of a
MS. of Theon's manual tables (now at Leyden), opposite the
name Diocletian, eVt TOVTOV 6 IIa7ro9 eypafav, which can
hardly refer to anybody but our Pappus. Suidas, however,
says that Pappus was a contemporary of Theon and as it is
evident from the same tables that Theon lived about 372, in
the time of Theodosius, the two accounts vary by nearly a
hundred years. Now Suidas says that Pappus wrote a com-
mentary on the four (instead of 13) books of the Almagest
and it is in the highest degree unlikely that both Theon
and Pappus, living in Alexandria at the same time, should
both have written a commentary on the same work1. And
Suidas, besides making a mistake about the Almagest it-
self, does not mention Pappus's great work, the a-vvaymyij, at
all. From this it is inferred that Suidas knew hardly any-
thing about Pappus and the other writer, who assigns him to
Diocletian's time (A.D. 284-305) is deemed better worthy of
credence2.
Many writings are attributed to Pappus. Proclus (p. '429)
speaks of Pappus' pupils (ol rrepl Hdinrov), so he evidently
was the head of a school. Eutocius (in Torelli, p. 208), and
Suidas mention his commentary on the Almagest. The former
also (Torelli, p. 90), mentions some notes on Euclid's Elements3.
Suidas ascribes to him a description of the earth, a book on the
rivers of Libya and another on the interpretation of dreams.
Pappus himself (iv. 27, p. 246), speaks of his commentary on the
analemma of Diodorus, a writer of whom nothing is known.
Proclus (pp. 189, 190), perhaps quoting the notes on Euclid,
1 Nevertheless Theon does not men- 
Vol. of his Pappus and Cantor, pp.
tion Pappus's commentary. Hultsch, 
374—376.
as above stated, thinks he stole from 
3 From these, no doubt, Axx. 4 and
it. 
5 were taken (Proclus, p. 197, 6).
2 See Hultsch's preface to the 3rd
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS. 
305
says that Pappus pointed out that an angle may
be equal to a right angle without being a right
angle. In the annexed figure of two equal semi-
circles, for instance, the angle comprised between
the two curves aS, ay, is obviously equal to the
right angle 82/S.
But the one work by which Pappus is known is his
a oollection of mathematical papers, originally in 8 books, of
which the first and part of the second are missing. This is the
work to which so frequent references have been made in these
pages and which, of all extant Greek books, is the richest in
information on the lost treatises of the foremost Greek geometers.
The design of the collection is to give a brief account of the
contents of most of the mathematical works which, in Pappus's
day, enjoyed the highest repute and then to set out lemmas or
auxiliary propositions to them. These lemmas, however, as is
evident by a comparison of them with extant works, such as
Euclid's Phaenomena or Apollonius' Conies, are selected in the
freest possible manner, and have often no apparent bearing on
the book which they are supposed to illustrate. On the other
hand the same comparison shews that Pappus gives a very
careful and correct summary of the works of which he
treats, and for this reason it seemed possible to the mathema-
ticians of the last century to reconstruct lost wprks on the
authority of Pappus alone.
155. The contents of the avvaywyrj may be here briefly
indicated1.
The fragment of Book 11. deals entirely with the tetrads of
Apollonius and has been described above (pp. 62—63).
Book in. contains four tracts, the first on the methods of
duplication of Eratosthenes, Nicomedes, Heron and Pappus
himself: the second on the theory of proportion, introduced by
a problem to exhibit an arithmetical, a geometrical and a
harmonic mean in the same figure2: the third is on Euclid 1. 21,
and shews that if the straight lines meeting within the triangle
1 This summary is partly from 
a n arithmetical, geometrical or har-
Cantor, pp. 378 382. 
monical mean, according as
2 pp. 70, 73. Between a and c, b is 
a-b:b-c~a 
:a, or a: b, or a : c.
G. G. M. 
20
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

306 
LAST YEARS.
be drawn from two points not the extremities of the base, then
"the sides of the included triangle may be greater than the
sides of the triangle which includes it in any ratio which is less
than that of two to one *": the fourth is on the five regular
polyhedra inscribed in the sphere and uses the Sphaerica of
Theodosius. Here Pappus proceeds by a method contrary to
that of Euclid xin. Euclid, who finds a ratio between a side of
the polyhedron and the diameter of the sphere, constructs the
polyhedron first and describes • the sphere about it: Pappus
constructs the sphere first and inscribes the polyhedron.
Book iv. begins with the theory of transversals to the circle,
followed by the problem to describe a circle about three circles
which touch one another. Then follow more problems on
figures touching one another. Pappus next passes to the spiral
of Archimedes, the conchoid of Nicomedes and the quadratrix,
which last is very fully discussed. Various subjects are here
incidentally treated, such as the rectification of the circle, the
relations between the quadratrix and the spiral, the trisection
of an angle, the division of a circle, into arcs which have to one
another a given ratio, by means of the quadratrix and the
spiral, the use of the quadratic for the solution of the three
problems (1) to describe in a circle a regular polygon of any
number of sides, (2) to find for any given chord a circular
arc which has a given ratio to the chord, and (3) to draw
angles which shall be incommensurable with one another.
Book V. begins with an extract from the work of Zenodorus
on plane figures of equal periphery, passes then to the trea-
tise of Archimedes on the half-regular solids, then returns to
Zenodorus on solids of equal surface and shews that, of the
regular solids with equal surface, that is the greatest which
has most angles.
Book VI. gives lemmas to the fj,i/epb<; daTpovofiov/ievo1}
(TOTTOIJ) or Minor collection of Astronomy*. 
This contained,
according to the preface, the following works, viz., the Sphaerica
1 Simson's note to Eucl. 1. xxi. 
study intermediate between the Ele-
J This collection, with some Arabic 
ments of Euclid and the Almagest.
additions, constituted the " middle 
See Steinschneider in Zeittchr. Math.
books" of the Arabs, i.e. the oourse of 
Phys. for 1865, x. pp. 456—498.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS. 
307
of Theodosius, the Data, Optica, Catoptrica and Pkaendmetia of
Euclid, the trepl SiocKij&ecav (De Habitationibus) and De Noctibus
et Diebus of Theodosius, the Moving Sphere of Autolycus, the De
Magnitudinibus etc. of Aristarchus, the dvafyopiieos of Hypsicles*
the Sphaerica of Menelaus. The books, perhaps, were not
studied in this order, for it is difficult to see why Autolycus
should be taken after Euclid, but on the other hand the TOTTO?
dvaXvo/ievo'} was studied in the order of its books1 and there
seems no reason otherwise for dividing the works of Theodosius.
Pappus omits the Catoptrica, the dva(f)opiKo<i and the Spherics of
Menelaus, but as he promises (p. 602 lin. 1) some lemmas to a
commentary by Menelaus on Euclid's Phaenomena, which are
not now included in the book, it may be that some mutilation
has taken place.
Book vn. deals, in like manner, with the TO'TTO? dvaXvofievos
or Collection of Analysis. This contained Euclid's Data,
Apollonius' Sectio Eationis, Sectio Spatii, Sectio Determinata,
De Tactiorvtbus, Euclid's Porisms, Apollonius' De Inclinationibus,
Plane Loci, and Conies, the Solid Loci of Aristaeus, the roiroi
irpo? e-infyaveiq of Euclid and lastly Eratosthenes' irepl (ie<ro-
TIJTOOV. The contents of these, down to the Conies, are described
in a long preface and then follow lemmas to all the books except
the Data and those of Aristaeus and Eratosthenes. The
Porisms of Euclid are taken between the Plane Loci and the
Conies of Apollonius, but otherwise the above order is preserved.
Book VIII. begins by announcing that it will deal with some
mechanical questions "more tersely and clearly and in a better
manner" than they had been handled by the ancients. To
these belong the theory of the centre of gravity and of the
inclined plane, and the problem, by means of cogwheels whose
diameters are in a given ratio, to move a given weight with a
given power. Here, again, arises the duplication-problem,
or rather the problem to construct a cube which has a given
ratio to another cube. This is solved by a mechanical device.
Pappus then discusses the method of finding the diameter of a
cylinder which is broken so that an exact measurement can-
1 Cf. p. 636. 18. "Qf the above mentioned books of analysis the order
(rd&s) is as follows."
20—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

308 
LAST YEARS.
not be taken on either base. Suddenly he passes thence to
problems (or porisms) to find given points on a sphere, e.g. the
point which is nearest to a given plane or the points in which a
given straight line will cut the sphere. Then he shews how to
inscribe seven similar regular hexagons in a circle, one having
the same centre as the circle, the other six standing each on
one side of the first. This problem serves for the construction of
cogwheels and extracts from the ftapovXicos and the Mechanics
of Heron, added perhaps by a later hand, conclude the collection.
156. To the development of Greek geometry the Collection
of Pappus can hardly be deemed really important. It is
evidence, indeed, that the geometrical school of Alexandria was
still flourishing after 600 years and it shews what subjects were
studied there. But among his contemporaries Pappus is like
the peak of Teneriffe in the Atlantic. He looks back, from a
distance of 500 years, to find his peer in Apollonius. In the
long interval, only two or three writers, Zenodorus and Serenus
and Menelaus, had produced in pure geometiy a little work of
the best order, and there are none such to follow. The
Collection of Pappus is not cited by any of his successors1, and
none of them attempted to make the slightest use of the proofs
and apergns in which the book abounds. It becomes interesting
only in the history of mathematics during the 17th and 18th
centuries, when there were again geometers capable of using it
and others who independently struck out and pursued lines
of investigation which were more or less clearly anticipated by
Pappus. 
To give here an elaborate account of Pappus
would be to create a false impression. His work is only
the last convulsive effort of Greek geometry which was now
nearly dead and was never effectually revived. It is not so
with Ptolemy or Diophantus. The trigonometry of the former
is the foundation of a new study which was handed on to other
nations indeed but which has thenceforth a continuous history
of progress. Diophantus also represents the outbreak of a
movement which probably was not Greek in its origin, and
1 Hultsch's Preface to Vol. in. p. 3. 
Pappus, cites the proposition VIII. 11
Eutocius however, (in Torelli p. 139) 
of,the Collectio. (This is also in Bk.
referring to the prixa-viml daayayal of 
m. pp. 64—69 of Hultsch).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS. 
309
which the Greek genius long resisted, but which was especially
adapted to the tastes of the people who, after the extinction of
Greek schools, received their heritage and kept their memory
green. But no Indian or Arab ever studied Pappus or cared in
the least for his style or his matter. When geometry came
once more up to his level, the invention of analytical methods
gave it a sudden push which sent it far beyond him and he was
out of date at the very moment when he seemed to be taking a
new lease of life.
A few lines only will be sufficient to call attention to some
passages of Pappus in which modern geometers still take an
antiquarian interest1. 
These occur mostly in Book vu. Here
(p. 682) occurs the theorem, afterwards re-discovered or stolen by
Guldin (1577-1643), that the volume of a solid of revolution is
equal to the product of the area of the revolving figure and the
length of the path of its centre of gravity. Here also (p. 1013)
Pappus first found the focus of a parabola and suggested the
use of the directrix. Here in the lemmas to the 8ectio Determi-
nate/, the theory of points in involution is propounded: and
among those to the De Tactionibus the problem is solved, to
draw through three points lying in the same straight line, three
straight lines which shall form a triangle inscribed in a given
circle*. Here also (p. 678) occurs the problem "given several
straight lines, to find the locus of a point such that the perpen-
diculars, or more generally straight lines at given angles, drawn
from the point to the given lines shall satisfy the condition that
the product of certain of them shall be in a given ratio to the
1 Some of these have been mentioned 
2 On this problem (no. 117) Chasles
before a propos of the books to which 
has the following remarks. "Theprops.
the lemmas of Pappus refer. A sum- 
105, 107, 108 are particular cases of
mary of a kind more satisfying to the 
it. One of the points is there supposed
modern geometer will be found in 
to be at infinity. The problem, gen-
Chasles Apergu pp. 28—44. Cantor 
eralised by placing the points anywhere,
pp. 382—386 cites generally the same 
has become celebrated by its difficulty,
propositions as Chasles, but adds some 
by the fame of the geometers who
remarks on hints of algebraical sym- 
solved it and especially by the solution,
bolism in Pappus. Taylor (Anc. and 
as general and simple as possible,
Mod. Conies, pp. Hi—liv) gives little 
given by a boy of 16, Ottaiano of
more than the lemmas to Euclid's 
Naples." Apergu, pp. 44, 328.
porisms from Book vu.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

310 
LAST YEAES.
product of the rest "1. Descartes and Newton brought this into
celebrity as the "problem of Pappus." But though the seventh
Book, which contains the lemmas to the TO7TO? dvakvoiievos is
by far the most important, there is matter in the other books of
a very surprising character. The 4th Book, which deals with
curves, contains a great number of brilliant propositions,
especially on the quadratrix and the Archimedean spiral. Pap-
pus supplements the latter by producing (p. 261 sqq.), a spiral
on a sphere, in which a great circle revolves uniformly about a
diameter, while a point on the circle moves uniformly along its
circumference. He then finds the area of the surface so deter-
mined, "a complanation which claims the more lively admiration,
if we remember that, though the whole spherical superficies was
known since Archimedes' time, to measure portions of it, such as
spherical triangles, was then and for long afterwards an \msolved
problem8". The 8th Book (p. 1034 sqq.) contains a proposition to
the effect that the centre of gravity of a triangle is that of another
triangle of which the vertices lie on the sides of the first and
divide them all in the same ratio3. All these, and many more of
equal difficulty, seem to be new and of Pappus' own invention. It
ought not, however, to be forgotten that in at least three cases,
which have been noticed above in their proper places, Pappus
seems to have assumed credit to which he is not entitled. In
Book III. he gives as his own a solution of the trisection-problem.
with a conchoid, which can hardly be other than the solution
which Proclus ascribes to Nicomedes: in Book iv. he gives 14
propositions of Zenodorus without so much as naming that
author: and in Book Vlll. he solves the problem ' to move a
given weight with a given power' in a manner which differs
only accidentally from Heron's4. It is probable that many
1 It is in this problem that Pappus 
proportionate to the length of the sides.
objects to having more than 4 straight 
4 In Heron the weight is 1000 talents,
lines, on the ground that a geometry 
the power 5, and he solves the problem
of more than three dimensions was 
by a series of cogwheels, the diameters
absurd. 
of each pair being in the ratio 5 :1.
2 Cantor p. 384. 
Pappus takes the weight 160, power 4
3 Pappus supposes points, starting 
and the diameters 2 :1. See Pappus
simultaneously from the three vertices, 
vm. prop. 10 (p. 1061 sqq.) and Yin-
to move along the sides with velocities 
cent's Heron cited supra, p. 278 n.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS. 
311
works of ancient geometers were, in Pappus' time, becoming
rare. Pappus himself, for instance, does not seem to have seen
Euclid's Conies and Eutocius and Proclus (much later) had
certainly not seen many books which they knew by name1. It
was therefore possible to appropriate many proofs without
much chance of detection and it may be that Pappus used this
opportunity.
157. It was suggested at the beginning of this chapter, that
possibly the Jews had something to do with the revival of the
arithmetical investigations which culminate about this time in
the Algebra of Diophantus. It is possible also that the decay
of Greek geometry was due to the gradual advance of peoples
who have never, at any time, cared much for this branch of
mathematics, though they have a surprising natural talent for
the other. At any rate, nearly all the leading writers of the
Neo-Platonic and Neo-Pythagorean schools were not Greeks.
Philo was a Jew: Nicomachus was an Arabian: Ammonius
the founder of Neo-Platonism was an Egyptian: so was Ploti-
nus: Porphyrius came from Tyre: the name of Anatolius,
wherever he was bom, means literally 'Oriental': Iamblichus
was a native of Chalcis, in Ccelesyria. These are the philoso-
phers who, in the first four centuries of our era, commanded the
largest influence and not one of them was a geometer. Never-
theless, the world is wide and the geometrical school at
Alexandria was still largely attended, though it produced no
brilliant professors after Pappus. 
Perhaps Patricius, the
author of two rules now inserted in Heron's works (Geom. 104*
and 8tereom. I. 22) belonged to this time, but there are two
persons of this name, one a Lydian of about A.D. 374, the other
somewhat later, a Lycian and the father of Proclus. Theon of
Alexandria was certainly making astronomical observations in
A.D. 365 and 372, and he as certainly held classes (avvovaiai)
for which he prepared his edition of Euclid. We have seen also
that the preface to Euclid's Optics consists of notes from Theon's
lectures. He also wrote a commentary on the Almagest, (ed.
Halma. 1821) most of which is extant and which is perhaps in
1 Heiberg, Litterargesch. Euklid. p. 89.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

312 
LAST YEARS.
great part founded on the similar work of Pappus1. This also
contains many little historical notices which have been extracted
above in their proper places, and the commentary to Book I. of
Ptolemy is especially valuable for its specimens of Greek
arithmetic. Theon's daughter Hypatia (06. A.D. 415), seems to
have been a better mathematician than her father. The story
of her life and her tragical death are familiar to English readers
through Kingsley's novel. None of her works are extant, but
Suidas (sub voce) says she wrote "virofivrjfia et? Aio<f>dvTt]P TOP
dcrrpovofiiKov tcavova eh TO, KWVIKCL 'KiroWcoviov vTrofiprj/ia".
This may mean three works, viz.: notes to Diophantus, the
astronomical canon and notes to Apollonius1 conies, or (altering
Aw<f>dvTr)p to Aio<})dpTov) may refer to two only, notes to the
astronomical canon of Diophantus and notes to the conies.
Hypatia was the last of the Alexandrian professors who attained
any fame. The Neo-Platonic school in Athens, under Syrianus,
now began to attract more attention, and in the interests of
Platonism the historical study of geometry was for a time
revived. Proclus the successor (Std&oxo?) of Syrianus at the
Athenian school (A.D. 410—485), studied in Alexandria and
there acquired that general acquaintance with Greek geometry
which enabled him to write his commentary on Euclid's
Elements. His notes on the first Book are still extant2, and
contain a very large proportion of all the most valuable informa-
tion we possess on the history of Greek geometry. But Proclus
himself is a wordy and obscure writer and his best things are
taken from Geminus and Eudemus. Proclus' pupil Marinus of
Neapolis (i.e. Flavia Neapolis, the ancient Sychem in Palestine)
wrote the life of his master and is the author of the preface to
Euclid's Data. He also was at the head of the Athenian
school. 
Isidorus succeeded him and was the teacher of
Pamascius of Damascus, who appended the 15th Book to
1 The MSS. have a fragment of 
Pappus or Diophantus.
Pappus's commentary at the beginning 
s Some of the extant scholia to the
of Theon's to Book v. and in Theon's 
other books are thought to be by
to Book 1. occurs a tractate on cal- 
Proclus. 
See Kiwche's essay, cited
culation with sexagesimal fractions 
above p. 74 n.
which is, in some MSS, attributed to
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS, 
313
Euclid's elements1, and also of Eutocius of Ascalon, the commen-
tator on Archimedes and Apollonius. Along with Damascius,
Simplicius, the author of the commentary to Aristotle's De
Coelo, taught in the Athenian school, but the Emperor
Justinian, who was by way of being a Christian, did not approve
of the heathen learning and, after many annoying decrees,
finally in 529 closed the school altogether. 
Meanwhile in
Alexandria the study of mathematics was still in some sort
maintained, but it may be conjectured that there was no great
zeal for geometry since the only mathematical works of which
we hear anything are three commentaries on the Arithmetic of
Nicomachus, by Hermas, Asclepius of Tralles and Johannes
Philoponus. The end was rapidly approaching. Mahomet fled
from Mecca in September 622 and died in 632, and his successors
prepared to enlarge the realm of Islam with the sword.
In 640 Alexandria fell and then "with one stride comes
the dark ".
158. A summary of the history of Greek mathematics,
which has been given in these pages, can be rendered effective
only by being so condensed that conjecture is indistinguishable
from fact:
At first the higher mathematics were cultivated only in the
service of philosophy and it was part of every philosophical creed
to despise the aims and arts of the vulgar. The same prejudice
remained after mathematics had come to be studied for their
own sake, and thus the attention of competent mathematicians
was always diverted from the ordinary methods of calculation
and Greek arithmetic remained to the last hampered by a vile
symbolism and consequently cumbrous procedure.
Geometry was introduced to the Greeks by Thales from
Egypt, but the same knowledge was, somewhat later, imported
1 This supposition is founded on the 
les built the San Sofia church at Con-
fact that the author of Bk. xv. mentions 
stantinople. Book xv. appended to the
(prop. 7) his great teacher Isidorus. 
Elements contains only 7 props, chiefly
Cantor(p.426)pointsoutthattherewas 
problems to inscribe one regular solid
another Isidorus of Miletus, in this cen- 
in another,
tury, who along with Anthemius of Tral-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

314 
LAST YEARS.
elsewhere by Pythagoras and led in his hands to far more im-
portant results. He also, by insisting that every proposition on
the relations of lines, or continuous magnitudes, has its analogue
in the relations of numbers, or discrete magnitudes, and vice versd
started the investigation of1 the theory of numbers and gave to
this inquiry its deductive style and the geometrical nomenclature
which it always retained. From his time both these studies
advance almost pari passu, but the history of the theory of
numbers is far more obscure than that of geometry.
In the fifth century B.C. the head-quarters of mathematics
shift from. Italy to Athens. Here Hippocrates opened the
geometry of the circle, which Pythagoras had neglected for that of
rectilineal figures, and he also recast the problem of duplication
of the cube into one of plane geometry. Plato revived
stereometry and raised analysis to the position of a recognized
geometrical method. The Athenian successors of Plato began
the study of conies and other curves.
Then, about B.C. 300, the head-quarters are removed to
Alexandria and in the following century Greek mathematics
reach their highest development. Stereometry, the geometry
of conies and theory of loci were now practically complete, so
far as the Greeks were able to finish them. Succeeding cen-
turies do no more than treat of isolated cases which the great
geometers had overlooked.
But during this time practical astronomy had been making
rapid strides in the hands of Eudoxus, Aristarchus, Eratosthenes
and others down to Hipparchus. Now the needs of the
practical astronomer are in many respects similar to those of
the surveyor, the engineer and the architect. Each of these is
chiefly concerned, not to find the general rules which govern all
similar cases, but to find under what general rules a particular
case, presented to them, falls. But the question whether an
angle is acute, or a triangle isosceles, can be determined only by
measurement, and hence about 130 B.C., in the time of Heron
and Hipparchus, we find the results of geometry applied to
measured figures, for the purpose of finding some other measure-
ment as yet unknown. 
Trigonometry and an elementary
algebraical method are thus introduced. For such calculations
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LAST YEARS. 
315
the Egyptians and Semites, who had now secured the grand
results of Greek deductive science, had an especial aptitude, and
the study of the theory of numbers, which was revived by Neo-
Platonists and Neo-Pythagoreans, mostly of Semitic and
Egyptian origin, changes its character accordingly. With Nico-
raachus, in effect, propositions no longer run "All numbers,
having the same characteristic, have such or such another
characteristic", but, "The following numbers have the same
characteristics". The equations of Diophantus, in which for
the first time algebraical symbols appear, and which are intend-
ed to find numbers which satisfy given conditions, are the
inevitable consequence.
The learning of the Greeks passed over in the 9th century to
the Arabs and with them came round into the West of Europe.
But no material advance was made by the Arabs in geometry
and it was their arithmetic, trigonometry and algebra which
chiefly interested the mediaeval Universities. In the 16th cen-
tury Greek geometry again became known in the original and
was studied with intense zeal for about 100 years, until Descartes
and Leibnitz and Newton, the best of its scholars, superseded it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

