 
 
AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial       5-1 
 
 
Lesson 5  
Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Understand the Constructive Solid 
Geometry Concept. 
 Create a Binary Tree. 
 Understand the basic Boolean 
Operations. 
 Create Solids using AutoCAD Primitive 
Solids. 
 Generate Shaded SOLID images. 
 Use the Dynamic Rotation – 3D Orbit 
command. 

5-2       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Design includes all activities involved from the original concept to the finished product. 
Design is the process by which products are created and modified. For many years 
designers sought ways to describe and analyze three-dimensional designs without 
building physical models. Although orthographic projections can be used to provide 
much of the information, they still require designers to translate between the three-
dimensional object and flat two-dimensional views. With the advancements in computer 
technology, the creation of three-dimensional models on computers offers a wide range 
of benefits. Computer models are easier to interpret and can be altered easily. Computer 
models can be analyzed using finite element analysis software, and simulation of real-life 
loads can be applied to the computer models and the results graphically displayed. 
 
There are three basic types of three-dimensional computer geometric modeling methods: 
wireframe modeling, surface modeling and solid modeling. The 3-D wireframe models 
contain information about the locations of all the points and edges in space coordinates. 
The 3-D models can be viewed from any direction as needed and are reasonably good 
representations of 3-D objects. But because surface definition is not part of a wireframe 
model, all wireframe images have the inherent problem of ambiguity.  
 
 
 
Wireframe Ambiguity: Which corner is in front, A or B? 
 
 
 
 
 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  
5-3 
 
Surface modeling describes part surfaces but not interiors. Designers are still required to 
interactively examine surface models to insure that the various surfaces on a model are 
contiguous throughout. Many of the concepts used in 3-D wireframe and surface 
modelers are incorporated in the solid modeling scheme, but it is solid modeling that 
offers the most advantages as a design tool. 
 
In the solid modeling presentation scheme, the solid definitions include nodes, edges, and 
surfaces, and it is a complete and unambiguous mathematical representation of a 
precisely enclosed and filled volume. Two predominant methods for representing solid 
models are the constructive solid geometry (CSG) representation and the boundary 
representation (B-rep). CSG defines a model in terms of combining basic solid shapes 
and B-rep defines a model in terms of its edges and surfaces. AutoCAD’s solid modeler 
is a hybrid modeler; the user interface and construction techniques are CSG-based, 
whereas the B-rep capabilities are invoked automatically and are transparent to the user. 
 
In this lesson, we will discuss the fundamental concepts of solid modeling. We will 
demonstrate the procedure required to construct a solid model using AutoCAD's CSG-
based user interface.  
 
 
The Guide-Block Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5-4       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Constructive Solid Geometry concept 
 
In the 1980s, one of the main advancements in Solid Modeling was the development of 
the Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) method. CSG describes the solid model as the 
combination of basic three-dimensional shapes (primitive solids). The basic primitive 
solid set typically includes: Rectangular-prism (Block), Cylinder, Cone, Sphere, and 
Torus (Donut). Two solid objects can be combined into one object in various ways, these 
operations are known as Boolean operations. There are three basic Boolean operations: 
UNION (Join), SUBTRACT (Cut), and INTERSECT. The UNION operation 
combines the two volumes included in the different solids into a single solid. The 
SUBTRACT operation subtracts the volume of one solid object from the other solid 
object. The INTERSECT operation keeps only the volume common to both solid objects. 
The CSG method is also known as the Machinist's Approach, as the method is parallel 
to machine shop practices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNION 
INTERSECT 
SUBTRACT 
SUBTRACT 
Primitive Solids 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  
5-5 
 
Binary Tree 
 
The CSG is also referred to as the method used to store a solid model in the database. The 
resulting solid can be easily represented by what is called a binary tree. In a binary tree, 
the terminal branches (leaves) are the various primitives that are linked together to make 
the final solid object (the root). The binary tree is an effective way to represent the steps 
required to construct the solid model. Complicated solid models can be modeled by 
considering the different combinations of Boolean operations required in the binary tree. 
This provides a convenient and intuitive way of modeling that imitates the manufacturing 
process. A binary tree is an effective way to plan your modeling strategy before you start 
creating anything. 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Leaf 1 
ROOT 
Leaf 2 
Terminal branches 
Result 
Union 

5-6       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
The Guide-Block CSG Binary Tree 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNION 
CUT 
CUT 
CUT 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  
5-7 
 
Starting Up AutoCAD 2000i 
 
1. Select the AutoCAD 2000i option on the Program menu or select the 
AutoCAD 2000i icon on the Desktop.  
 
2. In the AutoCAD Today startup dialog box, select the Create Drawings tab 
with the single click of the left-mouse-button. 
 
3. In the startup dialog box, select the Start from Scratch icon with a single click 
of the left-mouse-button. 
 
4. In the Default Settings section, pick Metric as the drawing units. 
 
5. Close the Drawing1 window by clicking the Close icon 
located at the upper-right-corner of the Drawing1 window. 
 
 
6. Pick Layers in the Object Properties 
toolbar. 
 
 
7. Click the New icon to create a new layer. 
 
8. Create a new layer with the following settings: 
 
Layer  
 
 
Color  
 
LineType 
Solid_Objects  
 
Cyan  
 
Continuous 
 
9. Set layer Solid_Objects as the Current Layer. 
 
10. Click on the OK button to accept the settings and exit the Layer 
Properties Manager dialog box. 
Start from scratch 
Metric 

5-8       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Creating the first 3-D object 
 
1. In the Status Bar area, reset the option buttons so that only POLAR, OSNAP, 
OTRACK, and MODEL are switched ON. 
 
 
2. Move the cursor to the Standard toolbar area and right-click 
on any icon of the Standard toolbar to display a list of toolbar 
menu groups. 
 
 
3. Select Solids, with the left-mouse-button, to display the Solids 
toolbar on the screen. 
 
 
 
The first section of the Solids toolbar contains the basic set of solids available in 
AutoCAD 2000i. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We will first create a 75 x 50 x 15 rectangular block. 
 
 
4. In the Solids toolbar, click on the Box icon. In the command 
prompt area, the message “Specify corner of box or [Ccenter] 
<0,0,0>:” is displayed. 
 
 
 
5. Pick a location that is near the lower-left corner of the graphics window. 
 
6. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify corner or 
[Cube/Length]:” is displayed. Enter: @75,50 [ENTER]. 
 
7. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify Height:” is displayed. 
Enter: 15 [ENTER]. 
 
 
Primitive Solids 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  
5-9 
 
Viewing the 3-D block 
 
 
1. Move the cursor to the Standard toolbar area and right-click 
on any icon of the Standard toolbar to display a list of toolbar 
menu groups. 
 
 
2. Select View, with the left-mouse-button, to display the View 
toolbar on the screen. 
 
 
 
The View toolbar contains two sections of icons that allow us to quickly switch to 
standard 2-D and 3-D views. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. In the View toolbar, click on the SE Isometric View icon.  
 
 
 
 
2-D Views 
3-D Views 

5-10       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Creating the second solid feature 
 
 We will next create a cylinder block as the second solid feature. 
 
1. In the Solids toolbar, click on the Cylinder icon. In the 
command prompt area, the message “Specify center point for 
base cylinder or [Elliptical] <0,0,0>:” is displayed. 
 
2. Inside the graphics window, press down the [SHIFT] key and 
right-mouse-click once to bring up the Object Snap shortcut 
menu. 
 
 
3. Select the Midpoint option in the shortcut menu. Snap to 
and select the midpoint of the left-bottom edge of the 
rectangular block as shown. 
 
4. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify radius 
for base of cylinder or [Diameter]:” is displayed. Snap to 
and select one of the endpoints of the bottom edge of the 
rectangular block. 
 
5. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify height of cylinder or [Center of 
other end]:” is displayed. Enter: 50 [ENTER]. 
 
 
 
 Two solid objects, one rectangular box and one cylinder, are displayed on the screen. 
 
Cylinder aligned to 
the bottom edge of 
the rectangular block 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  5-11 
 
Boolean operation - UNION 
 
1. Move the cursor to the Standard toolbar area and right-
click on any icon of the Standard toolbar to display a list 
of toolbar menu groups. 
 
2. Select Solids Editing, with the left-mouse-button, to 
display the Solids Editing toolbar on the screen. 
 
 
 
The first section of the Solids Editing toolbar contains the basic set of Boolean 
operation icons. 
 
3. In the Solids Editing toolbar, click on the Union icon. In the 
command prompt area, the message “Select Objects:” is displayed. 
 
4. Pick both solids by clicking on their edges. 
 
5. Inside the graphics window, right-mouse-click to accept the selection and 
proceed with the UNION command.  
 
Boolean Operations 
CSG UNION 

5-12       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Creating the second cylinder feature 
 
We will create another cylinder as the next solid feature. 
 
1. In the Solids toolbar, click on the Cylinder icon. In the 
command prompt area, the message “Specify center point for 
base cylinder or [Elliptical] <0,0,0>:” is displayed. 
 
2. Inside the graphics window, press down the [SHIFT] key and 
right-mouse-click once to bring up the Object Snap shortcut 
menu. 
 
3. Select the Center option in the shortcut menu. 
 
4. Snap to and select the center of the circle that is at the top of the solid block. 
 
5. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify radius for base of cylinder 
or [Diameter]:” is displayed. Enter: 15 [ENTER]. 
 
6. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify height of cylinder or 
[Center of other end]:” is displayed. Enter: -60 [ENTER]. 
(The negative value will extrude the cylinder downward, in the negative Z 
direction.) 
 
 
 Two solid objects, the base block and a cylinder, are displayed on the screen. On your 
own, use the FRONT VIEW and TOP VIEW options to confirm the top of the two 
solids are aligned. (Before continuing, restore the view as shown; including the 
Coordinate icon.) 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  5-13 
 
Boolean operation - SUBTRACT 
 
1. In the Solids Editing toolbar, click on the Subtract icon. In the 
command prompt area, the message “_subtract Select solids and 
regions to subtract from .. Select Objects:” is displayed. 
 
2. Pick the base block solid by clicking on one of the straight 
edges. 
 
3. Inside the graphics window, right-mouse-click to accept the selection and 
proceed with the SUBTRACT command. 
 
4. In the command prompt area, the message “ Select solids and regions to 
subtract .. Select Objects:” is displayed. 
 
5. Pick the cylinder block by clicking on one of the circular edges. 
 
6. Inside the graphics window, right-mouse-click to accept the selection and 
proceed with the SUBTRACT command. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSG CUT 

5-14       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Creating another solid feature 
 
As can be seen, the CSG construction approach is quite straightforward. The main task is 
in positioning and aligning the solid blocks prior to applying the Boolean operation.  
 
1. In the Solids toolbar, click on the Cylinder icon. In the 
command prompt area, the message “Specify center point for 
base cylinder or [Elliptical] <0,0,0>:” is displayed. 
 
2. Inside the graphics window, press down the [SHIFT] key and 
right-mouse-click once to bring up the Object Snap shortcut 
menu. 
 
3. Select the From option in the shortcut menu. 
 
4. Snap to the top-front corner of the base block and enter: 
@-30,25 [ENTER]. 
 
 
5. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify radius for base of cylinder 
or [Diameter]:” is displayed. Enter: 10 [ENTER]. 
 
6. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify height of cylinder or 
[Center of other end]:” is displayed. Enter: -30 [ENTER]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. On your own, perform the Boolean SUBTRACT operation. 
Use the top-front 
corner as a reference 
point to position the 
cylinder 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  5-15 
 
Shaded SOLID 
 
1. Move the cursor to the Standard toolbar area and right-click on any icon of 
the Standard toolbar to display a list of toolbar menu groups. 
 
2. Select Shade, with the left-mouse-button, to display the Shade toolbar on the 
screen. 
 
 
 
 
3. In the Shade toolbar, click on the Gouraud Shaded icon. 
This method produces a relatively smooth shaded solid. 
 
On your own, examine the effects of the other Shading 
options. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSG CUT 
Shading options 
3-D Wireframe 
2-D Wireframe 

5-16       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Creating the final feature 
 
We will create a rectangular cut as the final solid feature of the part. In the previous 
sections, with some careful planning, we positioned the solid blocks at the correct space 
locations while we were creating the solids. It is also possible to take a more general 
approach to orient and position solid blocks in space coordinates. 
 
1. In the Solids toolbar, click on the Box icon. In the command prompt 
area, the message “Specify corner of box or [Ccenter] <0,0,0>:” is 
displayed. 
 
2. Snap to and select the top-front corner of the base block. 
 
3. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify corner or 
[Cube/Length]:” is displayed. Enter: @-30,30 [ENTER]. 
 
4. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify Height:” is displayed.  
Enter: 20 [ENTER]. 
 
 
 
Two overlapping solids appear on the screen. We will use the editing tools to orient 
the cutter, the rectangular block, to its correct location.  
 
 
 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  5-17 
 
Rotating the rectangular block 
 
1. In the Solids Editing toolbar, click on the Rotate Faces 
icon. In the command prompt area, the message “Select 
Faces or [Undo/Remove/All]:” is displayed. 
 
2. Select the edges of the rectangular block until all edges 
are highlighted as shown. 
 
 
3. Inside the graphics window, right-
mouse-click and select Enter in 
the popup option menu to proceed 
with the ROTATE command. 
 
4. In the command prompt area, the 
message “Specify an axis point or 
[Axis by object /View /Xaxis /Yaxis 
/Zaxis]<2 points>:” is displayed. 
Inside the graphics window, right-
mouse-click and select Xaxis in 
the popup option menu to proceed 
with the ROTATE command. 
 
5. In the command prompt 
area, the message “Specify the origin of the rotation <0,0,0>:” is displayed. 
Pick the top-front corner of the rectangular block as the rotation origin. 
 
6. In the command prompt 
area, the message 
“Specify a rotation angle 
or [Reference]:” is 
displayed.  
Enter: 90 [ENTER]. 
 
7. Inside the graphics 
window, right-mouse-
click and select Exit in 
the popup menu. 
 
8. Right-mouse-click inside 
the graphics window and 
select Exit to exit the 
ROTATE command. 
 
9.  

5-18       AutoCAD® 2000i Tutorial 
 
 
Moving the Rectangular Block 
 
1. Pre-select the rectangular block by left-clicking on any edge of the block. 
 
2. Inside the graphics window, right-mouse-click and select Move in the popup 
menu. In the command prompt area, the message “Specify base point or 
displacement:” is displayed.  
 
3. Snap to and select the top-front corner of the rectangular block as the 
reference point. 
 
4. In the command prompt area, the 
message “Specify second point of 
displacement or <use first point as 
displacement>:” is displayed. 
Enter: @0,15,-20 [ENTER]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dynamic rotation – 3D orbit 
 
1. Click on the 3D Orbit icon in the Standard toolbar. 
 
 
 
 
 
The 3D-Orbit view displays an arcball, 
which is a circle, divided into four 
quadrants by smaller circles. 3D-Orbit 
enables us to manipulate the view of 
3D objects by clicking and dragging 
with the left-mouse-button.  
 
2. Inside the arcball, press down the 
left-mouse-button and drag it up 
and down to rotate about the screen 
X-axis. 
 

 
                                                                            Solid Modeling - Constructive Solid Geometry  5-19 
 
3. Move the cursor to different location on the screen, outside the arcball or on 
one of the four small circles, and experiment with the real-time dynamic 
rotation feature of the 3D-ORBIT command. 
 
4. On your own, perform the SUBTRACT BOOLEAN operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Throughout this text, various CAD techniques have been presented. Mastering these 
techniques will enable you to be effective and productive in creating CAD designs. In 
many instances, only a single approach to the construction tasks was presented; you are 
encouraged to repeat any of the lessons and develop different ways of thinking in 
accomplishing the same tasks. We have only covered the fundamentals of AutoCAD's 
functionality. The more time you spend using the system, the easier it will be to perform 
Computer Aided Design with AutoCAD 2000i. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CSG CUT 

