THEORY OF THREE LEVELS OF JUDGMENT
In the theory of three levels of judgment, there are (you guessed it) three levels of judgment which 
taken together form a case.
The basic idea is that the uppermost level, level 2 (L2), is a judgment about what the case is really 
about. For example:  “this deal is satisfactory,” “the dark bathroom tiles are the best,” “it’s safe to surf 
this beach,” are contrived examples.
The middle level, level 1 (L1), is composed of one or more judgments about the major subjects which 
serve as grounds for the L2 judgment. If the L2 judgment happened to be “this deal is satisfactory,” 
perhaps the L1 judgments are “the interest rate is great” and “the payment schedule is fine.”
The lowest level, level 0 (L0), is composed of judgments about features or major subcomponents of an 
L1 judgment. Perhaps if the L1 judgment is “the interest rate is great” as above. In a simple case the 
directly subordinate (and immediately subsequent) L0 judgment could be “the interest rate is the prime 
rate.” 
So there is a simple hierarchy appearing in the case. The judgments are given in sequence to the engine 
within a single case. For example:
L2 judgment about the case
L1 judgment about a subject serving as grounds for the judgment about the case
L0 judgment about a feature or major part of the preceding subject
L0… {repeat}
L1 judgment about a subject serving as grounds for the judgment about the case
L0 judgment about a feature or major part of the preceding subject
L0 judgment about a feature or major part of the preceding subject
L0 judgment about a feature or major part of the preceding subject
L0 … {repeat}
L1 
{repeat as above…}
The L2 judgment is what the case is really about, L1 judgments are judgments about the major, crucial 
subjects supporting the L2, and L0 judgments are about features or major subcomponents of L1s.
In the simplest case, only an L1 and L0 are required (bare minimum case). In this case there is only a 
judgment about a single subject.
An L2 must have at least one subsequent and subordinate L1, and an L1 must have at least one 
subsequent and subordinate L0.
The metaphysics of this structure warrants some consideration. The basic intuition is that L0 judgments
should be (close to) objective judgments about what appears in reality, about what is ideally 
confirmable by the senses and typically everybody would agree on. That is why only the L0 judgment 
can include terms relating to appearance.
Get yourself a cup of coffee or favorite beverage and philosophize about this structure for a little while.

L0 is a confirmable judgment about reality taken as true. It is taken as an objective judgment, which 
implies that everybody should agree about it. If an L0 judgment is “the waves are on average four feet 
high” we should all agree. L1 has an subjective component. Are such waves the right condition for 
surfing? Maybe. Maybe not. Maybe it depends on experience and preference. But the point is that the 
L1 is a judgment based upon the L0.  Suppose the L2 judgment, what the case is about, is “it’s safe to 
surf this beach.”
The L1 and L2 judgments are not expected to be strictly objective. A main goal of the engine is to learn
“concepts” from the training cases to be applied to new, novel cases at the L1 and L2 levels, thus 
retaining a degree of subjectivity.
Naturally you might be wondering: what happens if I want to reuse the content of some case in a 
different variation, or perhaps use the case within some hierarchy, or use the case as a part of a more 
expansive sequence of cases? This would seem to be a problem if we only have three levels. At this 
point, the engine cannot form new cases by merging prior or concurrent cases, however the three-level-
judgment structure will support this eventually:  L0 appearance terms are rolled up the heirarchy to L1 
and L2 judgments in the present code, so it is a matter of extracting from some prior case a relevant L1 
or L2 judgment and inserting it into a new case – but rebranding and reusing an L1 or L2 judgment(s) 
as a new L0 judgment(s) in a new case. The system is still grounded because initial L0 judgments with 
appearance are de facto grounding judgments (assuming truth maintenance and sensation updating are 
also built). 
In the above fashion cases can be eventually combined. This general scheme captures some of the 
structure of cognition in that an “idea” could be seen as an entity which transitions by adding and 
merging cases as new sensations and goals become available. An “idea” does not need to be static but 
rather an assemblage of dynamic cases at any time yielding a single judgment as a focal point, 
consistent with the structure I envision in my book “Approximation Zero” (available under the 
documentation page), an “idea” being defined as a single integrated totality of cases (L0/L1/L2).
With only three levels and a lot of variations and a lot of data and a lot of merging much can be said 
about reality. Not everything, perhaps, but a lot. Concepts and ideas emerge. For now, though, the 
engine is limited to a single case at a time in the present (although it does use the entire stock of data to 
learn).
Copyright 2023 Michael Archbold

