

 
Libra Shrugged

Also by David Gerard
Attack of  the 50 Foot Blockchain: Bitcoin, Blockchain, Ethereum 
and Smart Contracts

Libra Shrugged
How Facebook Tried
to Take Over
the Money
David Gerard

 
Copyright © 2020 David Gerard. All rights reserved. No part of  this 
book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic  or  mechanical,  including  photocopying,  recording,  or  by  any 
information storage and retrieval system without the written permission of 
the author, except where permitted by law.
 
Commercial  trademarks  are  named  and  depicted  in  this  book  for 
nominative  use  for  criticism,  reporting  and  commentary  in  the  public 
interest, under 15 U.S.C. § 1125(c)(3) in the United States and similar laws 
elsewhere.  This  usage is  not  intended  to  indicate  endorsement  by  the 
trademark holders.
 
First edition, November 2020
ISBN: 9798693053977 (print)
 
Book site: www.davidgerard.co.uk/blockchain/libra/
Contact the author: dgerard@gmail.com
 
Art and design: Alli Kirkham www.punkpuns.com/author
1    2    3    4

Contents
Introduction: Taking over the money
7
Chapter 1: A user’s guide to Libra
9
Chapter 2: The genesis of Libra: Beller’s blockchain
15
Chapter 3: To launch a Libra: Let’s start a crypto
19
Chapter 4: Bitcoin: why Libra is like this
25
Chapter 5: The Libra White Papers
33
Chapter 6: Banking the unbanked
43
Chapter 7: The Libra Reserve plan and economic stability
49
Chapter 8: Libra, privacy and your digital identity
61
Chapter 9: The regulators recoil in horror
67
Chapter 10: David Marcus before the US House and Senate
77
Chapter 11: July to September 2019: Libra runs the gauntlet
95
Chapter 12: October 2019: Libra’s bad month
101
Chapter 13: Mark Zuckerberg before the US House
111
Chapter 14: November 2019: The comedown
123
Chapter 15: Central bank digital currencies
129
Epilogue: Libra 2.0: not dead yet
141
Appendix: 2010–2013: The rise and fall of Facebook Credits
149
Acknowledgements
155
About the author
157
Index
161
Notes
167


7
 
Introduction: Taking over the money
Facebook was the biggest social network in history. A stupendous, 
world-shaping success, with around two billion individual users across 
Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp.
Facebook  and  Google overwhelmingly  dominated  Internet 
advertising. Facebook made $50 billion from advertising in 2018 — 
$25 on average for each user, and $112 per North American user.1
But  no  platform  is  forever.  And  governments  were  giving 
Facebook trouble — over personal data abuses, election rigging and 
fake news.
A spending spree in the 2010s hadn’t helped. Facebook  bought 
Instagram in 2012 for $1 billion, Oculus VR in 2014 for $2 billion, 
and WhatsApp in 2014 for $19 billion, but these weren’t paying off 
the way Facebook needed them to. Facebook needed an out.
In 2017, Morgan Beller from Facebook’s corporate development 
team had an idea: Facebook could diversify into finance — with 
something called “blockchain.” She sent the idea upwards.
Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s founder and CEO, looked at Beller’s 
blockchain idea, and wondered: what if  Facebook started its own 
private world currency? Facebook could have so much power that 
governments couldn’t annoy them any more. It would be the Silicon 
Valley dream.
 
Facebook announced Libra in June 2019. Libra would be a new 
global currency and payment system. It would flow instantly around 
the world by phone. It could even provide financial inclusion for 
billions: “banking the unbanked.” All this, just by using a blockchain.
The  details  were  vague,  incomplete  and  contradictory.  The 
currency would be backed by a reserve — but at some point the Libra 
“coins” would become completely decentralised and out of  anyone’s 
control. Libra would somehow bank the unbanked — but there was 
no plan for how this would work. Two billion users meant the reserve 
would be large enough to affect whole countries’ financial systems, 
and knock out small currencies entirely — but nobody involved 
seemed to have noticed. 

8
But Libra would also make Facebook too big to control — and 
lead the way for Facebook’s Silicon Valley fellows to swing the power 
of  their  money  as  they  pleased.  Libra  would  be  impossible  to 
regulate; Facebook and their friends could work around any single 
country’s rules.
And Facebook would become the “digital identity” provider to the 
world. If  you wanted to use money at all, you’d have to go through 
Facebook.
Facebook’s  plan  would  also  happen  to  break  economies 
worldwide. Even the US dollar could be shaken. But, trashing entire 
economies would be a small price for someone else to pay.
Governments looked at Libra, and they saw another 2008 financial 
crisis  in  the  making.  European  governments  responded  within 
minutes, America within hours, telling Facebook that this couldn’t be 
allowed to happen.
Libra was as incompetent as it was arrogant — and the world 
stopped it in its tracks.
 
When  Silicon  Valley  says  “disruption,”  this  means  they  don’t 
understand what they’re doing, don’t care to understand, and have 
only contempt for anyone who objects. “Move fast and break things,” 
as Facebook used to put it.
This time, the governments of the world said “no.”
But how did Libra fail so hard? How did Facebook spend two 
years working on Libra, to then put forward such a bizarre and ill-
considered plan that left every financial regulator who saw it reeling in 
horror?
What was Facebook thinking with Libra? And what happens when 
another company tries the same trick?
Or when Facebook won’t take “no” for an answer — and releases 
the cut-down version that they’re already calling “Libra 2.0”?

9
 
Chapter 1:
A user’s guide to Libra
Facebook wants to do its own payment system, called Libra — 
with its own currency! What does this mean for you? What’s the 
fabulous future that Facebook has planned for you?
None of  this exists yet — and it might never exist. In fact, this is 
the severely cut-down version of  what Facebook really wanted to do. 
But if  everything does all work out as Facebook has described… it’ll 
work a bit like this.
What’s a Libra? What’s it worth?
A Libra is a currency unit in the Libra system. Like dollars, or 
pounds, or euros. Its symbol is  — three wavy lines.
≋
The exchange rate to your local currency isn’t quite fixed — it’s set 
to the average of a “basket” of various other currencies.
If  you’re buying something where the price isn’t listed in Libras, 
what you pay will go up and down from day to day — welcome to the 
currency markets! Get used to doing quick calculations whenever you 
want to buy something.
Or just ignore the Libras, and use your local currency in the Libra 
system — like you would in PayPal.
How do I use Libra?
You have a Libra wallet — an app on your phone that lets you use 
your money — probably from Novi (formerly called Calibra), which 
is Facebook. If  you want to use your local currency (dollars, pounds, 
euros), it’ll work a lot like PayPal — you have money in an account on 
Novi, and you can send money to other Libra users.
If  you want to use the Libra currency, you can buy Libras with 
cash, or sell them for cash. The price will depend on the value of the 
Libra  basket  of  currencies  that  day.  You’ll  need  to  have  your 
government identification on file with Novi.
You can send money or Libras to anyone with a Libra wallet — 
Novi or not — anywhere in the world.

10
You can buy things with Libras — if  they’re for sale with a price 
in Libras.
What about my personal information? This 
is pretty private stuff.
Novi says that it won’t share your data with the main Facebook 
organisation — except in as-yet-undefined circumstances.
Kevin  Weil,  vice  president of  product for  Novi,  says:  “Your 
financial data will never be used to target ads on Facebook.”2
You can definitely trust Facebook on this firm promise! And 
never mind all the times Facebook broke privacy promises previously, 
including their 2019 Federal Trade Commission fine and settlement 
for breaking their previous 2011 settlement over privacy issues.
Libra looks very like Facebook building a massive data-miner on 
top of the entire system of consumer commerce — but they told US 
Congress that this definitely won’t happen with Novi, at least. It’ll be 
fine.
Am I stuck with Facebook and Novi?
There will apparently be other Libra wallet providers — though as 
of  late 2020, no-one else has announced any plans. Facebook apps, 
such as Messenger and WhatsApp, will only be able to use Novi — 
but you’ll be able to send Libras (or dollars or pounds or euros on 
Libra) to and from the other providers, if any ever come along.
Novi promises full data portability — so you can move all your 
Libra money and data to a new provider.3
So I can send money to anyone?
Almost anyone! You have to keep to the anti-money-laundering 
laws you’re under right now.
Sometimes people will send you money or Libras, and Novi will 
freeze the payment. Or you’ll try to send money or Libras, and you’ll 
be told Novi can’t let you pay that person. Or sometimes Novi will 
freeze your account, or suddenly shut it down.
This is just like PayPal does, for the same reasons — which they 
may or may not tell you. All of  this follows directly from the anti-
money-laundering laws — so Novi can’t legally promise you that 
none of this will ever happen.

11
But Novi-to-Novi transfers will almost certainly go through!
Is this a cryptocurrency? Can I get rich 
from this?
Libra is based on cryptocurrency ideas, but it all revolves around 
“stablecoins” — digital currencies that try to keep a fixed value. The 
Libra  currency  unit  is  not  intended  to  be  an  investment  or  a 
speculative gamble, like buying bitcoins and hoping they’ll go up in 
price, or foreign exchange trading. (It might turn out to be one in 
practice.)
The ordinary currencies on Libra will always be exchangeable at 
$1 on Libra = $1 cash, £1 on Libra =£1 cash, and so on. The price 
of  the Libra currency itself is calculated from the national currencies 
to be as stable as possible, even if  they change price against each 
other.
What’s a cryptocurrency, anyway? Do I 
care?
Probably not. From your perspective, the stuff on Libra is money, 
and you can spend it on things — the same way you can spend 
Amazon gift voucher dollars, or loyalty points at supermarkets.
Novi says they’ll keep track of  things for you — they’re doing a 
“custodial wallet,” which would work a lot like having money in an 
account at PayPal. Novi will have customer support if  you lose your 
phone or your password, or if you get scammed.4
This isn’t the usual case with cryptocurrencies. With Bitcoin and 
so on, if  someone picks your pocket from the other side of  the 
world, those are their coins now — getting your coins back is tedious 
and unlikely.
You can use a different custodial wallet for your money on Libra, 
which will be under much the same rules as Novi.
Some  crypto* fans  like  to  live  dangerously  and  keep  the 
cryptographic keys to their crypto-coins themselves, like keeping your 
savings in a sock under your mattress — all the control, all the risk, 
and they might have trouble sending money on Libra to or from the 
*
Cryptographers get understandably annoyed when “cryptocurrency” is 
shortened to “crypto.” Sadly, it’s standard finance jargon now.

12
Novi system — but the financial regulators absolutely won’t be letting 
that happen with Libra in the foreseeable future.
How does any of  this make my life better? 
Why should I sign up?
Libra promises a fabulously efficient financial future — “paying 
bills with the push of a button, buying a cup of  coffee with the scan 
of  a code or riding your local public transit without needing to carry 
cash or a metro pass.”5 Imagine if you could do all of that!
If  you’re in Europe or Asia rather than the United States, you’ve 
had all of that for the past decade or so with the card or phone that’s 
already in your pocket — without a weird “basket” currency in the 
way.
A lot of the problems that Facebook claims Libra solves are really 
just US retail banking being a few decades behind the rest of  the 
world — sending money between banks can take days, everything has 
fees, so many things need a phone call, paper checks are still a thing, 
and so on. But it’s standard in Silicon Valley to propose an all-
encompassing international system, and base it entirely on looking 
out your window in Palo Alto.
Various commentators have come up with ideas on how Facebook 
could  make  Libra  more  tempting  as  a  product  —  promotions, 
discounts and so on — but none of  these have been suggested by 
Facebook itself.
The  important  use  cases  that  Facebook  and  Libra  have  put 
forward  are  sending  money  internationally,  and  giving  access  to 
finance to billions of  people who don’t have it yet — “banking the 
unbanked.” They’ve also suggested that more commerce in general 
will mean Facebook might be able to sell ads for higher prices. 
They’re not at all clear on the tricky details for any of these.
In the meantime, Libra will be a sort of PayPal, but on Facebook. 
Maybe that’ll be useful to you.
What’s the point of  all this?
There’s the obvious motivation where Facebook gets to see all 
your spending data. But why are they doing it like this? Why’s there a 
new currency in there? Why’s there a “blockchain?”
This PayPal-but-it’s-Facebook system is Libra’s fallback position 
from what they originally wanted to build — which was a much 

13
weirder system, based on some wild ideas they got from Bitcoin and 
the other cryptocurrencies.
None of  these ideas would work at scale, and everything would 
break. This is what got governments around the world so upset at 
Libra, so quickly.
So why did anyone think this was a good idea?

14

15
 
Chapter 2:
The genesis of  Libra:
Beller’s blockchain
One day in mid-2017,  Morgan Beller, who had recently joined 
Facebook’s corporate development team, proposed to her supervisor 
that she start looking into how Facebook could get into blockchains 
and cryptocurrencies.
Beller  had  worked  on  Andreessen  Horowitz’s  cryptocurrency 
venture capital fund. She was increasingly sure that a “seismic” shift 
was coming to finance.6 The price of  Bitcoin was rising dizzily at the 
time — around $3,000 a bitcoin, up from just $750 in January — and 
“blockchain” was the hot buzzword.
Beller  went  out  into  the  blockchain  world,  met  with 
cryptocurrency people, and asked venture capitalists questions like: 
“If  you had a platform of  over two billion users, how would you go 
about trying to integrate blockchain technology into the platform?”7
 
Morgan Beller had grown up on Long Island, the daughter of 
corporate operations executive and consultant  Michael Beller. She 
studied at Cornell University from 2010 to 2013, graduating with a 
Bachelor of Science degree in statistical informatics.
At Cornell, Beller was part of  the  Alpha Kappa Psi business 
fraternity. She co-founded the  PopShop, a collaborative space for 
student entrepreneurs. She credits her “passion for venture capital” to 
her experience volunteering at TechCrunch Disrupt in 2011 — “That 
was my first exposure to the tech world, and I became completely 
intoxicated.”8
After  Cornell,  Beller  worked  at  eBay  for  three  months  as  a 
product  manager,  then  joined  venture  capital  firm  Andreessen 
Horowitz (“a16z”), getting involved in Andreessen’s cryptocurrency 
fund — which got her interested in the Bitcoin and blockchain world. 
“Crypto is a mental virus for which there is no cure. I was at a16z 
when they got infected with the crypto virus.”9
Beller joined blogging platform Medium in April 2016, in strategy 
and corporate development. She moved to Facebook in May 2017, 
where she started working on blockchains.

16
Beller wrote a memo to persuade Facebook executives that they 
had an opportunity to be leaders on this new platform — or risk 
being disrupted by it. She won over David Marcus, the Vice President 
of  Messaging Products (Facebook Messenger) — who happened to 
be an early Bitcoin fan.
Marcus  takes credit for the idea of  Facebook doing its own 
cryptocurrency: “I’m guilty,” he told reporters in October 2019.10 
Marcus had been thinking about something like Libra for several 
years.
 
David Marcus was born in France in 1973 and grew up in Geneva 
in Switzerland.11 He studied economics at the University of  Geneva, 
before dropping out to work at a bank to support his family.12 But he 
really wanted to go into business for himself. He founded his first 
company, GTN Telecom, in 1996.
His  mobile  phone  payments  company  Zong was  bought  by 
PayPal, which was then owned by eBay, in 2011. John Donahoe, CEO 
of  eBay, made Marcus the president of  PayPal in March 2012 — for 
his “founder’s perspective” and “start-up energy.”13
Marcus  revamped  PayPal’s  engineering  team,  and  oversaw 
acquisitions such as  Venmo. He sent out memos calling for more 
enthusiasm for the company’s products — “It’s been brought to my 
attention that when testing paying with mobile at Cafe 17 last week, 
some of  you refused to install the PayPal app (!!?!?!!), and others 
didn’t even remember their PayPal password” — and noting how 
“employees in other offices hack into Coke machines to make them 
accept  PayPal  because  they  feel  passionately  about  using  PayPal 
everywhere. I don’t see these behaviors here in San Jose.”14
In late 2012, Argentina ordered PayPal to cut off  direct payments 
between Argentinians. Marcus saw the price of  Bitcoin rise as the 
new rule went into effect — and he wondered if  Argentinians were 
buying bitcoins instead. He set up an account at Mt. Gox, the biggest 
Bitcoin exchange at the time, and started buying bitcoins himself.15
By March 2013, Marcus had set up a group inside PayPal to see 
how the company might harness Bitcoin or blockchains — though 
Bitcoin’s price volatility, and worries about regulation, made PayPal 
think that adding Bitcoin wasn’t a great idea yet. PayPal did continue 
to consider integrating Bitcoin into its products.
Marcus also attended the Bitcoin Foundation’s first conference, in 
May 2013 — though he turned his name badge around, so that 
people wouldn’t realise the president of  PayPal was there. He was 

17
appalled by the naïveté of  the Bitcoin companies, and their lack of 
understanding of money-laundering laws and basic compliance issues.
Marcus met with  Mark Zuckerberg of  Facebook for dinner in 
2014, expecting to discuss a business deal with PayPal — and was 
surprised to be offered a job at Facebook, running Messenger. He 
started at Facebook soon after. He wrote on LinkedIn at the time, “I 
realized that my role was becoming a real management one, vs. my 
passion  of  building  products  that  hopefully  matter  to  a  lot  of 
people.”16
 
Marcus brought the cryptocurrency idea to Zuckerberg in late 
2017,  and  they  talked  about  their  frustrations  with  present-day 
payment systems. Both Marcus and Zuckerberg thought a blockchain-
based  cryptocurrency  might  let  Facebook  work  around  banking 
system  middlemen  —  and  the  fees  and  delays  involved  in  the 
regulated environment.
Marcus  felt that  PayPal  had capitulated to  regulators.  With  a 
cryptocurrency, Facebook could realise the libertarian dream of  pure 
and borderless Internet money — freed from fragmented rules and 
markets.17
Zuckerberg  started  reading  up  on  blockchains  and 
cryptocurrencies. In his “personal challenges” blog post of 4 January 
2018, he wrote:18
There  are  important  counter-trends  to  this  —  like 
encryption and cryptocurrency — that take power from 
centralized systems and put it back into people’s hands. 
But they come with the risk of  being harder to control. 
I’m interested to go deeper and study the positive and 
negative aspects of  these technologies, and how best to 
use them in our services.
On 8 May 2018, Marcus announced that he was leaving Facebook 
Messenger  to  lead  a  team  dedicated  to  “exploring  blockchain 
technology”19 20 — and to put some executive muscle behind Beller’s 
ideas.

18

19
 
Chapter 3:
To launch a Libra:
Let’s start a crypto
On 11 May 2018, news site Cheddar revealed that Facebook’s 
blockchain  group  was  looking  into  a  cryptocurrency  for  the 
company’s billions of users. “‘They are very serious about it,’ said one 
of  the  people,  who  asked  not  to  be  identified  discussing 
unannounced plans.” This was the first public news that Facebook 
was planning a cryptocurrency.21
Around the end of  2018, the Facebook blockchain unit even 
suggested using the Facebook cryptocurrency for money transfer on 
WhatsApp in India.22 
(Indian regulators demanded that all personal data be held locally, 
and not sent back to California for processing — which Facebook 
didn’t agree to until August 2019.23 The version of  WhatsApp Pay 
that finally went live in India was a front-end to India’s Unified 
Payments Interface — just like Google Pay in India — and just used 
rupees.)
The  blockchain  unit  started  hiring  more  staff  —  especially 
researchers, cryptographers and academics. Marcus also took on ex-
PayPal executives.24 The unit had 32 staff  by the beginning of  2019. 
Morale was slipping — they weren’t sure if the project would ever go 
live. But Mark Zuckerberg finally gave the green light in January.25
By  February  2019,  Facebook  was  talking  to  cryptocurrency 
exchanges about selling their new crypto-coin — which would not 
float in value like Bitcoin, but would instead be a “stablecoin,” its 
value pegged to a basket of conventional currencies.26
Collecting friends
The blockchain unit considered that Facebook shouldn’t try to do 
a new currency on its own. They started looking for partners for the 
project, to form a Libra Association.
Companies needed to be of  a particular minimum size (e.g., $1 
billion in market value, or a reach of  greater than 20 million users), 
and nonprofits needed a five-year track record. If  you wanted to run 
a processing node on the Libra blockchain network, you’d need to put 

20
up $10 million — though, contrary to early reports, nobody had to 
put in the $10 million at the time of the public announcement.27
Facebook didn’t look very far to find Libra Association members. 
Most were closely associated with David Marcus and Facebook — 
they shared board members with Facebook, had significant investors 
in common, or employed former Facebook executives. One academic 
called it “a club run by like-minded, interconnected elites interested in 
power and profit.” Another called it “a façade of  decentralisation,” 
and thought it likely the members would collude.28 29
Facebook promised partners that it would relinquish control of 
Libra once it was up and running.25 Venture capitalists  Andreessen 
Horowitz, Morgan Beller’s previous employers, were quite clear that 
Libra would not just be Facebook’s show: “One of the key factors in 
our decision to join was that we would in fact have — and all 
members would have — an equal vote,” said general partner Kathryn 
Haun.30
News gets out
The blockchain unit was trying hard to keep its work confidential, 
even from the rest of  Facebook — but details were leaking all over 
the  press,  as  Facebook  staff  met  with  potential  partners  in  the 
venture. David Marcus decided that they would launch the project — 
even though neither their plan nor their software were fully worked 
out as yet.
The internal code name in 2019 was “Libra.” Facebook decided 
they wanted this to be the production name — so, on 20 April, 
Facebook bought the US trademark for “Libra” from an existing 
company, Libra Services, Inc., who made tax and accounting software 
for cryptocurrency companies. (That company changed its name to 
“Lukka.”31)
On  2  May  2019,  Facebook  registered  Libra  Networks  in 
Switzerland,  “to  provide  financial  and  technology  services  and 
develop related hardware and software.” This was the first public use 
of the name.
On the same day, the Wall Street Journal reported that Facebook’s 
year-old cryptocurrency project was called Libra, and that they were 
“recruiting  dozens  of  financial  firms  and  online  merchants”  for 
investments of  about $1 billion to serve as the backing reserve that 
would stabilise the currency — though Facebook wouldn’t comment, 
saying only that they were “exploring many different applications.”32

21
Surely not a cryptocurrency?
Nobody could understand why Facebook would do their new 
payment  system  as  a  blockchain.  A  free-floating  cryptocurrency 
would go up and down in value compared to the user’s own currency 
— normal people wouldn’t put up with “money” that was going up 
and down all the time.
A “permissioned”  blockchain — where someone runs it  and 
controls  who  can  use  it  —  is  just  a  slow  distributed  database. 
Companies only do these so they can use the buzzword “blockchain” 
in their press release.
A “permissionless” cryptocurrency like Bitcoin is built to be out 
of  anyone’s  control,  wastes  incredible  amounts  of  electricity  — 
Bitcoin uses about as much power as all of Austria43 — and would be 
a completely silly idea for a company to develop as an investment, 
unless they were maintaining control by other means.
Money transmission has very strict regulation — and Bitcoin and 
its  many  descendants  were  created  specifically  to  work  around 
government rules.
There was a plausible business in payments — something like 
PayPal, but run by Facebook — because this had worked really well 
for the WeChat messaging network in China. This would even give 
Facebook large amounts of data on its users’ spending habits, so they 
could sell even more finely targeted advertising.
In fact, Facebook already had a payments system — Messenger 
Payments, which had been running in the US since 2015.
What would a cryptocurrency let a regulated company do that a 
company like PayPal didn’t do already? Nothing that anyone could 
think of.
The Libra Association assembles
By the June 2019 announcement, Facebook had gathered twenty-
seven other companies to the Libra Association.
Facebook asked some of  the partner companies to co-sign the 
Libra white papers that Facebook had written — though many of 
them weren’t yet clear on how the coin would work, or what their 
roles would be.33
No cryptocurrency news sites were invited to the pre-launch press 
conferences — so instead, via multiple helpful leakers, crypto site The 
Block  was  first  in  the  world  to  publish  the  full  list  of  Libra 

22
Association members, on Saturday 15 June.34 The Block also got a 
copy of  Libra’s official announcement, due to go out the following 
Tuesday.
The initial partners were:
•
Payments: Mastercard, Mercado Pago, PayPal, PayU, Stripe, 
Visa
•
Technology  and  marketplaces:
 Booking  Holdings 
(booking.com, Priceline), eBay, Calibra (Facebook), Farfetch 
(fashion), Lyft (minicabs), Spotify (music), Uber (minicabs)
•
Telecommunications: Iliad, Vodafone Group
•
Blockchain:  Anchorage (crypto-asset custody),  BisonTrails 
(blockchain platform),  Coinbase (cryptocurrency exchange), 
Xapo (crypto-asset custody)
•
Venture  capital:  Andreessen  Horowitz,  Breakthrough 
Initiatives,  Creative Destruction Lab,  Ribbit Capital,  Thrive 
Capital, Union Square Ventures
•
Nonprofit: Kiva, Mercy Corps, Women’s World Banking
Apart from payment companies, every member of  note was a 
blockchain company, a venture capital firm, a company running at a 
loss to acquire customers, or a nonprofit.
The absences were noteworthy — no Apple Pay, no Google Pay, 
no Amazon, no Microsoft … and no banks.
David  Marcus  told  the  Financial  Times  that  he  wanted  to 
“absolutely and strongly deny the fact that we’ve approached banks 
and banks have said no.” Banks said otherwise — ING confirmed to 
the paper that they had rejected an approach to join.
Facebook had also approached Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan Chase 
and Fidelity Investments, all of  whom declined — even as Fidelity 
had been getting into crypto. “The challenge with cryptocurrencies is 
the opaqueness as to the sources of the money,” said Mike Corbat of 
Citigroup,  even  as  he  called  himself  a  “true  believer”  in 
cryptocurrencies.
Bank executives who had been approached by Facebook worried 
about regulation and practicality — “We see hurdles to scale, we see 
hurdles to adoption, we see enough of  this to decide that we would 
not participate in a scheme like this.”35
One  banker  said  Facebook’s  fundamental  error  had  been  to 
announce their plan without bringing regulators onside first of  all — 
which no sensible financial institution would have done.36 If  Libra 
didn’t  fully  address  regulators’  fears  on  money-laundering,  banks 

23
might have had to drop Facebook itself  as a customer. (Unbanking 
the banked.)37
PayPal had only been approached a few weeks before the Libra 
announcement. The  PayPal38 and  Visa39 press releases both spoke 
very positively about Libra, but conspicuously failed to commit to any 
specific actions.
Mastercard, one of  the last companies to sign up, said later that 
the $10 million ante was smaller than some of  their sponsorship 
deals.40 Their press statement didn’t even use the word “Libra.” Other 
members declined to send out a press release or speak to the media 
about Libra.
Several companies told the New York Times in June that they only 
signed up because they weren’t obliged to do anything — to promote 
Libra, to use Libra or to pay money into the Association — and could 
back  out  later.  They  were  already  hesitant  to  get  too  close  to 
Facebook and its controversies — and how it had mistreated its 
partners in the past.41
The announcement
Facebook unveiled Libra in an embargoed press preview at the old 
San Francisco Mint building on 11 June 2019. Select members of the 
UK press were invited to a further press conference on Saturday 15 
June.
Journalists at the Saturday press conference asked directly why 
Facebook’s project used a cryptocurrency — what that got them over 
not doing it as a cryptocurrency — and couldn’t get a sensible answer.
David Marcus held a further press conference on Monday 17 June. 
He told how Mark Zuckerberg was interested in the project and the 
ideas — “A high quality medium of  exchange for the world, on a 
blockchain that could scale.”
The  big  moment  was  Tuesday  18 June at  07:00 UTC  —  at 
midnight in California, 3AM in New York and 8AM in London, the full 
documents were put up on the libra.org website, newspapers released 
their analyses, and the world dived into the details.
Within  hours of  Facebook’s announcement, governments  and 
financial regulators worldwide were calling for Libra to be halted 
immediately.

24

25
 
Chapter 4:
Bitcoin: why Libra is like this
In truth, the gold standard is already a barbarous relic.
— John Maynard Keynes42
Libra is an attempt by Facebook to set up a private currency. But a 
huge amount of  the fuss around Libra was that it would be a 
“blockchain” or a “cryptocurrency.” Like that “Bitcoin” thing that 
was  big  a  few  years  ago.  Business  revolution,  and  magical  free 
Internet money, maybe!
Libra’s connection to blockchains is partly the technology — but 
it’s  mostly  the  ideas.  Libra  lifts  heavily  from  Bitcoin.  Everyone 
involved was a massive Bitcoin fan.
Every question Bitcoin and blockchain ask is a human problem — 
and the standard tech company answer is to use computer programs 
to do an end-run around the human element. (And especially around 
the regulatory element.) This always ends as badly as you’d expect — 
and that’s how Libra crashed and burned.
So — what’s a blockchain, anyway?
What is a blockchain?
Technically, a blockchain is simple. It’s an append-only ledger 
(using a data structure called a Merkle tree) — like an account book 
where you can only add new entries, not alter or remove old ones — 
and some mechanism to decide who adds the next entry. You can 
distribute copies of  the ledger, and anyone receiving one can check 
they have a good copy.
That’s it. That’s the whole thing.* Blockchains are really simple — 
and when normal people find out what a blockchain actually is, they 
go: “What? That’s not magical at all. How do they get all of  the 
nonsense I’ve read out of that?”
*
There are systems that are marketed as “blockchain” and claim all sorts of near-
magical properties of blockchains — but might have just the append-only 
ledger, or not even that. Or systems that claim the magic of “blockchain,” but 
just use a blockchain-like system as a back-end data store — most IBM press 
releases about “blockchain” are like this. But “append-only ledger with a 
consensus mechanism” is a reasonable working definition.

26
The weird hype and apocalyptic claims come from Bitcoin — the 
digital money that was the 2008 origin of the blockchain as we know it.
Digital cash
Digital cash is an obviously useful idea — something that works 
like notes and coins, but you can pass it around by computer, and 
over the Internet.
A common way to do this now is that you have a card — or 
maybe an app on your phone — that’s attached to your bank account. 
Wave the card or phone, you’ve bought your morning coffee.
So who gets to process transactions, and make sure that nobody 
spends their money twice? The solution the world has mostly come 
to is to  use a system run by banks and money transmitters — 
centralised entities, heavily regulated by law.
But this wasn’t good enough for the people who became Bitcoin 
fans — they wanted a payment system with no central controller at 
all.
How Bitcoin works
Bitcoin was invented in 2008 by a programmer calling himself 
Satoshi Nakamoto. He described  Bitcoin as a payment system — 
“electronic peer-to-peer cash.”
Bitcoin  has a public blockchain.  Anyone can look at it. The 
Bitcoin blockchain includes every Bitcoin transaction since Bitcoin 
was launched in January 2009.
When you “have” a Bitcoin, you have the key to a particular 
Bitcoin address on the public Bitcoin blockchain — like a password. 
If  you lose the key, you’ve lost your coins. Other cryptocurrencies 
work the same way.
The problem was: how to add new transactions to the ledger, 
without  a central controller who could be told what to do by a 
government. Governments were the original threat model for Bitcoin.
What Bitcoin does is run a computerised lottery, in a process 
called “mining.” Bitcoin miners guess a number. They take their 
guess, they combine it with a block of transactions that are waiting to 
be processed, and they do a simple calculation on them. If  the 
calculation gives a small enough number, the miner wins six-and-a-
quarter fresh new bitcoins! And their block of  transactions is added 
to the public blockchain.

27
The more guesses you make, the better your chances. In June 2020, 
Bitcoin miners were making 100 quintillion guesses every second. This 
used as much electricity as all of  Austria.43 This is called “proof-of-
work” — though it might better be termed “proof-of-waste.”
Blocks come out approximately every ten minutes. If  miners win 
coins too often, the difficulty goes up, to slow the system down — so 
the miners have to add more computers to compete. This results in 
spiraling electricity use — Bitcoin is, literally, anti-efficient.
The point of  all this waste is to secure the blockchain — the 
threat model  is  that  nobody  can change  the blockchain  without 
wasting at least as much electricity.
The Bitcoin mining system is incredibly slow, and very hard to 
scale up. Bitcoin now consumes between 0.1% and 0.5% of  all the 
electricity in the world — for the same seven transactions per second, 
worldwide, that it could do in 2009, when it was just running on 
Nakamoto’s desktop PC. Bitcoin is the most inefficient payment 
network in human history.
Bitcoin filled its tiny transaction capacity and clogged in mid-2015 
— making transactions slow, unreliable and expensive ever since. As a 
payment system, Bitcoin can only work as a toy proof-of-concept.
So why did anyone think this was a good idea?
The Bitcoin ideology
Bitcoin wasn’t really created to be a new payment system. Bitcoin 
was a political project to make money that worked in a certain way — 
to enforce a particular ideology.
Bitcoin  is  based  on  ideas  from  a  particular  subculture  of 
cryptographers, the “cypherpunks” of  the 1990s, who were into the 
“anarcho-capitalism”  of  heterodox  American  economist  Murray 
Rothbard and the Austrian School of economics.44
The  key  concept  is  extremist  libertarianism.  Not  just  less 
regulation, and more freedoms for business — but no regulations, and 
total freedom for business. Somehow, complicated social property 
rights would still exist without any government.
The  cypherpunks  wouldn’t  tolerate  even  the  possibility  of 
governments interfering in their money — or being able to reach into 
their bank accounts. So Nakamoto used an append-only Merkle tree 
ledger to make transactions irreversible. No authority could take your 
coins without the cryptographic key to those coins — or stop you 
sending your coins anywhere you liked.

28
The  original  purpose  of  cryptocurrency  was  to  evade  all 
government control or regulation. This was the key design constraint.
Bitcoin had a limited supply, like a gold standard — you can’t just 
“print money.” Bitcoin’s advocates also didn’t like credit, which was a 
major cause of  the financial crisis of  2008 — they thought the actual 
digital “gold” itself  should always be used as money. This would 
enforce financial discipline. (Of course, people started lending bitcoins 
and extending credit as soon as this became a thing you could do.)
“Gold standard” is a common phrase meaning that something is 
good and trustworthy — but the actual gold standard, which started 
in the 1790s, didn’t work well at all. Gold standard economies went 
through manic boom-and-bust cycles and financial crises. Countries 
came out of  the Great Depression of the 1930s as they moved off a 
rigid gold standard, and the last traces of  the gold standard were 
abandoned in 1971. Real economies need credit and monetary policy 
for any sort of  stability. Bitcoiners think that this is incorrect and 
immoral, and that bad ideas that didn’t work before will surely work 
again if they’re programmed well enough.
Of  course, the most common pitch for Bitcoin is much simpler: 
you might get rich for free. People will say and do any ridiculous thing 
if  they might get rich for free. The one really consistent ideology in 
Bitcoin is: “number go up.”
The fabulous promises of  Bitcoin!
The first bitcoiners tended to be quite clever in the manner of 
engineers — what they didn’t understand about economics, they were 
confident would just be a simple matter of  programming. Actual 
bankers  and  mainstream  economists  said  Bitcoin  ideas  were 
completely wrong and silly — so obviously those must have been 
fake disciplines.
Bitcoin became a study in how to reinvent the entire financial 
system from scratch — badly.
Bitcoin comes with a string of  promises. It’s totally decentralised! 
You don’t have to trust anyone, so it’s immune to bad actors! Bitcoin 
will  get  rid  of  middlemen!  Money  can  flow  instantly  and 
internationally, for free!
Bitcoin doesn’t realise any of these in practice, but the fans are still 
sure it does, or will, or could. As long as the price might go up.
Decentralised systems always tend to centralise, because that’s 
more cost-effective. Bitcoin mining has economies of  scale — so by 

29
early 2014, it had centralised. By July 2014, one entity controlled over 
50% of  all bitcoin mining. By 2015, the controllers of  90% of 
Bitcoin mining stood together on a single conference stage.45
Bitcoin is famously plagued by scams — because transactions are 
irreversible. All frauds, hacks, and fat-finger fumbles are final. If  I 
pick your pocket from the other side of  the world, those are my 
bitcoins now.
Bitcoin wasn’t used much until you could reliably exchange it for 
actual money, in early 2011. This led to an elaborate structure of 
middlemen — like the existing world of  finance, but incompetent. 
You can access the Bitcoin blockchain directly — but in practice, 
almost everyone keeps their bitcoins on an exchange.
Bitcoin’s uncensorability made it a favourite for criminals. The first 
real use case for Bitcoin was the  Silk Road darknet drug market. 
Bitcoiners  questioned  whether  this  was  even  a  crime,  morally 
speaking — though the authorities didn’t see it that way. It turned out 
that registering your crimes on a permanent public ledger of  all 
transactions wasn’t a good idea.
Transactions on the Bitcoin blockchain clogged in mid-2015, and 
have been slow and expensive since. Transaction fees peaked at an 
average of around $55 in December 2017.
There are various proposed “layer two” fixes for the Bitcoin 
transaction clog that do the real work off to the side somewhere. The 
most loudly advocated is the  Lightning Network — which doesn’t 
scale either, and whose toy implementation has already centralised.46
Censorship resistance just isn’t a problem ordinary people have in 
day-to-day life. They want convenience and reliability — and the 
Bitcoin system is absolutely not convenient or reliable as a payment 
system.
The Bitcoin promises are still out there, and they’re used to try to 
get people to buy bitcoins — so the big holders can finally cash out. 
The  promises  are  also  used  to  promote  other  Bitcoin-like 
cryptocurrencies.  They’re  even  used  to  promote  completely 
centralised uses — such as initial coin offering (ICO) tokens, where a 
central controlling entity makes a pile of digital tokens and sells them. 
Bitcoin promises are even used to promote private non-currency 
enterprise blockchains.
Prospective  users  hear  the  blockchain  hype  and  assume  the 
hypothetical plans are real products that exist now — though “the 
blockchain  could” is  a phrase that  really  means  “the  blockchain 
doesn’t,” because if it did, they’d say that.

30
Libra  got  a  bit  of  publicity  on  these  promises  —  though 
Facebook understood they’d have to deliver something that worked 
much better as a currency.
Other cryptocurrencies
Once Bitcoin existed, it could be copied — and so, from about 
mid-2011, people started making their  own magical Internet money. 
There  were  thousands  of  variants  in  short  order.  These  were 
generically called “cryptocurrencies,” or “cryptos.”
Some tried new ideas. Ethereum adds “smart contracts,” which are 
small computer programs that run right there on the blockchain; if 
Bitcoin is like an Excel spreadsheet, Ethereum is like a spreadsheet 
with macros. And the Ethereum subculture isn’t as ideological. New 
cryptocurrencies tend to include smart contract functionality, and so 
Libra does too.
Ripple  Labs’  XRP is  a  cryptocurrency  without  the  hideous 
electricity waste of  mining — though it’s ultimately controlled by 
Ripple,  through  some  obfuscation.  ICO  tokens  are  completely 
centrally-controlled objects — though they’ll often be marketed as 
“decentralised” anyway.
All these different kinds of token are called “cryptos,” and they all 
trade on the same exchanges as Bitcoin. They all trade freely against 
each other and ordinary currencies, and their prices can go up and 
down wildly.
Why didn’t Libra just use Bitcoin?
David  Marcus  had  long  understood  Bitcoin’s  problems  as  a 
currency — mainly that the price of a bitcoin wasn’t stable, and could 
go up or down 10% in a day. He said in 2013:47
It’s a great place to put assets, especially in places like 
Argentina with forty per cent inflation, where one dollar 
today is worth sixty cents in a year, and a government’s 
currency does not hold value. It’s also a good investment 
vehicle if  you have an appetite for risk. But it won’t be a 
currency until volatility slows down.
Marcus knew that Libra’s value had to be stable. He explained to 
CNBC in October 2019 why Libra wouldn’t just use Bitcoin:48
If  there was a stable, low-volatility, scalable version of 
Bitcoin that we could use today, my life would be so 

31
much simpler. We could just focus on embedding that in 
the Calibra wallet.
But  one  trick  Libra  could  take  from  Bitcoin’s  gold-standard 
thinking was to make the “coins” strictly represent a reserve — the 
actual value, stored away in a reserve somewhere.
Libra as a stablecoin
In cryptocurrency trading, a stablecoin is a crypto that is kept at a 
more-or-less steady value — and won’t go up and down like Bitcoin. 
Stablecoins are the crypto equivalent of  regulated electronic money 
(e-money).
The largest stablecoin is  Tether, which claims that each tether is 
backed one-to-one by a US dollar in a bank account — or perhaps by 
loans, or by bitcoins, or maybe by hot air; Tether is under investigation 
by the New York Attorney General over the integrity of  their reserve, 
and questions as to just what they’re backing these tethers with.49
Tethers are popular in crypto trading because they’re “dollars” that 
move around the world at the speed of  crypto. Much faster than 
moving  actual  money  around  —  with  all  those  tedious  money-
laundering rules. For a while, Tether openly touted evading regulation 
as its advantage.50 When a crypto trader says “stablecoin,” they mean 
something like Tether.
Tether’s backing reserve has never been audited — does it even 
exist? — and there are no verified cases of  anyone cashing out their 
tethers  for  dollars.  So  other  stablecoins  came  along  —  more 
regulated, with audits and so on. These were for the crypto trading 
market — they weren’t e-money for consumers to use.
Libra’s  currency  could have just  represented a single national 
currency in this way, like dollars or euros — but Facebook wanted the 
coin to work around the world. So the Libra currency would be based 
on the average value of  a “basket” of  several national currencies — 
in the hope that would make it mostly-stable compared to any one 
national currency.
This is not quite the same sort of  thing as Tether. But outside 
crypto, the term “stablecoin” now means “Libra” — when a bank, 
financial regulator  or government says “stablecoin,”  it’s always  a 
euphemism for Libra.
So, Libra was inspired by Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. But 
how could Libra make a version of these ideas work for ordinary end 
users?

32

33
 
Chapter 5:
The Libra White Papers
One  of  the  great  mistakes  is  to  judge  policies  and 
programs by their intentions rather than their results.
— Milton Friedman51
Libra  started  in  blockchain  dreams.  Libra’s  creators  wanted 
something that would give them what Bitcoin had promised.
The Libra team wanted Bitcoin, but without Bitcoin’s technical 
problems, and run by sensible people — i.e., themselves.
The Libra white papers are the plan that Facebook’s blockchain 
unit wrote up and presented to the world, including the regulators. In 
many cases, this was all they presented to the regulators. 
The white papers go live
For many years, the web address libra.org had served a short page 
about the Libra star sign.52 This was replaced some time in November 
2018 with a blank page.
At 07:00 UTC on 18 June 2019, a new page, “Libra: A New 
Global Currency” appeared53 — urging you to “Read the White 
Paper.”
In  the  cryptocurrency  world,  a  “white  paper”  is  a  sort  of 
investment prospectus — telling how the promoters’ made-up private 
money  for  bananas54 or  dentistry55 will  revolutionise  the  world 
economy,  and  achieve  trillions  of  dollars  in  total  supply.  And 
probably bank the unbanked.
Keeping to this tradition, Facebook released a series of  white 
papers  for  the  June  2019  announcement  of  Libra.  There  were 
multiple quiet updates to the various white papers after the US Senate 
and House hearings in July — but we’ll talk here about the original 
release versions, finalised between 14 and 17 June 2019. These were 
what financial regulators, central bankers and journalists were reading 
closely in the days and weeks following the announcement.56
The main Libra white paper was full of  half-explained new ideas, 
which puzzled a lot of  ordinary readers. But those who’d followed 
the cryptocurrency world found the concepts eerily familiar — they 

34
were claims that Bitcoin fans had made over the years, to try to get 
people to buy bitcoins.
Libra’s mission: bank the world
We start with the mission statement:
Libra’s mission is to enable a simple global currency and 
financial infrastructure that empowers billions of people.
Billions of  people around the world have cheap smartphones and 
a connection to the Internet. This has helped access to the financial 
system — but 1.7 billion people remain excluded, even though, of 
that 1.7 billion, “one billion have a mobile phone and nearly half  a 
billion have internet access.”
The white paper states the problem, then says that blockchains 
can “potentially” address the causes — “this approach can deliver a 
giant leap forward toward a lower-cost, more accessible, and more 
connected global financial system.”
Sounds great! How will it do that? The white paper never quite 
answers this question — it just says, over and over, that a blockchain 
system will definitely do this:
… the software that implements the Libra Blockchain is 
open source — designed so that anyone can build on it, 
and  billions  of  people  can  depend  on  it  for  their 
financial  needs.  Imagine  an  open,  interoperable 
ecosystem  of  financial  services  that  developers  and 
organizations will build to help people and businesses 
hold and transfer Libra for everyday use.
Other  parts  of  the  Libra  plan  had  secondary  white  papers, 
explaining their ideas in detail — but financial inclusion, the key 
promise and mission of Libra, did not.
The Libra Association
Facebook formed the Libra Association to issue and govern the 
Libra coin, and recruited twenty-seven other companies to become 
members of  the Association — payment providers, a few nonprofits, 
and a pile of  companies from the worlds of  cryptocurrency, Silicon 
Valley venture capital, or both.
The Association would choose who could run processing nodes 
for the Libra blockchain. It would choose new members for the 

35
Association; Facebook hoped to get to one hundred Association 
members in due course.
It would also create Libra tokens — the digital “coins” of  the 
currency itself  — when a Libra reseller gave the Association money 
to put into the backing reserve, and it would destroy the tokens when 
a reseller cashed coins out.
The Association would supervise the development of  the Libra 
blockchain  software.  This  included  developing  an  “open  identity 
standard” — though these initial white papers had no detail on 
Libra’s plans for this either, just a single sentence in the main white 
paper: “We believe that decentralized and portable digital identity is a 
prerequisite to financial inclusion and competition.”
Organisations trying to bank the unbanked have long thought that 
a robust digital identity of  some sort might help people without 
paperwork into the financial system. And Facebook, of  course, has 
long  collected  as  much  data  as  it  can  on  individuals,  to  target 
advertising. Though as of  2020, there doesn’t appear to have been 
any technical work on an identity system for Libra.
Facebook was a member of  the Association via their Calibra unit 
(now  called Novi). In fact, at this time, Facebook was the only 
member of  the Association — everyone else was just a prospective 
member. Facebook stressed that they were just one member of many 
— though if  twenty-seven mice are in bed with an elephant, they 
probably can’t stop the elephant from rolling over.57
The Libra Reserve
The Libra currency tokens would be backed by a reserve, managed 
by the Libra Association.
End users wouldn’t have direct access to the reserve — you’d 
convert your Libras to and from actual money at an authorised 
reseller, such as Facebook’s Calibra, or maybe at a cryptocurrency 
exchange.
A Libra token would not be backed by a single currency — but by 
a  basket of  currencies, with the price of  a Libra token being  a 
weighted average of  its component currencies. The white papers 
didn’t list the makeup of  the basket, but as of  September 2019, the 
component currencies were going to be the US dollar, the Euro, the 
Japanese yen, the British pound sterling and the Singapore dollar.58 So 
the value of  one Libra token would be variable — but hopefully not 
too variable.

36
The reserve would be filled by end users buying Libra tokens for 
cash, before they gave them to someone else, who would sell them 
for cash. As such, the reserve would be the working float in the Libra 
payment system.
The secondary white paper “The Libra Reserve” goes into more 
detail.59 The reserve would be “a collection of  low-volatility assets, 
including bank deposits and government securities in currencies from 
stable and reputable central banks.”  The Libra system would be 
seeded with coins provided by the Association to its members, and 
those coins would be paid for by “a private placement to investors.”*
The interest on the reserve would pay for running costs, offset 
transaction fees … and pay dividends to the companies who had 
bought Libra Investment Tokens to fund the Libra Association. (The 
Libra Investment Token idea was quietly scrubbed from all the Libra 
white papers in July 2019, and never mentioned again.)
The link between Libra currency tokens and the backing reserve 
would only be a promise by the Libra Association — they’d issue 
Libra tokens as liabilities against the reserve. This is not quite the 
same as your bank deposits being liabilities that the bank owes to you 
— only the Libra resellers could redeem the liability represented by 
the Libra token. If  you wanted cash for your Libra tokens, you could 
only take them to a reseller. If  the Libra reserve went broke, the 
resellers would be out of luck, so you’d be out of luck.
The magic of  blockchain
Blockchains sound pretty cool and awesome in the white paper:
Blockchains  and  cryptocurrencies  have  a  number  of 
unique properties that can potentially address some of 
the problems of  accessibility and trustworthiness. These 
include distributed governance, which ensures that no 
single entity controls the network; open access, which 
allows  anybody  with  an  internet  connection  to 
participate;  and  security  through  cryptography,  which 
protects the integrity of funds.
Just imagine if  you could get all of  that — just by using one of 
these “blockchains”!
*
If you follow the cryptocurrency world, you’ll recognise this as a SAFT offering 
(Simple Agreement for Future Tokens) — a form of Initial Coin Offering that 
would supposedly not be an offering of securities in US law. The SEC felt 
otherwise, and won in court against Telegram’s SAFT on this point in 2020.

37
That list  of  qualities  —  distributed  governance,  open  access, 
security through cryptography — was originally a list of claims about 
Bitcoin. They don’t entirely work for Bitcoin either, as we saw in the 
previous chapter — Bitcoin was centralised by about 2014, access is 
overwhelmingly  via  cryptocurrency  exchanges  acting  as  shaky 
financial institutions, and the blockchain itself  may be secure, but 
fraud is rampant.
You’ll see blockchain promoters do this a lot — they’ll make a list 
of  partially-true claims about Bitcoin, then say that their thing has 
something to do with blockchain, so their thing must therefore do all 
of them.
Watch  out  for  blockchain  promoters  —  in  this  case,  Libra’s 
promoters — trying to drive a truckload of  assumptions through 
“can” and “potentially.” As in the above quote, they’ll slip from a 
“could” statement to a present-tense “is” statement, as if  the made-
up thing they just imagined exists right now. Facebook admits later in 
the white paper that their blockchain won’t do all of those things.
Even to the extent that blockchains do these things, existing 
“decentralised” cryptocurrencies completely fail to scale up to more 
than toy proof-of-concept transaction rates. Bitcoin and its copies do 
decentralisation with proof-of-work mining — which can’t give usable 
transaction rates without breaking the security model.
The obvious move is not to decentralise — for example, Ripple 
Labs’ XRP is fast, it uses a network of  trusted validators to process 
transactions,  and  ultimate  control  rests  with  Ripple.  Enterprise 
blockchain systems run entirely on this “permissioned” model. The 
more ideological crypto fans hate the idea of  any central control — 
but they also have networks that can’t scale.
So Facebook proposes a permissioned blockchain, with a list of 
Libra-endorsed  official processing nodes. There are some technical 
details to mitigate the effects of  a compromised validator node, but 
the Libra Association could eject them from the network by legal 
means as needed.
This is nothing new — crypto people looked at Facebook’s plan, 
and saw something that was more or less Ripple’s XRP with smart 
contracts. It would be a completely centrally-controlled system, run 
by a single entity. In fact, nothing that was proposed for Libra actually 
needed a blockchain.
The initial Libra software release was a bare sketch of the planned 
system. Elaine Ou at Bloomberg News, who was a long-time Bitcoin 
fan, tried out the code drop.60 The software let her put fake coins into 

38
a simple cryptocurrency wallet. She was surprised how unfinished the 
code  was,  given  that  it  came  with  “a  12-page  white  paper 
accompanied by 96 pages of  technical detail,” and how badly this 
compared to previous software releases by Facebook.
(Ou’s guess  was that Libra must have been released early to 
appease financial regulators — because the code drop was useless to 
technologists.  As  it  turned  out,  the  Libra  documentation  for 
regulators was just as primitive — which left people wondering just 
what Facebook’s blockchain unit had been doing all this time.)
Libra’s creators really wanted Libra to be Bitcoin, so they wanted 
to take their energy-efficient blockchain fully permissionless:
Together  with  the  community,  the  association  will 
research the technological challenges on the path to a 
permissionless  ecosystem  so  that  we  can  meet  the 
objective to begin the transition within five years of  the 
launch.
There’s obvious issues here. If  the Libra blockchain is out of 
anyone’s control, then what’s the Libra Association for? How would it 
keep the Libra currency stable? How would the backing reserve work?
The  secondary  white  paper  “Moving  Toward  Permissionless 
Consensus” lists these problems — but doesn’t have solutions.61
But the biggest problem is that all of this is an unsolved problem 
in  computer  science  —  how  to  do  the  Bitcoin  decentralised 
governance  trick,  but  without  proof-of-work.  This  is  called  the 
“Blockchain Trilemma”: how to be all three of decentralised, scalable 
and secure. Proof-of-work currencies sacrifice scalability.
So far, there are lots of  blockchain projects that claim they’ve 
pulled off  this trick — but no accepted solutions. The stated plans 
for Libra include, not just technology that doesn’t exist yet — but 
mathematics that doesn’t exist yet.
Libraisation
Libra seemed to be particularly aimed at countries that had lots of 
Facebook users, and also had unstable currencies. David Marcus 
routinely mentioned how bad Argentina’s local currency was when he 
talked about Libra — he seemed to be thinking of  Argentina as a 
good target for having its currency replaced by Libra.
The Libra plan has obvious money-laundering hazards. “Know 
Your Customer” (KYC) rules require anyone transmitting currency 
— or currency substitutes — to track the sources of  funds, so as to 

39
cut off  funding for criminals and terrorists. (The Libra plans for a 
“digital identity” would almost certainly tie into this.)
Facebook said that Libra would keep to the highest of  KYC 
standards  —  but  one  Libra  partner  being  sloppy  would  risk 
compromising the whole Libra system, given that the basic aim was 
to move money around the world at the speed of cryptocurrencies. If 
the Libra Association couldn’t keep this tight, and show developed-
world regulators that it had done so, holes like this would be exploited 
immediately, and place the entire Libra system at risk.
But that brings with it another hazard: the potential Libraisation 
of  local economies. Unplanned dollarisation — when US dollars take 
over from local currencies — can cause crippling depreciation of the 
local  currency.  Libra  risked  doing  the  same  —  but  faster. 
Dollarisation is slowed by the need for physical dollars — which is 
why the $100 note is so popular internationally — but a vast supply 
of  Libra tokens could be poured into an economy from outside, just 
by phone.
This would most affect the local poor who couldn’t pass KYC 
checks for access to the Libra system — that is, literally the unbanked 
that Facebook said it wanted Libra to serve. Libraisation would set up 
a Libra economy that worked only for the local middle to upper 
classes — and for rich visitors from other countries.
Blockchains  don’t  solve  settlement  and  compliance  issues  — 
they’re only more efficient if  they can bypass regulation. Libra could 
only be more efficient than existing systems as long as it could dodge 
regulation, and none of its competitors could.
Libra  could  either  give  1.7  billion  people  access,  or  it  could 
maintain KYC integrity at all Libra access points — it couldn’t do 
both.
The shadow bank of  Libra
Shadow banking is the creation of  money as credit, but outside 
the usual regulations that apply to banks. Shadow banks tend to play 
fast and loose — because the lack of  regulation is their competitive 
advantage. This leads to problems if shadow banking gets big enough 
to be a systemic risk — money-market funds and similar non-banks 
allowing too much easy credit fueled the housing bubble in the lead-
up to the  2008 financial crisis, and the shadow banks going bad 
caused the 2008 credit crunch. In fact, the term “shadow banking” 
was coined in 2007 to describe this crisis as it was happening.62

40
The Libra token would be a synthetic foreign exchange derivative 
— a thing that the Libra Association issued, with a value that the 
Libra Association calculated from the basket of national currencies. It 
wouldn’t  have  an  intrinsic  value  from  the  fact  of  a  reserve,  as 
Facebook repeatedly claimed — it would only have a value insofar as 
the Libra Association said it did. To do this in the US, you need to be 
a bank, or have your token or share registered as an investment 
scheme.
So the Libra plan would mean operating as a shadow bank — 
issuing Libra-denominated liabilities that are explicitly intended to 
function as money. Libra “will create a mirror banking system using 
your money,” said  Carlos Maslatón, the head of  treasury at Libra 
member  Xapo,  when  he  was  explaining  the  plan  in  a  private 
WhatsApp chat group.63
Facebook’s bitcoiners wanted to create unregulated credit as a 
shadow bank themselves — because they were sure that they were 
smarter  than  all  those  conventional  mainstream  economists,  and 
wouldn’t set off  a disaster. Libra’s creators spent much of  2019 and 
early 2020 insisting that Libra couldn’t possibly cause problems from 
shadow banking — even though it was obvious to everyone else that 
shadow banking followed directly from the Libra plan.
Libra’s ideal world: liberty for me
The white paper also set out Libra’s ideological goals. This is what 
Facebook said it wanted from Libra:
We believe that many more people should have access to 
financial services and to cheap capital.
We believe that people have an inherent right to control 
the fruit of their legal labor.
We  believe  that  global,  open,  instant,  and  low-cost 
movement  of  money  will  create  immense  economic 
opportunity and more commerce across the world.
We  believe  that  people  will  increasingly  trust 
decentralized forms of governance.
We  believe  that  a  global  currency  and  financial 
infrastructure should  be designed and governed as a 
public good.

41
We  believe  that  we  all  have  a responsibility  to  help 
advance financial inclusion, support ethical actors, and 
continuously uphold the integrity of the ecosystem.
These seem largely unexceptionable in terms of  conventional 
market liberalism — though the odd turns of  phrase in the second 
and fourth items in that list should bring to the reader’s attention 
Libra’s  ancestry  in  Bitcoin,  in  Murray  Rothbard’s  completely 
unregulated  anarcho-capitalism, and in the world of  Silicon Valley 
venture capital.
The Libra plan came out when Facebook was under increasingly 
close attention from governments, who were deeply suspicious of the 
company’s track record on privacy, election manipulation and falsified 
news. Facebook had repeatedly defied calls to answer to elected 
representatives  —  such  as  the  company’s  open  defiance  of 
parliamentary  subpoenas  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  from 
Canada.
And yet, Facebook seemed to think it was large enough, and 
powerful enough, to swing a coup against the concept of government 
control of money.
Libra is an attempt to fulfill the ideological aims of  Bitcoin, as 
seen by venture capitalists and rich anarcho-capitalists who resent the 
very concept of  regulation or oversight — by issuing their own fast-
moving private money in quantities large enough that they can’t be 
stopped.
In the secondary Libra white paper “Commitment to Compliance 
and Consumer Protection,” Facebook directly stated that its intent 
was “to shape a regulatory environment”64 — Facebook wanted to 
shape regulation, not work to existing regulation. Regulators would 
need to bend to Facebook.
The white paper says: “The Libra Blockchain is  pseudonymous 
and allows users to hold one or more addresses that are not linked to 
their real-world identity.” This is normal in cryptocurrency — Bitcoin 
fans consider it a feature — but it’s directly at odds with Know Your 
Customer requirements. Perhaps they meant this for users with large 
amounts of  funds that they’d like to stash away, out of  sight, on the 
Libra blockchain.
From the viewpoint of  Libra’s Bitcoin origins, “an inherent right 
to  control the fruit of  their legal labor”  comes across  as Libra 
members’ aspirations to swing the power of  their capital as they 
please. Venture capital firms with their own Libra validators, able to 

42
exchange Libra tokens between themselves directly — out of sight of 
regulation or taxation.
These ideas have circulated in Silicon Valley for a while. Facebook 
board member and advisor Peter Thiel started PayPal with the idea of 
freeing money from government oversight — just like Bitcoin a 
decade later. In a 1999 speech to PayPal staff, Thiel said:65
Of course, what we’re calling “convenient” for American 
users will be revolutionary for the developing world … 
PayPal will give citizens worldwide more direct control 
over their currencies than they ever had before. It will be 
nearly  impossible  for  corrupt  governments  to  steal 
wealth from their people through their old means — 
because if  they try, the people will switch to dollars or 
pounds or  yen, in effect dumping the worthless local 
currency for something more secure.
… I have no doubt that this company has the chance to 
become  the  Microsoft  of  payments,  the  financial 
operating system of the world.
Facebook had all these ambitions for Libra.
This all points to the real attraction of  the project for Facebook. 
Libra isn’t really for consumers — Libra is Facebook’s call to arms 
against the very notion of  regulation. Facebook wants to be too big 
to regulate, and lead the way for its Silicon Valley fellows to be too big 
to regulate.
Governments and regulators immediately understood what Libra 
was  trying  to  do  —  and  that’s  why,  within  hours  of  the 
announcement, they called for a ban on the entire scheme. It’s one 
thing when some silly ICO says this stuff  — but it’s quite another 
coming from a company that already thinks it’s beyond any oversight.

43
 
Chapter 6:
Banking the unbanked
Without the help of  all, he can do nothing, although his 
strong-boxes are full of gold.
— Peter Kropotkin66
Banking the unbanked — reducing financial exclusion — has been 
acknowledged as a public welfare issue for decades, in both rich and 
poor countries. If you’re not in the system, you’re not part of society.
Facebook and WhatsApp have billions of  users in the developing 
world — but these users don’t generate much income for Facebook. 
A lot of  them don’t even have bank accounts. Maybe Libra could get 
these users into an economy that Facebook could tap into.
The  problems  Facebook  claims  to  solve  with  Libra  are  real. 
International  remittance fees are around 6.7% of  the money being 
sent. Mobile money is the cheapest channel, with fees of  around 
3.3% — with the poorest and least-connected paying the most.67
Facebook was clear in Libra’s mission statement:
Libra’s mission is to enable a simple global currency and 
financial infrastructure that empowers billions of people.
Facebook’s  very  first  promise  was  that  Libra  would  give  the 
unbanked meaningful participation in the financial system — and so 
it was vital that everyone should support Libra to this end. But they 
didn’t specify at all how Libra would do this.
The missing white paper
Most other concepts in the main Libra white paper had secondary 
white papers that went into more detail — but Facebook’s plans to 
bank the unbanked didn’t. The Libra plan has never been set out in 
writing.
It was near-impossible to get meaningful detail from Facebook on 
just how Libra would bank the unbanked — almost as if they weren’t 
quite sure either.
Around the June 2019 announcement of  Libra,  Kevin Weil — 
Calibra/Novi’s vice president of  product, and one of the three listed 
authors of  the Libra white paper — spoke of  WhatsApp users in 

44
developing countries sending each other photos of  money transfer 
receipts. His press slogan at the time was: “We want to make sending 
money as easy as sending a text message.”68
Weil would later talk at conferences about the idea of  Libra as a 
universal  standard  payment  system  —  like  the  Internet,  but  for 
money — and that this would help bank the unbanked. He put these 
plans “decades” out, which made his ideas conveniently untestable, 
and not just vague.69
Blockchains and banking the unbanked
At the pre-announcement press conference for Libra on Monday 
17 June, David Marcus said that Libra would solve the problem of 
billions of  people not having bank accounts. He told the press how 
the problems of  banking the unbanked were technical — that banks 
were unable to move money fast enough without a blockchain.
This is completely backwards. Banks know how to move numbers 
between computers. The slow part is settlement and compliance — 
making sure that everything is done in order, and making sure that 
banks, and money transmitters in general, are solvent, honest and not 
fronting for drug runners.
The phrase “bank the unbanked” was picked up by the Bitcoin 
subculture in about 2013, as something that Bitcoin would obviously 
do. Later cryptocurrencies made the same claim.
Nobody in Bitcoin, or any later cryptocurrency, has ever presented 
a  coherent  path  from  the  existence  of  their  crypto  to  financial 
inclusion.
Facebook seems to have lifted the claim directly from the Bitcoin 
subculture — and they supplied just as little detail.
The Libra plan as presented was — in its entirety — that a 
blockchain-based currency accessible on a phone would solve the 
problem. This would enable a system to evolve that would do the 
hard bits — because a blockchain could apparently do this with lower 
fees,  just  by  existing.  It’s  literally  the  Bitcoin  claim,  just  with  a 
different name for the coin.
Banking the unbanked in rich countries
The Libra white paper conflated the unbanked in developing 
countries with the unbanked in developed countries — specifically, 
the US. This is a completely different local problem.

45
The poor have enormous trouble getting bank accounts in the US. 
Banks will often refuse customers who they think might cause the 
slightest regulatory trouble. And if  you’ve ever had a bank account 
shut, you might not be able to get a new account.
The practical solutions that work to get the US unbanked into the 
system are sociological, and involve one-to-one on-the-ground work 
— walking people through basic financial literacy, and how to find an 
account that works for them.70 In many countries, banks are required 
to offer no-fee basic accounts.
And there’s nothing wrong with the US dollar for banking the US 
unbanked — creating a new currency is not in any way a necessary 
step. If  Facebook really cared about banking the unbanked, it could 
have set up a foundation to do this any time in the past ten years.
Banking the unbanked is a social process. Marcus and the white 
paper speak as if any of this is a technology problem — and none of 
it is.
Banking the unbanked in poor countries
The poor are poor, not stupid — and their living conditions are 
different in each country. You can’t impose a system top-down from 
your office in Menlo Park — you need to work locally.
The Libra white paper figure of 1.7 billion unbanked comes from 
the  World Bank report  The  Global Findex Database, 2017: Measuring 
Financial  Inclusion  and  the  Fintech  Revolution.71 Chapter  6  is 
“Opportunities For Expanding Financial Inclusion Through Digital 
Technology” — this is where Facebook read up on the problem.
But page 89 points out that a mobile phone isn’t enough — you 
need financial infrastructure on the ground, and a reliable system to 
cash out through. Page 93 notes that three-quarters of  those 1.7 
billion people don’t have Internet access, even if  they have a mobile 
phone — and whether it’s a smartphone that can run apps, such as 
the Calibra/Novi wallet, isn’t specified in the Global Findex Database.
Consider  M-Pesa —  a  service  from  mobile  phone  provider 
Vodafone, one of  the initial Libra Association members. M-Pesa 
started from the ground up in Kenya in 2005, for a customer base 
with 2G mobile phones with no data and no apps, and a 72% adult 
literacy rate. M-Pesa’s slogan was “Send money home” — domestic 
remittances. Users of  Vodafone’s local operator Safaricom could put 
money on account at a Safaricom shop, send a text message, and the 

46
receiver  could  show  the  message  to  get  the  cash  from  another 
Safaricom shop.
This sounds simple — but an easy system for users always has a 
complicated system at the back end. As well as technology,  the 
project had to deal with finance, culture, politics and regulation — 
running a network of  agents, giving agents incentives that worked 
and didn’t distort the system, balancing and redistributing cash on 
hand, and limiting fraud.
M-Pesa worked because it started from what its users needed — 
rather  than  starting  from  a  solution,  like  “bank  accounts”  or 
“blockchains,”  and  trying  to find  a question  that  solution  could 
answer.72
By 2019, M-Pesa had 37 million customers. But it never really took 
off  in India73 or South Africa74 because banks already had good 
market penetration — and it failed in Romania and Albania because 
the informal, off  the books, cash in hand economy was around 30% 
of GDP,75 and people relying on shadow economies aren’t so keen on 
electronic trackability.76 Local conditions are local.
Another issue for the unbanked is paperwork. The Global Findex 
Database reports 20% to 49% of adults without a bank account don’t 
have the documentation needed to open one. Others report just … 
not having enough money to use a bank account. A Silicon Valley app 
and a blockchain aren’t going to solve either of these.
Cash, privacy and banking the unbanked
Physical cash has the advantage of privacy — the bank and the tax 
office can’t trace the movement of  every note and coin. Only large 
transactions require notification to the anti-money-laundering (AML) 
authorities.
People with money, who benefit from being part of  the system, 
don’t worry nearly as much about traceability — they care much more 
about convenience than whether their bank has a copy of their entire 
financial life. The promoters of  schemes to bank the unbanked tend 
to be from this social class.
Privacy of  cash is a feature for the poor and marginalised in the 
informal  economy,  not  just  for  the  crooks  that  AML  rules  are 
supposedly intended to block — because being poor is treated by the 
middle-class as inherently suspect, and things the poor do may be 
criminalised because it’s the poor doing them.

47
The poor would mostly love to be part of the system — they want 
more  secure  and  stable  material  circumstances,  and  to  feel  like 
respectable members of  society. But often, they can’t get into the 
system even when they want to. So the poor and marginalised need 
the informal and marginal economy — that isn’t fully legible to the 
authorities — to survive.
Making people visible to the system, but not giving them power 
and security within the system, is a direct threat to them. The greatest 
day-to-day enemy of  the poor is the middle-class bureaucrat who 
contemptuously treats them as data to be processed, without care to 
their needs or circumstances. James C. Scott’s book Seeing Like A State 
describes the process:77
The  working  poor  were  often  the  first  subjects  of 
scientific social planning. Schemes for improving their 
daily lives were promulgated by progressive urban and 
public-health  policies  and  instituted  in model factory 
towns  and  newly  founded  welfare  agencies. 
Subpopulations  found  wanting  in  ways  that  were 
potentially threatening — such as indigents, vagabonds, 
the mentally ill, and criminals — might be made the 
objects of the most intensive social engineering.
Several past electronic money systems failed because having your 
informal economy fully legible to the state is not a feature — M-
Pesa’s failed push into Romania and Albania is a good example. So 
much is done by barter — both to stay off  the books, and because 
they just don’t have the cash. It’s a substantially non-cash economy. 
M-Pesa failed to read the room.
Large parts of the Greek economy operate similarly, which is why 
the Greek government is so desperate to get more people off  cash 
and onto electronic payment systems — to get transactions into 
legible, taxable form.
Can Libra solve any of  this? There are no signs that Facebook 
even understands this is an issue.
Libra scales the ivory tower
Libra was created by well-off-to-rich bitcoiners from the venture 
capital and startup world, creating a system for people whose lives 
they only understood in terms of  their own — and the system they 
came up with coincidentally looked very like a way for rich venture 

48
capitalists with anarcho-capitalist leanings to shift large sums around 
out of sight.
“Bank the unbanked” looked like an excuse slapped on top of that 
— even as the proposers seem to have been completely sincere in this 
aspiration.
“Banking the unbanked” is a complicated process that needs to 
adapt to local conditions. Facebook didn’t say anything about their 
plan to do this — so regulators looked at the rest of  the Libra plan, 
that didn’t make sense in poor countries, and seemed to be a plan to 
set up an ill-regulated shadow bank in rich countries.

49
 
Chapter 7:
The Libra Reserve plan
and economic stability
You can’t really build a global stablecoin, right? It’s an 
oxymoron.
— Christian Catalini82
The original Libra plan was to issue Libra currency tokens, each 
fully backed by assets held in reserve by the Libra Association. The 
value of  a Libra token would be calculated from a basket of national 
currencies in the reserve.
The revised and cut-down 2020 “Libra 2.0” plan was to just use 
national currency tokens — a dollar token, a euro token and so on — 
running on the Libra blockchain. This would still have a version of its 
Libra basket token, based on these national tokens.
But either way, there’s a serious problem — Facebook has 2.5 
billion users across all of  its services. What would it mean if  a 
substantial fraction of  Facebook users started using Libra? Just how 
much money would there be in the reserve?
The Libra reserve might be on the order of a trillion dollars — one 
of  the largest single investment funds in the world, larger than any 
single country’s entire sovereign wealth fund. Could the Libra reserve 
be a systemic risk, that could damage whole national economies?
This problem was immediately obvious to every regulator, banker 
and financial journalist. Facebook just insisted it surely wouldn’t be a 
problem.
Issuing tokens to represent a currency, based on a backing reserve, 
was  obviously  banking  —  and  if  it  wasn’t,  then  it  was  issuing 
investment securities. Facebook denied they wanted Libra to be a 
bank, even as their plan was, literally, to do things only banks were 
allowed to do.
The man behind the plan
Christian  Catalini  is  a  professor  of  business  at  MIT,  Head 
Economist at Novi and Chief  Economist at the Libra Association. 

50
He is credited as a co-creator of  Libra. The economic plan for Libra 
was put together by Catalini.
Catalini’s academic work focuses on blockchains, cryptocurrencies 
and crowdfunding. He has written numerous theoretical papers on how 
blockchain  economics  could  work.  In  2014,  he  supervised  an 
experiment to promote Bitcoin by giving incoming MIT students $100 
worth of  bitcoins each — and was disconcerted to find that even the 
few who bothered claiming the bitcoins tended to just sell them.78
When Facebook started looking into blockchains, Catalini spoke 
to Morgan Beller and David Marcus about their plans. He liked their 
ideas — “if  a company with the engineering talent and reach and 
scale of Facebook were to design this right and really build a platform 
around  financial  inclusion  and  payments,  it  could  have  a 
transformative impact on the globe”79 — and took leave from his 
MIT position to start at Facebook in July 2018.
The Libra reserve white paper59 does not  list any references. 
However, some commenters noted how much the plan for Libra 
resembled Austrian School economist  Friedrich von Hayek’s 1976 
book The Denationalisation of  Money,80 in which he advocates competing 
private  corporate  currencies,  and  assumes  the  public  will  prefer 
whichever has the lowest inflation.
How the Libra reserve works
In the original plan, each token of  the Libra currency would be 
backed by a basket of currencies — assets denominated in a selection 
of  national currencies, in fixed proportions. The second plan, for 
tokens to represent the national currencies, was much the same.
Facebook never stated the proportions they were thinking of  for 
the basket. One report in September 2019 said Facebook had told 
Fabio De Masi (Left Party, Germany) that it would be 50% US dollar, 
18% euro, 14% Japanese yen, 11% pound sterling and 8% Singapore 
dollar.58 81 Catalini later said the percentages were “just a proposal.”82
The assets in the reserve would be bank accounts, government 
bonds, and similar low-risk, liquid assets. Not quite cash-equivalents 
— but close enough that they could be cashed in as quickly as was 
needed to redeem the Libra tokens.
End users would not get interest on the money tied up in tokens 
— instead, the interest would pay for running the Libra system. 
Anything left over would be distributed as dividends to Association 
members who held Libra Investment Tokens.

51
The reserve wouldn’t really be a backing for the currency tokens 
— the only link between a token on your phone and the Libra reserve 
would be that the Libra Association said there was a link. You would 
not have a direct claim on the reserve itself. You could only get the 
token’s claimed value in real money from an authorised Libra vendor. 
One  token  would  only  be exchangeable  for  actual  money  if  an 
authorised vendor would give you actual money for it.
Most people would just buy and sell one currency — the Reserve 
white paper doesn’t say how the Association planned to deal with 
imbalances if one of  the basket currencies was much more popular 
than the others. Nor the swarms of  foreign exchange trading bots 
that would be unleashed the moment Libra was released, if  wallets 
like Facebook’s Calibra/Novi really didn’t charge any fee. There was 
nothing on how the Association would deal with the foreign exchange 
risk it would be taking on, trying to keep the basket balanced.
What is a Libra?
Regulators don’t look so much at what a company calls a financial 
instrument. They look at what the company wants to do with the 
instrument, and what existing thing the instrument seems to be.
There have been a few previous basket-based currencies, or at 
least basket-based units of  account — which isn’t quite the same 
thing. The best-known is probably the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)’s Special Drawing Right (SDR), made of a basket of currencies 
heavily used in trade. Since October 2016, the SDR has been 41.73% 
US dollar, 30.93% euro, 10.92% Chinese yuan, 8.33% Japanese yen 
and 8.09% pound sterling. So Libra’s basket is a lot like the SDR 
basket without the yuan.
The SDR is a way of keeping the accounts for a reserve — it’s not 
a  currency,  as  such.  The  IMF  and  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS) give all their accounts in SDRs. 
Since the SDR was created, nobody has started a currency based 
on SDRs, businesses don’t trade in SDRs, banks don’t offer accounts 
denominated in SDRs — in daily life, everyone just works in national 
currencies. The euro started as a similar sort of  basket, but almost 
nobody used it for anything until it evolved into a currency in its own 
right. It’s not clear there would be demand for Libra’s basket offering.
Libra’s plan to issue a new currency unit backed by a basket of 
currencies closely resembles an existing financial instrument — an 
exchange-traded  fund (ETF).  An  organisation  has  a  pool  of 
investment, and sells shares in the pool; the only link between the 

52
pool of investment and the shares in the pool is that the organisation 
says there’s a link.
Shares in ETFs are closely regulated as investments — the shares 
can’t just flow around like a currency.
An ETF will have its investment assets held in trust by a custodian 
— the ETF’s managing company can’t just dip into the assets if they 
get in trouble. This would be more protection than Libra promises.
If  the Libra association only issues tokens representing national 
currencies, then that turns Libra from something very like an ETF 
into something very like a money market fund (MMF).
Money market funds could be called the original version of  the 
“stablecoin”83 — MMFs take deposits, invest them in safe securities 
such as US Treasury bills or short-term commercial paper, and pay 
the investors dividends. Money market funds in the US were regulated 
by the SEC as offerings of securities, but they accepted deposits in a 
very bank-like manner, and were regarded as nearly as secure and 
cash-equivalent as banks — even though your money was at risk.
The money market funds weren’t regulated as closely as banks. So 
they loaded up on other investments that were rated as very low risk. 
This led to huge new demand for cash-equivalent investments — 
which  led  to  companies  like  Lehman  Bros creating  new  “cash 
equivalent” AAA-rated “secure” investments to meet the demand.
Many of  these turned out to be backed only by questionable 
mortgages. Then the investments went bad in the 2008 financial 
crisis, and several large money market funds had to be bailed out.
Since then, regulators have been exceedingly cautious of  MMF-
like proposals — the US and Europe have spent the last decade 
tightening the rules on money market funds.
Libra would have tremendous difficulty avoiding being regulated 
as either a security (ETF or MMF) or a bank.
The white elephant in the room
Facebook knows that regulators will demand the reserves keep 1:1 
backing, and monitor the backing to make sure it stays 1:1. But a large 
reserve is a powerful lever in itself. Regulators’ big worry about the 
Libra reserve is that Facebook users number in the billions — so the 
reserve might be weighty enough to affect entire financial systems.
How large would the Libra reserve be? TenPay/WeChat Pay and 
Alipay in China held a total of  1 trillion yuan ($151 billion) of 
customer funds as of June 2018,84 for approximately one billion users 

53
— that being just the working float of  customer money in the 
system. On the other hand, total e-money float across all providers in 
the Euro area in 2019 hovered around only 14 billion euros85 — 
because users kept their money in banks.
With up to two billion Libra users, the working float for the Libra 
reserve might be small like Europe, or it might be large as in China — 
regulators had to be ready for a Libra reserve on the scale of a trillion 
dollars. If  people kept their savings in Libra, the reserve could be 
much larger. One European Central Bank paper estimated the Libra 
reserve as likely to be between 153 billion and 3 trillion
€
€
86 — “Libra 
could potentially become one of Europe’s largest MMFs.”
How  big  are  national  wealth  reserves?  The  world’s  largest 
sovereign  wealth  fund  is  Norway’s  Government  Pension  Fund 
Global, more commonly known as the  Oil Fund, at approximately 
US$1.1 trillion. The main fund stabilising the Singapore dollar is GIC 
Private  Limited,  estimated  at  US$453 billion.87 (The  other 
Singaporean  fund  is Temasek, slightly  smaller  at  US$210  billion, 
which later joined the Libra Association.)
Libra would operate at this sort of scale. A trillion dollar investment 
fund is more than enough to affect the financial system.  Regulators 
realised this immediately, even as Facebook remained in denial.
(As  Libra’s  reserve  might  dwarf  the  Singapore  dollar’s  entire 
reserve, let alone its cash-equivalent securities, the currency was a 
bizarre  choice  for  the  Libra  basket.  This  is  probably  why  the 
Singapore dollar was left out of the 2020 Libra 2.0 plan.)
Facebook didn’t seem to understand that the Libra reserve’s sheer 
weight could be a problem. Their public statements assumed that the 
reserve would have no effect on the currencies in the basket — or on 
the  governments  they  planned  to  buy  stable  cash-equivalent 
investments  from.  Both  claims  were  obviously  wrong  if  Libra 
operated at Facebook scale.
Throwing your weight around, one-to-one
There are several obvious side-effects of a trillions-of-dollars float 
just wandering around the markets, looking for something to do with 
itself.
Soaking up all the cash-equivalents
A currency might have a large circulating supply, but there’s a lot 
less cash-equivalent investments in a given currency for you to just 

54
casually go out and buy. We noted above how, in the run-up to the 
2008 financial crisis, new “cash-equivalent” investments were created 
that weren’t nearly as safe as the government cash-equivalents they 
were substitutes for — because the actually-safe investments had 
already been bought up. And this was in the US dollar, a large 
currency for a large economy.
Libra could easily soak up all the cash-equivalent paper. Just the 
task of keeping Libra stable would be quite enough to move currency 
and bond markets.88 The Libra Association would be able to pressure 
governments to issue sufficient government paper to back Libra’s 
reserve — whether it was in the interest of the government’s citizens, 
or not.
And if  those “cash-equivalents” went bad — as they did in the 
2008 crisis — there would be a run on the no-longer-fully-backed 
Libra reserve.
The least disruptive solution would be for governments to require 
the Libra reserve to be deposited directly with the central bank at 
zero interest — much as the People’s Bank of  China requires the 
large money transmitters to keep 100% of  customer deposits in a 
zero-interest account directly with the central bank.89 The Bank of 
England has suggested something similar for Libra-like stablecoins.
Taking up all the deposits
If  Libra pulls large quantities of  deposits out of  commercial 
banks and into the Libra reserve, then that money won’t be available 
as reserves for the banks — and this would affect banks’ ability to 
make loans, which keep the real economy running smoothly,90 and to 
invest their reserve, which might mean they would have to raise 
interest rates on loans.
This runs the risk of a credit squeeze — which was how the 2008 
financial crisis really did its damage.
A credit squeeze from a lack of  commercial bank deposits is also 
one of  the worries that central banks have about central bank digital 
currencies. But central banks have a mandate to maintain economic 
stability — private companies don’t.
An end-run around capital controls
Capital controls limit the flow of  money in and out of  small 
economies, in the interest of local stability.

55
Capital controls were strongly discouraged for many years by the 
United States, the IMF, and the World Bank, in the interest of  global 
free trade — and by the owners of  substantial amounts of  capital, 
who wanted to move their money as freely as possible, and never 
mind the effects on everyone else.
So  central  banks  had  to  solve  an  “impossible  trinity”  —  a 
reasonably  stable  exchange  rate,  an  independent  local  monetary 
policy, and free capital flows. If  a country tries to pursue all three at 
once, things may go well at first, but will soon become unstable.
A good example is the  Asian crisis of  1997–1998 — where 
countries tried to keep their local currencies pegged to the US dollar, 
allow free capital flow, and set their interest rates independently. At 
this time, local interest rates were higher than in the US — so, with 
no capital controls, foreign money was promptly moved wherever it 
could grow fastest. Investors took huge profits.
When trade balances shifted, and local interest rates dropped, the 
foreign investors took their money out just as quickly as they’d put it 
in. Countries such as Thailand ran out of dollars, and had to let their 
currencies float, and thus devalue. But many short-term debts were in 
US dollars — and this bankrupted local businesses.
The crisis spread to other countries, and the IMF had to bail them 
out. Since the Asian crisis, the IMF and World Bank have been more 
receptive to the use case for capital controls.
Facebook explicitly listed breaking capital controls as a goal for 
Libra in the white paper:
We  believe  that  global,  open,  instant,  and  low-cost 
movement  of  money  will  create  immense  economic 
opportunity and more commerce across the world.
As  an  internationally  frictionless  private  currency  founded  by 
millionaires and billionaires, Libra would mostly be used, not by 
individuals to buy goods and services — but by people like its 
founders to move capital with much greater ease.
Evading  capital  controls  is  strongly  promoted  by  the  Bitcoin 
subculture as a use case for cryptocurrency — as Libra’s creators well 
know. The original Libra plan would have made large flows of capital 
effectively unrestricted, in a much more liquid form than Bitcoin.
Banking from the shadows
Investing the float of  customer funds — that they shouldn’t be 
touching — is a major income stream for many “fintech” startups. 

56
They take in as much customer money as possible, then they manage 
it like a bank — but without the oversight that banks work under.91
The People’s Bank of China clamped down on even the possibility 
of  this  happening  with  the  requirement  for  the  large  money 
transmitters to deposit 100% of  customer funds with the central 
bank — they didn’t want to risk WeChat Pay or Alipay slipping into 
shadow banking.
Facebook sought only US money transmitter licenses for Calibra 
— not a banking license — because Calibra/Novi would work like 
PayPal:  a  site  that  holds  your  money  for  you  to  use  at  your 
convenience.
But Facebook wants the Libra Association to do bank-like things 
in the background — take other people’s money, and issue credit slips 
that they say can be used as money. That’s a banking activity.
Banks can do all sorts of  things with other people’s money. They 
can invest it, loan it out, and offer financial products, for their own 
benefit. But society has very particular ideas about how you should 
handle what is, in fact, other people’s money — so banks are closely 
regulated to make sure they’re honest, to check they aren’t risking 
their  customers’  money,  and to  check  they aren’t  throwing  their 
economic weight around to the point where there are risks to the 
system.
Non-banks who handle other people’s money would love to do 
the stuff  that banks do. Shadow banking is attractive because it isn’t 
as regulated as banking, and doesn’t worry about deposit insurance 
and so on — so shadow banks can offer better interest rates, and 
financial products that banks aren’t allowed to.
Shadow banking is dangerous. Regulators really don’t like anything 
that smells of  shadow banking, because they remember the  2008 
financial crisis. The house price bubble of  the 2000s was fueled by 
what  was  effectively  credit  from  non-banks,  such  as  the  money 
market funds — as long as prices kept going up, even bad mortgages 
could be paid off  by the rise in the value of  the house if  the 
mortgagee defaulted. Total assets managed by non-banks grew almost 
as large as the total managed by regulated banks.
When house prices stopped going up and bad mortgages started 
defaulting, companies wanted their money back. They tried to get 
their investments out of the non-banks, and these bank runs on non-
banks left the non-banks bankrupt and the investors high and dry. 
This caused a chain of  crises in other parts of  finance that were 

57
relying on the non-banks.92 The Federal Reserve eventually had to bail 
out the shadow banking system.
Ant Financial, the parent company of Alipay in China, sells a wide 
variety of  financial products to its users — banking, credit cards, 
loans, wealth management, insurance. Libra resellers, such as Calibra/
Novi, could become some of  the world’s largest financial services 
companies.
What services will Libra resellers offer? Will the Libra Association 
offer the resellers assistance with liquidity — lending them Libra 
tokens to keep the tokens flowing — the way that central banks do 
for commercial banks? In the regulated system, this is what allows 
banks to create money — but under regulation and monitoring.
It’s  hard  to  imagine  Facebook  putting  bank-like  levels  of 
monitoring into place from the start. By offering financial services 
without the regulation for those services, Libra turns into a shadow 
banking system.
It’s  not  at  all  clear  that  Facebook  understands  the  obvious 
implications of what they’re saying — but the implications still follow.
Swiss regulators have confirmed that an organisation controlling a 
Libra-like reserve for a stablecoin pegged to a variable basket of 
currencies, with interest on the reserve going to the organisation, 
would need to be run as a bank93 — Libra’s basket plan would 
absolutely have required a bank charter in Switzerland, and likely in 
every other jurisdiction it wanted Libra tokens to be allowed into. 
Even  a  stablecoin  based  on  national  currencies  would  require 
regulation as a bank, and the reserves for the coin would be treated as 
bank deposits.
Before Libra, Bitcoin also promised to solve the problems of  the 
existing financial system and get rid of  its middlemen — and then it 
recreated most of those middlemen, but incompetently.
Interest? What interest?
The countries whose currencies would be in the Libra basket are 
running  at  historically  low  interest  rates.  Cash-equivalents, 
government bonds, and even many corporate bonds in US dollars or 
euros presently have near-zero, or even negative, interest rates.
JP Morgan Chase fixed-income strategist Joshua Younger wrote to 
clients on 5 September 2019 about Libra, saying that it was “unclear 
how such a system could continue to function if  the collateral is a 
cost rather than a revenue source.”94

58
Younger also worried that a popular Libra-like coin could make 
bad  economic  times  worse,  not  better:  “The  need  to  impose 
transaction  costs  as  rates  decline  —  especially  when  they  turn 
negative — could worsen and prolong recessions by acting as an 
escalating tax on consumers and businesses as conditions worsen.”
The lack of  profit on high-quality cash-equivalent investments 
would be a strong incentive for the Libra Association to get into 
riskier but more profitable investments — and make it harder for 
users to cash out Libra tokens, so as to keep the reserve as large as 
possible.
If  the Libra Association makes up this shortfall by charging fees 
on Libra wallets, users are likely to leave Libra as fast as they can. 
When  the  Bundesbank,  the  German  central  bank,  was  charging 
negative interest to its local retail banks in late 2019, even those banks 
started filling bank vaults with physical euro notes.95
The  Libra  2.0  plan  took  heed  of  this  objection.  The  Libra 
Association  members  —  i.e.,  Facebook  —  would  subsidise  the 
reserve and transaction costs if  needed, and keep tokens convertible 
back and forth with the base currencies themselves. That is, Facebook 
wanted so very much to run its own private currency that it would do 
so at a loss.
Regulators: Libra shall not pass
In September 2019, the French and German finance ministers 
both  said  they  could  not  allow  the  development  of  Libra  on 
European soil — as it would really obviously affect their monetary 
sovereignty.
Bruno Le Maire and Olaf Scholz, the French and German finance 
ministers, said in a joint statement after a meeting in Helsinki of 
eurozone finance ministers on September 13: “France and Germany 
consider that the Libra project, as set out in Facebook’s blueprint, 
fails to convince that those risks will be properly addressed.”96 Scholz 
said on September 17: “We cannot accept a parallel currency. You 
have to reject that clearly.”97
David Marcus responded with a series of  tweets that showed no 
understanding of the issues with the reserve:98
Recently there’s been a lot of talk about how Libra could 
threaten the sovereignty of  Nations when it comes to 
money. I wanted to take the opportunity to debunk that 
notion.

59
Libra is designed to be a better payment network and 
system  running  on  top  of  existing  currencies,  and 
delivering meaningful value to consumers all around the 
world.
Libra will be backed 1:1 by a basket of strong currencies. 
This means that for any unit of Libra to exist, there must 
be the equivalent value in its reserve.
As  such  there’s  no  new  money  creation,  which  will 
strictly remain the province of sovereign Nations.
We also believe strong regulatory oversight preventing 
the Libra Association from deviating from its full 1:1 
backing commitment is desirable.
Marcus asserted — as he had all through discussion of  the Libra 
project — that issuing a token with a one-to-one full reserve would 
be sufficient not to affect the stability of  economies, even if  done at 
Facebook’s scale.
Christian  Catalini  maintained  that  “a  relatively  small  level  of 
reserves could support an extremely high volume of  transactions. 
Reserves will grow slowly and would still probably remain small 
relative to domestic markets.”99 This was despite comparable — and 
much-discussed — real-world examples such as WeChat Pay and 
Alipay.
Libra communications chief  Dante Disparte said Le Maire and 
Scholz just didn’t understand the blockchain: “We recognize that 
blockchain is an emerging technology, and that policymakers must 
carefully consider how its applications fit into their financial system 
policies.”100
But the regulators didn’t care about the technology at all — the 
system could have used a conventional SQL database, or paper ledger 
books. (And Le Maire was actually a fan of  blockchains, and had 
spoken at Paris Blockchain Week!) The regulators were worried by 
what Facebook was saying, and what Facebook was planning to do 
with  money  and  financial  systems  —  whatever  the  back-end 
technology.

60

61
 
Chapter 8:
Libra, privacy and your digital identity
Facebook and a cartel of  junior partners will leverage 
their  platform  power  to  establish  a  global  financial 
surveillance system, on the back of  public monetary 
systems.
— Raúl Carrillo, Demand Progress101
Facebook really wants to do a private currency. Facebook wants to 
do a private currency so very much that the amended Libra 2.0 white 
paper of April 2020 — part of Libra’s formal application to the Swiss 
Financial Markets Authority — says that Libra Association members, 
i.e., Facebook, will top up the reserve with a capital buffer, and the 
Libra Association,  i.e., Facebook, will redeem tokens on the Libra 
network for cash itself if Libra’s vendor network won’t.
What does Facebook want from a private currency so much that 
they’re offering to lose money to run it?
The obvious answer is: personal data — because Facebook always 
wants personal data. Facebook’s business is selling personal data to 
advertisers.
Libra would be a massive data mining apparatus sitting atop the 
financial system. The data is there — it would be completely out of 
character for Facebook not to collect all the data from Libra that it 
possibly could.
Would Facebook break Mark Zuckerberg’s promises not to use 
spending data from its Calibra/Novi wallet for ad targeting? Past 
behaviour is the best predictor of  future behaviour — so we should 
expect that Facebook will break these promises. Facebook does not 
take “no” or “never” for an answer. We should assume that one of 
Zuckerberg’s key goals with the Libra project is to harvest as much 
personal data as possible.
Facebook’s track record with privacy
Facebook’s reach is massive. Just in the US, 68% of  all US adults 
used Facebook in 2016, and 52% of all US adults used it at least once 
a day.102 That’s a huge amount of information, often quite private, on 
a huge number of people.

62
The  Federal  Trade  Commission’s  2019  complaint  against 
Facebook describes how Facebook manages user permissions:103
To  encourage  users  to  share  information,  Facebook 
promises users that they can control the privacy of  their 
information  through  Facebook’s  privacy  settings. 
However,  through  at  least  June  2018,  Facebook 
subverted users’ privacy choices to serve its own business 
interests.
Facebook allowed unrestricted access to user profiles, despite the 
company claiming that apps “will access only the profile information 
these  applications  need  to  operate”.  Facebook  shared  personal 
information with advertisers — including other users’ information 
that had been set “friends only.” Supposedly “deleted” user profiles 
were not deleted.
Facebook’s  2011 settlement with the  FTC promised this would 
not happen again — and Facebook said it would put controls into 
place to make sure it didn’t happen again. Then it happened again.
Facebook uses personal data as a business weapon directly. From 
at least 2011 to 2015, Facebook would pass data to companies it 
favoured, and withhold data from companies it didn’t — it gave 
special access to Amazon as they bought so much advertising, but cut 
off  messaging  app  MessageMe in  case  it  got  too  popular  and 
competed with Facebook.104
When Facebook bought WhatsApp in 2014, it told the European 
Commission that it would not match Facebook and WhatsApp user 
data — and, in fact, that it couldn’t do so reliably. Then in August 
2016, Facebook did it anyway, using users’ phone numbers to match 
them across Facebook and WhatsApp. In May 2017, the Commission 
fined Facebook 110 million for this — and they were particularly
€
 
annoyed that Facebook knew in 2014 it could share data between 
WhatsApp  and  Facebook  in  this  manner,  but  had  told  them 
otherwise.105
Political consultancy  Cambridge Analytica compiled data on 50 
million Facebook users — who were mostly the friends of  270,000 
users who had downloaded a researcher’s “personality quiz” app — 
into comprehensive user profiles that it then used to closely target 
political advertising in the 2016 US election and the 2016 UK Brexit 
referendum. It turned out that thousands of other apps had also been 
scraping third-party personal data since 2008.
The Cambridge Analytica scandal could only happen at all because 
Facebook allowed access to user data contrary to the users’ privacy 

63
settings. The UK House of  Commons report “Disinformation and 
‘fake news’” noted that if  Facebook had just kept to the 2011 FTC 
settlement,  the  Cambridge  Analytica  scandal  could  never  have 
happened.106
The FTC eventually  fined Facebook $5 billion over Cambridge 
Analytica in 2019 — just before David Marcus appeared before the 
House and Senate in July.
These are only the most prominent examples. Facebook’s history 
of personal data abuse is extensive, and consistent. Given the chance, 
you can be sure Facebook will abuse users’ data — no matter what 
permissions the users think they gave, and no matter the promises 
Facebook may have made to regulators.
What could Facebook do with data from 
Novi and Libra?
Facebook dominates social media. Facebook and Google are an 
advertising duopoly. Facebook has tried to break into payments for 
years — lured by the prospect of  being able to get users’ spending 
habits  directly,  rather  than  guessing  from  their  interests  and 
interactions. Using data from Novi to sell targeted advertising would 
be hugely effective and lucrative.
The question is not what Libra is — but what it can do. And what 
it’s likely to do, given Facebook’s history.
Facebook has said that Novi would only share data with the 
Facebook  platform  with  explicit  user  consent  —  but  Facebook 
routinely requires excess data sharing permissions, or includes user 
“consent” hidden in lengthy terms and conditions.
At no point has Facebook stated that having a Novi wallet will not 
require you to have a Facebook account. Facebook has previously tied 
other services to having a Facebook account. The 2020 Oculus Quest 
2  virtual  reality  headset  required  a  Facebook  account,  and  an 
automated system locked many buyers out, turning their new headset 
into  a  “$300  paperweight.”107 All  Oculus  headsets  will  require  a 
Facebook account by 2023, to help you “find, connect, and play with 
friends in VR” — and only incidentally to match you to ads.108
Facebook is also likely to just share the Novi data with its other 
apps anyway — as it did with WhatsApp.
Facebook even builds shadow profiles on Internet users who 
aren’t Facebook users, by using the Facebook buttons included on 
web pages. All the incentives are for Novi to use a “Pay with Novi” 

64
web page button to collect data on non-users, in the same way, and 
there’s nothing to stop them.
The  Libra  blockchain  will  be  accessible  to  Libra  Association 
members. Novi will have a copy of the data on the Libra blockchain, 
and Facebook will be able to use data-matching to fill out shadow 
profiles of every user of Libra — not just the Novi users.
Digital papers, please
The most important component of  Libra will be digital identity 
— even more important than monetising your spending data.
We’ve  seen  how  Know-Your-Customer,  as  required  by  anti-
money-laundering laws, would cripple Facebook’s plans to bank the 
unbanked.
Libra couldn’t work as planned without an internationally accepted 
digital identity standard. Facebook wants to be the entity backing that 
digital identity standard.
If  you think Facebook is hard to regulate now — just think how 
hard Facebook would be to regulate if  it controlled not just the 
money, but your access to financial services outside Facebook.
How hard would it be for a government to stop Facebook abusing 
your personal information any way they liked, or leaking your data to 
their third-party customers?
How will Libra work out in practice?
The most likely outcome of  Libra is a completely predictable 
personal data abuse scandal, just like the ones before it — and a 
public apology from Zuckerberg, using a variant on his standard 
apology template:
I hope you understand, this is not how I meant for 
things to go, and I apologize for any harm done as a 
result of  my neglect to consider how quickly the site 
would spread and its consequences thereafter. I definitely 
see how my intentions could be seen in the wrong light.
That was Zuckerberg’s apology for using female Harvard students’ 
photos  without  permission  for  his  site  “FaceMash”  in  2003. 
Zuckerberg has used variations of this wording since. Zeynep Tufecki 
called it Zuckerberg’s “14-Year Apology Tour.”109
David Marcus and Mark Zuckerberg both promised the US House 
and Senate repeatedly that Novi data would be kept isolated from 

65
Facebook’s advertising engine. I see no reason to doubt Marcus’s 
sincerity — but, given Facebook’s extensive track record of  repeated 
privacy violations, it would be foolish to assume Zuckerberg didn’t 
have his fingers crossed.

66

67
 
Chapter 9:
The regulators recoil in horror
Facebook is doing a great job at spurring regulatory 
clarity in the industry — alas, in the direction of  “ban 
this and jail everyone involved.”
— Ben Munster110
In the weeks after the Libra announcement, the financial press, the 
regulators and the central banks picked over what Facebook had 
provided and tried to make sense of  it — and what its implications 
were.
Most of  the implications were bad. It’s one thing to do a small 
crypto with all sorts of  grandiose claims, but which is mostly just 
going to be traded by crypto speculators — and it’s quite another 
when it’s a company the size of Facebook, with billions of users, and 
a possible trillion-dollar backing reserve.
Mark Zuckerberg said in 2010:111
In a lot of  ways Facebook is more like a government 
than  a  traditional  company.  We  have  this  large 
community of  people, and more than other technology 
companies we’re really setting policies.
Governments kept Zuckerberg’s comparison firmly in mind.
Why financial regulation exists
If  you’re handling other people’s money, then those other people 
are going to have very particular ideas on how you handle money. So 
finance has rules and regulations. You can argue the particular rules 
— but a functional system that you can do business in is going to 
have regulations, and regulators to oversee them.
Financial  regulators  are  fine  with  innovation,  and  want  to 
encourage and help business development — but they know all the 
ways that cutting corners can go wrong. Everyone remembers the 
2008 financial crisis. Regulators need to know that a big new player 
knows what it’s doing.
If  a normal financial institution wants to do something new and 
unusual, they’ll call the regulators very early in the process. They’ll set 

68
out their plans, maybe show them a prototype. If  a regulator has 
concerns, the company will shower them in knowledgeable lawyers to 
reassure them.
In finance, the process of  iterating to a Minimum Viable Product 
involves regulators at every step of the way.
What you don’t do is write up a rough sketch of  the system with 
none of  the details filled in, announce that billions of  people around 
the world will use it, then throw the rough sketch over the wall — 
and expect regulators and legislators to be just fine with this. You 
don’t go, “yep, we’re doing this, be amazed,” like you’re announcing a 
video game or an electric truck.
Facebook spent two years working out their blockchain plan and 
philosophy — and almost none of  this time talking to the financial 
regulators who could sink their financial product with a word.
Facebook seemed actually surprised when all the regulators reacted 
to their fabulous plans with horror — within hours of  them being 
announced.
Pre-launch discussions with regulators
Several  months  before  the  Libra  announcement,  Facebook 
employees  met  with  US  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
Chairman  Jay  Clayton,  and  with  SEC  staff,  to  talk  about 
cryptocurrencies — though not specifically about the project that 
became Libra.112
In  spring  2019,  David  Marcus  met  with  Steve  Mnuchin,  US 
Secretary of  the Treasury. Even with the few details Facebook had at 
the time, Mnuchin told Marcus: “I hate everything about this.”17
In the month or two before the announcement, Facebook began 
contacting the most important regulators — but gave them only the 
vaguest details of the project itself.113
In the UK, Facebook met with a junior minister at the UK 
Ministry of  Finance, and with officials working on cryptocurrency 
policy, on 23 April 2019. The next day, Facebook met with the 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to discuss Libra. On 14 May, 
Facebook met officials from the Ministry of  Finance, the  Bank of 
England and the FCA.114
Facebook approached the US Commodities and Futures Trading 
Commission (CFTC) in late May 2019, to work out whether CFTC 
rules would apply to Libra.115

69
Europe
The very first official response to the Libra announcement on 18 
June came within minutes — from Bruno Le Maire, France’s Minister 
for Finance. Le Maire was a guest on Europe 1 Radio in France that 
morning, and said:116
That Facebook creates its own currency, an instrument 
for transactions, why not. On the other hand, it’s out of 
the question that it becomes a sovereign currency … The 
ability  to  issue  financial  instruments,  to  maintain  a 
reserve and to be a lender of last resort — all this is not 
possible.
… I have asked the G7 central bank governors to report 
to us by mid-July, when the G7 finance ministers meet, 
so that they can tell us what guarantees to obtain from 
Facebook. We must ensure that there is no risk for the 
consumer either.
This will allow Facebook to collect millions and millions 
of  fragments  of  data  again.  This  reinforces  my 
conviction  that it is  necessary to  regulate the digital 
giants, to ensure that they do not end up in monopolistic 
positions.
After a letter from Le Maire and  Banque de France governor 
François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  the  Group  of  Seven  nations  (G7) 
established  a  working  group  to  consider  the  risks  of  private 
currencies,  and  “look  into  a  range  of  challenges  raised  by  the 
emergence of  stable coins, including on the regulatory front.”117 The 
letter didn’t name Libra — but everyone knew Libra was what this 
was about.
G7 finance ministers met on July 17 and agreed they had “a very 
large consensus on the need to act quickly.”118 Benoît Cœuré of  the 
European Central Bank presented a first report on Libra, and the G7 
asked  Cœuré  to  set  up  a  task  force  to  look  into  Libra-like 
currencies.119
Cœuré said afterwards: “Market discipline is useful but I wouldn’t 
see it as progress to shift monetary sovereignty from governments to 
private multinationals … large companies having enormous market 
power which occasionally have been indicted of  misusing their client 
data.”120

70
United States
Within hours of  Libra’s announcement, Maxine Waters, chair of 
the US  House Committee on Financial Services, promised greater 
regulation of cryptocurrencies in general, starting with Libra:121
With  the  announcement  that  it  plans  to  create  a 
cryptocurrency,  Facebook is continuing its unchecked 
expansion and extending its reach into the lives of  its 
users  …  Given  the  company’s  troubled  past,  I  am 
requesting that Facebook agree to a moratorium on any 
movement forward on developing a cryptocurrency until 
Congress  and  regulators  have  the  opportunity  to 
examine these issues and take action.
Crypto people routinely call for “regulatory clarity” — meaning, 
they want permission to do what they were going to do anyway. 
They’re rarely so happy with the clarity they get.
Two  days  after  the  Libra  announcement,  Facebook  met  with 
officials from the US Treasury, the SEC and other agencies — and 
gave them just … the 12-page Libra white paper. The regulators were 
shocked that Facebook didn’t have detailed answers ready to the 
obvious  questions  about  money  laundering  and  consumer 
protection.122
Waters and three other House Democrats called on 2 July for 
Libra to be halted “until regulators and Congress have an opportunity 
to examine these issues and take action … If  products and services 
like  these  are  left  improperly  regulated  and  without  sufficient 
oversight, they could pose systemic risks that endanger US and global 
financial stability.”123
The House Financial Services Committee asked  Jerome Powell 
from the US  Federal Reserve about Libra on 10 July. He said that 
“Libra  raises  many  serious  concerns  regarding  privacy,  money 
laundering,  consumer  protection  and  financial  stability.”124 The 
project could not go forward without fully addressing all of  these — 
“in a deliberate process that will not be a sprint to implementation.”125
Senator Mike Crapo (R-ID) asked Powell if  “we need to create a 
new regulator” to handle Libra-like initiatives. Powell thought this was 
plausible — since Libra’s proposal crossed so many different fields of 
regulation.126
US President  Donald Trump tweeted about Libra on 12 July, 
telling Facebook directly that if  they were going to act like a bank, 
they needed to get a banking charter:127

71
Facebook  Libra’s  “virtual  currency”  will  have  little 
standing  or  dependability.  If  Facebook  and  other 
companies want to become a bank, they must seek a new 
Banking  Charter  and  become  subject  to  all  Banking 
Regulations, just like other Banks, both National and 
International.
Facebook had met with Treasury Department staff  on 27 June.128 
Steve Mnuchin gave a press conference on 15 July: “The Treasury 
Department has expressed very serious concerns that Libra could be 
misused by money launderers and terrorist financiers … To be clear, 
FinCEN will hold any entity that transacts in Bitcoin, Libra or any 
other cryptocurrency to its highest standards.” Mnuchin said that 
“they and others have a lot  of  work to do before they get us 
comfortable.”129
Facebook  had  registered  Calibra  with  FinCEN,  applied  for 
money-transmitter licenses, and applied for a BitLicense — required 
for cryptocurrency businesses in New York.130 But that wasn’t enough 
to quiet worries about the Libra system as a whole.
By July, the  SEC was already looking into whether Libra would 
constitute an exchange-traded fund — and hence a security under US 
law, not a currency or commodity.128 Jay Clayton said on 16 July that 
Libra had not approached him since the June announcement. He said, 
“I am keenly interested in their securities law analysis.”131
On 14 July, Democratic members of the House Financial Services 
Committee were circulating a discussion draft of the “Keep Big Tech 
Out of  Finance Act,” to maintain “a firewall between commerce and 
banking.” The bill would keep a “large platform utility” — a company 
primarily offering an online platform service, with at least $25 billion 
in annual revenue — from offering financial services or launching a 
“digital asset that is intended to be widely used as [a] medium of 
exchange.”132 The bill was just a rough draft for discussion, and it 
wasn’t considered likely to make it past the Senate — but it set the 
tone for the coming House hearing on Libra.
Also in America, Facebook co-founder  Chris Hughes warned a 
few days after the Libra announcement that Libra could move control 
of  monetary  policy  from  banks  and  governments  to  private 
companies — who would put their own business interests ahead of 
public interests. “What Libra backers are calling ‘decentralisation’ is in 
truth a shift of  power from developing world central banks toward 
multinational  corporations  and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
European Central Bank.”133

72
Hughes told regulators to tightly restrict the gateways between 
Libra and conventional currency. “If  global regulators don’t act now, 
it could very soon be too late.”
United Kingdom
Mark Carney, then Governor of  the Bank of  England, suggested 
on 20 June that the Bank open deposits to payment providers — as 
well as the commercial banks it currently dealt with.134
Carney mentioned Libra as one such payment provider. Though 
he cautioned:
The Bank of  England approaches Libra with an open 
mind but not an open door. Unlike social media for 
which standards and regulations are being debated well 
after they have been adopted by billions of  users, the 
terms of engagement for innovations such as Libra must 
be adopted in advance of  any launch … Our citizens 
deserve no less.
Carney told a news conference on 11 July: “If  you are a systemic 
payment system, you have to be on all the time. You can’t have 
teething issues, you can’t have people losing money out of  their 
wallets … This is not learning on the job stuff, it’s got to be rock 
solid right from the start or it’s not going to start.”135
The UK’s Financial Conduct Authority had got back in touch with 
Facebook the moment Libra was announced.136 Andrew Bailey, then 
head of the FCA, told the Treasury Select Committee on 25 June that 
the FCA had “already engaged with Facebook and there will be many 
more engagements. We are waiting to see how the responsibility will 
divide between Facebook and the other organisation.”137
Central banks scramble
A central bank’s job  is to keep their economy  stable against 
shocks. Central banks reacted to Libra with the same horror that 
regulators and governments had.
“I  think  Facebook  hadn’t  thought  through  carefully  how 
important control of  currency is for governments and for central 
banks,”  Simon Potter of  the  Peterson Institute think tank told the 
Financial Times.

73
Lael  Brainard  at  the  US  Federal  Reserve concurred:  “Libra 
heightened  the  urgency  and  sharpened  the  focus  of  senior 
policymakers on this work.”138
Stefan Ingves of  Riksbank, the Swedish central bank, had looked 
into  a  central  bank-issued  digital  krona  in  2017.  The  Libra 
announcement came as a surprise — central bankers “ended up in a 
lot of  conversations about Libra, because Libra showed up, at least 
from a central bank perspective, kind of out of the blue.”
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) — the central bank 
for central banks — warned that “a big tech could be small in 
financial services and yet rapidly establish a dominant position by 
leveraging its vast network of users.”139 BIS had a “courtesy meeting” 
with Facebook before the June announcement — but they knew 
nothing more than what was in the Libra white papers.140
The People’s Bank of  China (PBOC) said it had been working on 
a central bank digital currency (CBDC) since 2014 — a sort of 
stablecoin, but run centrally, and carrying what was legally official 
currency. Of course, “working on” is a somewhat squishy concept — 
but at the least, the PBOC research bureau had been writing papers 
on the subject. Wang Xin, director of  the research bureau, said on 8 
July 2019 that the PBOC was paying “high attention” to Libra — and 
had accelerated  its own official digital currency efforts as a direct 
response to Libra.141 This became China’s DC/EP (Digital Currency/
Electronic Payments) project.
Mu  Changchun,  then  a  deputy  director-general  of  PBOC’s 
Payment and Settlement Department, wrote in July 2019 that Libra 
would need central bank supervision — since it would have to act like 
a central bank, even as it disclaimed the responsibilities of  one. He 
also questioned the technical capabilities of  Libra’s software and 
design as presented in June.142 As of 2020, Mu is heading the DC/EP 
project.
Mark Zuckerberg and David Marcus later talked up the threat of a 
Chinese digital currency as a reason for Western regulators to let 
Libra through.
Facebook responds
David Marcus posted to Facebook on 3 July 2019, two weeks after 
the announcement, somewhat disconcerted at the reaction to Libra.143 
“As  expected  there  are  also  some  questions  and  a  few 
misunderstandings.” Much of  this seemed to be a direct response to 
critiques from the Financial Times.144

74
Cryptocurrency fans were upset that Libra was not a decentralised, 
permissionless blockchain, like Bitcoin. Marcus maintained that “one 
hundred geographically distributed, industry-diverse organizations is 
quite decentralized.” He emphasised that they did want to move Libra 
to a fully permissionless system in due course.
Marcus’ plan for financial inclusion was: “With Libra, anyone with 
a $40 smartphone and connectivity will have the ability to securely 
safeguard their assets, access the world economy, transact at a much 
lower cost, and over time access a whole range of financial services.” 
He still didn’t provide an actual mechanism for how this would work.
Marcus  said  that  Facebook  was  working  with  regulators.  He 
downplayed  the  notion  that  Facebook  would  have  a  controlling 
influence over the eventual network — so you wouldn’t have to trust 
Facebook itself too much.
Did Facebook have any idea what it was 
doing?
Facebook proposed a system that was clearly meant to be  big. 
They’re big enough to affect the world, and they set out big plans.
Not only did Facebook not talk to regulators early on — Libra’s 
creators seemed unaware of  recent financial history.  They didn’t 
research the history of  their proposed reserve model, and didn’t 
realise they’d come up with precisely the sort of shadow banking that 
made the 2008 financial crisis blow up really badly.
Sheila  Bair,  former  chair  of  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC) — who guarantee bank deposits up to $100,000 
in the US — described the problem in early July:145
Libra proposes the failed business model used by money 
market funds prior to the financial crisis. It wants you to 
buy Libra on the promise that the coin will maintain 
stable value, but there will be no regulatory oversight of 
what Libra actually does with your money and no capital 
and liquidity requirements that you would typically find 
with a bank.
That structure proved disastrous during the 2008 crisis, 
when  the  Reserve  Fund,  a  money  market  fund  that 
heavily invested in Lehman Bros debt, “broke the buck” 
and prompted widespread runs on other money market 
funds.

75
Bair suggested the Federal Reserve Board should regulate Libra’s 
reserve — as it does banks.
Did Facebook hire anyone who’d worked at a central bank, or for 
a government, on serious macroeconomics — someone who could 
talk to regulators in their own language — at any point since Morgan 
Beller started looking into cryptocurrencies for them in 2017?
Well, no — in June 2019, David Marcus said that “we need 
someone who knows how economies tend to work, who understands 
how to operate in a very complex, decentralized governance type of 
environment.”146
You might think “someone who knows how economies tend to 
work” would have been a useful sort of  person to have on the team 
before the big announcement. Presumably, Christian Catalini was the 
wrong sort of economist.
Marcus’ appearances before the US House and Senate in July did 
not alleviate these concerns. Libra was not just a financial product, 
and Facebook was not just untrustworthy — Libra was Facebook 
expressing power. But worse than that — would Libra be incompetent 
power?

76

77
 
Chapter 10:
David Marcus before the US House 
and Senate
Governments won’t let Facebook use its superpower — 
negligence  —  to  disrupt  their  economy.  Enabling 
genocide in Myanmar is one thing, but messing with our 
ability to buy Chick-fil-A and Land Rovers is another 
level.
— Scott Galloway, NYU Stern147
On 16 and 17 July, the United States Congress called Facebook to 
account for its plans for the world’s money.
The governments of  the US and the European Union are great 
fans of business — they want you to go out and make a great big pile 
of  money. Many of  the legislators at the July hearings loved the 
innovation of  Libra — and they loved what Facebook was promising 
with Libra.
But governments worry when a big new player doesn’t seem to 
know what it’s talking about, and won’t acknowledge the incredibly 
obvious implications of  its plans. Did Facebook even understand 
what followed from what it was saying?
In an era of  rancorous distrust throughout United States politics, 
Libra  brought  forth  a  groundswell  of  bipartisan  agreement: 
Republicans  and  Democrats  both  hated  the  Libra  plan,  and 
everything about it, the moment they saw it.
David Marcus appeared as head of  Facebook’s Calibra unit, and a 
founder of  the Libra project. He spoke precisely and earnestly in 
detail, wanting to give legislators the best possible impression of  a 
project he cared about deeply.
But Libra’s biggest problem was Facebook. Even if  Libra had 
been a good idea — which the legislators weren’t convinced of  — 
Facebook was flatly unacceptable as Libra’s creator and sponsor. 
These hearings were not just about Libra — they covered all of 
Facebook’s other bad behaviour over the previous few years.
Looking back, the July 2019 hearings dealt the mortal blow to the 
original  Libra plan.  Everything  after  this  was  the  hot  air  slowly 
wheezing out.

78
Lost in the inbox
The US government first got wind of Facebook’s private currency 
plan in early 2019. The Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and 
Urban Affairs sent a letter to Mark Zuckerberg on 9 May, signed by 
Mike Crapo (R-ID) and  Sherrod Brown (D-OH), asking for more 
detail  about  the  project148 —  particularly  how  Facebook  would 
protect consumer financial data.*
The Committee didn’t have a reply from Facebook by the time of 
the 18 June announcement of  Libra. On 19 June, the Committee 
called Facebook  to appear before them for a 16 July hearing.149 
Facebook didn’t answer the letter until 8 July113 — a week before the 
hearing.
Just a few hours after Facebook announced Libra, Maxine Waters 
(D, CA-43), chair of the House Committee on Financial Services, had 
asked Facebook to halt the project while legislators examined it. 
Patrick McHenry (R, NC-10), the top Republican on the committee, 
asked  Waters  to  hold  a  House  hearing  about  Libra.  This  was 
scheduled for 17 July.150
Facebook’s trust deficit
One Congressional official told the Financial Times: “Facebook 
thought they could hide behind the fact that there are twenty-seven 
other partners in Libra. But members know that this is Facebook’s 
project,  and  this  is  a  chance  to  go  after  them  for  things  like 
Cambridge Analytica.”151
After Senator Crapo opened the Senate hearing,  Senator Brown 
spoke:
Facebook is dangerous. Now, Facebook might not intend 
to be dangerous — but surely, they don’t respect the 
power of the technologies they are playing with — like a 
toddler who has gotten his hands on a book of matches. 
Facebook has burned down the house over and over, and 
called every arson a learning experience … The last thing 
that we need is to concentrate even more power. It 
would be crazy to give them a chance to experiment with 
bank  accounts,  to  use  powerful  tools  they  don’t 
understand.
*
Senators’ affiliations are given by party (Republican or Democrat) and state. 
Representatives’ affiliations also include their district.

79
Nine  of  the  seventeen  senators  who  asked  questions  at  the 
hearing distrusted Facebook in particular, and didn’t trust Marcus’ 
promises that Facebook’s Calibra unit would keep users’ spending 
data isolated from the main Facebook platform — after all the times 
Facebook had broken previous privacy promises, good and hard. The 
House was similarly skeptical.
Both  the  House  and  Senate  seemed  amazed  at  Facebook’s 
effrontery — the company had come from a $5 billion Federal Trade 
Commission fine just a few days earlier, Senator Brown mentioned 
Facebook’s  role in  the  recent  Myanmar  genocide  …  and  here 
Facebook  was presenting  its  own  private  currency  for  a  virtual 
country of two billion people. Brown added:
After  people’s  data  and  private  messages  have  been 
stolen and sold, after you’ve let Russian bots try to throw 
the 2016 election — with no contrition, I might add — 
after you’ve abetted genocide in foreign countries, you 
really  think people  should  trust  you  with  their bank 
accounts and our economy? I think that’s delusional.
Even if Libra was a good idea, Facebook was the wrong company 
to be putting it forward. Brian Schatz (D-HI) said: “You’re making an 
argument for cryptocurrency generally. The question is not, should 
the United States lead in this area — the question is: why Facebook? 
And why before you’ve fixed your other stuff.”
Brad Sherman (D, CA-30) said: “Madam Chair, we need to get 
Mark Zuckerberg here. This is the biggest thing, or it tries to be the 
biggest thing, this committee will deal with this decade. And while we 
have one of his employees here, this is Zuckerberg’s program.”
The platypus of  money
Rep.  McHenry opened by asking: “Mr. Marcus, I’ve read your 
white paper. I understand the nature of  digital currency and digital 
technology. What is a Libra? … Is it a security? Is it a commodity? Is 
it an exchange-traded fund?”
Marcus said that Libra was a digital currency, to be used as a 
payment  tool  —  but  several  other  legislators  echoed  McHenry’s 
confusion.
Libra was promoted as being an everyday currency — but it would 
work very like an exchange-traded fund.
This question was important: “If  it’s ‘none of  the above’ in our 
current regulatory structure,” asked McHenry, “how do you comply 

80
with regulations?”  Bill Huizenga (R, MI-02), who had worked on 
crypto-asset regulation, said, “What is this, fish or fowl? And it seems 
that it’s more of  a platypus to me, that it evolves in its different 
parts.”
Jim Himes (D, CT-04) was blunter: “You said this is not an 
exchange-traded fund. I’m a former banker. Looks to me exactly like 
an  exchange-traded  fund,  backed  by  short-term  instruments  and 
foreign currency. It has a creation and remittance mechanism. So 
elaborate for me why this is not an exchange-traded fund.”
Marcus  detailed  Calibra’s  FinCEN  and  state  registrations  for 
McHenry, and said that Libra was working with the G7 Working 
Group on Stablecoins and with FINMA, the Swiss regulator. To 
Himes, he admitted that the mechanism was similar to an ETF — but 
that Libra tokens were not an investment with an expectation of 
profit.
Himes  was  not  satisfied:  “Users  will  have  the  profoundly 
unfamiliar experience of assuming foreign currency risk … How will 
you make transparent what you acknowledged is foreign currency risk 
that consumers will face?” Marcus responded that the Calibra wallet 
would include “education.”
Consumer protection
Consumers use money — but they mostly don’t understand the 
financial system. Most people have a bank account hooked to a card; 
a lot of people without bank accounts have a prepaid card that can be 
topped up. A service like PayPal looks a lot like a current account at a 
bank — you have an account, you have money sitting in it, you can 
buy things with it.
Libra would look like banking to those people — especially when 
Facebook promoted it by saying things like “banking the unbanked.”
Joyce  Beatty  (D,  OH-03)  was  chair  of  the  subcommittee  on 
diversity and inclusion, and this was her particular area:
Are you taking people’s money and letting them pay for 
things, letting them transfer money? … We know those 
who are unbanked or underbanked are that for a reason. 
This is very complicated. … How do you take somebody 
from my district who is underbanked or unbanked, and 
educate them? No financial literacy. They think you’re a 

81
bank because even when you mention PayPal and those 
systems which you were the president of, I used PayPal 
as a store owner but it was tied to my credit card, it was 
tied to the regulations of  the federal government. So, 
how do you tell us that it’s not banking?
Jim Tester (D-MT) worried about security of  deposits — “In 
2008 there was a run on banks, and a number of companies that went 
belly up. Nobody anticipated there would be a run. Nobody.”
Kyrsten Sinema (D-AZ)  worried about ordinary people being 
ripped off by malicious actors on the Libra blockchain:
Your head of  product, Kevin Weil, told TechCrunch on 
June  18th152 that  there  are  “no  plans  for  the  Libra 
Association to take a role in actively vetting” developers 
of wallets, exchanges, or other related apps. But failing to 
vet developers would expose Arizonans to scammers, 
which is unacceptable.
… Let’s say an unsavory app developer that’s based in 
Pakistan utilizes an exchange that’s based in Thailand to 
rip off an Arizonan who’s using a wallet that was built in 
Spain,  so  they steal  all of  their Libra. And  that,  of 
course, is minted by an association based in Switzerland. 
So which law enforcement or government or agency in 
which country does the Arizonan call to seek his or her 
Libra and financial recourse in this situation?
Marcus said that there would be full protection for Calibra Wallet 
users — but if  they insisted on using a non-US wallet, “it will be the 
role of  the Libra Association to ensure that there will be proper 
education so that consumers can make informed choices.”
Marcus’ pitch to education didn’t convince.  Ed Perlmutter (D, 
CO-07) said:
We all have the same question for you, and that’s the 
resistance you’re feeling, because we think you’re a bank 
but you’re not quite like a bank, and if you’re a bank, we 
regulate the heck out of  ya, because we have seen a lot 
of  people  lose  money  where  there  hasn’t  been 
regulations. So that’s the resistance that I feel. I want to 
support your innovation, I want to support the efficiency 
you people believe you’re bringing to the table, but I also 
don’t want anybody getting hurt here.

82
Good intentions are not enough
It was glaringly obvious that a new currency at Facebook scale 
would  be  a  systemic  risk  —  it  would  be  big  enough  to  break 
everything.
Regulators and legislators had Libra’s number immediately — they 
knew this kind of  foolishness, and they knew that these Bitcoin 
venture capital bros were absolutely stupid and arrogant enough to do 
another 2008 financial crisis all by themselves.
Marcus was faced with defending the plans for Libra, when the 
plans barely existed as yet. All he could do was restate Facebook’s 
good intentions.
Gregory  Meeks  (D,  NY-05),  Chair  of  the  Subcommittee  on 
Consumer Protections and Financial Institutions, set out the problem:
I  can  say  with  confidence  that  Lehman  Bros,  Bear 
Stearns and the entire subprime mortgage ecosystem did 
not set out to bring the global financial system to its 
knees. I can say with confidence that the legitimately 
brilliant minds and Nobel Prize winners, in fact, behind 
LTCM [Long-Term Capital Management] did not set out to 
trigger the Asian financial crises, but they nearly broke 
the global markets. And I can also say with confidence 
that the deregulation of  the early 1980s and bankers did 
not set out to trigger the savings and loans crisis, but it 
did.
Not only that, they all typically founded their logic in 
innovation, expanding access to financial services, and 
arguments  of  inclusion.  And  yet,  they  all  broke  the 
system.  And  the  people  at  the  bottom  of  the 
socioeconomic  ladder  systemically  paid  the  heaviest 
price. So you may be speaking earnestly when you tell us 
the  lofty  goals,  but  I  was  here  in  Congress  when 
Secretary Paulson came to us and told us we were within 
days of  a complete shutdown of  the global financial 
system. I don’t expect you to understand what that was 
like — but I assure you, it was absolutely terrifying, and 
one of my worst moments in Congress.
Meeks,  Nydia Velázquez (D, NY-07) and  Barry Loudermilk (R, 
GA-14) suggested that Libra be designated “systemically important,” 
which would mean enhanced oversight of  Libra by the  Financial 

83
Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). Marcus said that Libra had been 
talking to FSOC.
Carolyn Maloney (D, NY-12), Chair for the Subcommittee on 
Investor Protection, asked: “Will you commit to doing a small pilot 
program for Libra, first limited to no more than one million users and 
overseen by the Federal Reserve and the SEC?”
In the payments world, small pilot programmes for new ventures 
are routine. This is the standard way of doing a new thing — because 
you never know quite what will happen, and the weird things people 
will do, until you go live. PayPal ran several such pilots when Marcus 
was there.
And yet, Marcus wouldn’t commit to a small pilot — even though 
it  would be  completely ordinary to  just  start  small  to  see what 
happened, like every other new payment initiative does. Maloney 
asked for this repeatedly — “The Libra reserve could be managing 
too much money, which could make it systemic; too much money 
could be pulled out of  banks in order to buy Libra” — but Marcus 
just would not agree to launching Libra with an initial pilot program, 
in the normal way.
Michael San Nicolas (D, Guam; vice-chair, House Committee on 
Financial Services) asked a simple and obvious question: “What does 
the  organization  project  the  average  user  will  have  as  a  Libra 
balance?” Marcus  had no answer: “We have not projected average 
balances at this point.” Marcus couldn’t give even an estimate of how 
much money  Facebook expected Libra users to be holding in the 
system.
San Nicolas hit the roof. “Do you really expect me to believe that? 
Facebook is built around average users, average number of hits. Visa, 
Mastercard, all these huge players are signing up, and you guys have 
no idea how much you expect to have in an average Libra account?” 
He flatly refused to believe that large corporations would sign up as 
Libra Association members without any idea of the numbers.
San Nicolas pointed out the obvious: that the working float in the 
Libra system would be in the hundreds of  billions of dollars, at least 
— and that this would be enough to affect the US dollar. If Libra was 
allowed to launch at that scale, stopping or regulating Libra would be 
politically impossible — no matter the risks.

84
Libra, money laundering and sanctions
Even  the  most  innovation-loving  and  deregulation-minded 
legislators  were  worried  about  money  laundering  risks  and 
international sanctions — where the US has tremendous power to 
levy sanctions, since it controls the dollar.
Making international payments easy was key to Libra’s pitch.  If 
there was any way for bad actors to use Libra to get around anti-
money-laundering (AML) rules, they would — Ann Wagner (R, MN-
02) worried that “North Korea uses cryptocurrencies to get around 
our sanctions all the time.” Would the Libra Association blacklist 
addresses if requested?
Rather  than  answering  directly,  Marcus  kept  responding  to 
sanctions enforcement questions with a pitch to patriotism. “If  we 
don’t lead in this space, others will.” If  Libra didn’t do a coin, some 
other (unnamed) persons would do one, “out of  reach from our 
national security apparatus.” He meant China, and its moves to a 
digital yuan — moves that China had accelerated in direct response to 
the Libra announcement.
Marcus did add that the Libra Association would register with 
FinCEN, and that all wallets operating in the US would be strongly 
compliant — though he didn’t mention wallets outside the US.
Roger Williams (R, TX-25) asked about the white paper statement 
that users would be  pseudonymous on the Libra blockchain, and 
might have multiple addresses. Marcus said that the issue was that 
adding personal information to a blockchain would be irresponsible, 
but the on-ramps and off-ramps would be regulated — though this 
didn’t address anyone who accessed the Libra blockchain directly.
Bill Foster (D, IL-11) was particularly concerned with direct users 
of  the Libra blockchain. “Once a large fraction of  Libra would be 
transferred into self-custody, and then there starts to be a significant 
flow amongst the self-custody entities out on the dark web or other 
places, how do you prevent that from actually allowing things like 
ransomware? … So if there’s one wallet out in some set of islands or 
something like this, that doesn’t follow US … are we just out of luck 
there, and all the illicit transactions will flow through there?”
French  Hill  (R,  AR-02)  asked  about  Libra  and  international 
remittances and Know-Your-Customer (KYC) rules, which are part 
of enforcing AML. Marcus assured him that the Calibra wallet would 
be strongly compliant — but outside of  the US, Libra would be 
taking a “country-by-country approach.”

85
Rep. McHenry pointed out that if  Libra successfully decentralised 
and  went  permissionless,  AML  would  be  impossible  by  design. 
Remember that the entire point of  permissionless decentralisation in 
crypto  was  to  be  beyond  any  possible  government  control  of 
transactions. Marcus claimed that even with a decentralised Libra, the 
Libra Association would “likely” still run most of  the processing 
nodes for the Libra blockchain.
What’s in it for Facebook?
It was entirely unclear how Facebook would make money from 
Libra  —  how  they’d  get  a  return  on  their  not-inconsiderable 
investment, without charging fees or exploiting personal data.
Libra Association members (at least) could buy Libra Investment 
Tokens, which would pay a dividend from profits on the Libra reserve 
— which seemed odd for a nonprofit association. Patrick Toomey (R-
PA)  asked, “Could  you  explain  how  paying  potentially  unlimited 
dividends to investors is not a for-profit operation?” Marcus said that 
dividends would not be unlimited, and that Facebook was discussing 
this with the G7 Working Group on Stablecoins.
The closest Marcus could get to stating a business case for Libra 
was that easier payments would mean that “ninety million businesses” 
on Facebook platforms would expand, and this would give them 
more money to buy ads. He also suggested that Calibra might offer 
financial  services  in  the  future  —  in  partnership  with  financial 
institutions, as Calibra was not going to get into banking.
Sylvia Garcia (D, TX-29) tried and failed to get even a rough 
estimate from Marcus of  what Facebook had spent on Libra to date 
— on all the funding and all the engineering. TechCrunch had asked 
Facebook this question two weeks previously — so it’s a number the 
company should have been able to give a rough value for, by the time 
of the hearing.153
The Libra Association
Marcus stated repeatedly that Facebook was just one Association 
member, and they wouldn’t and couldn’t control it “We don’t want to 
control the network, and we think it’s important that those decisions 
are made collegially with the other cofounding members.”
Legislators didn’t buy this one at all.  Senator Brown said, “You 
know that only Facebook has access to two billion people, and to say 
that you are just one of many is simply not true.”

86
Lacy  Clay  (D,  MO-01)  pointed  out  the  obvious  conflict  of 
interest:  the  Libra  reserve  promised  stability,  and  that  the  Libra 
currency would be backed one-to-one — but all the incentives were 
for the Association to manage the reserve for maximum profit, like 
any other investment portfolio.
Several  noted  that  Facebook  seemed  to  have  chosen  all  the 
Association  members to maintain  its  own  control,  and  Anthony 
Gonzalez (R, OH-16) said: “there’s something glaringly missing from 
the group, which are everyday users” — there was no mechanism for 
Libra’s users to influence the Association.
Rashida Tlaib (D, MI-13) asked: “Can a member of  the Libra 
Association — the group of friends — be voted out by Libra users?” 
Marcus said that “the way that governance will evolve will allow for 
that in the future.”
Tlaib also worried how connected the Association members were 
to Facebook — the overlapping board memberships and investment 
relationships.
Senator  Schatz  had  spoken  to  other  prospective  Association 
members:
What I’m hearing — and they’re terrified to talk about 
this  publicly  —  is  that  members  of  the  consortium 
actually  have  lots  of  questions  too,  similar  to  the 
questions that are being offered on this dais, and they 
have great reservations about moving forward — but 
they don’t want to be left out because of  Facebook’s 
market power.
Jesús “Chuy” García (D, IL-04) said: “Facebook’s voice is more 
like the Godfather’s voice in the Family. It’s true that it’s just one 
voice among many — but, you know, it’s also the only voice that 
matters.”
Switzerland
Several legislators were unhappy that the Libra Association was 
being founded outside the US. Why Switzerland? What was wrong 
with the US?
In his answer to  Mike Rounds (R-SD), Marcus tried to have it 
both ways:
We believe that a global digitally native currency that will 
be used by people all around the world would benefit 
from being headquartered in an international place that is 

87
also  the  home  of  many  respected  international 
organizations … The reality, though, if  you look at the 
current composition of  the Libra Association members, 
those are mostly American companies.
Some  didn’t  buy  this  —  Senator  Brown  spoke  of  Facebook 
wanting to “run their own currency out of  a Swiss bank account,” 
and others spoke of how hard it would be to make US regulation and 
consumer protection reach as far as a Swiss nonprofit.
Some  pro-blockchain  representatives  brought  up  a  lack  of 
regulatory clarity in the US — crypto-assets are under multiple US 
legal  frameworks.  A  few  members  asked  Marcus  if  the  Libra 
Association had been set up in Switzerland to take advantage of that 
country’s clearer regulation of cryptos. Marcus said to Bryan Steil (R, 
WI-01) that “the clarity of regulation was definitely one of the factors 
for Switzerland, but one out of  many. I do think we would have had 
the ability from a regulatory framework to do this in the United 
States.”
Censorship of  payments
Several  Republicans  brought  up  the  possibility  of  payment 
censorship, if  Libra was subject to Facebook’s rules on behaviour. 
Some right-wing media figures had been banned from Facebook for 
breaching its terms of  service — Sean Duffy (R, WI-07) mentioned 
alt-right figure Milo Yiannopoulos and Nation of  Islam leader Louis 
Farrakhan.
Duffy pulled out a twenty-dollar bill, and said how “everybody can 
use a twenty-dollar bill, this twenty-dollar bill doesn’t discriminate on 
anything.” He asked if  Libra would be as free to use as the twenty-
dollar bill.
Marcus said that Facebook did not want to tell people what to do 
with their money, but that they would need to be “very thoughtful” 
about this. Duffy said that the “thoughtful answer” would be: “I’m 
going to behave like a fiat currency — if  you abide by the law, you 
have access.”
Innovation and blockchain
Several in attendance were enthusiastic about Libra — even just as 
an example of  the sort of  innovation that should be encouraged. 
Others were fans of blockchains and cryptocurrency in particular.

88
Rep. McHenry said at the end of the House session:
I don’t know how history’s going to judge this hearing. I 
fear not well, though … there is this underlying fear 
amongst policy makers here on the Hill, because they 
don’t understand cryptocurrency and digital assets. That’s 
my fear, that this will not wear well historically — the 
concerns raised, the questions raised. … I hope there 
won’t be much that is laughed at in 30 years. My fears, 
however,  are  that  the  reactionary  element  that  was 
brought up here today in part will be dealt with with 
great  disdain  after  the  next  generation  of  internet 
technology.
Whoops!
In his written statement to the Senate,154 Marcus said that “for the 
purposes of  data and privacy protections, the Swiss  Federal Data 
Protection and Information Commissioner (FDPIC) will be the Libra 
Association’s privacy regulator.” The FDPIC promptly told CNBC: 
“Until  today  we  have  not  been  contacted  by  the  promoters  of 
Libra.”155 The FDPIC contacted Facebook and gave them until the 
end of August to give them the information they would need.156
(Mark Zuckerberg followed up on this in his October testimony to 
the House: “The misunderstanding there was that I believe that he 
and the team had been working with the primary Swiss financial 
regulator, FINMA,  and now  we are also working  with  the  data 
regulator.”)
Less than an hour after Marcus denied to Rep. Velázquez that 
Libra would attempt to be a bank — “The Libra Association or 
Calibra have no plans in engaging in banking activities” — the official 
Libra Twitter tweeted a 26 June Wall Street Journal article, with the 
text: “By creating a de facto central bank, Libra could succeed where 
other cryptocurrencies fall short,” which was the subheading of  the 
Journal article.157 The tweet was deleted almost immediately — but 
not before others saved screenshots of it.158
Outside experts weigh in
Five  outside  witnesses  appeared  at  the  House  hearing  — 
Professor Chris Brummer of  Georgetown University Law Center 
(who has commented extensively on Libra), Prof. Katharina Pistor of 
Columbia Law School, Robert Weissman of  Public Citizen, Prof. 

89
Gary Gensler of  MIT (who was previously Chairman of  the CFTC), 
and Meltem Demirors of  CoinShares, a long-time cryptocurrency 
advocate.159
Chris Brummer
Prof. Brummer focused on the Libra white paper — and how it 
completely failed to disclose the risks of Libra for consumers.160
If  a currency in the reserve basket dropped in value, using Libra 
would expose ordinary users to foreign exchange risk — and the 
white paper didn’t even list the particular currencies that would be in 
the basket.
There could even be panic-induced runs on Libra if  there was 
trouble at Facebook, at another Libra Association member, or at an 
authorized reseller — or if there was a hack on the Calibra wallet, or 
a hack on a popular app built on the Libra platform.
Facebook’s  governance  plans  for  the  Libra  Association  were 
obscure.  Facebook  claimed  the  goal  of  the  reserve  was  “value 
preservation” — but all the incentives were to work the reserve as 
hard as possible for profit. “Perhaps the most problematic aspect of 
the White Paper’s disclosure is its failure to clearly disclose that 
holders of  Libra are exposed to counterparty risk in the form of 
mismanagement of reserve investments.”
Libra  couldn’t  possibly  comply  with  money  laundering  or 
international sanctions rules by regulating only the resellers, and not 
the  network  itself  —  one  reseller  in  a  lax  jurisdiction  could 
compromise the whole system. The Libra Association itself  would 
need financial intelligence units (FIUs), around the world — the same 
way  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  need  FIUs. 
“Otherwise,  users  of  Libra  coins  could  well  find  themselves 
answering questions by law enforcement officials in the wake of what 
they  thought  were  ordinary  Libra  purchases  …  Ultimately,  the 
weakest link in the network can become a gateway for all kinds of 
wrongdoers.”
Brummer noted the explicit statement in the white paper that the 
Libra blockchain would allow users to control one or more addresses 
not linked to their real-world identity — and how this flouted the 
Bank Secrecy Act travel rule, which requires information such as the 
name and address of  the sender. Prof. Gensler interjected to note 
that “there is not currently a way that you could actually foreclose 
somebody  on  the  sanctions  list  from  getting  this  coin  and 

90
transacting,” unless you listed the addresses of  sanctioned entities in 
the Libra network software itself.
It wasn’t clear whether Libra currency tokens would be securities 
under US law. Libra Investment Tokens — which were still in the 
white paper at this time — certainly would be. The Libra reserve plan 
very closely resembled money market funds and exchange-traded 
funds, and would almost certainly qualify in the US as an investment 
company under the Investment Company Act of 1940.
Katharina Pistor
Prof. Pistor described Libra as a for-profit currency of  currencies 
— it was built to make money for its members from interest on the 
reserve.161 The Libra Association’s legal structure meant it wasn’t 
meaningfully accountable to anyone — not to Libra holders, nor to 
the governments responsible for the safe assets is the Libra reserve.
US legal frameworks leave plenty of room for regulatory arbitrage 
— moving jurisdictions while still being able to wield your financial 
force. Pistor considered it unlikely that Libra, as described in the 
white papers, could be effectively regulated at all.
Libra  would  only  be  as  stable  as  the  public  reserves  of 
government-managed currencies it rested upon — “free riding on a 
public safety net for which they are not paying.” Rep. Velázquez asked 
Pistor about runs on the Libra — Pistor answered that the US would 
likely have to backstop “any uncertainties or run on the Libra, even if 
it emanates from elsewhere in the world.”
Libra would likely be large enough to be a systemic risk if it failed. 
Since the 2008 financial crisis, regulators have required banks to have 
plans to unwind the organisation in an orderly manner in case of 
insolvency. They would have to require the same of Libra.
Pistor noted that the very safe assets the Libra plan rested upon 
were already in high demand. If Libra was successful, the Association 
might have trouble finding sufficient safe assets.
Worse yet, the finance industry might synthesise “safe” assets to 
meet the demand, as they did in the lead-up to the 2008 crisis. When 
house prices went down, these “safe” assets turned toxic overnight. 
“Libra has the potential to transition in no time from ‘too small to 
care’ to ‘too big to fail,’” Pistor said.
A  global  currency  would  require  an  extensive  personal 
identification infrastructure, or it couldn’t meet AML requirements — 
which is what the digital identity proposal in the Libra white paper 

91
was about. “Facebook might become the provider of  a global digital 
identity. The question before us is not whether such identities need to 
be created, but who shall do so — governments that are subject to 
democratic control, or private actors that can insulate themselves 
from any accountability.”
Robert Weissman
On 2 July, thirty-three nonprofits, including Public Citizen, wrote 
to the US House and Senate committees and US regulators with a list 
of  concerns about Libra — on governance, national sovereignty, law 
enforcement, tax policy, consumer protection, privacy, competition 
and systemic risk. “All of  us believe the risks posed by Facebook’s 
proposal are too great to allow the plan to proceed with so many 
unanswered questions.”162 The testimony of  Robert Weissman of 
Public Citizen built upon the letter.163
Libra would let Facebook turn social media market dominance 
into  financial  market  dominance  —  and  then  dominance  of 
commerce  itself.  Calibra  would  let  Facebook  dominate  Libra  in 
practice, even as it had only one vote in the Association.
Runs on Libra were trivially possible — for instance, competition 
between currencies in the Libra basket, such as users selling euros for 
Libra then buying dollars. “It is entirely possible the Association 
would not be able to pay out.” A currency might crash, or a “safe” 
reserve asset might go bad — leaving Libra no longer fully backed.
Rep. Clay asked Weissman about systemic risks if a majority of US 
Facebook users became Libra users. Weissman described how a run 
on  Libra  could  require  government  action  on  the  scale  of  the 
Troubled Asset Relief  Program in the 2008 financial crisis — which 
disbursed $431 billion to prop up distressed shadow banks.
Unless Libra tokens were legally defined as “money,” a lot of  US 
consumer protection laws would not in fact apply. Jurisdiction over 
international transactions was unclear — if  you bought something 
overseas and you were scammed, what could you do about it? Would 
the Libra Association protect Libra users? Weissman said that Libra 
would become “a haven for hucksters”:
Altogether, the world would be looking at a system of 
the old Swiss banking secrecy rules, or Cayman Island 
secrecy on steroids — with not just secret banks, but 
secret transactions across borders into secret banks, or 
into secret non-bank corporations that may exist only 
virtually.

92
Weissman described the anticompetitive power of  Libra: “No 
other company can do what Facebook can do and suddenly magically 
make appear this new product inside your phone, inside your life, 
inside your mind, for two billion people.”
Weissman said that Facebook “has demonstrated that its policies 
and  statements  are  snapshots  in  time  rather  than  real,  abiding 
commitments and guarantees to consumers and the public.” It had 
repeatedly failed to keep even to its voluntary commitments. “In 
short, this is not a corporation that should get the benefit of  the 
doubt.”
Gary Gensler
Prof. Gensler, who led the CFTC from 2009 to 2014, was more 
positive about the Libra project — he thought Libra “may help spur 
greater competition in payments, potentially enhancing access and 
reducing costs.”164
But he warned that the Libra reserve should be regulated by the 
SEC  per  the  Investment  Company  Act  of  1940  as  a  pooled 
investment in foreign currencies, and the Libra Association should be 
registered as an investment advisor.
There would be two classes of investors in Libra — the holders of 
Libra Investment Tokens, who got a dividend, and the holders of 
Libra currency tokens, who got no dividend or interest, and just had 
risks. The two would have conflicting interests.
Alternately, the Libra reserve could be regulated like a bank — 
since it would function as one, in issuing its own private electronic 
banknotes.
Gensler also noted the systemic risk issues that money market 
funds caused in the 2008 financial crisis — and that there would need 
to be clear restrictions on how the Libra reserve managed its assets.
Rep.  Velázquez asked Gensler why Libra was being founded in 
Switzerland rather than the US. He answered:
You could have a nonprofit and yet still pay dividends, 
which is kind of foreign to the way we think here. I think 
it is also a signaling effect to all of  their users that they 
are  less  controlled  by  the  US,  and  when  this  Libra 
reserve gets big at some point in time, if  any developed 
country is going to use the Libra instead of the US dollar 
and Libraize instead of  dollarize, I think it signals in the 

93
future: hey, we’re not under the control of  whatever 
future US president and sanctions regime.
Meltem Demirors
Demirors has long worked in cryptocurrency advocacy. Demirors’ 
main point was that Libra should not be compared to Bitcoin — 
Bitcoin was a public network, but Libra was a private enterprise built 
by and for a large company.165 She pitched for looser regulations on 
Bitcoin companies.
Rep. McHenry asked Demirors about cryptocurrency in general, 
and the challenges for the industry. Demirors described the problems 
with inconsistent regulation, and used Switzerland as an example of a 
country where crypto regulation was clearer.
McHenry asked Demirors’ position on Libra. “Facebook should 
be allowed to innovate just as anyone else in this country is allowed to 
innovate,” she answered, “but it should not be allowed to pursue this 
path under the guise of being an open cryptocurrency like Bitcoin.”
 
After the outside witnesses, Chairwoman Waters concluded the 
hearing, and thanked and led a round of  applause for the witnesses. 
She finished: “No corporation this big or this powerful works as a 
nonprofit without making a lot of  money … we should have more 
hearings and get Mr. Zuckerberg here himself. I’m with that.”

94

95
 
Chapter 11:
July to September 2019:
Libra runs the gauntlet
I think there’s a number of  very constructive feedback 
coming from many of  the regulators and the technical 
staff, from central banks to institutions like the SEC and 
others, and it’s been extremely helpful.
— Christian Catalini82
Things didn’t go any better for the Libra project after the Senate 
and House hearings. The regulators were still unhappy, the central 
banks were still working on responding to this obvious threat to 
economic stability, and the public still didn’t understand what Libra 
was, or why they’d want to start using a whole new currency.
Refreshing the White Papers
Facebook  quietly  updated  the  various  white  papers  after  the 
Senate and House hearings — most notably removing all mention of 
Libra Investment Tokens in the 23 July versions, and replacing it with 
“the distribution of  incentives in the form of  Libra to qualifying 
Founding  Members  per  the  Incentives  Distribution  Policy.”  The 
incentive policy wasn’t set out.166
The main white paper went through eight versions from June 
2019  to  February  2020,  mostly  updating  Libra  Association 
membership  as  prospective  members  dropped  out.  The  Libra 
Association white paper changed the word “investors” to “members” 
between July and August.167
Switzerland on stablecoins
Libra wanted to set up shop in Switzerland — so it absolutely 
needed to be square with the Swiss regulator, the Financial Markets 
Authority (FINMA). Libra contacted FINMA to ask about the legal 
status of  their planned coin, and apply for a licence as a payment 
system.

96
You might think they’d have done that  before announcing their 
project to the world, including their plans to set up in Switzerland — 
but better late than never.
FINMA published their guidance on stablecoins on 11 September 
2019.168 This was a supplement to FINMA’s existing guidance on ICO 
tokens and related crypto-assets — such as existing projects that 
already called themselves “stablecoins.”
If  Libra wanted to run a basket-based coin, the Libra reserve 
would be regulated as a collective investment scheme — and the 
users’ money would be regulated in Switzerland like bank deposits 
were. If  Libra ran coins based on national currencies, the purchasers’ 
money would also be regulated like bank deposits.
FINMA had found previously that a token might need to be 
registered as  all of a bank, a security (an investment scheme) and a 
payment system with anti-money-laundering obligations.
Stablecoins pegged to a national currency at a fixed redemption 
rate — e.g., one token for one Swiss franc — would be regulated as 
bank deposits, and the issuer would need to be licensed as a bank.
When a claim to redeem a token could depend on market prices 
— say, when the token is pegged to a basket of currencies — all risks 
had to be borne by the issuer, or the token itself would be a collective 
investment scheme. If  a token was not redeemable directly with the 
issuer — such as Libra, which could only be redeemed via Libra 
Authorized Resellers — this could trigger a requirement for licensing 
under other rules, such as the Financial Market Infrastructure Act, 
which protects against systemic risks from derivatives (analogous to 
Dodd-Frank in the US).
The  guidance  also  included  a  list  of  questions  for  aspiring 
stablecoin issuers — the issuer would need to answer how the value 
of the coin was calculated, how a basket-based coin worked, and how 
to redeem coins.
FINMA  noted  that  “the  highest  international  anti-money 
laundering standards would need to be ensured throughout the entire 
ecosystem of  the project” — and that Libra in particular required an 
“internationally coordinated approach.”
All of  this would make Libra into a system for well-documented 
users in highly-regulated rich countries — and not so available in 
poorer countries, with billions of under-documented people.
Mark Branson, Director of  FINMA, was interviewed by Neue 
Zürcher Zeitung about Libra on 12 September, the day after the 
stablecoin guidance came out. Swiss politicians had worried that Libra 

97
could be a risk to Switzerland’s reputation — but Branson said that 
FINMA could mitigate that risk with credible regulation, supervision 
and frameworks. But Switzerland couldn’t do it on their own — “a 
project of  such global dimensions can only be addressed through 
international coordination and consultation with other regulators.”169
Branson wasn’t worried by Libra — he said in October, “I am 
much more nervous about projects which develop in a dark corner in 
the  financial  system  somewhere,  spread  themselves  out  through 
cyberspace and one day are too big to be stopped.”170
Swiss  National  Bank chairman  Thomas  Jordan  spoke  on  5 
September on “Currencies, money and digital tokens” — “as long as 
prices, wages and loans are set in Swiss francs, the SNB can influence 
incentives for savers and borrowers via its monetary policy and thus 
ensure price stability over the medium term. However, if  stablecoins 
pegged  to  foreign  currencies  were  to  establish  themselves  in 
Switzerland,  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary  policy  could  be 
impaired.”171
The  Federal Council, the head of  government of  Switzerland, 
followed with a press release in October: “The Federal Council is 
keeping a very close eye on global stablecoin projects and their 
associated opportunities and risks.”172
Other regulators
European Union
In mid-August, the  European Commission started an antitrust 
investigation  into  Libra,  and  sent  questionnaires  to  prospective 
Association members saying that they were “currently investigating 
potential anti-competitive behavior.” The Commission also wanted to 
look into the governance structure of  the Libra Association, and 
Facebook’s plans to integrate Libra into WhatsApp and Messenger.173
Yves  Mersch  of  the  European  Central  Bank spoke  on  2 
September at the ECB Legal Conference. Mersch considered Libra to 
be unusually risky even for a private currency: “I sincerely hope that 
the people of  Europe will not be tempted to leave behind the safety 
and soundness of  established payment solutions and channels in 
favour of the beguiling but treacherous promises of Facebook’s siren 
call.”174
Facebook insisted in September that it had been working with 
regulatory authorities in Europe. French cryptocurrency journalist 

98
Grégory  Raymond  discovered  otherwise:  “According  to  my 
information, the French authorities have not received an application 
for accreditation from Libra (needed to operate in the EU). To their 
knowledge, it’s the same elsewhere in the EU: ‘In the face of the risks 
identified,  Facebook  has  so  far  provided  no  response  to  public 
authorities.’”175
Valdis  Dombrovskis,  the  European  Union  financial  services 
commissioner, sent Facebook a questionnaire in late September about 
money laundering, the financial stability of  Libra reserves, and the 
privacy of  its users’ data.176 Dombrovskis wanted to know how to 
regulate Libra-like coins in Europe — and if  Libra should even be 
allowed to operate in the EU.177
United Kingdom
Mark Carney, Governor of  the Bank of  England, discussed Libra 
in  his  August  2019  speech  at  the  Jackson  Hole  Economic 
Symposium.178 Libra was a “high profile” new entrant into payments, 
and “depending on its design, it could have substantial implications 
for both monetary and financial stability.”
Carney worried about over-reliance on the US dollar. The US 
accounts for 10% of  global trade and 15% of  global GDP — but 
half of trade invoices and two-thirds of global securities are priced in 
dollars. Whenever the US economy is out of step with the rest of the 
world, the Federal Reserve’s interest rates don’t work for economies 
outside the US. This weakens the US in turn.
The Libra proposal inspired Carney to suggest the bankers start a 
new basket-based international currency — a “Synthetic Hegemonic 
Currency … perhaps  through  a network of  central bank digital 
currencies.”
The Financial Times said that, given what a disaster Libra’s launch 
had been, “we hear a lot of  the participants at Jackson Hole were 
rather miffed as to why Carney mentioned Facebook’s stable coin 
idea at all.”179
United States
Between June and October 2019, Facebook hired seven additional 
lobbying firms to talk to the US government about cryptocurrencies 
and finance issues.180

99
The SEC had still not determined whether Libra was a security by 
the time SEC chair Jay Clayton appeared before the House Financial 
Services Committee on September 24.181
Sigal Mandelker, the US Treasury Undersecretary of  Terrorism 
and Financial Intelligence, met in Switzerland on 10 September with 
officials from FINMA and the Bank for International Settlements to 
discuss Libra and cryptocurrencies.
Mandelker  said,  “Whether  it’s  Bitcoin,  Ethereum,  Libra,  our 
message is the same to all of these companies: anti-money laundering 
and combating the financing of  terrorism has to be built into your 
design from the get-go.” She said that the cryptocurrency industry 
had put a lot of  effort into developing the technology — but far too 
little into regulating the networks they were building.182 “They will 
have to comply with US standards if they’re going to survive.”183
Australia
On  31  July,  the  Australian  Securities  and  Investments 
Commission’s  Emerging  Threats  and  Harm  Committee  met  to 
discuss  “the  potential  disruption  to  Australian  financial  markets 
posed by the Libra crypto-asset and ecosystem” and its “many threats 
and risks, including the proliferation of  scams based on Libra via 
mobile apps.”
Facebook’s  Australian  executives  were  unable  to  answer  four 
regulators’  technical  questions  on  9  July.  A  meeting  in  October 
between senior Australian officials and Facebook US executives left 
the regulators no happier.
Elizabeth Hampton of  the Office of  the Australian Information 
Commissioner (OAIC) emailed her fellow regulators: “If we don’t get 
answers to these questions from the US-based team we will then need 
to consider whether formal powers are exercised where available.”
A spokesman  for  the  OAIC  said  in  November:  “We  remain 
concerned that Facebook and Calibra have only made broad public 
statements  about  privacy,  and  they  have  not  addressed  the 
information handling practices that will be in place to secure and 
protect personal information.”184
Singapore
Ravi Menon, managing director of  the  Monetary Authority of 
Singapore, said in September that “the global regulatory community 
is coming around to the view that we need a broadly consistent 

100
approach. Some of  the macro financial risks are actually global in 
nature. It’s not as if one regulator can act on its own.”
Menon was interested in the possible benefits of Libra — but said 
“the history of  private money over the last three thousand years has 
not been a good one.” Private issuers would have incentive to debase 
the currency — to just issue coins whenever it was profitable for the 
currency’s proprietors.185
Trusting Facebook with your privacy
Facebook’s obvious use case for a payment system was to be yet 
another source of personal information on users. Every regulator and 
commentator noticed this immediately.
Calibra staff  promised that Facebook would keep Calibra data 
separate from other Facebook data — though without any details, as 
Calibra’s systems didn’t exist yet.186
On 5 August, data protection officials from Albania, Australia, 
Burkina Faso, Canada,  the  EU,  the UK  and  the USA wrote to 
Facebook, worried about Libra’s privacy risks — particularly given 
Facebook’s terrible track record with personal data.187
Did consumers even want Libra?
It wasn’t clear that consumers were even that interested in Libra. 
Brent Thill, a financial analyst at  Jefferies, surveyed 600 US social 
media users in July. Eighty percent said they were unlikely to buy 
Libra — mainly because they didn’t trust Facebook.188
The Libra plan brought to mind successful social media payment 
systems  like  WeChat  Pay  and  Alipay  in  China.  But  in  Europe, 
consumers already had good mobile payment systems — and the US 
was fast catching up.
The promise of  better cross-border payments would appeal to 
some users — but this wouldn’t be the mass market that Libra would 
need. Even then, it was unclear how Libra would make cross-border 
payments  better  while  keeping  proper  regulation  —  Facebook 
seemed to assume that blockchain-based tokens had special qualities 
they didn’t actually set out anywhere.
But the Libra project’s biggest problem wasn’t the end users — it 
was its own internal troubles. These boiled over in October.

101
 
Chapter 12:
October 2019:
Libra’s bad month
It  was  a  neat  idea  that’ll  never  happen,  and  I  have 
nothing else to say about it.
— Jamie Dimon, JP Morgan Chase, on Libra,
18 October 2019189
Libra’s issues came to a head in October — when regulators 
worked  out how  to deal with “global stablecoins,”  most of  the 
payment companies left Libra, and Mark Zuckerberg failed to sell 
Congress on Facebook’s bona fides. And what was left of  the Libra 
Association formally launched.
The payment processors leave
All the payment companies left the Libra Association before the 
official  October  launch,  except  PayU  —  and  Facebook  seemed 
blindsided by this.
From June through to October 2019, there wasn’t much visible 
activity around the Association. The Swiss nonprofit association itself 
technically had no members other than Facebook, and Facebook was 
the only company paying for staff  or development — the other 
members were just lending their names to the endeavour.
But all was not well in the background.
Regulatory scrutiny spooked at least three members as early as 
August — two considered cutting ties, and a third worried about 
public support for Libra attracting the wrong sort of  attention. “I 
think it’s going to be difficult for partners who want to be seen as in 
compliance  to  be  out  there  supporting  it,”  said  one  company 
representative.190
Prospective  members  started  worrying  when  regulators  and 
politicians around the world hammered on the theme of  Libra as 
funding terrorists and criminals, and as a threat to the world financial 
system.  PayPal  thought  Facebook  hadn’t  really  addressed  the 
backlash, and wasn’t happy with Facebook not having put in the work 

102
with regulators before the launch — “companies don’t want that to 
bleed into their businesses,” said one person close to the company.191
Facebook was frustrated in turn by its partners not coming to the 
party.  But,  as  one  of  the  members  said,  “Some  of  those 
conversations  should  have  taken  place  before  the  launch,  to 
understand how regulators would think about this, so there wasn’t so 
much pushback.”
Facebook  set  up  a  meeting  for  Association  members  in 
Washington DC on 3 October — but on 1 October, the Wall Street 
Journal reported that Visa, Mastercard and other members were 
planning to leave.192
David Marcus tweeted to deny the Wall Street Journal story: “The 
part of  this article suggesting we weren’t on top of, or didn’t share 
detailed information about how  to secure Libra and protect the 
network against illegal activity is categorically untrue; (worth calling 
BS).”193 But other press — who had spoken to the members who 
were leaving — backed up the Journal’s claims. 
PayPal pulled out of the 3 October meeting, and announced it was 
leaving Libra on Friday 4 October, two days after Marcus’ denial. The 
company deleted its original June press release about joining the Libra 
Association.194
The Libra project was defiant: “We’re better off  knowing about 
this  lack  of  commitment  now,  rather  than  later,”  said  Libra 
communications chief Dante Disparte.
On 8 October, US Senators  Sherrod Brown and  Brian Schatz 
wrote to Visa, MasterCard, and Stripe, warning them against signing 
up to Libra until Facebook could answer the many deep concerns 
over the project:195
Facebook appears to want the benefits of  engaging in 
financial activities without the responsibility of  being 
regulated as a financial services company. Facebook is 
attempting to accomplish that objective by shifting the 
risks and the need to design new compliance regimes on 
to regulated members of  the Libra Association like your 
companies. If  you take this on, you can expect a high 
level of  scrutiny from regulators not only on Libra-
related payment activities, but on all payment activities. 
On  11  October,  five  more  members  left  together:  payment 
providers Stripe, Visa, Mastercard and Mercado Pago, and auction site 
eBay.196

103
Ajay Banga, CEO of  Mastercard, said later that he had pulled 
Mastercard out because he couldn’t get a hard commitment that “key 
members” of the Association would “not do anything that is not fully 
compliant with local law” — such as basic due diligence and know-
your-customer. “Every time you talked to the main proponents of 
Libra, I said ‘Would you put that in writing?’ They wouldn’t.”197
Banga didn’t see how Libra would make its money. “When you 
don’t understand how money gets made, it gets made in ways you 
don’t like.” And Libra’s claims of  “financial inclusion” didn’t make 
any coherent sense to him.
Some  of  the  companies  who  left  the  Libra  project  in  early 
October said Facebook had underestimated the regulatory reaction 
— and had greatly oversold how committed other members were.198
Facebook’s ongoing privacy scandals and antitrust investigations 
meant Libra was tainted by association — “Facebook has been a 
lightning rod,” said one former member. Facebook had thought the 
launch  would  be  a  “tremendous  rollout”  —  but  they  didn’t 
understand how serious the former members’ worries were.
Several companies said that the final straw had been when Mark 
Zuckerberg was called on 9 October to testify before Congress, and 
when  the  senators  wrote  to  the  payment  companies.  “Some 
companies’  entire  business  models  were  publicly  threatened  by 
incredibly powerful senators,” said one, “who threatened to subject 
them to higher levels of scrutiny if they even so much as had a Libra 
node on one of their servers.”199
Senator Brown issued a statement on the payment companies 
leaving: “Large payment companies are wise to avoid legitimizing 
Facebook’s private, global currency. Facebook is too big and too 
powerful, and it is unconscionable for financial companies to aid it in 
monopolizing our economic infrastructure. I trust others will see the 
wisdom of avoiding this ill-conceived undertaking.”200
US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin disputed that the senators’ 
letter had been a threat to the payment companies — he thought it 
was just a “very clear” statement that Libra had to meet anti-money-
laundering standards. “I think they realized that they’re not ready, 
they’re not up to par. And I assume some of  the partners got 
concerned and dropped out until they meet those standards.”201
Olaf Scholz, the German Finance Minister, was also pleased at the 
departures:  “It’s  a  good  sign  that  important  companies  have 
withdrawn from this project. I see the project as a threat to the 
autonomy of  states and to democratic governance in our society. We 

104
must ensure that the issuance of  a currency remains a matter for 
states and not large private companies.”202
Booking Holdings (Priceline) dropped out on 14 October, just 
before the first official meeting of  the Libra Association. Booking 
didn’t comment on its departure203 — but a source told the Financial 
Times that “it was not a company that liked to be associated with 
controversy.”204
David Marcus was sanguine. “Of course, it’s not great news in the 
short term, but in a way it’s liberating,” he tweeted205 He told a panel 
at the International Monetary Fund conference in Washington on 16 
October: “It will take time for us to address all of  the regulatory 
concerns that were raised and it’s our duty and our responsibility to 
come with answers to all of  these questions … I think once we’ve 
done this then I think we’ll see more banks and traditional financial 
services firms join the effort.”206
In the wake of  almost all the payment processors leaving, analysts 
Moffett Nathanson wrote:207
We believe Libra will fail without the involvement of the 
major payments players, as they bring essential, deep 
payments  expertise,  trusted  payments  brands,  global 
acceptance and settlement networks, and relationships 
with every major financial institution, government, and 
regulatory body around the world.
That is — the precise list of  things Facebook would need to get 
Libra off the ground.
Regulator reactions
Bruno Le Maire, France’s finance minister, wrote in the Financial 
Times on 17 October: “Facebook’s Libra is a threat to national 
sovereignty.”208 Le Maire’s solution was to innovate in payments and 
technology — but under the central banks. “Neither political nor 
monetary sovereignty can be shared with private interests.”
Benoît Cœuré of  the  European Central Bank said in October: 
“There is certainly no judgement that stablecoins shouldn’t exist. In 
the case of  Europe, neither the Commission nor the ECB intend to 
make Europe a no-fly zone for stablecoins. But when we talk about 
people’s  money,  there  is  no  trade-off  between  innovation  and 
safety.”209

105
Cœuré worried about smaller and developing countries — they 
might  get  cheaper  and  faster  payments,  but  they  risked 
“stablecoinisation.”
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the international money 
laundering and terrorist financing watchdog, said on 18 October that 
stablecoins would be subject to the same rules as cryptocurrencies 
and traditional assets, and worried about “new risks regarding money 
laundering and terrorist financing.” FATF said it would report on 
stablecoins in 2020.210
Economist  and  former  Greek  Minister  of  Finance  Yanis 
Varoufakis was very impressed with the ideas behind Libra — but not 
that it was a private company project. He suggested in October that 
the International Monetary Fund should run a Libra-like coin itself, 
as an international trading currency. “Brilliant ideas that would be 
catastrophic  in  the  hands  of  buccaneering  privateers  should  be 
pressed into public service.”211
On 13 October,  Randal Quarles, chair of  the  Financial Stability 
Board (FSB), wrote a letter to G20 finance ministers and central bank 
governors  discussing  the  risks  of  “global  stablecoins.”  The  FSB 
worried that such coins “have the potential to become systemically 
important,  including  through  the  substitution  of  domestic 
currencies.” The FSB would submit a report in 2020.212
Federal Reserve Governor Lael Brainard spoke at the Future of 
Money in the Digital Age conference on 16 October on “Digital 
Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape.”213
Brainard warned against any entity that wanted to act like a bank 
without being regulated like a bank. She set out rules for coins like 
Libra  —  compliance  with  Know-Your-Customer  regulations, 
especially across borders; consumer protections like bank accounts 
have; consumer data protection; and defining just what the “various 
players in the Libra ecosystem” are doing financially.
Brainard talked up the coming  FedNow payment system —  to 
replace the ACH bank transfer system, which could take days to send 
money, with an instant settlement system, in the manner of the UK’s 
Faster Payments Scheme. This would leave workarounds like Libra 
more or less superfluous inside the US.

106
Bank for International Settlements: 
“Investigating the impact of  global 
stablecoins”
The twenty-six central banks on the Committee on Payments and 
Market Infrastructure of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
invited Libra’s founders to Basel, Switzerland, to talk with them on 16 
September. The meeting was chaired by Benoît Cœuré of the ECB.214 
Cœuré said after the meeting that stablecoins were “largely untested” 
at any sort of scale, and that there would be a high bar for regulatory 
approval.215
This meeting fed into the BIS and G7’s stablecoin report, started 
in July and released on 17 October: “Investigating the impact of 
global stablecoins.”216 The report was closely read by every banker 
and regulator in the world who was wondering how to respond to 
Libra, and by the US House before they questioned Mark Zuckerberg.
The report names Libra itself  only in the footnotes — but it’s all 
about Libra:
Some risks are amplified and new risks might arise if 
adoption is global in nature. Stablecoin initiatives built on 
an existing — large and/or cross-border — customer 
base may have the potential to scale rapidly to achieve a 
global or other substantial footprint. These are referred 
to as “global stablecoins” (GSCs).
Stablecoin systems are payment systems, and the biggest problem 
with international payments is not the technology — it’s compliance 
with  anti-money-laundering  laws.  Cryptocurrencies  mostly  work 
around this by ignoring it — but Libra couldn’t be allowed to do that.
Sound governance is essential. Regulators need confidence that 
the coin is not being run by slapdash bozos — such as believers in 
weird Bitcoin economics, which the Committee politely phrases as: 
“Sound governance may be especially challenging in the case of 
permissionless DLT systems.” (DLT stands for  Distributed Ledger 
Technology, a common euphemism for “blockchain.”)
Stablecoins must ensure fair pricing — not only when they’re sold 
directly by the issuer, but in secondary markets. The Committee 
warned specifically against the sort of  shenanigans we see in crypto 
trading:
they  may  have  an  incentive  to  disclose  untruthful 
information on their activities, such as the number of 

107
customers and trading volume for advertising and other 
purposes.  Alternatively,  stablecoin  issuers  could 
intentionally (or unintentionally) mislead their customers 
on the critical functions they perform, such as the way 
they manage collateral assets.
A stablecoin must, of  course, have robust computer security — 
they can’t be as hackable as the systems in the cryptocurrency world 
keep turning out to be.
Consumers must be protected — in ways they presently aren’t 
when using cryptocurrencies:
If  there are unauthorised payments from a stablecoin 
account, there should be clarity on what rights the holder 
has to claim a refund and clear instructions on how to 
obtain  a  refund.  Concerns  over  information  and 
consumer  understanding  could  be  exacerbated  by 
misleading marketing and the potential for misselling, as 
has been observed in the wider cryptoasset market.
Because we’re talking about Facebook, the report mentions data 
protection. Specifically, that if  you put anything that may constitute 
personal data onto a blockchain — a permanent, immutable ledger — 
you’ll  run  head-first  into  Europe’s  General  Data  Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), and the “right to be forgotten.”
A popular stablecoin will be a systemic risk. A single coin winning 
in the market could have anti-competitive network effects. The price 
stabilisation mechanism needs high standards of risk management — 
and must guard against runs on the coin.
A global stablecoin’s reserve might be large enough to affect 
financial markets — especially if they buy up all the high-quality cash-
equivalent assets. Countries with less stable currencies risk sudden 
Libraisation, the replacement of  their local currencies with Libra — 
particularly  “given  the  inability  to  hold  sovereign-to-sovereign 
discussions on the public policy implications of such substitution.”
The report wasn’t entirely negative on global stablecoins. “Recent 
GSC initiatives have highlighted the shortcomings in cross-border 
payments and access to transaction accounts, and the importance of 
improving  access  to  financial  services  and  cross-border  retail 
payments.” But the initiatives will have to show that they will actually 
improve access and payments — not just say that they want to.

108
The Libra Association launches
The Libra Association officially formed on 14 October 2019, with 
the remaining twenty-one members signing on. The founding board 
was  David  Marcus,  Matthew  Davie  (Kiva),  Patrick  Ellis  (PayU), 
Kathryn Haun (Andreessen Horowitz) and Wences Casares (Xapo).217
Mark Zuckerberg stressed to Congress on 23 October that the 
Libra  Association  was  much  more  than  Facebook  —  and  that 
Facebook  might  even  pull  out  of  the  Association  if  the  other 
members took Libra in a direction Facebook couldn’t work with.
But as of October, Facebook was still Libra’s only financial backer 
— and other members said that Libra would fall apart if  Facebook 
pulled out.218 Association members had yet to put in their $10 million. 
Members told the BBC that there was no timeline for contributing — 
though all who were asked said they would likely put their money in: 
“The feeling is that we needed to form, ratify a budget, and then 
figure out how  to  fund that  budget,  rather than  the other way 
around.”219
Dante Disparte admitted on 14 October that Libra might not 
make  a  2020  release.  “Even  though  we  may  be  ready  with  the 
technology,  the regulatory piece is  the  bit  that carries  the  most 
uncertainty … Our commitment is that the project will not launch 
until such time as it has met all the necessary regulatory approvals on 
both sides of the Atlantic.”220
David Marcus on the state of  Libra
While Mark Zuckerberg was preparing for the House hearing, 
David Marcus was meeting Congressional staff, and giving speeches 
on Libra to a World Bank meeting and to the Group of Thirty (G30), 
an international group of financiers and academics.
Marcus told the New York Times221 that politicians had been 
negative — but he said that regulators had been much more positive 
in private.
He took credit for bringing the Libra ideas into discussion: “We 
didn’t launch anything. We opened up the idea that maybe it was a 
good thing to try to do something new to advance the state of access 
to digital money in general.” He told Fortune, “Everyone is now 
talking about digital currencies around the world — everyone. And if 
it hadn’t come from us, that timeline — to make progress in having 
the right framework for digital currencies — would have taken much 
longer.”17

109
Marcus didn’t regret how Libra was announced, and he disagreed 
that Facebook should have done more to bring regulators on board 
ahead of  the launch — even as the payment companies who had left 
the Libra Association earlier in the month specifically cited the lack 
of  engagement  with  regulators.  “Even  if  we  spent  ten  years 
outreaching, you’d still hear the same thing.”
Marcus claimed the overwhelming negative response was actually 
good news for Libra — “We’ve advanced the dialogue on the fact that 
the status quo was not and should not be an option and that we need 
to move forward with a better system to enable more people to 
participate in the financial system.”
He had just one regret: “If  I had to do it all over again, I would 
probably just focus on what this thing really is, which is a new 
payment system.”
The end of  Libra?
At  the  Institute  of  International  Finance (IIF)  meetings  in 
Washington DC in mid-October, bankers casually spoke in the past 
tense about Libra — amazed at Facebook’s spectacular failures of 
judgement.40
After months of  negative reactions, Zuckerberg’s House hearing 
on 23 October was widely seen as the make-or-break moment for 
Libra — whether a company like Facebook would be allowed to start 
a financial enterprise of globally systemic scale.

110

111
 
Chapter 13:
Mark Zuckerberg before
the US House
The House Committee on Financial Services was keen to discuss 
Libra with Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of  Facebook — the man who 
would have the final say on the project. A hearing was announced on 
9 October 2019, to be held on 23 October: “An Examination of 
Facebook and Its Impact on the Financial Services and Housing 
Sectors.” Zuckerberg would be the sole witness testifying,  in what 
turned out to be a six-hour grilling.222
After the past few months of  the world heaping ordure on Libra, 
this was Zuckerberg’s last chance to make this plan fly with the 
legislators who could make or break it — and he failed to bring fresh 
answers.
The Committee had many more questions about Facebook’s past 
and ongoing misbehaviour than they did about Libra itself. But those 
questions were explicitly about whether Facebook was a fit company 
to run a scheme like Libra.
Zuckerberg spoke in a clear, relaxed and confident tone — but he 
was weak on detail. Zuckerberg’s glibness contrasted with David 
Marcus’ earnest precision in the July hearing.
Zuckerberg dodged questions about Libra itself  by talking about 
Facebook’s Calibra wallet instead, and he punted tricky questions to 
the  “independent”  Libra  Association  —  as  if  Facebook  hadn’t 
founded the Association, and wasn’t its sole  funder. He seemed 
unclear on many details of  the Libra project — including questions 
that were follow-ups to questions that Marcus had been asked in July.
Both  sides  of  the  House  were  still  sceptical  of  Libra.  Bill 
Huizenga  (R,  MI-02)  commented:  “You  have  accomplished 
something that nobody, and I mean nobody, thought was possible — 
Brad Sherman, Chair Waters, many on the other side of  the aisle, 
actually agree with and in fact, use tweets by the President to support 
their position. I never thought I would see the day, but here we are.”
Several House members were quite enthusiastic about Libra. But 
even  they  wondered  about  the  details  of  Libra’s  anti-money-
laundering compliance — particularly given that all the US-based 
payment  processors had suddenly  left  the  Libra  Association  just 

112
weeks before — and why the Association was based in Switzerland if, 
as Zuckerberg said several times, Libra was an extension of American 
financial power that was urgently needed to fight China’s planned 
digital coin.
Zuckerberg may have been wondering just what on earth his 
underlings had dropped him in with this Libra project.
The hearing opens
Press and staff  crowded around the committee room from 7AM. 
The public gallery filled for the hearing, with queues around the 
building.223
The Chair, Maxine Waters (D, CA-43), launched the proceedings 
just after 10AM with an excoriation of  Facebook. “I’ve come to the 
conclusion that it would be beneficial for all if Facebook concentrates 
on  addressing  its  many  existing  deficiencies  and  failures  before 
proceeding any further on the Libra project.”224 225
Waters  spoke  of  the  many  ways  that  Facebook  had  “utterly 
failed.”  The company had failed on diversity and inclusion.  It had 
been caught in “redlining,”  when housing advertisements were not 
shown to users of particular races — which Facebook was being sued 
for  both  by  the  US  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development,  and  privately  by  housing  charities.  Antitrust 
investigations were active in 47 states and the District of  Columbia. 
The  company  had  been  fined $5  billion  by  the  FTC  over  the 
Cambridge Analytica scandal. Facebook had enabled the government 
of Russia to interfere in the 2016 election.
“It’s clear to me,” said Waters, “and to anyone who hears this list, 
that perhaps you believe that you’re above the law. And given the 
company size and reach, it should be clear why we have serious 
concerns about your plans to establish a global digital currency that 
would challenge the US dollar. In fact, you have opened up a serious 
discussion about whether Facebook should be broken up.”
The Ranking Member,  Patrick McHenry (R, NC-10), said that 
“there’s a lot of  anger out there, and now it’s being directed at the 
architects of  this system. That’s why you’re here, Mr. Zuckerberg.” 
But he was much more positive about Libra’s potential: “If  history 
has taught us anything, it’s better to be on the side of  American 
innovation, competition and most importantly the freedom to build a 
better future for all of  us,” he said. “American innovation is on trial 
this day, in this hearing.”

113
Zuckerberg admitted that Facebook had “faced a lot of  issues 
over the past few years, and I’m sure there are a lot of  people who 
wish it were anyone but Facebook who were helping to propose this.” 
He quickly went into the pitch for Libra: “The financial industry is 
stagnant, and there is no digital, financial architecture to support the 
innovation that we need. I believe that this problem can be solved 
and Libra can help.” He warned that “China is moving quickly to 
launch a similar idea in the coming months.” He said that Facebook 
was working on its bias and diversity issues.
Facebook’s past record
This hearing was not just about Libra itself  — it was about 
Facebook’s fitness to run a financial institution of  systemic scale. 
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s (D, NY-14) grilling of Zuckerberg went 
viral: “I think you, of  all people, can appreciate using a person’s past 
behaviour in order to determine, predict, or make decisions about 
future behaviour.”
Nearly half  the representatives present, from both parties, raised 
serious  concerns  about Facebook.  Many  mentioned  Facebook’s 
extensive  track  record  of  privacy  violations  —  including  how 
Facebook built data profiles on people who weren’t even Facebook 
users — and how they found it hard to believe that Facebook really 
would  keep  data  from  the  Calibra  wallet  sequestered  from  the 
Facebook  advertising  engine,  when  Facebook  had  integrated 
WhatsApp data after promising not to.
Others raised the abuse of  Facebook data in biasing elections, 
including the Cambridge Analytica scandal, and in vote suppression. 
Ocasio-Cortez questioned Zuckerberg closely on what he knew, and 
when he knew it. Members were not happy with Facebook refusing to 
fact-check claims in political advertising.  Alma Adams (D, NC-12) 
and Dean Phillips (D, MN-03) wondered if  Libra would become just 
another tool for bad actors to abuse.
Lacy Clay (D, MO-01) and David Scott (D, GA-13) asked about 
Facebook’s “redlining” housing advertisements. Zuckerberg said that 
“our policies have always been that discrimination is not allowed” … 
and how Facebook had entered into a settlement to remove the 
discrimination that they had been allowing for years.
Madeleine Dean (D, PA-04) asked: “From 2009 until this very 
year, while under a consent decree to clean up your credibility, your 
credibility with your customers, to protect their privacy, to protect 

114
them from deceptive practices — you failed to do that for 10 years. 
Am I correct?”
Zuckerberg  said  that  he  “wouldn’t  agree  with  that 
characterization.”  Dean  noted  that  Facebook  had  been  fined  $5 
billion “in recognition of that failure.”
Zuckerberg said to several members that the compliance regimes 
Facebook had been placed under, owing to  its string of  repeated 
violations, were actually  good news for the company’s future good 
behaviour — because now Facebook was being closely monitored. So 
letting Libra proceed would work out just fine.
Several representatives really didn’t buy this. Jesús “Chuy” García 
(D,  IL-04)  put  forward  the  “Keep  Big  Tech  Out  Of  Finance” 
discussion draft from July as a bill:226 “Whenever we have blurred the 
lines between commerce and banking in this country, we have run 
into problems. I don’t think we can trust you.”
Other objections were less substantial. Bill Posey (R, FL-08) chose 
this  hearing to object  to Facebook  having  restricted anti-vaccine 
activism on the site as misleading health advice. Zuckerberg politely 
replied that “I don’t think it would be possible for anyone to be 100% 
confident, but my understanding of  the scientific consensus is that it 
is important that people get their vaccines.”
Money laundering and terrorist financing
The House still demanded strong anti-money-laundering (AML) 
provisions in Libra — to block criminals and terrorists.
Zuckerberg  said  that  Facebook  had  artificial  intelligence 
technology that would help detect questionable transactions — much 
as it tried to detect terrorist content on the social network. Denver 
Riggleman (R, VA-05) asked about algorithmic enforcement of AML 
rules.  Zuckerberg  said  they  were  “looking  at  whether  there  are 
elements of  the AML or KYC [Know-Your-Customer] regulations that 
can be encoded at the network level.”
Zuckerberg said several times that Facebook’s Calibra wallet would 
have solid identity requirements. Carolyn Maloney (D, NY-12) didn’t 
think this was enough: “Will you commit to not supporting any other 
anonymous  wallets  for  Libra? I  consider this  a national  security 
issue.” But Zuckerberg would only commit for Calibra, and not for 
Libra itself.

115
Libra versus China
Zuckerberg  repeatedly  pitched  Libra  as  an  American  weapon 
against China’s plans for a digital coin:
We need to trade off  and think about and weigh any 
risks of a new system against what I think are surely risks 
if  a Chinese financial system becomes the standard in 
more countries, because then it would be very difficult, if 
not impossible, for us to impose our sanctions.
Anthony Gonzalez (R, OH-16) wasn’t convinced. “I think you’ll 
be hard pressed to find somebody who’s more of a hawk on China in 
this committee. Like, this isn’t Mark Zuckerberg versus Xi Jinping.”
Facebook had previously tried and failed to push into China, and 
Zuckerberg had even started  learning Mandarin at one point. “I 
probably, ten years ago, would have been more optimistic that trying 
to work in China could have contributed to making a more open 
society,” he said.
Rep. McHenry asked: “You see Alipay and WeChat Pay working. 
Why not just do a Facebook version of Alipay in order to level this?” 
Zuckerberg said that the American banking system had a lot of 
creaky legacy — “part of the infrastructure that they’re building on is 
a lot more modern than some of  what we would have to build on 
here.”
Zuckerberg did admit to Andy Barr (R, KY-06) that China had put 
its programme to start a central bank digital currency into high gear 
specifically  because  of  Libra  —  that  Facebook  had  caused  the 
problem they were now selling a solution to:
As soon as we put out this white paper on Libra, what 
we saw was, in China, especially, they immediately kicked 
off  this public-private partnership with some of  their 
biggest companies in order to race to try to build a 
system like this quickly, a digital renminbi.
Why not just run Libra on dollars?
The US government is understandably fond of  the US dollar — 
as Juan Vargas (D, CA-51) put it, “the dollar is very important to us as 
a tool of  American power, and also a tool of American values. So we 
would much prefer to put sanctions on a country than send our 
soldiers there. So when something threatens the dollar, we get very 
nervous.”

116
Congress wasn’t so happy at the idea of Facebook running a non-
American basket currency at large enough scale to be a systemic risk. 
Michael San Nicolas (D, Guam) went into some detail about all the 
ways a basket reserve could go wrong.
Steve  Stivers  (R,  OH-15)  asked:  “But  why  create  a  private 
currency? Why not just pick a currency and use that as part of  your 
payment system?” French Hill (R, AR-02) also suggested that Libra 
should just use dollars.  Sylvia Garcia (D, TX-29) said Libra should 
talk to the Federal Reserve about an official digital dollar.
Zuckerberg answered that Libra  was intended to  be usable and 
welcomed globally — though it would be substantially based on the 
US dollar. He admitted he didn’t entirely buy into the basket plan 
himself  — “I, personally, am much more focused on being able to 
help innovate and build a global payment system than I am in any 
specific makeup of  what a currency or reserve might look like” — 
and said that  they were also  discussing a possible system based on 
individual sovereign currencies.
Zuckerberg was keen to reassure the Committee that the currency 
basket would mostly be US dollars. “I actually think that a project like 
this could be important for extending America’s financial leadership.” 
He suggested a regulation requiring the basket to be primarily US 
dollars.
The Libra Association
Several  companies  had  left  the  Libra  Association  earlier  in 
October. None had given reasons officially, but sources at some of 
the payment processors had told the press that Facebook hadn’t given 
sufficient attention to regulatory compliance.
Ann Wagner (R, MO-02) worried that the payment processors had 
left because of  “concerns whether you’re up to the task of  meeting 
our money laundering and regulatory standards.”  Scott Tipton (R, 
CO-03) and  Ted Budd (R, NC-13) wondered how Libra would do 
sufficiently strong AML without any of  the US payment processors 
on hand — whether they’d be starting from scratch.
Zuckerberg said that the payment processors had left because 
Libra was “a risky project, and I think that there’s been a lot of 
scrutiny.”
Gregory Meeks (D, NY-05) noted that “you do have a trust factor. 
I’ve met with a lot of your investors who are pulling out of Libra.”

117
Al  Green  (D,  TX-09)  was  concerned  that  Libra  Association 
member companies were mostly headed by straight white men — 
“The public needs to know whether this is an organization that is 
truly diverse or whether it is an organization that is owned and 
operated by a small group of  persons, all of  whom have similar 
characteristics.”
Rep. Huizenga and Rep. Gonzalez got Zuckerberg to confirm that 
if  the  Libra  Association  went  ahead  without  US  approval,  then 
Facebook would leave the Association.
Lance Gooden (R, TX-05) wanted Libra brought back to the US: 
“One of  the things that was troubling to me was this idea that we’ve 
got a great American company like Facebook, and a great American 
success story like yourself, who’s pushing this idea on foreign soil.”
Rep. Vargas was pretty sure that Facebook could bring the Libra 
Association back from Switzerland to the US if  it wanted to — 
“Seems to be falling apart without you guys, frankly. So they don’t 
seem to exist without you. You’re the big dog in this fight. Honestly, 
if  you decide to bring it to the United States, it comes to the United 
States. I mean, you can hide behind that a little bit, but I won’t believe 
it.”
Ayanna Pressley (D, MA-07) concurred: “Mr. Zuckerberg, Libra is 
Facebook, and Facebook is you.”
Zuckerberg reiterated that Switzerland was a good place to base 
Libra as an international organisation — but repeated that “we want 
to extend American financial leadership across the world.”
Rep. Gooden noticed that the Libra Investment Token proposal 
— where Association members would pay in $10 million each to start 
the Libra reserve, and get dividends from the interest on the reserve 
—  had  been  quietly  removed  from  the  Libra  white  papers. 
Zuckerberg confirmed that the dividend idea had been “modified or 
abandoned.”
How do you make your money, anyway?
Billion-dollar corporations aren’t famous for starting large systems 
with obvious potential for profit, and handing them to the public for 
free. Facebook didn’t plan to charge fees to use their Calibra wallet, or 
to make Libra transactions — so what was Facebook getting out of 
Libra and Calibra?
“The vision here is to make it so that people can send money to 
each other as easily, and securely, and cheaply as it is to send a text 

118
message,” said Zuckerberg. “I think that sending money would be a 
very useful utility to add for people around the world, in addition to 
the messaging products that we have.”
Zuckerberg said that Libra would help encourage direct sales from 
the Facebook and Instagram Marketplaces. It would reduce friction 
for businesses on Facebook — and so help sell more ads. Jennifer 
Wexton (D, VA-10) wondered: “are you going to mine data and use 
that to monetize the data that you get from people’s purchases?” 
Zuckerberg was quick to state again that Calibra data would not be 
used in this way.
Banking the unbanked
Zuckerberg hammered on the “bank the unbanked” message in 
his written testimony — “more than 14 million people right here in 
the US” — though it wasn’t mentioned much by the members.
Frank Lucas (R, OK-03) asked: “A significant portion of  the 
underbanked simply do not trust banks. I suspect they may not trust 
captains of  industry or members of  Congress either, for that matter. 
How do you persuade those people that you’re trustworthy and to use 
the system?”
Zuckerberg said to Lucas that people kept using Facebook itself, 
so they clearly trusted the company that much. He told John Rose (R, 
TN-06) that strong financial regulations meant that consumers could 
trust that any particular company would follow those rules.
Rep.  Meeks wanted more direct action from Facebook, such as 
working with  minority depository institutions (MDIs). “How much 
of  Facebook’s money is in MDIs that provide services and help the 
unbanked and the underbanked? Have you invested in any of  the 
minority development depository institutions in America or any place 
else  in  the  world?”  Zuckerberg  didn’t  know.  Meeks  guessed  the 
amount was zero, and said that “action speaks much louder than 
words.”
Brad Sherman (D, CA-30) was not impressed. “For the richest 
man in the world to come here and hide behind the poorest people in 
the world, and say that’s who you’re really trying to help, you’re trying 
to help those for whom the dollar is not a good currency. Drug 
dealers, terrorists, tax evaders.”

119
The problems with cryptocurrency
Libra was created by Bitcoin fans, who started from Bitcoin ideas 
and ideals — but none of  those ideas would work in a regulated 
environment, and particularly not if  the idea might be a systemic risk 
at large scale.
Real finance has human oversight and trusted responsibility all 
through it — and not automated systems that humans can’t touch. 
Unfortunately, Libra’s Bitcoin ancestry was still clear in the design of 
the system.
Bill Foster (D, IL-11) is himself  a computer programmer. He had 
looked at the Libra code, and was particularly concerned that the 
Libra software allowed anonymous and irreversible transactions:
It seems to me that if you have the private key, you have 
control of  that Libra balance, period. Full stop. And that 
makes it pretty hard … it’s equivalent to self-custody. 
And if  you allow self-custody, it’s pretty hard to stop 
anonymous trading.
… From the very start, you have to understand: is there a 
mechanism to reverse a transaction? All these big Bitcoin 
billionaires go around with big security details because if 
someone puts a gun on their head and says, “Give me 
your Bitcoin,” it is not a reversible transaction. And so I 
don’t think people want to live in that kind of situation.
Zuckerberg started answering about the Calibra wallet — but 
Foster wouldn’t be swayed: “No, Libra. Libra. Libra.” Zuckerberg 
kept answering about Calibra, but said that they had not nailed down 
all the policies on that sort of issue for Libra itself.
A financial system running entirely on smart contract  programs 
on a public blockchain is a big, juicy single target for hackers. Rep. 
Rose  asked  who  would  be  liable  if  the  system  was  hacked. 
Zuckerberg said it would depend if  it was a Facebook service that 
was  hacked  —  in  which  case  Facebook  would  be  liable  —  or 
something deeper in the Libra network; and that this risk would be an 
appropriate case for regulation.
Zuckerberg  told  Warren  Davidson  (R,  OH-08)  that  full 
decentralisation, in the manner of  Bitcoin, was interesting, but it 
wasn’t what Facebook wanted to do: “We’re not going to create 
something that’s decentralized that can’t hold up the highest standards 
of  protecting against all the risks that we’re talking about today, 
whether it’s financial stability or fighting terrorism or crime or fraud.” 

120
Rep. Gonzalez, however, was “very positive” about fully decentralised 
blockchains,  and  encouraged  Zuckerberg  to  “work  on  ways  to 
decentralize, so that there is no control whatsoever.”
Who’s regulating this?
A basket-based currency that ran at a large enough scale to be a 
systemic  risk  would  touch  every  federal  financial  regulator.  Rep. 
Maloney listed the Federal Reserve, the FDIC (who insure bank 
deposits),  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency (who 
regulate  banks),  the  SEC,  the  CFTC,  the  Consumer  Financial 
Protection Bureau, FinCEN (money laundering), the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency, “and many, many more. And to be clear, Libra 
would affect all of those regulators.”
Zuckerberg  answered  that  Libra  would  be  in  the  ambit  of 
“probably all of  them for different things.” But he reiterated that 
Libra and Calibra would get all the appropriate US approvals before 
launching anywhere in the world.
Emanuel Cleaver (D, MO-05) had written to the Financial Stability 
Oversight Council (FSOC), and was less sanguine: “I was told that it’s 
unclear whether US and foreign regulators will have the ability to 
monitor  Libra and require any kind of  corrective actions. What 
happens if  regulators just throw up their hands and say that, ‘we 
cannot guarantee the soundness of this product’?”
Zuckerberg said that Libra’s one-to-one reserve should do most of 
that job — but that Libra was working with FSOC, and would not 
launch without their approval as well.
Nydia Velázquez (D, NY-07) asked that Libra wait, not just for 
regulators, but for explicit approval by Congress — given that the G7 
global  stablecoin  report  had  just  warned  of  “significant  adverse 
effects, both domestically and internationally.” Zuckerberg replied 
that  “Congress  exercises  significant  oversight  over  the  regulators 
through these committees” — which Velázquez cut off with “So that 
is a no. Thank you.”
Closing statements
In closing the proceedings, even Rep. McHenry, a fan of Libra — 
especially in the face of  the Chinese threat — was disappointed by 
the day’s testimony: “I’m not sure we’ve learned anything new here … 
we still don’t have a deeper understanding of how Libra will work.”

121
Delegate San Nicolas, as Vice Chair, repeated members’ concerns 
about “our responsibility as the reserve currency of  the world,” and 
Libra basing itself in Switzerland.
Rep. Waters finished the session repeating Facebook’s list of  past 
failures and bad behaviour. “I hope that you’ve heard these concerns 
and that you will heed our warnings.”
San Nicolas struck the gavel to adjourn the hearing just after 4PM. 
Zuckerberg stood, chatted and shook hands with several members, 
spoke with Waters and McHenry for a few minutes each, then left the 
room through the back door.
How did Zuckerberg do?
This hearing did not advance Libra at all — it mainly focused 
attention on Facebook’s past bad behaviour.
Zuckerberg was on defense. He understood that this hearing was 
going to be about Facebook, and that his job was to take the heat. He 
used  Libra  to  deflect  from  Facebook’s  other  sins  —  and  Libra 
became a sideshow at its own hearing.
But Zuckerberg was vaguest on the Libra-specific questions. The 
only mitigation of the original Libra plan that Zuckerberg offered was 
to  use various local currencies,  rather than a basket-based Libra 
currency.
The  members  were  unimpressed  by Zuckerberg’s  attempts  to 
dodge behind the Libra Association, and how he answered questions 
about Libra by talking about Facebook’s Calibra. They didn’t buy 
China as an excuse either.
Zuckerberg realised he wasn’t going to charm anyone here with 
Libra,  and  noticeably  brightened  up  when  talking  about  a  “big 
initiative around news and journalism” instead, which was launched a 
few days later as Facebook News.
Zuckerberg maintained face — but he didn’t convince the House 
to let Libra go ahead.

122

123
 
Chapter 14:
November 2019: The comedown
One marker of  the progress made by blockchain bros in 
2019  is  that  “Facebook:  the  most  trusted  name  in 
cryptocurrency” remains both a joke and a statement of 
fact.
— Financial Times FT Alphaville227
After Mark Zuckerberg’s appearance before the House, Facebook 
was generally considered to have blown it with Libra — there was no 
way the US would let anything that was within a mile of  Facebook’s 
original plan go ahead.
But the idea was still in the air, and banks and regulators were still 
considering what to do about future proposals of  this sort. And, of 
course, Facebook’s Calibra unit and the fresh new Libra Association 
were still trying to work out what they could make happen.
Zuckerberg himself  has not spoken or written of  Libra in public 
since the October 2019 House hearing — except passing mentions 
during Facebook earnings calls.
Facebook’s bottom line
Facebook’s reputation had taken a beating, and their corporate 
sins had been brought up afresh in Zuckerberg’s House hearing — 
but Facebook was still a money machine.
In the third quarter of  2019, Facebook’s earnings per share were 
$2.12, up 20% compared to the third quarter of 2018. Total revenues 
were $17.7 billion — up 29% year-on-year.
Mark Zuckerberg’s third quarter of  2019 earnings call,228 on 30 
October, mentioned Libra only in passing — it was one of  “multiple 
exciting initiatives around commerce and payments that are moving 
forward,” and part of  “our work with something like Libra that is 
trying to build some new technological infrastructure for financial 
services.”
Facebook’s Chief  Financial Officer, Dave Wehner, said there was 
“no update right now on the timetable on the 2020 launch” and that 
Libra was “in a holding pattern as far as getting to a point where 
we’ve got regulatory approval.” 

124
Calibra stays the course
Calibra staff remained enthusiastic — and talked up Libra’s future 
as the single system to rule them all.
In late October,  Christian Catalini explicitly positioned Libra as 
the new central system for finance: “The idea is to create a platform 
that is fully interoperable, where different financial institutions can all 
use the same infrastructure and be compatible. This addresses the 
fragmented nature of payments systems today.”99
Catalini  dismissed  the  possibility  of  Libra  taking  over small 
economies, saying that “Libra at present is optimised as a medium of 
exchange to enable cheap and fast payments, which is very different 
to a currency role” — which didn’t in any way answer how such 
Libraisation of  an economy wouldn’t then happen just as everyone 
else could see it happening. And most people would think that being 
“a medium of  exchange to enable cheap and fast payments” was a 
currency role.
Kevin  Weil  spoke  at  San  Francisco  Blockchain  Week  on  31 
October229 and Web Summit on 5 November.230 He posited Libra as 
an Internet or text-message network of  payments — you had all 
these payment providers that didn’t talk to each other, but if  they 
were all backed by Libra then they could interoperate: “Can we do for 
money what the internet did for communication?” This harked back 
to Peter Thiel’s 1999 pitch for PayPal as “the Microsoft of payments, 
the financial operating system of the world” as we noted earlier.
The Libra Association: new members
The  Libra  Association  finalised  its Articles  of  Association  in 
November 2019,231 updated from the original July version.232 The 
mission statement was changed from “empowering billions of people 
through a new global currency” to the rather less snappy “create a 
lower-cost,  more  accessible  payment  tool  built  on  the  Libra 
blockchain  that  will  facilitate  a  more  connected  global  payment 
system, providing financial or other services to those most in need of 
such services.”
In January 2020, the Association appointed a Technical Steering 
Committee — to manage the technical development of  this project 
that didn’t have any fixed business specification as yet, and that 
regulators might never allow to launch.233
Membership was now free — members could lend money to the 
Association, but would not be advantaged in governance.

125
Vodafone quit the Association in January 2020. Vodafone said that 
if  they were going to put actual money and engineering effort into 
financial inclusion, their own M-Pesa seemed like a better prospect.234 
It did, after all, have a track record of success.
New 2020 members included Shopify, an e-commerce platform;235 
Tagomi, a cryptocurrency prime brokerage;236 Heifer International, 
who provide financial and technological support to small farmers in 
developing countries;237 Checkout.com, a UK payments processor;238 
crypto hedge fund  Paradigm; private equity firm Slow Ventures;239 
Blockchain Capital, a crypto venture capital firm;240 and Singapore 
government-owned sovereign wealth fund Temasek Holdings.
Temasek is  the smaller of  the two funds (the  larger being  GIC 
Private Limited) that keeps Singapore economically healthy and the 
Singapore dollar on an even keel — with $210 billion of assets under 
management, it was a hefty player to see joining Libra. This may have 
been in response to Libra’s previous plans to add the Singapore dollar 
to  the  Libra  basket  —  which  could  have  badly  destabilised  the 
currency. It seems likely that Temasek joined so they’d be on the 
inside, and not the outside.
Regulators stay wary
The  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO) discussed “global stablecoins” as part of  its October 2019 
board meeting, and issued a statement: “So-called ‘stablecoins’ can 
include features that are typical of  regulated securities. This means 
IOSCO Principles and Standards may apply to stablecoins depending 
on how they are structured”.241
In Congress, Sylvia Garcia (D, TX-29) and Lance Gooden (R, TX-
05) introduced the Managed Stablecoins are Securities Act of 2019 — 
they were pretty sure that things like Libra were already securities, but 
wanted to nail it down.242 If you ask for regulatory clarity …
On  5  December  2019,  the  European  Union’s  Council  and 
Commission bluntly stated that they would block “global stablecoins” 
until  regulators’  and  central  bankers’  many  concerns  were  fully 
addressed.  “Tackling  the  challenges  raised  by  ‘global  stablecoins’ 
requires  a  coordinated  global  response  …  the  Council  and  the 
Commission  state that no global  ‘stablecoin’ arrangement should 
begin operation in the European Union until the legal, regulatory and 
oversight challenges and risks have been adequately identified and 
addressed.”243

126
SRF News spoke to outgoing Swiss President Ueli Maurer on 27 
December 2019:244
Q. Libra as it’s currently presented — has it any chance 
at all?
A. I don’t think so, because having a basket of currencies 
backing this currency is not going to be accepted by the 
national banks. The project in this form has actually 
failed.
Consumers: still not interested
In February 2020, the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions 
Forum (OMFIF) ran a poll on digital payments across 13 countries. 
The people they surveyed were not happy with the idea of  tech 
companies issuing currencies — but were much happier with the idea 
of  central banks issuing currencies. In fact, central banks were the 
most trusted financial institutions.245
Facebook Pay: doing 100% of  the useful bit 
of  Libra
If  Libra is the Thanksgiving turkey you tried deep frying 
but caught on fire, Facebook Pay is the backup rotisserie 
chicken.
— Alex Hickey, Morning Brew246
On 12 November 2019, Facebook announced Facebook Pay — a 
way to send money between Facebook users or businesses. Facebook 
Pay was available to US users of Facebook and Messenger, with plans 
to add the service to Instagram and WhatsApp, and to release it in 
other countries.247
Facebook Pay was a rebranded version of  Messenger Pay (or 
Messenger Payments — its branding was never very clear), which 
originally launched on 17 March 2015, when David Marcus was still 
running Messenger.
Messenger Pay was for person-to-person payments — it was a 
direct competitor to PayPal’s Venmo. Over its first two years in the 
US, most transactions were less than $50.
To  use  Messenger  Pay,  you  connected  your  existing  Visa  or 
Mastercard debit card as a back end. To send someone money, you 
opened a message to that person, tapped the “$” icon, entered an 

127
amount and tapped “pay.” You could receive money by connecting 
your debit card for the money to be sent to.248
Messenger Pay didn’t charge a transaction fee — what Facebook 
got out of  this was keeping you on the platform, and showing you 
ads. And, of course, that juicy personal financial data.249
The  catch  was that  Messenger Pay  ran atop  the  existing  US 
banking system — transactions between banks could take days.
The service opened in the UK and France in November 2017. 
Facebook’s announcement post called Messenger Pay “one of  the 
most requested features in Messenger.”  Unfortunately,  this didn’t 
translate into demand — the UK and French versions of  Messenger 
Pay were shut down on 15 June 2019, apparently from a lack of 
users.250
But even in the US, Messenger Pay was never popular — and the 
service remained barely known, as either Messenger Pay or Facebook 
Pay.
You may be on Facebook lots — but would you trust Facebook 
with your money? For most people, the answer was “no.”
So what  did  Facebook  Pay  mean  for Libra?  Facebook’s  only 
comment was their press release statement:
Facebook Pay is built on existing financial infrastructure 
and partnerships, and is separate from the Calibra wallet 
which will run on the Libra network.
The  money  transmitters  did  the  hard  bits  of  Know-Your-
Customer, and Facebook just brought the users along and collected 
the data — the things it was good at.
Facebook Pay did 100% of  the useful part of  the Libra idea — 
and  in  a  way  that  played  to  Facebook’s  strengths,  and  not  its 
weaknesses.
Facebook probably didn’t spend two years building blockchain-
based castles in the air, going through three Congressional hearings, 
and invoking kill-it-with-fire loathing from financial regulators around 
the  world,  just  to  make  a  consolidated  payments  app  look  less 
threatening by comparison. But that would certainly be an added 
bonus.
Mark Zuckerberg’s vision for 2030
On  9  January  2020,  Mark  Zuckerberg  posted  his  personal 
challenge for the year to his Facebook. But this time, he made it a 

128
personal challenge for the decade — “what I hope the world and my 
life will look in 2030.”251
Zuckerberg spun a vision of small, private social networks, virtual 
and augmented reality, generational change, how to govern a digital 
community, and “decentralized opportunity” — and his example was 
a world where you could “send money home to another country 
instantly and at low cost through WhatsApp.”
Not mentioned at any point: the word “Libra.”

129
 
Chapter 15:
Central bank digital currencies
He had his cash money, but you couldn’t pay for food 
with that. It wasn’t actually illegal to have the stuff, it was 
just that nobody ever did anything legitimate with it.
— William Gibson, Count Zero
Central banks issue physical cash — but what if  they could print 
official legal tender digitally? The real world  result from Libra may 
turn out to be “central bank digital currency,” or “CBDC.”
A central bank’s job is to keep its economy on an even keel. 
Central bank researchers look at a new idea and think: “what would 
happen if this weird thing got popular?” The structure of money can 
change surprisingly fast.
So the researchers routinely come up with wild plans to rebuild 
the financial system, but upside-down and inside-out — just in case 
they suddenly need them.
Bankers noticed Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies early. When 
people talk about a new form of  “money,” and there are news 
headlines about the price of Bitcoin, central bank research papers will 
follow.
Then  Libra  threatened  to  put  the  idea  of  a  blockchain-like 
currency into practice, at massive scale — but badly. Central bank 
researchers quickly dusted off their old papers, with an eye to heading 
off  disaster. And if  there was anything to the Libra idea, maybe it 
could be implemented with an eye to caution.
Central banks have issued electronic money before — but current 
discussion of  “CBDC” involves a lot of misapplied blockchain hype. 
End users don’t need to worry too much about this particular back-
end plumbing.
What is a central bank digital currency?
E-money  (electronic  money)  is  money  for  consumers  that’s 
transmitted electronically outside the banking system itself. PayPal is a 
well known example. A central bank digital currency is e-money 
issued directly by the central bank — it’s regulated differently, but the 
end user shouldn’t see much difference.

130
Central banks had been thinking about what central-bank-issued 
e-money might mean since the 1990s252 — but the current round of 
CBDC discussion was largely inspired by Bitcoin and blockchains.
CBDC on a blockchain was first suggested in 2013 by economics 
blogger J. P. Koning as “Fedcoin.”253 Koning proposed that the US 
Federal Reserve run a widely-distributed blockchain-based database, 
and create and destroy dollar tokens on the chain as needed. This could 
also be a consumer payment system, running on your phone.254 255
Central banks wrote papers on what a popular retail CBDC might 
mean, and what the economic risks might be.
For a long time, all of this was just an academic exercise — with a 
fair bit of  blockchain hype. But as CBDC proposals get closer to 
reality, they tend to have less and less to do with blockchains.
Some proposals are for wholesale CBDC — between the central 
banks and the commercial banks — though it’s not yet clear what this 
gets anyone over the banks just sending numbers between known and 
trusted  computers,  as  we’ve  done  for  decades.  Banks  have 
experimented with blockchains, but the results are, at best, slightly 
worse, slower and less sophisticated versions of  existing systems. 
Wholesale CBDC is mostly blockchain hype, and mainly of  interest 
to the sort of crypto news site that thinks CBDCs are good news for 
Bitcoin.
Responding to Libra with CBDC
Libra frightened the central banks — a popular private currency 
run by people who didn’t seem to know what they were doing could 
be disastrous.
Central banks started looking into CBDC with more urgency. 
There might be a gap in the market, mainly for low-cost international 
settlement — and Facebook said Libra could fill that need. But Libra 
would run at a large enough scale to risk financial stability.
So central banks would need to do a coin themselves — one that 
was responsible to the public, rather than to a private company or 
consortium. The People’s Bank of  China finally kicked its CBDC 
programme into high gear in direct response to Libra. (Though they 
were also reacting to US dollar hegemony and the size of  the local 
payment providers.)
It wasn’t clear that Libra could in fact do what it claimed — nor 
was it clear that a central bank version would do the job either.

131
Why do a CBDC?
If you live in Europe or China, you probably have good electronic 
payment systems — within your country, at least. So you know that 
good payment systems are possible without adding a blockchain.
Other countries are different — because local conditions are 
important.
•
The US is an advanced economy — but the payment system 
is old, creaky and complicated, and payment companies have 
to register federally and in fifty states.
•
Many countries still run on physical cash, cheques and so on. 
But better payment systems speed up the flow of money, and 
get the economy moving faster.
•
Even in Europe, the systems inside a country will be fast — 
but  payments  between  countries  may  still  be  slow  or 
expensive.
•
Sweden has the opposite problem. Cash is used less and less 
—  but  some  sort  of  cash  is  considered  to  be  socially 
necessary, and the Riksbank, Sweden’s central bank, worries 
about how to manage an economy with almost no central 
bank cash in it.
Maybe CBDCs will fix all of these problems! Somehow. Libra also 
promised to fix all of these problems — somehow.
Watching every move you make
Physical cash doesn’t have Know Your Customer (KYC) — your 
transactions are private (unless they’re large). But one thing that the 
anti-money-laundering (AML) agencies have required of  digital cash 
so far is KYC. So they would want a CBDC to have KYC.
The idea of  all transactions being on a blockchain also appeals to 
the anti-money-laundering agencies — imagine having a complete 
ledger of your entire economy. No criminal transaction could escape.
Bureaucrats also keep being seduced by the prospect of a full Eye 
of  Sauron panopticon of  every transaction in the economy. This 
appeals to those who think their problem is not having enough 
knowledge to exert control as finely as they’d like to.
This is otherwise known as the  Big Data Fallacy — where you 
think that just getting enough data will surely solve all your problems. 
It’s a fallacy because your problems are usually political — you know 

132
perfectly well what you need to do, and you’re hoping the big data will 
help convince others to let you do it.
Nevertheless,  bureaucrats  and  anti-money-laundering  agencies 
find the prospect of a CBDC with a full record of everything hard to 
resist.
Libra would record  less data centrally — a lot of  transactions 
would happen internally to Facebook’s Calibra/Novi, and not even 
make  it  outside  of  that  company  to  be  recorded  on  the  main 
blockchain.
Can CBDCs give us better payment 
systems?
A common fallacy of  CBDC proposals is thinking that changing 
the back-end is all you need to make a better payment system.
CBDC proposals tend to have a disconcerting lack of detail about 
what magic a CBDC will bring that the commercial banks couldn’t do 
better — and that commercial banks haven’t done better in other 
countries. A lot of  CBDC plans have been vague, and don’t offer 
much that’s new.
Facebook claims Libra can give us better payment and settlement 
systems. Facebook’s method appears to be to ignore regulations. 
Central banks can’t do that.
Agustín Carstens of  BIS acknowledged in June 2019: “There 
needs to be evidence for demand for central bank digital currencies 
and it is not clear that the demand is there yet. Perhaps people can do 
what they want by using electronic wallets provided by banks or 
fintech  companies.  It  depends  on  the  development  of  payment 
systems.”256
Retail CBDCs are only useful if  they let you do something that 
wouldn’t be possible without them. But current payment systems are 
pretty  good,  and  mostly  just  need  to  be  put  into  place  in 
infrastructure-poor economies.
The more solid CBDC plans aim to get the commercial banks to 
build better inter-bank payment systems. A central bank may even 
build a CBDC system to kickstart better retail payment systems.
Real-world retail CBDCs
Central banks have issued electronic money for broad public use 
twice before: Avant in Finland, and Sistema de Dinero Electrónico in 

133
Ecuador. Both failed — Avant wasn’t as convenient as debit cards, 
and Ecuador’s central bank just wasn’t trusted by the populace.
Uruguay ran a very limited CBDC proof-of-concept over 2017 
and 2018, which involved a small number of ordinary end users.
China’s  DC/EP  proposal  —  which  isn’t  live  yet  —  will  be 
accepted  by  end  users  to  the  degree  it  works  as  well  as 
Tenpay/WeChat Pay or Alipay.
New systems in pilot tests with real end users include the Bahamas 
Sand Dollar and the Eastern Caribbean DCash.
These are very different from each other, and show the many 
success and failure modes of projects labeled “CBDC.”
Finland: Avant (1993)
The very first CBDC was Avant-Kortti (“Avant Card”), which was 
launched by the Bank of Finland in 1993.257
Avant was a stored value smart card — you bought a card with 
money on it that you could then spend. From 1994, you could top up 
an Avant card with more money. The encrypted smart card was far 
more secure than the magnetic stripe debit and credit cards of  the 
time. So this was e-money, but backed by the central bank.
Cards  were  anonymous  and  individual  transactions  weren’t 
tracked, so money on Avant would work like cash. The card was 
labeled an “electronic purse” — the Bank of  Finland hoped Avant 
would replace small change. Though users couldn’t exchange Avant 
money between themselves directly — this was possible in the design, 
but that function was not enabled.
Avant fit most modern definitions of  CBDC — it was in the 
national currency, it was entirely electronic, the money was a claim 
against the central bank, it was a widely accepted payment instrument, 
and it didn’t need to be continuously online to a central authority. The 
main difference to modern schemes was that Avant didn’t start from 
blockchain ideas.
The money in Avant was not legal tender — despite being issued 
by  the  central  bank  — so  that  merchants  would  not  be  legally 
required to accept it in payment of  debts, which would have required 
them to buy expensive terminals.
In 1995, the Bank of Finland sold Avant’s operator, Toimiraha, to 
a consortium of  commercial banks. This made no difference to the 
users — nothing changed about the system.

134
Avant was one of  the first examples of  regulated e-money, and 
informed the European Union’s E-money Directive of 2000.
Avant was moderately popular — at its peak there were 900,000 
cards in active use, in a country of five million people.
The  biggest  problem  was  that  users  were  unhappy  at  being 
charged a fee for loading and unloading money,  especially as ATM 
withdrawals were free by this time. Users hated fees more than they 
liked anonymity. Avant was discontinued at the end of March 2006.
Ecuador: Sistema de Dinero Electrónico (2014)
The Sistema de Dinero Electrónico (SDE; “electronic money 
system”), run by the  Banco Central del Ecuador (BCE), was a bit 
odd. For one thing, the currency was the US dollar. For another, the 
BCE didn’t quite have the powers you’d expect of something called a 
“central bank.”
SDE wasn’t quite a CBDC — in practical terms, it was really a 
failed payment system.
Ecuador went through a hyperinflation in the late 1990s. The 
national currency, the sucre, went down in value rapidly, and the 
economy was already substantially running on cash in US dollars — 
so the government chose dollarisation, and formally declared the US 
dollar the national currency of Ecuador in January 2000.
This left the central bank unable to issue its national currency, act 
as  the lender of  last resort,  or  manage monetary policy in  any 
meaningful way. So the BCE’s focus shifted to guidelines and policy. 
It was also the regulator for payments.
In 2014, Ecuador’s Congress approved a fully-backed electronic 
dollar — so this was technically the first CBDC US dollar, sort of! 
The system was launched as SDE.
Each dollar in SDE was backed by a dollar stored at the central 
bank. BCE was the only legal issuer of  e-money — cryptocurrency 
was also disallowed — and the phone company, CNT, was the only 
legal distribution channel.
You could sign up with an Ecuadorian identity card and a mobile 
phone. This gave you an account at the BCE. You could go to an 
authorised outlet and deposit cash into the account.
The stated reason for SDE was to improve access to the banking 
system for poorer residents, and reduce the reliance of  the economy 
on physical cash, to get the economy moving.

135
Users could exchange dollars on SDE between themselves, just 
like cash. The poor ran on a cash economy, a lot of  which was an 
informal economy, and the central bank hoped that SDE would bring 
them into the financial system.
Both  local  commentators  and  foreign  debtors  worried  that 
Ecuador would create unbacked dollars in SDE to fund government 
spending and pay off  the country’s debts — particularly given that 
the  government  had  defaulted  on  bond  issues  just  a  few  years 
before.258 But Ecuador denied any such plans, and didn’t end up doing 
anything along these lines with the dollars in SDE.259
SDE had a limited launch in late 2014 and a full public launch in 
2015. The BCE expected 500,000 users by the end of 2015.
SDE failed to take off  — the system only had 5,000 users by the 
end of 2015. By the end of 2017, SDE had moved $62 million via 5.1 
million transactions in its entire existence260 — with only $11 million 
on deposit, as compared to the $24.5 billion in cash in the Ecuadorian 
economy. There were 402,515 e-money accounts — but less than 
30% of these were ever used, at all.261
Ecuadorians with money trusted private banks more than they 
trusted the central bank — because they remembered the ways the 
government had abused its financial powers in recent years.262
Nor was SDE taken up by the unbanked or underbanked.263 Even 
in the rural areas — “Aquí pagamos con la palabra y el dinero 
contante y sonante” (“here, we pay with our word, and hard cash”) — 
people trusted their local co-op bank, but they didn’t trust the central 
bank.
The central bank just wasn’t good at serving retail customers, 
either — even if it had had the full trust of the users.
The government eventually acknowledged SDE wasn’t going to 
do the job. The commercial and cooperative banks put together a 
new mobile payment system, Bimo, with BCE as the regulator. SDE 
was shut down in March 2018, and accounts could be migrated to 
Bimo.264
The main lesson of  SDE is: don’t try to back your system with a 
bank that your users don’t trust with their money.
Uruguay: e-Peso (2017)
Banco Central del Uruguay (BCU) issued an e-Peso in a public 
pilot programme that ran from November 2017 to April 2018. The 
pilot was part of an official push for financial inclusion.265

136
BCU  issued  20  million  e-pesos.  Commercial  banks  were  not 
involved  in  the  pilot  —  though  once  it  started,  some  banks 
approached BCU asking if  they could join in. Digital wallets were 
operated centrally by Antel, the national phone company.
The 10,000 end users could hold a maximum of 30,000 e-pesos in 
their  wallet,  and  registered  participating  businesses  could  hold 
200,000 per wallet. Users could transfer money to each other — if 
they had phone coverage. Transaction data was encrypted, but could 
be decrypted if legally required.
To encourage participation, the first thousand users got a 500 e-
peso credit, and there were monthly lotteries for the most active users 
and businesses.
The pilot finished in April 2018. The e-pesos were cashed out and 
destroyed.
BCU considered the pilot a success — the system basically worked 
on a small scale, and commercial banks wanting to join suggested that 
such a system could be popular. BCU is still considering whether to 
do a full-scale public e-Peso — the technical bit works, and now 
they’re going through the economic risk assessments.
Bahamas: Sand Dollar (2020)
The Central Bank of  the Bahamas (CBB) wanted to encourage an 
electronic  payment  system  that  reached  the  outer  islands  of  the 
Bahamas — the cash infrastructure was shrinking as commercial banks 
closed branches, but phone coverage was surprisingly good, if patchy.
Electronic  payment  systems  for  retail  were  usually  built  by 
commercial banks. But in this case, the central bank figured it needed 
to push things forward.266
The CBB started with a list of  what they needed in an electronic 
payment system, and worked out the system from there — something 
to handle spotty network coverage and lots of poor prospective users, 
but almost all of whom had phones. 
Most users connected via their bank account — the CBB left retail 
to the retail banks. Users who didn’t have bank accounts could get a 
Sand Dollar wallet with their name, address, phone number and a 
photo, which was enough to open a very limited account at a retail 
money changer.
 The Sand Dollar wallet app on your phone could transmit small 
amounts of money when you were offline.

137
The Sand Dollar pilot in 2020 was small  — just $48,000 in 
circulation in the system267 — but it went well, and the system was set 
to go live across the Bahamas in late 2020.
Eastern Caribbean: DCash (2020)
DCash, from the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), started 
its  pilot  programme  in  late  2020  —  with  real  consumers  and 
merchants using it for real transactions.268
DCash had similar local conditions to the Bahamas Sand Dollar 
initiative. However, the system had no offline capability at the pilot 
stage — you had to be online.
Most DCash end users worked through their banks, with limited 
accounts available for unbanked users.
DCash had a blockchain in the system, though it was just an 
instance of  IBM’s Hyperledger running as a back-end data store, and 
not doing anything you couldn’t do just as well without a blockchain.
China: DC/EP (in testing)
Digital  Cash/Electronic  Payments,  or  DC/EP,  is  a  payment 
system project by the  People’s Bank of  China (PBOC), carrying 
central-bank-backed digital renminbi (yuan).
PBOC started looking into blockchains in 2014, and officially 
established the  Digital Currency Research Institute in 2017, which 
had looked  into CBDCs. In the  wake of  Facebook’s June 2019 
announcement of Libra, Wang Xin of the PBOC said on 8 July 2019 
that they were stepping up their CBDC project,141 to turn it into 
something that would stand up to public use at scale.
DC/EP has the following design goals:
•
Two-tier design. PBOC issues the money, the commercial 
banks distribute it — the central bank is not going to try to 
do retail itself.
•
Interoperability. You can’t send payments between the big 
private money transmitters, Tenpay/WeChat Pay and Alipay 
— but all DC/EP providers will be interoperable.
•
Financial inclusion. PBOC gave no specific plan to achieve 
financial inclusion, though there were aspirations to reach 
remote and rural populations.
•
Traceability of  all transactions.  WeChat Pay and Alipay 
don’t give the central bank full logs of  every transaction. 

138
Some in the PBOC are seduced by the prospect of  a full 
record of the entire Chinese economy.
•
“Controllable” anonymity. You will be anonymous to the 
retailer — but the central bank still gets a full feed of  who’s 
doing what.
•
Working offline.  You should be able to exchange money 
without being online 24/7. Transactions will be sent in when 
you’re back online.
PBOC found that even relatively fast permissioned blockchains 
were too slow in internal testing. DC/EP would have to be able to 
handle at least 300,000 transactions per second across the country at 
peak times to do what cash does. So DC/EP won’t be a blockchain. 
(The  system  will  apparently  contain  some  sort  of  blockchain 
descendant.)  Mu Changchun, leader of  the DC/EP initiative, co-
authored  a  paper  that  recommended  not  to  use  blockchains  to 
transform traditional payment systems.269
PBOC would like DC/EP to replace physical cash to some degree 
— “M0,” the physical cash in the economy. The money in DC/EP 
will be legal tender, just as paper notes are.270
The financial press, as well as the crypto press, leapt upon every 
new morsel of  information about DC/EP — the PBOC had to keep 
stating that there was no release date as yet. The trickiest part was not 
the technology — it was regulatory issues, particularly around anti-
money-laundering and tax evasion.271
The press covered what looked very like public pilot programmes 
in several areas from late 2019 on — even as the PBOC insisted on 
calling these only “internal and closed pilot tests.” PBOC Governor 
Yi Gang also mentioned testing in “some scenarios of  the coming 
Winter Olympics” in 2022. He stressed again that there was no 
release date as yet.272
Pilot tests continue through late 2020, at increasing scale.
Why would I want a CBDC?
Consumers want systems that make their lives easier. Convenience 
is king. Nobody is going to choose a new payment system that’s less 
convenient.
The users won’t care who issues the dollars, pounds or euros, if 
they can assume basic legal protections — they’ll only care how easily 
they can get, move and spend them.

139
If  you’re in a country with good electronic payment systems, a 
retail CBDC probably won’t do anything new for you. The Reserve 
Bank of  Australia decided against a CBDC in 2020, because, even 
with the decline in cash use in the COVID-19 crisis, existing systems 
were still working fine, and there was still good access to physical 
cash.273
If  you’re a banker, of  course, it matters a lot who the money is a 
liability against. But for anyone else, knowing that a payment system 
is a “CBDC” tells you nothing else about that system. If  someone 
wants you to get excited because something is a CBDC, look closely 
at what the system does and doesn’t do.
If  you’re Facebook, you might want to run blockchain CBDC 
tokens over your network instead of Libra tokens — in Libra 2.0.

140

141
 
Epilogue:
Libra 2.0: not dead yet
There is no innovation whatsoever. They have literally 
invented nothing. Libra is possibly the least innovative 
project to ever come out of Silicon Valley.
— Aleksi Grym274
Facebook’s 2019 plan for a basket-based cryptocurrency had been 
resoundingly rejected. Governments around the world had finally said 
“no” to a piece of Silicon Valley “creative destruction.”
But it wasn’t in Facebook’s nature to give up on the quest for 
personal data. On 16 April 2020, the Libra Association released the 
Libra White Paper, version 2.0 — in the hope of  making financial 
regulators a bit less unhappy with them.
The  Libra  network  would  run  individual  tokens  representing 
national currencies, starting with dollars, pounds and euros.
The  idea  of  taking  Libra  fully  permissionless  was  officially 
abandoned. Only permitted entities would be able to add transactions 
to  the  Libra  blockchain  —  not  individuals.  And  anti-money-
laundering  (AML)  functionality  would  be  built  into  the  Libra 
blockchain itself.
Facebook was forced to transform its great plan into PayPal-but-
it’s-Facebook — or Libra wouldn’t be allowed to exist. Though the 
back-end system would still run on a blockchain — for no functional 
reason, but they could say it was on a blockchain.
Floating the national currency plan
David Marcus and Mark Zuckerberg both floated the idea of 
Libra using national currency coins in October 2019 — Zuckerberg 
speaking to Congress, and Marcus to a banking seminar in the US.275
Several sources told the Financial Times in February 2020 that the 
Association had been developing a plan for a “Libra 2.0,” to address 
US regulators’ concerns.276
In early March, stories about the Libra national currency token 
scheme ran in Bloomberg277 and The Information.278 The basket-
based Libra token would run alongside the national tokens, somehow.

142
On 16 April 2020, the Libra Association proudly announced that 
it had formally initiated with FINMA, the Swiss regulator, the process 
of becoming licensed as a payment system.279
FINMA did its own press release as well, emphasising that it 
wasn’t just going to let Libra through without checking with everyone 
else — “FINMA has been in close contact with the Swiss National 
Bank and more than 20 other supervisory authorities and central 
banks from around the world since the start of  its dealings with the 
Libra project … FINMA has always emphasised that the planned 
international  scope  of  the  project  requires  an  internationally 
coordinated approach.”280
The Libra White Paper v2.0
The press release came with a heavily revised version of the Libra 
white paper. The new white paper still had the wild aspirations to 
crypto-fueled unregulated finance — but there were also extensive 
concessions to regulators, which meant that none of that stuff  could 
be allowed to happen any more.281
National currency tokens and the native Libra
The national currency tokens would be electronic coins on the 
Libra network. At that point, the Libra Association would just be an 
e-money provider.
The Libra Association also wanted to run CBDCs on the system 
as  they  became  available.  This  would  save  messing  about  with 
managing a reserve, if the tokens themselves were the money.
What about Libra the token? The Association still wanted to do 
their custom currency. The plan was to run the Libra currency as a 
smart contract program that would balance fixed proportions of 
national currency tokens in the background, in some manner.
The  composition  of  the  native  Libra  currency  was  not  yet 
decided. The white paper suggested handing control of the basket to 
“a  group  of  regulators  and  central  banks  or  an  international 
organization” under the guidance of  FINMA — rather than doing it 
themselves.
The Libra reserve(s)
The new white paper mentioned “key concerns” with Facebook’s 
original Libra reserve plan — that is, every financial regulator in the 
world coughing up their own skulls in horror — and in particular, the 

143
October 2019 paper from the G7 Working Group on Stablecoins, 
where “stablecoin” was the standard central bank euphemism for 
“Libra.”
The national currency tokens would each be backed by a reserve 
denominated in that currency. Each reserve would include a capital 
buffer, to deal with investment losses, negative yields or liquidity 
problems. Facebook wanted so very much to run a private currency 
that they would put their own money into this.
If  economic conditions meant Libra dealers stopped redeeming 
tokens from the Libra network for actual money, the Association — 
that is, Facebook — would step in to redeem tokens directly.
The white paper listed various other emergency scenarios. These 
all looked rather like stress test provisions for banks.
The Association planned to deal with the threat of Libraisation — 
a country’s economy being taken over by Libras — after it happened, 
maybe:
In particular, if  adoption in a region without a single-
currency stablecoin on the network generates concerns 
about currency substitution, then the Association could 
work with the relevant central bank and regulators to 
make a stablecoin available on the Libra network.
Permissioned compliance
If  you’re doing e-money, Know-Your-Customer on the individual 
customers isn’t enough — anti-money-laundering rules require you to 
watch the movements of the e-money itself.
The new white paper acknowledged that the Libra system would 
need  a  full  regulatory  compliance  framework,  or  it  wouldn’t  be 
allowed to exist. The Association couldn’t just leave compliance to the 
Libra dealer network, as they’d been hoping to. The Libra  system 
would need to be fully conformant with financial compliance, risk 
management and anti-money-laundering rules, at the network level.
The Libra network would only be open to designated Libra dealers 
and regulated cryptocurrency exchanges — “Virtual Asset Service 
Providers,” as defined by the Financial Action Task Force, in FATF-
compliant jurisdictions.
The Association still hoped to make the network open to anyone 
to use — because their new solution to “banking the unbanked” was 
for individual end users to run Libra software themselves (“Unhosted 
Wallets”), and access a future public Libra blockchain directly:

144
Unhosted  Wallets  enable  financial  inclusion,  broad 
competition,  and  responsible  innovation  and  thus 
facilitate the creation of  services for the unbanked and 
underbanked. Since their activities may pose a greater 
risk, they will be subject to balance and transaction limits.
But there was no chance of  regulators letting anything like this 
happen — direct personal access to the blockchain was too obviously 
a channel to launder money. You’d deal with the Libra network 
through  a  provider  with  full  Know-Your-Customer  checks  and 
compliance mechanisms in place, or you wouldn’t deal with it at all.
Making money 2.0
Facebook removed the Libra Investment Token scheme from the 
Libra white papers in July 2019, and replaced it with a scheme of 
unspecified Libra coin “incentives.” The wording in the White Paper 
2.0 was “incentive programs to propel the adoption of  the Libra 
payment system”.
The 2.0 white paper does not mention user data protection, nor 
privacy.
Regulators respond
In US Congress, Rep. Sylvia Garcia wasn’t mollified: “Facebook 
and the Libra Association have issued a second white paper that 
retains a Libra coin backed by a basket of  assets. As such, this does 
not address the concerns I raised when Mr Zuckerberg testified 
before the Financial Services Committee.”282
Experts still considered Facebook the biggest issue with any Libra 
plan. “The political barriers to Libra getting off  the ground are still 
there,” said Ben Koltun of  Beacon Policy Advisors to the Financial 
Times.283
Central banks and financial regulators still kept the closest possible 
eye on Libra-like ideas — because even if  it was payments-focused 
and based on national currencies, a popular Libra-like coin could still 
be a systemic risk.
The  Financial Action Task Force reported to the G20 finance 
ministers on “so-called stablecoins” in July 2020.284 Andrew Bailey, 
then of  the Bank of  England, spoke in September 2020 on how to 
regulate “global stablecoins.”285 The  European Union announced a 
new college of supervisors in September 2020 to regulate “significant 
e-money tokens” — that is, Libra-like coins.286

145
The Financial Stability Board ran its promised consultation on 
“global stablecoins” in April 2020,287 delivering a final report on 13 
October 2020: “Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of  ‘Global 
Stablecoin’ Arrangements.”288 This was another report that didn’t 
mention Libra by name, but was entirely about Libra. The section on 
cross-border payments referenced requirements that were set out in 
another report the FSB released on the same day, “Enhancing Cross-
border Payments: Stage 3 roadmap,” which stretched to 2023 at the 
earliest — possibly holding up international payments being run over 
Libra until then.289
WhatsApp Pay Brazil: no lessons learned
Facebook Pay was the back end for Facebook’s attempt to enter 
the Brazilian payments market with WhatsApp Pay in June 2020.
Facebook took the same approach with Brazilian regulators that 
they’d taken with Libra — they gave them only the vaguest details, 
then  tried  to  launch  at  sufficiently  large  scale  that  it  would  be 
politically difficult to shut them down once they were up and running.
Banco Central do Brasil (BCB) president Roberto Campos Neto 
said: “Prior to the launch, there was a meeting in which WhatsApp 
kind of  explained its plan, but the central bank was taken by surprise 
with the launch on June 15.”290
Facebook tried to launch the system in Brazil through a loophole: 
a company could start a payment service without a license until it 
reached 500 million reals in volume, or 25 million transactions, over a 
12-month period. But this was meant to encourage small businesses 
into the market — it wasn’t meant for an existing network with 120 
million users in the country.
The loophole Facebook had used was closed on 23 June, and BCB 
promptly told  Mastercard and  Visa to cut off  payments through 
WhatsApp.291 CADE, the Brazilian competition regulator, suspended 
WhatsApp’s partnership with local payment provider  Cielo for a 
week. 
Local  commenters  suggested  that  Facebook  was trying  to 
monopolise quick payments in Brazil, before the local real-time retail 
settlement system PIX came online in November 2020 — that is, a 
foreign  corporate  proprietary  system  to  push out a  local  open 
standard.

146
WhatsApp Pay Brazil was finally allowed to proceed as a strictly 
limited  pilot  in  July.  Campos  Neto  was  still  concerned  about 
Facebook’s record on data protection.292
Calibra becomes Novi at Facebook 
Financial
Facebook renamed  Calibra in May 2020 as  Novi. “People were 
confusing Libra and Calibra all the time,” said Marcus. “In hindsight 
it’s hard to blame them.”293
Facebook’s various financial initiatives — Novi (formerly Calibra), 
Facebook Pay and WhatsApp Pay — were consolidated in July 2020 
into Facebook Financial (F2), with Marcus in charge. “We have a lot 
of  commerce stuff  going on across Facebook,” he told Bloomberg. 
“It felt like it was the right thing to do to rationalize the strategy at a 
company level around all things payments.”294
Libra going forward
Morgan  Beller,  who  originally  started  Facebook’s  blockchain 
initiative in 2017, said in June 2020: “We’re trying to change the 
system, and there are a lot of  people who are incentivized for the 
global financial system not to change.”6
Maybe regulators were just a bunch of  haters — or maybe Libra 
was a bad idea, done badly, by a badly-behaved company.
Libra  was  born  in Bitcoin  dreams  —  but  none  of  those 
aspirations could ever have been realised, because they contradicted 
everything about how economics and consumer finance work in the 
real world.
The fallacy of  Libra, and of  cryptocurrency plans in general, is 
that the problem isn’t that we need a new technology. We know how 
to move numbers on a computer.  The problems with Libra were 
always going to be regulation — especially when the project came 
from Facebook.
Crypto dreams are tolerated when they’re put forward by weird 
small-time nutters — but not when they’re coming from a huge 
company with a continent-sized user base.
But, even though every single thing about Libra went wrong, 
Facebook doesn’t take “no” or “never” for an answer. Work proceeds 
on the Novi wallet, the Libra blockchain software, and proposals for 

147
regulators — even if  Facebook is still the only Association member 
putting in funding or engineering effort.
The  Libra Association spent 2020 hiring executive staff  with 
experience at large banks like HSBC and regulators such as FinCEN. 
The Association anticipates final regulatory permission to launch a 
Libra payment network some time in 2021. Or something called 
“Libra,” at least.
Morgan  Beller  left  Facebook  in  September  2020  and  joined 
venture capital firm NFX as a General Partner,295 focusing on early-
stage investing. “Being part of  Libra from the earliest days made me 
realize that I love that phase of  a project — the sitting around and 
figuring out what we should do,” she said.296 That is: having big ideas 
is much more fun than delivering on them.

148

149
 
Appendix:
2010–2013: The rise and fall of 
Facebook Credits
Libra wasn’t Facebook’s first foray into payment systems. In 2009, 
the company set up Facebook Credits, to cash in on pay-to-win 
games.
When Libra was announced in June 2019, Facebook told Barron’s 
that “Facebook Credits was a completely closed system, and this is 
open  and  decentralized.”297 But  it’s  an  instructive  example  as 
Facebook’s  first  attempt.  The  company  didn’t  have  run-ins  with 
regulators — but they did try to gouge a captive audience of partners.
Pay-to-win — hitting the gambling addicts
Pay-to-win games are common on phones. You can start playing 
for free — but the game gets harder and harder, and you eventually 
have to buy power-ups with real money to progress at all. “Free-to-
pay” is the standard industry euphemism. Candy Crush is a famous 
recent example.
Pay-to-win games weren’t new with smartphones. A decade ago, 
the games ran in Facebook — on your desktop PC’s web browser, in 
Flash.
There was a lot of  money in pay-to-win —  Zynga, makers of 
Farmville and  Mafia  Wars,  took  in  $597  million  in  2010.298 For 
comparison, Facebook’s own revenue in 2010 was just under $2 
billion.299
More than 90% of  Zynga’s revenue was users buying in-game 
coins, which they could use to buy power-ups. PayPal said that Zynga 
was its second-biggest merchant for 2009 — only beaten by eBay, 
PayPal’s owner.300
Facebook saw what its platform was being used for, and just how 
much money its developers were taking in, and decided it wanted a 
piece of that.

150
The genesis of  Credits
Facebook started developing an in-app currency system in 2007, 
and ran a closed beta in December 2007.301
In November 2008, the company put a system of  “credits” into 
the Facebook Gift Shop, where you could buy virtual gifts — pixels 
on a screen to amuse your friends with. Gifts that were previously $1 
would now be 100 credits.302
“The new system means we can introduce a wider variety of 
gifts,”  Facebook  explained,  “allowing  you  greater  freedom  in 
expressing  appreciation  for  your  friends”  —  though  they  didn’t 
explain how these credits would do this better than dollars had.
The system that was finally released as Facebook Credits was 
introduced for early testing in May 2009, with an official beta starting 
in February 2010.303
Rather than buy coins inside a game directly, Facebook wanted 
you to use Facebook Credits — ten Credits cost one US dollar, or 
about the same in several other currencies. You could buy Credits 
with a credit card or PayPal, or from the gift card rack in shops.
The idea of  Credits was that an official currency for the whole 
platform would decrease payment friction, and so increase spending. 
Users were encouraged to buy large amounts of  credits at a time — 
50 credits cost $5, but 2,360 credits cost $200, an 18% discount.304
Developers could use the “credit_balance” interface to see how 
many  Credits  a  user  had305 —  and  Facebook  confirmed  that 
developers could use this to identify the biggest Credit holders, and 
squeeze them for even more money.306
By February, the Credits beta was already going well — Facebook 
said that “early testing has shown that users paying with Facebook 
Credits are significantly more likely to complete a purchase than the 
average Facebook user.”303 By October 2010, there were 200 games 
using Facebook Credits307 — including several of  the most popular 
ones.
Credits for everyone!
Credits  had  limitations.  Developers  couldn’t  charge  a  user  in 
fractional Credits. They could only sell virtual goods. They couldn’t 
sell anything related to alcohol or tobacco. They couldn’t let users 
redeem Credits for actual currency, or exchange Credits with other 
users.308

151
When a developer wanted to cash in their Credits, Facebook took 
a 30% fee — the same swingeing fee that Apple charged in its App 
Store.  Facebook  Credits  also  had  a  chargeback  mechanism  for 
disgruntled users.
Facebook wanted Credits to become the  only currency for apps 
running on the Facebook platform. Facebook had discussed with 
large developers in late 2009 their plans to make Credits mandatory,309 
and  Mark  Zuckerberg  told  Bloomberg  TV  in  April  2010  that 
Facebook apps would have “one currency that people use.”310
All apps were supposed to switch to Credits by the end of  2010 
—  but  developers  were  dragging  their  feet.  In  January  2011, 
Facebook set a hard deadline of  1 July 2011 — all new apps would 
have to use Credits exclusively, and old apps would need to switch 
over.311
(My wife tells me that when she first set up an artist page on 
Facebook,312 she’d get messages daily from Facebook telling her to 
buy Credits, so she could buy ads for her page. She got to the point 
of blocking messages from Facebook itself. Her artist page says it was 
created January 2013 — so Facebook was still pushing Credits as late 
as that.)
Credits try to break out to the wider world
Facebook had wider ambitions for Credits — it wanted to turn 
Facebook Credits into a broader system for microtransactions and 
small purchases.313 Facebook Payments Inc. was set up in December 
2010 and registered in multiple US states.314
Warner  Bros  Digital  Distribution experimented  with  renting 
movies for Credits. The Dark Knight was made available for rental for 
30 Credits ($3) in early March 2011, and did well enough that five 
more movies were made available in late March.315 A selection of 
movies could be rented for Credits through 2011.
You  could  use  Credits  as  a  currency  on  Facebook  Deals, 
Facebook’s  four-month  experiment  in  competing  with  group 
discount-buying startup Groupon. This was the first place you could 
use Facebook Credits to buy real things.316
The death of  Facebook Credits
Facebook updated its Android mobile app in October 2011 to 
include buying Facebook Credits — but the iPhone app couldn’t use 
the system. This was because Apple also wanted to take its 30% cut, 

152
on top of  Facebook’s 30%. This was a serious problem as mobile 
became a more popular platform.317
Facebook  deprecated  Credits  on  19  June  2012,  in  an 
announcement to developers: “Introducing subscriptions and local 
currency pricing.”318 Developers could now charge different prices in 
different  countries — and offer  subscriptions  to  games  in  local 
currencies. (A lesson the company didn’t learn from for Libra.) Users’ 
balances in Credits were converted back into the user’s local currency.
Facebook Credits was finally removed on 13 September 2013.
So what killed Credits?
Facebook’s  user  and  developer  base  was  becoming  more 
international. Users were put off  by figuring out weird currency 
conversion  rates  that  changed  daily.  Game  coins  were  way  too 
expensive in poorer countries — there was no localised pricing.319
Credits gave developers a 5–10% increase in sales320 — but this 
was eaten straight away by Facebook’s 30% fee. A developer could 
only  use  alternative  payment  methods  if  they  had  an  exclusive 
partnership with Facebook. Developers started actively seeking out 
other payment methods to avoid Facebook’s fee.
Users had no reason to care about the Facebook Credits system. 
They’d buy Credits to put them into one or two of  their favourite 
games — the Credits were just a way to play that game. Users didn’t 
tend to keep Credits sitting around on their account.
Credits didn’t work at all like money — users couldn’t transfer 
Credits between themselves.
But  Credits’  biggest problem  was  that,  by  this  time,  desktop 
computer platforms were being replaced by mobile phones. Games 
were being developed to run as apps of  their own, directly on the 
phones, not via Facebook — and the Flash versions of the games for 
Facebook didn’t work on phones.
What Facebook Credits means for Libra
It’s not clear that Facebook tried all that hard to turn Facebook 
Credits into money people could use. Facebook Deals was the only 
place you could use Credits for physical goods — and that was only 
for a few months.
Turning Facebook Credits into a usable currency would have been 
a huge amount of  work for Facebook, especially in fraud control and 
anti-money-laundering compliance — PayPal had enormous issues 

153
just turning a profit on small transactions in US dollars, without it all 
being eaten up fighting crooks.
The plus point for Libra was that Facebook didn’t plan to keep all 
the value the system would generate — there was something in it for 
the other players in the system.
It’s also not clear anyone with experience from Facebook Credits 
was even involved in Libra at any point — but relevant expertise is 
less welcome than you might think around blockchain dreams.
The old Facebook Credits web page now directs to something 
called  Facebook Game Cards. The Facebook help page for Game 
Cards was last known to have worked in mid-2017.321

154

155
Acknowledgements
The genesis of  this book is a hot take on Libra that Foreign Policy 
commissioned a few days after Libra’s launch in June 2019. James 
Palmer edited my quick ramblings into a hard-hitting article that 
enjoyed some popularity.322 James might get a twitching red-pencil 
finger at points here, but I tried to keep him in mind as one of  my 
target readers.
The loved one, Rose, puts up with me talking about cryptos all the 
time, and beta-reads everything I put out — vastly improving it. I 
figure buying the occasional gaming workstation is a pretty good deal.
I did try contacting the Libra Association and Facebook’s Calibra/
Novi a number of times, and even sent them early drafts of the book 
— but my only input from Facebook was unofficial background from 
helpful people at Facebook and Calibra/Novi, who did their best to 
represent their company in a good light.
Thanks for questions, suggestions and editorial help go out to 
Falahuddin Arief, Tilman Bayer, Dave Birch (always good for 200-
page  PDFs  with  page  references),  Eric  Biro,  Oliver  Blanthorn, 
Richard Gendal Brown, María José Calderón, Raúl Carrillo, Amy 
Castor,  Katie  Chan,  Frances  Coppola,  Peter  da  Silva,  Sonja 
Davidovic,  Stephen  Diehl,  Ron  Echeverri,  Vincent  Faidherbe, 
Caroline Ford, David Golumbia, Kevin Green, Aleksi Grym, Nigel 
Heffernan, Axel Johnston, Andrew Ketrow, John Kiff, J. P. Koning, 
Stephan  Küffner,  P.  Majchrzak,  Chris  McKenna,  Miriam  Oudin, 
María Laura Patiño, Giles Payne, Colin Platt, Michael Reece Purson, 
Drew Robertson, David S. H. Rosenthal, Ed Salazar, John Smith, Tim 
Starling, Nicholas Weaver, Michael Westergaard (who came up with 
the title) — and many others who I can’t name. This book is as good 
as it is because of all of you.
Particular thanks to Ariel Glenn, for cheerleading fabulously and 
relentlessly through the last few months of  finishing up this “feel-
good techno-tragedy.”
Sorry, you never asked so I never gave you the advice 
that while writing your first book is just failing at not 
writing a book the second book is actually a lengthy 
process of  realizing that nothing you did on the first 
book actually works reliably.
— Elizabeth Sandifer

156

157
 
About the author
David Gerard writes the cryptocurrency and blockchain news site 
Attack of  the 50 Foot Blockchain, and is the author of  the 2017 book 
Attack of  the 50 Foot Blockchain: Bitcoin, Blockchain, Ethereum & Smart 
Contracts.
As well as being a crypto journalist, he works as a Unix system 
administrator, where his job includes keeping track of  exciting new 
technologies, and advising against the bad ones. He has also been an 
award-winning music journalist (Western Australia Music Industry 
Awards, 1991), and has blogged about music at Rocknerd.co.uk since 
2001.
Originally from Australia, he lives in east London with his spouse 
Arkady Rose and their daughter.
David  remains  a  frequent,  if  occasionally  annoyed,  user  of 
Facebook.  You  can  see  his  official  page  at 
facebook.com/DavidGerard.author/
David’s website is at davidgerard.co.uk/blockchain/

158

159
Also by David Gerard
Attack of  the 50 Foot Blockchain
Bitcoin, Blockchain,
Ethereum & Smart Contracts
An experimental new Internet-based form of  money is created 
that anyone can generate at home; people build frightening firetrap 
computers full of  video cards, putting out so much heat that one 
operator is hospitalised with heatstroke and brain damage.
A young physics student starts a revolutionary new marketplace 
immune  to  State  coercion;  he  ends  up  ordering  hits  on  people 
because they might threaten his great experiment, and is jailed for life 
without parole.
Fully  automated  contractual  systems  are  proposed  to  make 
business and the law work better; the contracts people actually write 
are unregulated penny stock offerings whose fine print literally states 
that you are buying nothing of any value.
The biggest crowdfunding in history attracts $150 million on the 
promise that it will embody “the steadfast iron will of  unstoppable 
code”; upon release it is immediately hacked, and $50 million is 
stolen.
How did we get here?
David Gerard covers the origins and history of  Bitcoin to the 
present  day,  the  other  cryptocurrencies  it  spawned  including 
Ethereum, the ICO craze and the  2017 crypto  bubble,  and the 
attempts to apply blockchains and smart contracts to business. Plus a 
case study on blockchains in the music industry.
Bitcoin  and  blockchains  are  not  a  technology  story,  but  a 
psychology story.
Remember: if it sounds too good to be true, it almost certainly is.
“A sober riposte to all the upbeat forecasts about cryptocurrency” 
— New York Review of Books 
“A very convincing takedown of  the whole phenomenon” — 
BBC News
Available from Amazon (Kindle or paperback) and all other ebook stores

160

161
Index
2008 financial crisis
39, 56
ACH
105
Adams, Alma
113
Albania
46
Alipay
57
Alpha Kappa Psi
15
Amazon
62
anarcho-capitalism
27, 41
Anchorage
22
Andreessen Horowitz
conditions of joining Libra
20
Libra Association board
108
Morgan Beller
15
Ant Financial
57
Argentina
inflation
30
potential for Libraisation
38
restrictions on PayPal
16
Asian crisis of 1997–1998
55
Australian Securities and Investments 
Commission
99
Austrian economics
27
Avant-Kortti
133
Bailey, Andrew
72, 144
Bair, Sheila
74
Banco Central del Ecuador
134
Banco Central del Uruguay
135
Banco Central do Brasil
145
Banga, Ajay
103
Bank for International Settlements
99
big tech warning
73
Investigating the impact of global 
stablecoins
106
Special Drawing Right
51
Bank of England
68, 72
Bank of Finland
133
Bank Secrecy Act
89
Banque de France
69
Barr, Andy
115
Beacon Policy Advisors
144
Bear Stearns
82
Beatty, Joyce
80
Beller, Michael
15
Beller, Morgan
146
blockchain idea
7, 15
leaving Facebook
147
Big Data Fallacy
131
Bimo
135
BisonTrails
22
Bitcoin
ideology
27
mining
26
power usage
21, 27
Bitcoin Foundation
16
Block, The
21
blockchain
definition
25
permissioned
21
permissionless
21
Booking Holdings
joining Libra Association
22
leaving Libra Association
104
Brainard, Lael
73, 105
Branson, Mark
96
Breakthrough Initiatives
22
Brown, Sherrod
danger of Facebook
78
Facebook control of Libra 
Association
85
letter to payment processors
102
Senate letter to Facebook
78
Switzerland
87
Brummer, Chris
89
Budd, Ted
116
Bundesbank
58
CADE
145
Calibra
joining Libra Association
22
name change to Novi
146
Cambridge Analytica
62
Campos Neto, Roberto
145
capital controls
54
Carney, Mark
deposits for payment providers
72
Jackson Hole speech
98
Carrillo, Raúl
61
Carstens, Agustín
132
Casares, Wences
108
Catalini, Christian
49, 59, 124
censorship of payments
87
Central Bank of the Bahamas
136
Checkout.com
125
Cielo
145
Citigroup
22

162
Clay, Lacy
Libra reserve management
86
redlining
113
runs on Libra
91
Clayton, Jay
68, 71, 99
Cleaver, Emanuel
120
Cœuré, Benoît
69, 104, 106
Coinbase
22
Commodities and Futures Trading 
Commission
68
Corbat, Mike
22
COVID-19
139
Crapo, Mike
new regulator for Libra
70
Senate letter to Facebook
78
Creative Destruction Lab
22
cryptocurrency
abbreviation as “crypto”
11
as Bitcoin variant
30
Currencies, money and digital tokens 
(speech)
97
custodial wallet
11
cypherpunks
27
Dark Knight, The
151
Davidson, Warren
119
Davie, Matthew
108
DC/EP
73, 137
DCash
137
De Masi, Fabio
50
Dean, Madeleine
113
Demand Progress
61
Demirors, Meltem
93
Denationalisation of Money
50
Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the 
Evolving Payments Landscape
105
Digital Currency Research Institute 
(People’s Bank of China)
137
Dimon, Jamie
101
Disparte, Dante
59, 102, 108
Distributed Ledger Technology
106
dollarisation
39, 134
Dombrovskis, Valdis
98
Donahoe, John
16
Duffy, Sean
87
e-money
129
E-money Directive (2000)
134
e-Peso
135
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank
137
eBay
joining Libra Association
22
leaving Libra Association
102
Ecuador
134
Ellis, Patrick
108
European Central Bank
69, 97, 104
European Commission
62, 125
antitrust investigation
97
European Council
125
exchange-traded fund
51
Facebook
2011 settlement with FTC
62
acquisitions
7
advertising revenue
7
comparison to a government
67
fine by European Commission
62
merge of WhatsApp data
62
Q3 2019 earnings call
123
size
7
Facebook Deals
151
Facebook Financial (F2)
146
Facebook Game Cards
153
Facebook Gift Shop
150
Facebook News
121
Facebook Pay
126
Facebook Payments Inc.
151
FaceMash
64
Farfetch
22
Farmville
149
Farrakhan, Louis
87
Faster Payments Scheme
105
Fedcoin
130
Federal Council (Switzerland)
97
Federal Data Protection and 
Information Commissioner 
(Switzerland)
88
Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.
74
Federal Reserve
70, 73, 105
Federal Trade Commission
2011 settlement with Facebook
62
fining Facebook $5 billion
10, 63
FedNow
105
Fidelity Investments
22
Financial Action Task Force
105, 143
stablecoin report
144
Financial Conduct Authority
68, 72
Financial Markets Authority (FINMA)
95, 99, 142
Financial Stability Board
Enhancing Cross-border Payments: 
Stage 3 roadmap
145
letter to G20 on risks of stablecoins
105
Regulation, Supervision and 
Oversight of ‘Global Stablecoin’ 
Arrangements
145

163
Financial Stability Oversight Council 82, 
120
Financial Times FT Alphaville
123
FinCEN
71
Finland
133
Foster, Bill
84, 119
Future of Money in the Digital Age 105
G7
69
Galloway, Scott
77
García, Jesús “Chuy”
Keep Big Tech Out Of Finance bill 
introduced
114
Libra Association and Facebook 86
Garcia, Sylvia
cost of Libra development
85
Federal Reserve CBDC
116
Libra 2.0 white paper
144
Managed Stablecoins are Securities 
Act
125
General Data Protection Regulation 107
Gensler, Gary
92
Gibson, William
129
GIC Private Limited (Singapore)
53
Global Findex Database
45
gold standard
28
Goldman Sachs
22
Gonzalez, Anthony
China threat
115
decentralisation
120
Facebook leaving the Libra 
Association
117
Libra Association and users
86
Gooden, Lance
Libra Investment Token
117
Managed Stablecoins are Securities 
Act
125
US-based Libra Association
117
Google
7
Greece
47
Green, Al
117
Groupon
151
Grym, Aleksi
141
GTN Telecom
16
Hampton, Elizabeth
99
Haun, Kathryn
20, 108
Hayek, Friedrich von
50
Heifer International
125
Hickey, Alex
126
Hill, French
Know-Your-Customer
84
Libra should use dollars
116
Himes, Jim
80
House Committee on Financial Services
70, 111
House of Commons (UK)
63
Hughes, Chris
71
Huizenga, Bill
bipartisan opposition to Libra
111
Facebook leaving the Libra 
Association
117
nature of Libra
80
Hyperledger
137
identity standard
35, 64, 91
Iliad
22
impossible trinity (central banking)
55
India
19
ING
22
Ingves, Stefan
73
initial coin offering
29
Institute of International Finance
109
International Monetary Fund
accepting capital controls
55
discouraging capital controls
55
Special Drawing Right
51
International Organization of Securities 
Commissions
125
Investigating the impact of global 
stablecoins
106
Jackson Hole Economic Symposium 98
Jefferies
100
Jordan, Thomas
97
JP Morgan Chase
22, 57, 101
Keep Big Tech Out of Finance Act 71, 
114
Kiva
22, 108
Know Your Customer
38, 131
Koltun, Ben
144
Koning, J. P.
130
Le Maire, Bruno
58, 69, 104
Lehman Bros
52, 82
libertarianism
27
Libra Association
2020 hiring
147
mission statement
124
official launch
108
Technical Steering Committee
124
white paper explanation
34
Libra Investment Token
36, 50, 85, 92, 
95, 117, 144
Libra Networks
20
Libra reserve
basket proportions
50
projected size
53
libra.org website
23, 33

164
Libraisation
38, 93, 107, 143
Lightning Network
29
Long-Term Capital Management
82
Loudermilk, Barry
82
Lucas, Frank
118
Lukka
20
Lyft
22
M-Pesa
45
M0
138
Mafia Wars
149
Maloney, Carolyn
agencies regulating Libra
120
ban anonymous Libra wallets
114
pilot program
83
Mandelker, Sigal
99
Marcus, David
58, 108
Bitcoin’s problems
30
career
16
hired by Facebook
17
joining Facebook blockchain team17
Libra Association founding board
108
payment processors leaving
104
response to initial reaction to Libra
73
Maslatón, Carlos
40
Mastercard
leaving Libra Association
102
Libra Association press release
23
WhatsApp Pay Brazil
145
Maurer, Ueli
126
McHenry, Patrick
Alipay
115
closing October hearing
120
decentralisation
85
initial response to Libra
78
innovation
88
nature of Libra
79
opening October hearing
112
regulatory clarity
93
WeChat Pay
115
Medium (blogging platform)
15
Meeks, Gregory
financial crises
82
Libra Association trust factor
116
minority depository institution
118
systemic importance
82
Menon, Ravi
99
Mercado Pago
joining Libra Association
22
leaving Libra Association
102
Mercy Corps
22
Merkle tree
25
Mersch, Yves
97
MessageMe
62
Messenger Pay
126
Ministry of Finance (UK)
68
minority depository institution
118
mission statement
34
Mnuchin, Steve
68, 71, 103
Moffett Nathanson
104
Monetary Authority of Singapore
99
money market fund
52
Morning Brew
126
Mt. Gox
16
Mu Changchun
73, 138
Munster, Ben
67
Nakamoto, Satoshi
26
New York Attorney General
31
NFX
147
Novi
name change from Calibra
146
wallet
9
Ocasio-Cortez, Alexandria
Cambridge Analytica
113
Oculus VR
acquisition by Facebook
7
requiring Facebook account
63
Office of the Australian Information 
Commissioner
99
Official Monetary and Financial 
Institutions Forum
digital payments poll
126
Oil Fund (Norway)
53
Ou, Elaine
37
Paradigm
125
Paulson, Henry
82
PayPal
1999 aspirations
42
comparison to Libra
9
comparison to Novi
9
leaving Libra Association
102
Libra Association press release
23
purchase of Zong
16
PayU
joining Libra Association
22
Libra Association board
108
remaining in Libra Association
101
People’s Bank of China
73, 137
Perlmutter, Ed
81
Peterson Institute
72
Phillips, Dean
113
Pistor, Katharina
90
PIX
145

165
PopShop
15
Posey, Bill
114
Potter, Simon
72
Powell, Jerome
70
Pressley, Ayanna
Facebook dominating Libra 
Association
117
proof-of-work
27
pseudonymity
41, 84
Public Citizen
91
Quarles, Randal
105
Raymond, Grégory
98
redlining
112
regulatory clarity
87, 93, 125
remittance fees
43
Reserve Bank of Australia
139
Ribbit Capital
22
Riggleman, Denver
114
Riksbank
73, 131
Ripple Labs
30
Romania
46
Rose, John
liability for hacks
119
public distrust of Facebook
118
Rothbard, Murray
27
Rounds, Mike
Libra Association based in 
Switzerland
86
SAFT
36
San Nicolas, Michael
closing October hearing
121
currency basket risks
116
size of Libra reserve
83
Sand Dollar
136
Schatz, Brian
distrust of Facebook
79
letter to payment processors
102
Libra Association members’ 
uncertainty
86
Scholz, Olaf
58, 103
Scott, David
113
Scott, James C.
47
Securities and Exchange Commission68, 
71, 99
Seeing Like A State
47
shadow banking
39, 55
Sherman, Brad
call for Zuckerberg to appear
79
promises to bank the unbanked 118
Shopify
125
Silk Road
29
Sinema, Kyrsten
81
Sistema de Dinero Electrónico
134
smart contract
30
Special Drawing Right
51
Spotify
22
stablecoin
BIS: Investigating the impact of 
global stablecoins
106
definition
31
European Union regulator
144
Swiss regulation
95
Steil, Bryan
87
Stivers, Steve
116
Stripe
joining Libra Association
22
leaving Libra Association
102
Swiss National Bank
97
Switzerland
stablecoin regulation
95
Synthetic Hegemonic Currency
98
Tagomi
125
TechCrunch Disrupt
15
Temasek
125
Tester, Jim
81
Tether
31
Thailand
55
Thiel, Peter
42
Thill, Brent
100
Thrive Capital
22
Tipton, Scott
116
Tlaib, Rashida
86
Toimiraha
133
Toomey, Patrick
85
Troubled Asset Relief Program
91
Trump, Donald
70
Tufecki, Zeynep
64
Uber
22
unhosted wallet
143
Union Square Ventures
22
Uruguay
135
vaccination
114
Vargas, Juan
Facebook dominating Libra 
Association
117
importance of US dollar
115
Varoufakis, Yanis
105
Velázquez, Nydia
Congressional approval before 
launch
120
Libra Association based in 
Switzerland
92
runs on Libra
90
systemic importance
82

166
Venmo
acquisition by PayPal
16
competition from Messenger 
Payments
126
Villeroy de Galhau, François
69
Visa
leaving Libra Association
102
Libra Association press release
23
WhatsApp Pay Brazil
145
Vodafone
joining Libra Association
22
leaving Libra Association
125
M-Pesa
45
Wagner, Ann
payment processors leaving
116
sanctions
84
wallet
9
Wang Xin
73, 137
Warner Bros Digital Distribution
151
Waters, Maxine
70
closing October hearing
121
initial response to Libra
78
opening October hearing
112
Wehner, Dave
123
Weil, Kevin
43, 81
Libra as backbone for payments 124
promise to isolate personal data
10
Weissman, Robert
91
Wexton, Jennifer
118
WhatsApp
acquisition by Facebook
7
merge of Facebook data
62
purchase by Facebook
62
WhatsApp Pay Brazil
145
WhatsApp Pay India
19
Williams, Roger
84
Women’s World Banking
22
World Bank
45
accepting capital controls
55
discouraging capital controls
55
Xapo
108
joining Libra Association
22
shadow banking
40
Xi Jinping
115
XRP
30
Yiannopoulos, Milo
87
Younger, Joshua
57
Zong
16
Zuckerberg, Mark
apology for FaceMash
64
blockchain idea
7
China threat
115
comparison of Facebook to a 
government
67
hiring David Marcus
17
learning Mandarin
115
personal challenge for 2030
127
Zynga
149

167
Notes
1
Kevin Rooke. “Facebook Makes More Revenue Per User Than Netflix.” The 
Spring, 24 March 2019. (archive)
2
Mike Isaac, Nathaniel Popper. “Facebook Plans Global Financial System Based on 
Cryptocurrency.” New York Times, 18 June 2019.
3
David Marcus, Senate testimony, 16 July 2019.
4
Katie Paul, Anna Irrera. “Factbox: Facebook’s cryptocurrency Libra and digital 
wallet Calibra.” Reuters, 23 October 2019.
5
Facebook. “Coming in 2020: Calibra.” Press release, 18 June 2019.
6
Kathryn Miles. “Visionaries: Morgan Beller.” MIT Technology Review, June 2020.
7
Salvador Rodriguez. “Meet Morgan Beller, the 26-year-old woman behind 
Facebook’s plan to make its own currency.” CNBC, 20 July 2019.
8
Scott Gartenberg. “Beller ’13: Undergrads Should Follow Passions.” Cornell Daily 
Sun, 23 February 2014.
9
Connie Loizos. “Morgan Beller, co-creator of the Libra digital currency, just joined 
the venture firm NFX.” TechCrunch, 22 September 2020.
10
Aimee Keane, Hannah Murphy, Kiran Stacey. “The state of Libra.” Financial 
Times Behind The Money podcast, 24 October 2019.
11
“Full transcript: Facebook Messenger head David Marcus on Recode Decode.” 
Recode, 19 June 2017.
12
Shannon Bond. “David Marcus, the man leading Facebook’s charge into financial 
services.” Financial Times, 22 June 2019.
13
John Donahoe. “David Marcus is PayPal’s New President.” PayPal blog, 29 March 
2012. (archive)
14
Jordan Novet. “PayPal chief reams employees: Use our app or quit.” VentureBeat, 
11 February 2014.
15
Marcus’ involvement in the early history of Bitcoin is largely drawn from: 
Nathaniel Popper. Digital Gold: Bitcoin and the Inside Story of  the Misfits and Millionaires 
Trying to Reinvent Money. HarperCollins, 2015.
16
David Marcus. “Here’s to an amazing team, and to new beginnings.” LinkedIn, 9 
June 2014.
17
Robert Hackett. “Libra Hangs in Limbo — and What’s Next in the Digital 
Currency Race.” Fortune, 19 December 2019.
18
Mark Zuckerberg. “Every year I take on a personal challenge to learn something 
new.” Facebook, 4 January 2018.
19
Kurt Wagner. “Facebook is launching a new team dedicated to the blockchain. 
Messenger’s David Marcus is going to run it.” Recode, 8 May 2018.
20
David Marcus. “After nearly four unbelievably rewarding years leading Messenger, 
I have decided it was time for me to take on a new challenge.” Facebook, 8 May 
2018.
21
Alex Heath. “Facebook Plans to Create Its Own Cryptocurrency.” Cheddar, 11 
May 2018.
22
Sarah Frier, Julie Verhage. “Facebook Is Developing a Cryptocurrency for 
WhatsApp Transfers, Sources Say.” Bloomberg 21 December 2018.
23
Suvashree Ghosh, Anto Antony. “WhatsApp Compliance Under India Review 
Before Payments Approval.” Bloomberg, 14 August 2019.
24
Alex Heath, Tanaya Macheel. “Facebook’s Blockchain Group Is on a Hiring Spree 
to Reinvent Money.” Cheddar, 13 December 2018.

168
25
Tim Bradshaw, Martin Coulter, Hannah Murphy. “How Facebook raced to build 
Libra coin.” Financial Times, 19 June 2019.
26
Nathaniel Popper, Mike Isaac. “Facebook and Telegram Are Hoping to Succeed 
Where Bitcoin Failed.” New York Times, 28 February 2019.
27
Libra. “How to Become a Founding Member.” Version dated 14 June 2019. 
(archive)
28
Elise Thomas. “The Ties That Bind Facebook’s Libra.” Wired, 10 July 2019.
29
Olga Kharif. “Libra Association Board Members Have Ties to Facebook.” 
Bloomberg, 15 October 2019.
30
Danielle Abril. “Andreessen Horowitz: How Facebook’s Libra Cryptocurrency 
Will Be Governed.” Fortune, 19 June 2019.
31
Frank Chaparro, Ryan Todd. “Facebook acquired a trademark from a little-known 
tax company for its secret crypto project.” The Block, 3 May 2019. (archive)
32
AnnaMaria Andriotis, Liz Hoffman, Peter Rudegeair, Jeff Horwitz. “Facebook 
Building Cryptocurrency-Based Payments System.” Wall Street Journal, 2 May 
2019.
33
AnnaMaria Andriotis, Peter Rudegeair, Liz Hoffman. “Facebook’s New 
Cryptocurrency, Libra, Gets Big Backers.” Wall Street Journal, 13 June 2019.
34
Frank Chaparro, Aislinn Keely. “Facebook’s cryptocurrency partners revealed — 
we obtained the entire list of inaugural backers.” The Block, 14 June 2019. 
(Archive of 30 June 2019.) 
35
Hannah Murphy. “Facebook unveils new global digital coin called Libra.” Financial 
Times, 18 June 2019.
36
Laura Noonan, Robert Armstrong, Nicholas Megaw, Stephen Morris. “Banks steer 
clear of Facebook’s Libra project.” Financial Times, 8 July 2019.
37
Laura Noonan, Patrick Temple-West. “Banks may cut ties with Facebook on Libra 
concerns, ING warns.” Financial Times, 22 October 2019.
38
PayPal. “Why PayPal plans to be part of the Libra Association.” Press release, 18 
June 2019. (now deleted — archive copy)
39
Visa. “Visa announces intent to join the Libra Association.” Press release, 18 June 
2019. (archive)
40
Robert Armstrong. “The end of Libra?” Financial Times, 21 October 2019.
41
Nathaniel Popper. “Regulators Have Doubts About Facebook Cryptocurrency. So 
Do Its Partners.” New York Times, 25 June 2019.
42
J. M. Keynes. A Tract on Monetary Reform. Chapter 4: “Alternative aims in monetray 
policy.” p172. Macmillan, 1924.
43
Alex de Vries. “Bitcoin’s Growing Energy Problem.” Joule, 2(5), 801-805. 
doi:10.1016/j.joule.2018.04.016
44
The best available explanation of how the 1990s techno-libertarian subculture led 
to Bitcoin is The Politics of  Bitcoin: Software as Right-Wing Extremism by David 
Golumbia (University of Minnesota Press, 2016).
45
@lopp. “On stage right now: people representing approximately 90% of the 
Bitcoin hashing power. Truly an historic moment.” Twitter, 6 December 2015.
46
Larry Cermak. “The growth of the Lightning Network has been remarkable. But 
there’s a catch.” The Block, 15 January 2019. (archive)
47
Stephen Shankland. “PayPal president David Marcus: Bitcoin is good, NFC is 
bad.” CNet, 10 December 2013.
48
@SquawkCNBC. “Does the creator of Libra own Bitcoin? ‘I’m a big fan of 
bitcoin and what I see as digital gold,’ says @DavidMarcus on #btc.” Twitter, 16 
October 2019.
49
Matt Levine. “Things Got Weird for Stablecoin Tether.” Bloomberg, 26 April 
2019.

169
50
“Frequently Asked Questions.” Tether, archive of 20 March 2015. “You can fund 
your account with bitcoins and convert to Tethers to stabilize your bitcoins and 
without having to undertake KYC.”
51
Richard Heffner. “Milton Friedman: Living Within Our Means.” The Open Mind, 
Thirteen, 7 December 1975. 
52
“Libra (Sept 24th to October 23).” Libra.org, archive of 25 October 2018.
53
“Libra: A New Global Currency.” Libra.org, archive of 18 June 2019.
54
Frances Coppola. “Bananas Don’t Make A Good Stablecoin.” Forbes, 28 February 
2019.
55
David Gerard. “Dentacoin — it’s real and sincere, even if nobody cares.” Blog 
post, 29 March 2019.
56
Libra Association Members. “An Introduction to Libra.” Version dated 14 June 
2019. (archive)
57
This metaphor — a riff on Pierre Trudeau’s 1969 quote to the National Press 
Club on Canada’s relationship with the US — is courtesy a Financial Times FT 
Alphaville comment I can’t find again. Please get in touch with the original link for 
your credit!
58
Tim Bartz. “Facebook verzichtet bei Libra auf chinesische Währung.” Der Spiegel, 
20 September 2019.
59
Christian Catalini, Oliver Gratry, J. Mark Hou, Sunita Parasuraman, Nils 
Wernerfelt. “The Libra Reserve.” Version dated 14 June 2019. (archive)
60
Elaine Ou. “I Tried Using Facebook’s Libra Blockchain. It Didn’t Work.” 
Bloomberg Opinion, 20 June 2019.
61
Shehar Bano, Christian Catalini, George Danezis, Nick Doudchenko, Ben Maurer, 
Alberto Sonnino, Nils Wernerfelt. “Moving Toward Permissionless Consensus.” 
Version dated 14 June 2019. (archive)
62
Paul A. McCulley. “Teton Reflections.” Pimco blog, 7 September 2007.
63
Original quote: “Vamos a crear un sistema bancario reflejo usando tu moneda.” 
Leaked audio in: David Gerard “Foreign Policy: Facebook’s New Currency Has 
Big Claims and Bad Ideas — by me.” Blog post, 24 June 2019.
64
Libra. “Commitment to Compliance and Consumer Protection.” Version dated 14 
June 2019. (archive)
65
Eric M. Jackson. The PayPal Wars: Battles with eBay, the Media, the Mafia, and the Rest of 
Planet Earth. Chapter 1: “The New Recruit.” pp25-27. World Ahead Publishing, 
2004. ISBN 1-936488590.
66
Peter Kropotkin. The Conquest of  Bread. Chapter III part 1, p23. G. P. Putnam’s 
Sons, 1906.
67
World Bank. Remittance Prices Worldwide. No. 34, June 2020.
68
e.g., Nick Statt. “Facebook’s Calibra is a secret weapon for monetizing its new 
cryptocurrency.” The Verge, 18 June 2019.
69
Ryan Browne. “Facebook exec says libra cryptocurrency won’t spread ‘like a social 
network’.” CNBC, 5 November 2019.
70
Brendan Greeley. “Facebook’s Libra will not help the unbanked.” Financial Times 
FT Alphaville, 19 June 2019.
71
A. Demirgüç-Kunt, L. Klapper, D. Singer, S. Ansar, J. Hess. The Global Findex 
Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution. World Bank 
Group, 2018. ISBN 978-1-4648-1268-2.
72
Carmen Nobel. “Mobile Banking for the Unbanked.” Harvard Business School, 
2011.
73
Peter Vanham. “Mobile money: Kenya good, India bad.” Financial Times, 28 May 
2012.
74
Lerato Mbele. “Why M-Pesa failed in South Africa.” BBC News, 11 May 2016.

170
75
Leandro Medina, Friedrich Schneider. “Shadow Economies Around the World: 
What Did We Learn Over the Last 20 Years?” International Monetary Fund, 
January 2018.
76
Leonid Bershidsky. “The Upside to Facebook’s Libra Disaster.” Bloomberg 
Opinion, 15 October 2019.
77
James C. Scott. “Chapter 3: Authoritarian High Modernism.” In Seeing Like A 
State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed. Yale University 
Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0-30007016-3. 
78
Deirdre Fernandes. “Bitcoin doesn’t gain much currency at MIT.” Boston Globe, 
27 September 2016.
79
“MIT Sloan Experts Series — Christian Catalini: Breaking Down the Libra 
Cryptocurrency.” YouTube, 7 November 2019.
80
F. A. Hayek. The Denationalisation Of  Money. Institute for Economic Affairs, 1976. 
ISBN 0 255 36239 0.
81
Ben Walsh. “Facebook’s Libra Currency Will Be Tied, in Part, to the U.S. Dollar.” 
Barron’s, 23 September 2019.
82
Laura Shin. “A Libra Co-Creator on How Facebook Will Make Money From 
Calibra.” Unchained (podcast), 5 November 2019.
83
Izabella Kaminska. “Zuckerbuck vs PayPal vs China.” Financial Times FT 
Alphaville, 25 October 2019.
84
Denise Jia. “PBOC to Raise Reserve-Funds Ratio for Third-Party Payment Firms 
to 100%.” Caixin Global, 30 June 2018.
85
“MFI balance sheets: Electronic money issued in the euro area.” European Central 
Bank Statistical Data Warehouse, 17 February 2020.
86
Mitsutoshi Adachi, Matteo Cominetta, Christoph Kaufmann, Anton van der 
Kraaij. “A regulatory and financial stability perspective on global stablecoins.” 
Macroprudential Bulletin, European Central Bank, 5 May 2020.
87
“GIC Private Limited (GIC).” Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. Archive of 27 
October 2020.
88
Frances Coppola. “Libra isn’t just a cryptocurrency, it’s a threat to national 
sovereignty.” Wired, 16 October 2019.
89
“PBOC reins in funds of payment platforms.” China Daily, 15 January 2019.
90
John Nugée. “What Libra means for money creation.” OMFIF, 5 February 2020.
91
Izabella Kaminska. “Will fintechs sink or swim when floats are regulated?” 
Financial Times FT Alphaville, 7 January 2019.
92
See Paul J. Krugman. The Return of  Depression Economics and the Crisis of  2008. 
Chapter 8: “Banking in the Shadows” and Chapter 9: “The Sum of All Fears.” W. 
W. Norton, 2009. ISBN 978-0-393-07120-7.
93
“FINMA publishes ‘stable coin’ guidelines.” FINMA, 11 September 2019.
94
Ben Walsh. “Facebook’s Libra Currency Has an Interest-Rate Problem.” Barron’s, 
6 September 2019.
95
Nicholas Comfort, Stephan Kahl. “German Banks Are Hoarding So Many Euros 
They Need More Vaults.” Bloomberg, 31 January 2020.
96
Francesco Guarascio. “France, Germany blast Facebook’s Libra, back public 
cryptocurrency.” Reuters, 13 September 2019.
97
Michael Nienaber, Christian Kraemer. “Germany’s Scholz: We cannot accept 
parallel currencies such as Facebook’s Libra.” Reuters, 17 September 2019.
98
@davidmarcus. “1/ About monetary sovereignty of Nations vs. Libra:” Twitter, 
16 September 2019.
99
Bhavin Patel, Katie-Ann Wilson. “Libra and the global monetary system.” OMFIF, 
28 October 2019.

171
100 Ben Munster. “France vows to block Facebook’s Libra in Europe.” Decrypt, 12 
September 2019
101 Raúl Carrillo. “Banking on Surveillance: The Libra black paper.” Americans for 
Financial Reform Education Fund and Demand Progress Education Fund, 25 
June 2020.
102 Shannon Greenwood, Andrew Perrin, Maeve Duggan. “Social Media Update 
2016.” Pew Research Center, 11 November 2016.
103 Federal Trade Commission. “FTC Imposes $5 Billion Penalty and Sweeping New 
Privacy Restrictions on Facebook.” Press release, 24 July 2019.
104 Olivia Solon, Cyrus Farivar. “Leaked documents show Facebook leveraged user 
data to fight rivals and help friends.” NBC News, 6 November 2019.
105 European Commission. “Mergers: Commission fines Facebook 110 million for 
€
providing misleading information about WhatsApp takeover.” Press release, 18 
May 2017.
106 Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee. “Disinformation and ‘fake news’: 
Final Report.” House of Commons, 27 February 2019.
107 Emma Kent. “Oculus Quest 2 Facebook account merge turns some headsets into 
‘paperweights’, affected users say.” Eurogamer, 15 October 2020.
108 “A Single Way to Log Into Oculus and Unlock Social Features.” Oculus blog, 18 
August 2020.
109 Zeynep Tufecki. “Why Zuckerberg’s 14-Year Apology Tour Hasn’t Fixed 
Facebook.” Wired, 6 April 2018.
110 Ben Munster. “With Libra, Facebook jumps on a long derailed bandwagon.” 
Decrypt, 19 June 2019.
111 David Kirkpatrick. The Facebook Effect. Chapter 12: “$15 Billion.” Simon & 
Schuster, 2010. ISBN 978-1-4391-0980-9.
112 Jeff Horwitz, Parmy Olson. “Facebook Unveils Cryptocurrency Libra in Bid to 
Reshape Finance.” Wall Street Journal, 18 June 2019.
113 Pete Schroeder, Katie Paul. “U.S. Senate to grill Facebook over plans for Libra 
cryptocurrency.” Reuters, 16 July 2019.
114 Tom Wilson, Huw Jones. “Facebook met UK officials three times before Libra 
announcement.” 18 September 2019.
115 Laura Noonan, Hannah Murphy. “Facebook in talks with US regulator over digital 
currency.” Financial Times, 2 June 2019.
116 “Facebook va créer sa monnaie : ‘Nous allons demander des garanties’, prévient 
Bruno Le Maire.” Europe 1, 18 June 2019.
117 Caroline Binham, Chris Giles, David Keohane. “Facebook’s Libra currency draws 
instant response from regulators.” Financial Times, 18 June 2019.
118 Leigh Thomas, Myriam Rivet. “Consensus among G7 ministers to tackle 
Facebook’s Libra: French chair.” Reuters, 17 July 2019.
119 Leigh Thomas, Michael Nienaber. “G7 finance chiefs pour cold water on 
Facebook’s digital coin plans.” Reuters, 17 July 2019.
120 Francesco Canepa, Leigh Thomas. “Libra launch won’t happen until regulators are 
happy: Coeure.” Reuters, 18 July 2019.
121 Maxine Waters. “Waters Statement on Facebook’s Cryptocurrency 
Announcement.” Press release, US House Committee on Financial Services, 18 
June 2019.
122 Elizabeth Dwoskin, Damian Paletta. “Facebook privately pitched its 
cryptocurrency plan last month to regulators. They were left even more scared.” 
Washington Post, 16 July 2019.
123 Maxine Waters. “Committee Democrats Call on Facebook to Halt Cryptocurrency 
Plans.” Press release, US House Committee on Financial Services, 2 July 2019.

172
124 Pete Schroeder, Trevor Hunnicutt. “Fed chief calls for Facebook to halt Libra 
project until concerns addressed.” Reuters, 10 July 2019.
125 Jessica Smith. “Powell: Libra ‘cannot go forward’ without addressing serious 
concerns.” Yahoo! Finance, 10 July 2019.
126 Matthew C. Klen. “Congress Is More Concerned About Facebook’s Libra 
Currency Than Inflation.” Barron’s, 11 July 2019.
127 @realdonaldtrump. “....Similarly, Facebook Libra’s ‘virtual currency’ will have little 
standing or dependability. If Facebook and other companies want to become a 
bank, they must seek a new Banking Charter and become subject to all Banking 
Regulations, just like other Banks, both National...” Twitter, 12 July 2019.
128 Dave Michaels, Lalita Clozel. “SEC Weighs Whether to Regulate Facebook’s 
Libra.” Wall Street Journal, 13 July 2019.
129 Aislinn Keely. “Video and Transcript of U.S. Treasury Secretary’s Press Briefing on 
Cryptocurrencies.” The Block, 15 July 2019.
130 Anna Irrera, Katie Paul. “Facebook’s Libra coin likely to run a regulatory gauntlet.” 
Reuters, 28 June 2019.
131 Katanga Johnson. “U.S. SEC chief says he has not met with Facebook since Libra 
announcement.” Reuters, 16 July 2019.
132 Pete Schroeder, Ismail Shakil. “U.S. proposes barring big tech companies from 
offering financial services, digital currencies.” Reuters, 14 July 2019.
133 Chris Hughes. “Facebook co-founder: Libra coin would shift power into the 
wrong hands.” Financial Times, 21 June 2019.
134 Mark Carney. “Enable, empower, ensure: a new finance for the new economy.” 
Bank of England, 20 June 2019.
135 Huw Jones, Leigh Thomas. “Facebook’s Libra must be ‘rock solid’ before launch 
warns BoE’s Carney.” Reuters, 11 July 2019.
136 Huw Jones, David Milliken, Brenna Hughes Neghaiwi. “European watchdogs 
demand detail on Facebook’s cryptocurrency.” Reuters, 25 June 2019.
137 Caroline Binham. “UK regulator scrutinising Facebook’s plan for digital currency.” 
Financial Times, 25 June 2019.
138 Brendan Greeley. “Facebook’s Libra currency is wake-up call for central banks.” 
Financial Times, 21 October 2019.
139 “BIS Annual Economic Report.” Bank for International Settlements, 23 June 
2019.
140 Huw Jones, Tom Wilson. “Politicians need to move fast as Facebook & Co move 
into finance: BIS.” Reuters, 23 June 2019.
141 Frank Tang. “Facebook’s Libra forcing China to step up plans for its own 
cryptocurrency, says central bank official.” South China Morning Post, 8 July 2019.
142 Mu Changchun. “Opinion: Facebook’s Libra Needs Central Bank Supervision.” 
Caixin Global, 9 July 2019.
143 David Marcus. “Libra, 2 weeks in.” Facebook, 3 July 2019.
144 Jemima Kelly. “Facebook fights back against Libra criticism.” Financial Times FT 
Alphaville, 5 July 2019.
145 Sheila Bair. “Why the Fed should oversee Facebook’s Libra.” Yahoo! Finance, 8 
July 2019.
146 Alex Heath. “Facebook’s Marcus Says Libra Association Will Be Independent ‘by 
Launch’.” The Information, 28 June 2019.
147 Scott Galloway. “The Arrogance and Genius of Libra Coin: Why Facebook’s plans 
for a cryptocurrency are already dead in the water.” Blog post, 25 June 2019.
148 Mike Crapo, Sherrod Brown. “Facebook letter.” United States Senate Committee 
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 9 May 2019.

173
149 “Facebook Digital Currency.” C-SPAN, 16 July 2019. Quotes used in this chapter 
were checked against this video.
150 “Facebook Digital Currency.” C-SPAN, 17 July 2019. Quotes used in this chapter 
were checked against this video.
151 Kiran Stacey, Hannah Murphy. “Facebook’s cryptocurrency hopes hit a wall in 
Washington.” Financial Times, 18 July 2019.
152 Josh Constine. “Facebook announces Libra cryptocurrency: All you need to 
know.” TechCrunch, 18 June 2019.
153 Josh Constine. “We still don’t know how much of Libra Facebook owns.” 
TechCrunch, 3 July 2019.
154 David Marcus. “Testimony of David Marcus: Head of Calibra, Facebook.” Senate 
Banking Committee, 15 July 2019.
155 Elizabeth Schulze. “Swiss group that’s supposed to oversee privacy for Libra says it 
hasn’t heard from Facebook at all.” CNBC, 16 July 2019.
156 Brenna Hughes Neghaiwi. “Swiss watchdog expects details on Facebook’s Libra by 
end of month.” Reuters, 20 August 2019.
157 Greg Ip. “Facebook’s Libra Could Give Dollar, Banks Some Welcome 
Competition.” Wall Street Journal, 26 June 2019.
158 @Libra_. “By creating a de facto central bank, Libra could succeed where other 
cryptocurrencies fall short. More from @wsj:” Twitter, 16 July 2019. Archived by 
Maya Zehavi.
159 “Examining Facebook’s Proposed Cryptocurrency and Its Impact on Consumers, 
Investors, and the American Financial System.” US House Committee on 
Financial Services, 17 July 2019.
160 Chris Brummer. “Written Testimony of Chris Brummer: 99 Problems.” 15 July 
2019.
161 Katharina Pistor. “Written Statement of Proposed Testimony.” 16 July 2019.
162 “Congress and Regulators Should Impose a Moratorium on Facebook’s Libra.” 
Public Citizen, 2 July 2019.
163 Robert Weissman. “Written Testimony of Robert Weissman: President, Public 
Citizen.” 16 July 2019.
164 Gary Gensler. “Examining Facebook’s Proposed Cryptocurrency and Its Impact 
on Consumers, Investors, and the American Financial System.” 16 July 2019.
165 Meltem Demirors. “Written Testimony Of Meltem Demirors: Chief Strategy 
Officer CoinShares.” 16 July 2019.
166 Libra. “The Libra Association.” Version dated 23 July 2019. (archive)
167 Libra. “The Libra Association.” Version dated 12 August 2019. (archive)
168 FINMA. “FINMA publishes ‘stable coin’ guidelines.” Press release, 11 September 
2019.
169 Thomas Fuster, Hansueli Schöchli. “Finma-Direktor Mark Branson: «Wenn ein 
Finanzplatz Ambitionen hat, muss er mit Aufmerksamkeit leben können».” Neue 
Zürcher Zeitung, 12 September 2019. “Ein Projekt mit einer derart globalen 
Dimension kann nur in internationaler Koordination und in Absprache mit 
anderen Aufsichts- und Regulierungsbehörden angegangen werden.”
170 Angelika Gruber. “Switzerland’s FINMA boss fears crypto’s ‘dark corners,’ not 
Libra.” Reuters, 1 October 2019.
171 Thomas Jordan. “Currencies, money and digital tokens.” Swiss National Bank, 5 
September 2019.
172 The Federal Council. “Federal Council informed of current status of stablecoin 
debate.” Press release, 16 October 2019.
173 Lydia Beyoud, Aoife White. “Facebook’s Libra Currency Gets European Union 
Antitrust Scrutiny.” Bloomberg, 20 August 2019.

174
174 Yves Mersch. “Money and private currencies: reflections on Libra.” European 
Central Bank, 2 September 2019.
175 @gregory_raymond. “Selon mes infos, les autorités FR n’ont pas reçu de demande 
d’agrément de @Libra_ (indisp. pour opérer dans l’UE). À leur connaissance, 
même chose ailleurs dans l’UE : ‘Face aux risques identifiés, Facebook n’a pour 
l’instant apporté aucune réponse aux autorités publiques’.” Twitter, 12 September 
2019.
176 Francesco Guarascio. “Spooked by Libra, EU pledges to regulate digital 
currencies.” Reuters, 8 October 2019.
177 Sam Fleming, Mehreen Khan. “Facebook questioned by Brussels over Libra risks.” 
Financial Times, 6 October 2019.
178 Mark Carney. “The Growing Challenges for Monetary Policy in the current 
International Monetary and Financial System.” Jackson Hole Symposium, 23 
August 2019.
179 Claire Jones. “The problems of the global monetary order go deeper than Trump.” 
Financial Times FT Alphaville, 27 August 2019.
180 Bowdeya Tweh, Peter Rudegeair. “Facebook CEO to Testify at House Panel 
About Libra.” Wall Street Journal, 9 October 2019.
181 Katanga Johnson. “U.S. securities chief ‘not prepared’ to say if Facebook’s Libra a 
security.” Reuters, 24 September 2019.
182 Brenna Hughes Neghaiwi. “Swiss-based Libra will have to meet tough U.S. 
standards: U.S. Treasury.” Reuters, 10 September 2019.
183 Hugo Miller. “Facebook’s Libra Will Be Under U.S. Money-Laundering Scrutiny.” 
Bloomberg, 10 September 2019.
184 Michael Roddan. “Facebook faces inquiry on Libra currency.” The Australian, 6 
November 2019.
185 Stefania Palma. “Singapore joins calls for global approach to Facebook’s Libra.” 
Financial Times, 19 September 2019.
186 Madhumita Murgia. “Facebook data pledges for digital currency questioned.” 
Financial Times, 19 June 2019.
187 Besnik Dervishi, Angelene Falk, Daniel Therrien, Marguerite Ouedraogo Bonane, 
Giovanni Buttarelli, Elizabeth Denham, Rohit Chopra. “Joint statement on global 
privacy expectations of the Libra network.” 5 August 2019.
188 “It doesn’t matter if Facebook’s Libra fails: Analyst.” (video) CNBC, 17 July 2019. 
189 Michelle Davis. “Facebook’s Libra Is ‘Neat Idea That’ll Never Happen,’ Dimon 
Says.” Bloomberg, 18 October 2019.
190 Hannah Murphy, Shannon Bond. “Facebook’s Libra backers look to distance 
themselves from project.” Financial Times, 23 August 2019.
191 Hannah Murphy, Kiran Stacey. “PayPal on the verge of quitting Facebook’s Libra 
project.” Financial Times, 3 October 2019.
192 AnnaMaria Andriotis, Peter Rudegeair. “Visa, Mastercard, Others Reconsider 
Involvement in Facebook’s Libra Network.” Wall Street Journal, 1 October 2019.
193 @davidmarcus. “The part of this article suggesting we weren’t on top of, or didn’t 
share detailed information about how to secure Libra and protect the network 
against illegal activity is categorically untrue; (worth calling BS).” Twitter, 2 
October 2019.
194 Peter Rudegeair. “PayPal Drops Out of Facebook’s Libra Payments Network.” 
Wall Street Journal, 4 October 2019.
195 Sherrod Brown. “Brown, Schatz Warn Payments Providers of Risks with Libra 
Association.” Press release, 8 October 2019.
196 Laurence Dodds. “Exodus from Facebook’s Libra digital currency as Visa, 
Mastercard and other backers quit.” Daily Telegraph, 11 October 2019.

175
197 Robert Armstrong. “Mastercard chief speaks out against nationalism and 
Facebook.” Financial Times, 3 February 2020.
198 Hannah Murphy, Kiran Stacey. “Where it all went wrong for Facebook’s Libra.” 
Financial Times, 15 October 2019.
199 Chris Giles, Kiran Stacey, Hannah Murphy. “Global regulators put pressure on 
Libra with enhanced scrutiny.” Financial Times, 13 October 2019.
200 United States Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. “Brown 
Statement On Payment Providers Declining To Join Facebook’s Libra 
Association.” Press release, 11 October 2019.
201 Lauren Feiner. “Treasury Secretary Mnuchin says libra backers dropped out 
because the project is ‘not ready’ to meet regulatory standards.” CNBC, 14 
October 2019.
202 Michael Nienaber. “Withdrawal of companies from Libra project is a good sign: 
Scholz.” Reuters, 15 October 2019.
203 Joe Light, Olivia Carville. “Libra Loses a Quarter of Its Members as Booking 
Holdings Exits.” Bloomberg, 14 October 2019.
204 Alice Hancock. “Priceline owner becomes latest to drop Facebook’s Libra.” 
Financial Times, 14 October 2019.
205 @davidmarcus. “I would caution against reading the fate of Libra into this update. 
Of course, it’s not great news in the short term, but in a way it’s liberating. Stay 
tuned for more very soon. Change of this magnitude is hard. You know you’re on 
to something when so much pressure builds up.” Twitter, 11 October 2019.
206 Michelle Price. “Facebook executive confident Libra will win enough financial 
backers.” Reuters, 16 October 2019.
207 Corinne Reichert, Andrew Morse. “Facebook’s Libra cryptocurrency loses support 
of five founding members.” CNet, 14 October 2019.
208 Bruno Le Maire. “Facebook’s Libra is a threat to national sovereignty.” Financial 
Times, 17 October 2019.
209 “Interview with Bloomberg.” European Central Bank, 17 October 2019.
210 Tom Wilson. “‘Stablecoins’ could hinder efforts to stamp out money laundering: 
global watchdog.” Reuters, 18 October 2019.
211 Yanis Varoufakis. “The IMF Should Take Over Libra.” Project Syndicate, 18 
October 2019.
212 Randal K. Quarles. “To G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors.” 
Financial Stability Board, 13 October 2019.
213 Lael Brainard. “Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments 
Landscape.” The Future of Money in the Digital Age, 16 October 2019.
214 Mehreen Khan, Sam Fleming, Caroline Binham. “Central banks to grill Facebook 
over Libra.” Financial Times, 15 September 2019.
215 Patrick Jenkins. “Life after Libra: how regulators could fuel rise of digital 
currency.” Financial Times, 21 October 2019.
216 G7 Working Group on Stablecoins. “Investigating the impact of global 
stablecoins.” Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, Bank for 
International Settlements, 17 October 2019.
217 Libra Association. “Libra Association Fact Sheet: Libra Meetings on October 14, 
2019.” Press release, 14 October 2019.
218 Kiran Stacey, Hannah Murphy. “Zuckerberg warns blocking Libra will be boon to 
China tech.” Financial Times, 23 October 2019.
219 Dave Lee. “Facebook’s partners yet to commit money to Libra.” BBC News, 23 
October 2019.
220 Kiran Stacey, Hannah Murphy. “Facebook admits digital currency doubts as 
regulatory hurdles loom.” Financial Times, 14 October 2019.

176
221 Cecilia Kang, Nathaniel Popper. “Facebook Lays On the Charm for Its Libra 
Cryptocurrency Plan.” New York Times, 21 October 2019.
222 US House Committee on Financial Services. “Facebook CEO to Testify Before 
Financial Services Committee.” Press release, 9 October 2019.
223 Emily Birnbaum, Silvan Lane. “Live coverage: Zuckerberg testifies before House 
on Facebook’s Libra project.” The Hill, 23 October 2019.
224 “Facebook CEO Testimony Before House Financial Services Committee.” C-
SPAN, 23 October 2019.
225 “Mark Zuckerberg Testimony Transcript: Zuckerberg Testifies on Facebook 
Cryptocurrency Libra.” Rev.com (third-party transcript), 24 October 2019. This 
transcript was the main source for this chapter, with quotes checked against the C-
SPAN video.
226 “Congressman Jesús ‘Chuy’ García Introduces Bill to Keep Big Tech Companies 
Out of Financial Sector.” Press release, 23 October 2019.
227 “FTAV Person of Interest 2019: The Longlist.” Financial Times, 23 December 
2019.
228 “Facebook Q3 2019 Earnings.” Facebook Investor Relations, 30 October 2019.
229 Martine Paris. “Full speed ahead for Calibra, says Facebook’s Kevin Weil.” Modern 
Consensus, 1 November 2019.
230 Paul Sawers. “Facebook comparing Libra to the open internet rings hollow.” 
VentureBeat, 5 November 2019.
231 “Articles of Association of Libra Association.” 20 November 2019.
232 “Articles of Association of Libra Association.” 31 July 2019.
233 Michael Engle. “Steering Committee now governs Libra technical development.” 
Libra Association, 16 January 2020.
234 Nikhilesh De. “Vodafone Is the Latest Big Company to Quit Facebook-Founded 
Libra Association.” CoinDesk, 21 January 2020.
235 Shopify. “Shopify joins Libra Association.” Press release, 21 February 2020. 
236 Josh Constine. “Facebook’s Libra Association adds crypto prime broker Tagomi.” 
TechCrunch, 26 February 2020.
237 Pierre Ferrari. “Heifer International Joins the Libra Association.” Blog post, 20 
April 2020.
238 Guillaume Pousaz. “Checkout.com joins the Libra association.” Blog post, 28 
April 2020.
239 Libra Association. “The Libra Association announces new members.” Press 
release, 14 May 2020.
240 Libra Association. “The Libra Association welcomes Blockchain Capital as its 
newest member.” Press release, 18 September 2020.
241 International Organization of Securities Commissions. “Statement on IOSCO 
study of emerging global stablecoin proposals.” Press release, 5 November 2019.
242 “Rep. Sylvia Garcia and Rep. Lance Gooden Introduce the Managed Stablecoins 
are Securities Act of 2019.” Press release, 21 November 2019.
243 The European Council. “Joint statement by the Council and the Commission on 
‘stablecoins.’” Press release, 5 December 2019.
244 “Ueli Maurer zieht Bilanz: «Die Schweiz redet mit allen».” SRF News, 27 
December 2019.
245 Bhavin Patel, Pierre Ortlieb. “Digital Currencies: A question of trust.” OMFIF, 5 
February 2020.
246 Alex Hickey. “Facebook Introduces Facebook Pay.” Morning Brew, 12 November 
2019.
247 Deborah Liu. “Simplifying Payments with Facebook Pay.” Facebook, 12 
November 2019.

177
248 “Send Money to Friends in Messenger.” Facebook, 17 March 2015.
249 Josh Constine. “Facebook Introduces Free Friend-To-Friend Payments Through 
Messages.” TechCrunch, 17 March 2015.
250 Ingrid Lunden. “Facebook is discontinuing P2P payments in Messenger in the UK 
and France on June 15.” TechCrunch, 16 April 2019.
251 Mark Zuckerberg. “Every new year of the last decade I set a personal challenge.” 
Facebook, 9 January 2020.
252 “Implications for central banks of the development of electronic money.” Bank 
for International Settlements, 1 October 1996.
253 J. P. Koning. “Why the Fed is more likely to adopt bitcoin technology than kill it 
off.” Moneyness (blog), 14 April 2013.
254 J. P. Koning. “Fedcoin.” Moneyness (blog), 19 October 2014.
255 The phrase “central bank digital currency” seems to have been coined by Richard 
Gendal Brown of enterprise blockchain company R3, in his blog post “A Central 
Bank “cryptocurrency”? An interesting idea, but maybe not for the reason we 
think,” 5 March 2015. The initialism “CBDC” was first sighted in a speech by Ben 
Broadbent of the Bank of England, “Central banks and digital currencies,” 2 
March 2016.
256 Claire Jones. “Central bank plans to create digital currencies receive backing.” 
Financial Times, 30 June 2019.
257 Aleksi Grym. “Lessons learned from the world’s first CBDC.” BoF Economics 
Review 8/2020, 15 September 2020.
258 Jennifer Sondag, Nathan Gill. “Ecuador Turning to Virtual Currency After Oil 
Loans.” Bloomberg, 11 August 2014.
259 Everett Rosenfeld. “Ecuador becomes the first country to roll out its own digital 
cash.” CNBC, 9 February 2015.
260 Evelyn Tapia. “Cinco cambios para impulsar el dinero móvil.” El Comercio, 18 
December 2017.
261 “71% de cuentas de dinero electrónico, sin uso en Ecuador.” El Universo, 3 
December 2017.
262 María Laura Patiño. “El dinero electrónico, una apuesta peligrosa.” El Universo, 1 
June 2016.
263 “Juan Pablo Guerra: Dinero electrónico es un medio de pago, no moneda.” El 
Universo, 3 December 2017.
264 “Ecuador: Cuentas de dinero electrónico dejarán de funcionar el 31 de marzo.” El 
Universal, 26 March 2018.
265 Mario Bergara, Jorge Ponce. “Central Bank Digital Currency: The Uruguayan e-
Peso case.” In Do We Need Central Bank Digital Currency? Economics, Technology and 
Institutions. ed. Ernest Gnan, Donato Masciandaro. SUERF, 2018.
266 “Project Sand Dollar: A Bahamas Payments System Modernisation Initiative.” 
Central Bank of the Bahamas, 24 December 2019.
267 Jim Wyss. “Bahamas Plans E-Currency to Connect Far-Flung Island Beaches.” 
Bloomberg, 15 September 2020.
268 “ECCB Digital EC Currency Pilot: Frequently Asked Questions.” Eastern 
Caribbean Central Bank.
269 Mu Changchun, Di Gang, Lu Yuan, Qian Youcai, Qing Su De’. “央行数字货币研
究所谈区块链技术的发展与管理.” (“The Central Bank Digital Currency Research 
Institute talks about the development and management of blockchain 
technology.”) Sina Technology, 21 February 2020.
270 Fan Yifei. “关于数字人民币M0 定位的政策含义分析” (“Analysis on the Policy 
Implications of Digital RMB M0 Positioning.”) China Financial News Network, 14 

178
September 2019.
271 Frank Tang. “China has ‘no timetable’ for launch of its digital currency, says 
central bank governor.” South China Morning Post, 24 September 2019.
272 “Interview with PBC Governor Yi Gang by Financial News and China Finance on 
Key Issues During ‘Two Sessions’.” People’s Bank of China, 30 May 2020.
273 Reserve Bank of Australia. “Payments System Board Update: August 2020 
Meeting.” Press release, 21 August 2020.
274 @aleksigrym. “You hit the nail on the head. There is no innovation whatsoever. 
They have literally invented nothing. Libra is possibly the least innovative project 
to ever come out of Silicon Valley.” Twitter, 4 March 2020.
275 Andrea Shalal. “Facebook open to currency-pegged stablecoins for Libra project.” 
Reuters, 20 October 2019.
276 Hannah Murphy. “Shopify joins Facebook’s Libra currency association.” Financial 
Times, 21 February 2020.
277 Joe Light, Benjamin Bain, Olga Kharif. “Facebook Weighs Libra Revamp to 
Address Regulatory Concerns.” Bloomberg, 3 March 2020.
278 Alex Heath. “Facebook Revamps Libra Plans, Bowing to Regulators.” The 
Information, 3 March 2020.
279 Libra Association. “Libra Association applies for payment system license from 
FINMA.” Press release, 16 April 2020.
280 FINMA. “Libra Association: FINMA licensing process initiated.” Press release, 16 
April 2020.
281 Libra Association. “White Paper v2.0.” Archive of 16 April 2020.
282 “Congresswoman Sylvia Garcia’s Response to Facebook Libra’s Announcement 
about its Restructuring.” Press release, 15 April 2020.
283 Kiran Stacey, Hannah Murphy. “How Facebook’s Libra went from world changer 
to just another PayPal.” Financial Times, 17 April 2020.
284 “FATF Report to G20 on So-called Stablecoins.” Financial Action Task Force, 7 
July 2020.
285 Andrew Bailey. “Reinventing the wheel (with more automation).” BIS, 3 
September 2020.
286 Jorge Valero. “LEAK: EU to create ‘superbody’ of watchdogs to oversee digital 
currencies.” Euractiv, 10 September 2020.
287 “Addressing the regulatory, supervisory and oversight challenges raised by ‘global 
stablecoin’ arrangements: Consultative document.” Financial Stability Board, 14 
April 2020.
288 “Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of ‘Global Stablecoin’ Arrangements.” 
Financial Stability Board, 13 October 2020.
289 “Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Stage 3 roadmap.” Financial Stability Board, 
13 October 2020.
290 Carolina Mandl, Marcela Ayres. “Communication collapse: Inside Facebook’s 
tussle with Brazil’s central bank.” Reuters, 16 July 2020.
291 Mario Sergio Lima, Kurt Wagner. “Brazilian Authorities Suspend WhatsApp 
Payments.” Bloomberg, 23 June 2020.
292 Marcela Ayres, Jamie McGeever, Gabriela Mello, Chris Reese, Tom Brown. “Brazil 
central bank chief says WhatsApp payments service faces further review.” Reuters, 
2 July 2020.
293 Kurt Wagner. “Facebook Renames Blockchain Division After Libra Confusion.” 
Bloomberg, 26 May 2020.
294 Kurt Wagner. “Facebook Financial Formed to Pursue Company’s Payments 
Plans.” Bloomberg, 10 August 2020.

179
295 Melia Russell. “Morgan Beller, the 27-year-old VC who led Facebook’s Libra 
project, is the next Bill Gurley, her new boss says.” Business Insider, 22 September 
2020.
296 “Announcing our new General Partner, Morgan Beller.” NFX blog, 22 September 
2020.
297 Ben Walsh. “What Facebook’s Cryptocurrency Libra Is Really About.” Barron’s, 21 
June 2019.
298 “ Zynga Revenue 2009-2019 | ZNGA.” MacroTrends.
299 “Facebook Revenue 2009-2019 | FB.” MacroTrends.
300 Chris Morrison. “Zynga Was PayPal’s Second-Largest Merchant in 2009.” 
AdWeek, 18 March 2010. (archive)
301 Justin Smith. “Facebook beta testing Platform payment system.” Inside Facebook, 
18 December 2007. (archive)
302 Justin Smith. “Facebook Exchanges Dollars for Virtual Credits, Eyes Expanding 
Virtual Gifts Revenues.” Inside Facebook, 2 November 2008. (archive)
303 Deborah Liu. “Expanding Our Commitment to Facebook Credits.” Facebook 
Developer Blog, 25 February 2010. (archive)
304 “Facebook scraps its own Credits currency for apps.” BBC News, 20 June 2012.
305 “Facebook Credits API.” Facebook Developers. (archive)
306 Josh Constine. “The Facebook Credits GetBalance API Helps Developers 
Dynamically Price Virtual Goods.” Inside Facebook, 4 March 2011. (archive)
307 George Lee. “Expanding Facebook Credits.” Facebook Developer Blog, 13 
October 2010.
308 “Facebook Credits Terms.” Facebook, 25 February 2010. (archive)
309 Eric Eldon. “Facebook Talking to Developers About New Plans for Its Virtual 
Currency.” Inside Facebook, 25 November 2009. (archive)
310 Douglas MacMillan. “Zynga and Facebook. It’s Complicated.” Bloomberg 
Businessweek, 22 April 2010. (archive)
311 Eric Eldon. “Facebook Sets July, 1, 2011 Deadline to Make Credits Sole Canvas 
Game Payment Option.” AdWeek, 24 January 2011. (archive)
312 Arkadian Dreams, facebook.com/arkadiandreams — buy a T-shirt!
313 Miguel Helft. “Facebook Hopes Credits Make Dollars.” New York Times, 22 
September 2010.
314 Owen Thomas. “Watch out, PayPal: Facebook gets serious about payments.” 
VentureBeat, 21 March 2011.
315 Josh Constine. “Traction for The Dark Knight Leads Warner Bros to Rent More 
Films Via Facebook.” AdWeek, 28 March 2011. (archive)
316 Miguel Helft. “Facebook Is Latest Rival to Groupon and LivingSocial.” New York 
Times, 25 April 2011.
317 Matt Rosoff. “Facebook Totally Caved To Apple On Its New Mobile Platform.” 
Business Insider, 10 October 2011. (archive)
318 Prashant Fuloria. “Introducing subscriptions and local currency pricing.” 
Facebook Developer Blog, 19 June 2012.
319 Josh Constine. “Facebook Sunsets Credits, Transitions To Local Currencies To 
Boost International Payments.” TechCrunch, 13 September 2013.
320 Eric Eldon. “Facebook’s Increasing Focus on Credits Prompts Developer 
Speculation.” Inside Facebook, 18 February 2010. (archive)
321 “Facebook Game Payments.” Facebook Help Center. (Archive of 4 June 2017.)
322 David Gerard. “Facebook’s New Currency Has Big Claims and Bad Ideas.” 
Foreign Policy, 24 June 2019.




