Current Policies and
Policy Development
Lida Anestidou, DVM, PhD
Institute for Laboratory Animal
Research
The National Academies, USA

Current polices on ????
Research ethics
Human participants’ research
Ethical conduct of research
Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) or
Research Integrity
Values in science
  Personal moral values
Vocation vs. profession
  Specialized training
  Oversight
  Licensing or certiﬁcation

Not a 20th century phenomenon
Not restricted by national borders or research
ﬁelds
Do sufﬁcient funds play a role?
Is misconduct more frequent today?
20-30 cases/year (Steneck 2006. Sci Eng Ethics 12(1): 53)
1% or 33% (Martinson et al 2005. Nature 435(7043): 737)
40% (Academia Mexicana de Ciencias 2006)
Why is Scientiﬁc Misconduct on the map

Samples of deﬁnitions
Japan: fabrication, falsiﬁcation and plagiarism
(Special Committee on Research Misconduct 2006)
Germany: scientiﬁc dishonesty. Misconduct is used in
context to describe categories of action which
seriously deviate from good scientiﬁc practice
(Commission on Self Regulation in Science 1998)
USA: fabrication, falsiﬁcation and plagiarism
(Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy 2000)

What is not included
Honest error and differences of opinion are
explicitly excluded (US, UK)
Questionable research practices/professional
misconduct/misbehavior….
Investigator bias
Authorship practices/attribution/publication practices
Inaccuracies/misrepresentations
Conﬂict of interest/non-disclosure
Collaboration
Record keeping/data management/patents/ownership
Exploitation of subordinates/research subjects/animals
Misuse of scientiﬁc research

When are policies developed
Retroactively: to address egregious behaviors
In response to increased sensitivity/awareness
To display perception of change
Problem-oriented: a certain behavior is wrong and
must be stopped (Pritchard 1993. Acad Med 68(9): S67)
Narrowly construed, restrictive, one-size-ﬁts-all
(“ethics police”)

When are policies developed:
The inﬂuence of politics
Social control of science
Codes of conduct
NSABB
UK ethics code for scientists
Constraints of science (Kempner et al 2005. Science 307: 854)
Regulated research (embryonic stem cells)
Threat of social sanction (animals, drugs, alcohol)
Dangerous knowledge (weapons research)
Scientiﬁc community’s unspoken rules (virulent pathogens)
Publication on sensitive subjects

Should we develop an international  policy?
“Global Science Corps”: Cultural relativism vs.
ethical universality
Is a common framework of scientiﬁc integrity
possible or necessary?
What is an acceptable deﬁnition of misconduct?
Should there be a universal algorithm for dealing
with scientiﬁc misconduct?

Part of the research for this presentation was supported by
a grant from the Vanderbilt University Center for Ethics.

