
Little Words

Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics series
Selected Titles
Crosslinguistic Research in Syntax and Semantics: 
Negation Tense and Clausal Architecture
RAFFAELLA ZANUTTINI, HÉCTOR CAMPOS, ELENA HERBURGER, 
AND PAUL H. PORTNER, EDITORS
Discourse and Technology: Multimodal Discourse Analysis
PHILIP LEVINE AND RON SCOLLON, EDITORS
Educating for Advanced Foreign Language Capacities
HEIDI BYRNES, HEATHER D. WEGER-GUNTHARP, KATHERINE SPRANG, EDITORS
Language in Our Time: Bilingual Education and Official English, Ebonics
and Standard English, Immigration and Unz Initiative
JAMES E. ALATIS AND AI-HUI TAN, EDITORS
Language in Use: Cognitive and Discourse Perspectives 
on Language and Language Learning
ANDREA E. TYLER, MARI TAKADA, YIYOUNG KIM, AND
DIANA MARINOVA, EDITORS
Linguistics, Language, and the Professions: Education, Journalism, 
Law, Medicine, and Technology
JAMES E. ALATIS, HEIDI E. HAMILTON, AND AI-HUI TAN, EDITORS
Linguistics, Language, and the Real World: Discourse and Beyond
DEBORAH TANNEN AND JAMES E. ALATIS, EDITORS
Little Words: Their History, Phonology, Syntax, Semantics, 
Pragmatics, and Acquisition
RONALD P. LEOW, HÉCTOR CAMPOS, AND DONNA LARDIERE, EDITORS
Sustaining Linguistic Diversity: Endangered and Minority Languages 
and Language Varieties
KENDALL A. KING, NATALIE SCHILLING-ESTES, LYN FOGLE, JIA JACKIE LOU, 
AND BARBARA SOUKOUP, EDITORS

LITTLE WORDS
Their History, Phonology, Syntax,
Semantics, Pragmatics, and Acquisition
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere, Editors
Georgetown University Press
Washington, D.C.

Georgetown University Press, Washington, D.C. www.press.georgetown.edu
© 2009 by Georgetown University Press. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Little words : their history, phonology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and acquisition /
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere, editors.
p. cm.—(Georgetown University round table on languages and linguistics series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-58901-254-7 (alk. paper)
1. Grammar, Comparative and general. 2. Lexicology. I. Leow, Ronald P. (Ronald Philip),
1954– II. Campos, Héctor. III. Lardiere, Donna. 
P201.L557 2009
415—dc22
2008029496

 This book is printed on acid-free paper meeting the requirements of the American
National Standard for Permanence in Paper for Printed Library Materials.
15 14 13 12 11 10 09
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
First printing
Printed in the United States of America

Contents
List of Illustrations
ix
Preface
xi
Chapter 1. Introduction
1
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere, Georgetown University
PART I: HISTORY
Chapter 2. From “Two” to “Both”: Historical Changes in the Syntax 
and Meaning of Oba in Slavic
9
Agnieszka L¯ azorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva, 
University of Southern California
Chapter 3. When Small Words Collide: Morphological Reduction 
and Phonological Compensation in Old Leonese Contractions
21
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt, University of South Carolina
PART II: PHONOLOGY
Chapter 4. Distinguishing Function Words from Content Words in 
Children’s Oral Reading
37
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan and Michael Fender, California State University,
Long Beach
Chapter 5. Motivating Floating Quantiﬁers
47
Lisa Rochman, Ben Gurion University
PART III: SYNTAX
Chapter 6. Applicative Phrases Hosting Accusative Clitics
61
Luis Sáez, Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Chapter 7. The Little DE of Degree Constructions
75
Remus Gergel, Universität Tübingen
Chapter 8. The Complementizer The
87
Heather Lee Taylor, University of Maryland

Chapter 9. What Is There When Little Words Are Not There?: 
Possible Implications for Evolutionary Studies
99
Ljiljana Progovac, Wayne State University
Chapter 10. Spanish Personal a and the Antidative
109
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich, University of California, Davis
PART IV: SEMANTICS
Chapter 11. Predicting Argument Realization from Oblique 
Marker Semantics
121
John Beavers, The University of Texas at Austin
Chapter 12. Aspect Selectors, Scales, and Contextual Operators: 
An Analysis of by Temporal Adjuncts
131
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis, University of Colorado at Boulder
Chapter 13. Distributive Effects of the Plural Marker –tul in Korean
143
Jong Un Park, Georgetown University
PART V: PRAGMATICS
Chapter 14. The Pragmatics of the French Discourse Markers 
donc and alors
159
Stéphanie Pellet, Wake Forest University
Chapter 15. “Little Words” in Small Talk: Some Considerations on 
the Use of the Pragmatic Markers man in English and macho/tío in 
Peninsular Spanish
171
Laura Alba-Juez, Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia
Chapter 16. Little Words That Could Impact One’s Impression on Others: 
Greetings and Closings in Institutional E-mails
183
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas, Georgetown University
PART VI: ACQUISITION
Chapter 17. Instructed L2 Acquisition of Differential Object Marking 
in Spanish
199
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign
Chapter 18. The Role of Pedagogical Tasks and Focus on Form in 
Acquisition of Discourse Markers by Advanced Language Learners
211
María José de la Fuente, George Washington University
vi
Contents

Chapter 19. Article Acquisition in English, German, Norwegian, 
and Swedish
223
Tanja Kupisch, University of Calgary; Merete Anderssen, University of Tromsø;
Ute Bohnacker, Uppsala University; and Neil Snape, Hokkaido University
Chapter 20. A Continuum in French Children’s Surface Realization 
of Auxiliaries
237
Cristina D. Dye, Georgetown University
vii
Contents


Illustrations
Tables
3.1
“Palatalizing” Leonese
22
3.2
“Nonpalatalizing” Leonese
22
4.1
Mean Vowel Duration by Word Class and Group
40
4.2
Mean Vowel Intensity by Word Class and Group
41
4.3
Mean Standardized Peak Pitch by Word Class and Group
42
4.4
Vowel Quality in Inﬁnitival to, by Group
43
14.1
Distribution of alors and donc with Respect to Turn
161
14.2
Distribution of alors and donc per Participant
161
15.1
Examples of the Different Markers in Initial, Middle, and 
Final Position
173
15.2
Use of the Marker man According to Gender (%)
174
15.3
Use of the Different Markers in Spanish according to Gender (%)
175
15.4
Frequency of Use of the Different Markers according to 
Discourse Function (%)
177
18.1
Assessment Task 1: t test Between-Group Comparisons
215
18.2
Assessment Task 2: t test Between-Group Comparisons
215
19.1
Number of Recordings Analyzed and Total of Noun Phrases 
Requiring Articles (in brackets)
228
19.2
Noun Phrases with a Deﬁnite Article versus Noun Phrases with 
an Indeﬁnite Article in the Input (%)
231
19.3
Bare Nouns from the Total of Noun Phrases in the Input (%)
231
Figures
3.1
Structural Representation of Nasals, Laterals, and Rhotics
23
3.2
Structural Blending of con  la  colla
25
3.3
Structural Blending of con  la  conna
25
3.4
Structural Blending of por  la  polla
27
3.5
Structural Blending of por  la  *porra Disallowed
27
3.6
Structural Simpliﬁcation of con  la  cona
29
3.7
Structural Simpliﬁcation of con  la  *cola Disallowed
29
3.8
Structural Blending of por  la  pola
30
3.9
Structural Simpliﬁcation of por  la  *pora Disallowed
30

3.10
Model of Phonological Compensation for Morphological Reduction
31
4.1
Vowel Duration by Group and Word Class
40
4.2
Vowel Intensity by Group and Word Class
41
4.3
Peak Vowel Pitch by Group and Word Class
42
4.4
Mean Proportion of [u] by Group
43
4.5
Vowel Quality of Inﬁnitival to
44
13.1
Representation for (11a,i)
151
16.1
Most Frequently Used Greeting/Salutation Patterns for NSs
189
16.2
Most Frequently Used Greeting/Salutation Patterns for NNSs
190
16.3
Closing Sequence Moves: Comparison between NSs and NNSs
191
17.1
L2 Learners’ Mean GJT Ratings for DOM Sentences (max  5)
205
17.2
L2 Learners’ Use of the Preposition a in Obligatory Contexts
206
19.1
Article Suppliance in English, German, Norwegian, and 
Swedish (stages)
228
19.2
Article Suppliance in English, German, Norwegian, and Swedish
229
19.3
Article Type and Bare Nouns in Comparison
230
20.1
Spectrogram of veux rémonter, “wanna go up”
242
20.2
Clauses with Auxiliaries as a Proportion of Verb Clauses, 
by Individual Child and Age
242
Tableaux
3.1
con  la  colla, conna
24
3.2
(e)n  la  enna
26
3.3
por  la  polla
26
3.4
la  lla
28
3.5
con  la  cona
28
3.6
por  la  pola
30
3.7
la  ela
31
x
Illustrations

Preface
The Georgetown University Round Table of Languages and Linguistics (GURT) is
an annual conference with a long-standing tradition—Georgetown University has
hosted GURT since 1949. The conference began as a gathering for discussion of is-
sues in all ﬁelds of language studies; over time it has developed into a nationally and
internationally known forum for the in-depth treatment of special topics.
The 2007 Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics
(GURT 2007) was cohosted by the Department of Spanish and Portuguese and the
Department of Linguistics and was held March 8–11. GURT 2007 focused on “little
words”—items such as clitics, pronouns, determiners, conjunctions, discourse parti-
cles, auxiliary/light verbs, prepositions, and so on—including their phonology, mor-
phology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, discourse function, historical development,
variation, and acquisition (by children or adults). The plenary speakers, representing
the broad scope of the theme of the conference, were Jonathan D. Bobaljik (Uni-
versity of Connecticut), Thomas Cravens (University of Wisconsin–Madison), 
Katherine Demuth (Brown University), Kai von Fintel (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology), and Claire Lefebvre (Université du Québec à Montréal). The confer-
ence drew more than two hundred attendees from local, national, and international
institutions that included representatives from Asia, Europe, and Canada. There were
seventy-four paper presentations, twelve poster presentations, and one colloquium.
To address the broad disciplinary scope of the conference’s focus on little words
and provide a relatively balanced representation from the different areas of research
disseminated during the conference, we had the difficult task of accepting only a small
number of manuscripts for each research area from the many high-quality submissions
we received. To this end, the following chapters address each of the six areas of re-
search that were well presented and discussed during this event, which may be the ﬁrst
professional conference devoted to little words from a multidisciplinary perspective.
We are very grateful to the Faculty of Languages and Linguistics (FLL), the De-
partment of Linguistics, and the Department of Spanish and Portuguese for ﬁnancially
supporting GURT 2007 and to all the reviewers who shared their expertise in help-
ing us select a representative number of high-quality papers to be presented and pub-
lished. We would also like to express our deepest appreciation to all the graduate
students who assisted in one way or another to make this conference a success, es-
pecially Mika Hama, our graduate organizer who spent countless hours participating
in the planning and implementation of many of the aspects of the conference, dis-
playing her remarkable organizational abilities and sharing her magnetic enthusiasm
while undertaking these heavy responsibilities. Finally, we would like to sincerely
thank our colleague, Dr. Maite Camblor-Portilla, who not only served as our web-
master and GURT contact person throughout the conference but also assisted with
the preparation of this volume.


1
Introduction
RONALD P. LEOW, HÉCTOR CAMPOS, AND DONNA LARDIERE
Georgetown University
“LITTLE WORDS”—items such as clitics, pronouns, determiners, conjunctions, discourse
particles, auxiliary/light verbs, prepositions, and so on—have been the focus of in-
vestigation in many research areas that include phonology, morphology, syntax, se-
mantics, pragmatics, discourse function, historical development, variation, and
acquisition. The unique purpose of GURT 2007 was to bring these different research
areas into one professional conference that would promote discussion, both cross-dis-
ciplinary and within a single discipline, during the course of the event. To reﬂect the
broad disciplinary scope of GURT 2007, Little Words: Their History, Phonology,
Syntax, Semantics, Pragmatics, and Acquisition is divided into six parts that address
each of these research areas.
Part I: History
In chapter 2 ¯Lazorczyk and Pancheva make the novel observation that Old Church
Slavonic (OCS) oba, the historical counterpart of the modern Slavic “both,” was not
a distributive quantiﬁer (like Modern Slavic and English “both”) but simply a numeral
“two,” although it differed from another numeral dъva “two” in that it was associ-
ated with a deﬁniteness presupposition. They propose an account of the syntactic and
semantic reanalysis of oba where it changes from a numeral, merged as a speciﬁer
of number phrase inside a [] deﬁnite-marked determiner phrase (DP), to a quanti-
ﬁer merged as a speciﬁer of a functional projection higher than the DP, headed by a
null distributive operator. In this chapter they discuss the motivation for this histori-
cal change and the larger implications of their ﬁndings.
Elsman and Holt discuss in chapter 3 the phenomenon of the grammaticaliza-
tion of lexical words into function words that has received much attention in various
ﬁelds of linguistics. They point out that while grammaticalization usually results in
the phonological reduction of the words in question, this reduction does not usually
result in the loss of semantic recoverability. However, given that function words are
inherently phonologically short, any reduction resulting from grammaticalization
would incur a proportionally greater loss to the surface realization of their meaning.
To support this phenomenon, they provide a close analysis of data from Medieval
Leonese, which suggests that as function words are grammaticalized and undergo
phonological reduction, individual features take on a correspondingly greater role in
1

distinguishing meaning that was previously represented by entire segments. In this
chapter, the authors show how the burden of morphological representation shifts
from the segmental to the featural level to prevent the complete loss of surface forms
that are already short.
Part II: Phonology
In chapter 4 Lord, Berdan, and Fender analyze the prosodic differences between func-
tion words and content words in English. Adults reading aloud showed reduced stress
on function words, as measured by acoustic correlates including length, intensity,
pitch, and vowel quality. Compared with proﬁcient readers, nonproﬁcient children
showed less distinction between function words and content words. This difference
appears to be a major contributor to the impression of word-by-word nonﬂuent read-
ing. Fluent readers look ahead in the text in order to construct appropriate phrasal
word groups and assign prosodic contours. In contrast, many of the nonﬂuent read-
ers are looking only as far as the next word; their cognitive resources are focused on
next-word recognition, and there are too few words in the look-ahead queue to as-
sign phrasal groupings. The authors suggest that acoustic analysis and eye tracking
can contribute to our understanding of the development of reading ﬂuency.
Rochman addresses the motivation for using ﬂoating quantiﬁers in chapter 5. In
contrast to other research on ﬂoating quantiﬁers that focuses on the syntax of how
the quantiﬁer comes to occur in the position it does, she looks at why speakers opt
to use the ﬂoated word order. Rochman shows that ﬂoating quantiﬁers are used pre-
ceding foci, a type of focus marker. Interpretively, the ﬂoating quantiﬁers result in a
contrastive interpretation of the focus (producing a contrastive focus). She then brieﬂy
discusses how the ﬂoating quantiﬁer comes to occur in the position that it does in the
linear string and concludes with a possible phonological account for why in natural
speech ﬂoating quantiﬁers only occur in one of the several possible positions.
Part III: Syntax
In chapter 6 Sáez discusses how third-person accusative clitics of Spanish verbs like
ayudar trigger me-lui constraint effects. Because they are accusative (not dative) and
third-person (not ﬁrst-/second-person) clitics, their offending status escapes standard
formulations of such constraint, including Ormazábal and Romero’s (1998a, 1998b)
one. Sáez proposes that those accusative clitics can ﬁnd easy accommodation if they
are actually generated in the speciﬁer of an applicative phrase (as goals). He provides
several pieces of evidence to support his claim: impossibility of a dative clitic, inher-
ent interpretation for adverbs like mucho, and unavailability of depictives. The com-
plement of the applicative phrase (the theme) is a cognate object undergoing
conﬂation, and its covertness explains the goal accusative makeup as resulting from
a case assignment principle (a variant of the one in Alsina [1997]). Finally, adopting
Ormazábal and Romero’s (2007) approach to me-lui constraint effects, he proposes
that they are triggered in these cases not by the clitic itself (a determiner undergoing
cliticization) but by the (silent) applicative object agreement.
Gergel analyzes in chapter 7 the Romanian little word de as it occurs with adjec-
tives. The claim is that the word under scrutiny serves as an exponent in degree con-
2
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere

structions. He discusses the pertinent morphosyntactic properties found in the language
together with the paradox arising from a positive setting for degrees as far as the basic
morphological and syntactic facts of the language are concerned, on the one hand, and
some apparent negative tests (e.g., in questions and subcomparatives), on the other. To
resolve this paradox, Gergel proposes that de is inserted in the relevant degree construc-
tions under a functional degree—and in general also movement-sensitive head. In ad-
dition the chapter analyzes new evidence from an independent domain involving the
little word de, namely as it is attested in (adjectival) doubling constructions.
In chapter 8 Taylor discusses comparative correlatives in English that consist of
two clauses, both of which obligatorily begin with the word the. She points out that if
this the is analyzed as a determiner, it must be concluded that the expressions consist
of two DPs, perhaps similar to an equative expression. However, Taylor states that
there is evidence against such an equative-like analysis—the verb in the second clause
is the main verb, contrasting with the verb in the ﬁrst clause, which never shows these
properties. In order to account for these facts, Taylor proposes that the obligatory the
at the start of both clauses be treated as a complementizer (C0), the head of its clause.
This analysis of the is extended to another English expression, nominal extraposition.
Progovac’s goal in chapter 9 is to provide a theoretical argument, using the tools
of the syntactic framework of minimalism (e.g., Chomsky 1995), that certain small
clauses (syntactic objects with no or few little words), which can be found in root
contexts as well as in other unexpected uses, may represent “living fossils” from a
root small-clause stage in language evolution. In addition to the root small-clause
stage, the clausal development may have also gone through a proto-coordination
stage, on its way to developing speciﬁc functional categories. According to Progo-
vac, these claims are consistent (a) with a syntactic analysis of what counts as an in-
crease in complexity, (b) with well-known grammaticalization processes, (c) with
“living fossil” evidence, and (d) with stages in language acquisition. Progovac argues
that not only does this approach help situate syntax in an evolutionary framework,
but it also sheds light on some crucial aspects of syntax itself.
In chapter 10 Velázquez-Mendoza and Aranovich analyze the distribution of
Spanish personal a in ditransitives. They observe that the kind of direct objects that
are normally marked by personal a in monotransitives (human, deﬁnite) occur with-
out a in ditransitives. To account for this, they suggest that personal a cannot occur
on secondary objects. These are deﬁned as the direct object of a ditransitive in which
the goal immediately follows the verb. A consequence of their analysis is that in di-
transitives with pronominal themes the only possible word order is V-Theme-Goal, be-
cause object pronouns must be marked by personal a. Their analysis receives further
support from evidence based on relativization of Spanish ditransitives. The conclusion
of their study is that little word a reveals that Spanish is in the process of becoming,
or has already become, a primary object/secondary object (PO/SO) language.
Part IV: Semantics
In chapter 11 Beavers examines the role of adposition semantics in the realization of
oblique arguments. Contra recent approaches in which either the verb or the adposi-
tion carries the core predicational force of a clause and thus solely determines how
3
INTRODUCTION

arguments within the clause are realized, Beavers suggests that both verbs and adpo-
sitions assign thematic roles to oblique arguments, albeit subject to a compatibility
constraint: the role assigned by the verb must crucially subsume the role assigned by
the adposition. He then shows how various typological parameters (including motion
encoding and the presence of dative shift) can be reduced on this approach to cross-
linguistic variation in adposition inventories. Finally, Beavers reexamines the notion
of semantically vacuous “default” adpositions and suggests that such adpositions do
not exist, further supporting the idea that argument-marking adpositions are seman-
tically contentful.
In chapter 12 Thomas and Michaelis argue that Krifka’s (1998) path-based analy-
sis of temporal measure adverbials can be extended to aspectual adverbials that de-
note time points, in particular by temporal adverbials (e.g., That should happen by
today). Using data from the Wall Street Journal corpus they demonstrate that by tem-
poral adverbials presuppose a path schema that, subject to the demands of context,
might represent a schedule or a process. In all contexts, they claim, the by adverbial
denotes the ﬁrst point at which some observer—whether the author or a participant—
got, expects to get, or hopes to get a positive answer to the question “Is state x in
force?” In some contexts, they argue, this sampling point represents an earlier than
expected point of eventuation (as in, e.g., By 8 a.m. [the traffic] already had thinned
out), in others it represents a deadline (as in, e.g., Mr. Bush has called for an agree-
ment by next September at the latest), and in still others it simply represents the ﬁrst
point at which the relevant state is evident (as in, e.g., U.S. oil supplies [. . .] had
peaked in 1970 and 1971 and by 1973 were declining). Because the sampling-point
schema is compatible with a number of more speciﬁc ones, they suggest that the by
temporal adverbial is a contextual operator in the sense of Kay (1990): It instructs
the interpreter to retrieve an appropriate semantic frame and place the situation de-
noted by the predication into that frame.
Park’s main goal in chapter 13 is to provide the generalized patterns of interpre-
tations of distributivity, which are drawn from the non-nominal plural marker (NNM)
–tul and its interactions with different types of predicates. In particular, Park shows
that there are two distinct types of distributive effects, an argument and an event dis-
tributive reading, and that only the latter is due to the presence of the NNM plural
marker –tul, while the former is due to the distributive operator introduced by a plu-
ral subject. In order to explain the generalized patterns, Park proposes the eclectic
approach under the neo-Davidsonian event semantics, which combines both the syn-
tactic agreement approach and the semantic approach.
Part V: Pragmatics
In chapter 14 Pellet examines the use of French discourse markers (DMs) donc and
alors (both equivalent to English “so”) in native speaker conversational discourse to
argue that the two DMs are not functionally equivalent: donc and alors occur in com-
plementary distribution. Donc asserts the validity of the speaker’s viewpoint and oc-
curs within turn, whereas alors is used to preface a reaction to just-heard information
and occurs at the beginning of a turn. A discourse analysis of the occurrences of these
markers demonstrates that there is no functional overlap between the two. Pellet con-
4
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere

cludes with a justiﬁcation of exclusive uses of the two markers (instances where only
one marker is possible) with what each of them indexes respectively ([logical] con-
tinuity for donc, change of orientation for alors), hence reinforcing the argument that
they are not functional equivalents. She ends with a discussion of the possible com-
pound alors donc and the unacceptability of donc alors.
Alba-Juez reports in chapter 15 on the qualitative and quantitative results of her
analysis of the little words macho/a and tío/a in Spanish and man in English. Follow-
ing Fraser’s (1996, 2006) taxonomy, she categorizes these expressions as parallel prag-
matic markers that appear in the form of vocatives and are characteristic of oral,
colloquial language, mainly found in the corpora used within the framework of the
so-called small talk. She analyzes the strategies used by “small talkers” when em-
ploying these markers, as well as the main discourse functions they fulﬁl, namely their
function as markers of (im)politeness, interaction regulators, and as alerters (focus-
ing function). Alba comments on the issues of solidarity and gender with respect to
these little words and especially about the uses of the Spanish marker macha.
Biesenbach-Lucas, in chapter 16, examines the impact of faculty’s higher status
and relative social distance on the use of greetings and closings in student–professor
e-mail communication. She conducts an analysis of linguistic realizations of greetings
and closings, examines closings for sequenced moves, and compares the linguistic pat-
terns and moves used by native and nonnative speakers of English. Her ﬁndings indi-
cate that two distinct e-mail formats set native speakers (NSs) apart from non-native
speakers (NNSs): unlike NNSs, NSs produce brief openings and closings that are nev-
ertheless appropriately status congruent given the faculty addressee. In contrast, NNSs
inappropriately blend formal business letter formulae with informal, often oral, expres-
sions. Biesenbach-Lucas’s study suggests that e-mail from students to professors in an
academic context is developing toward brevity and ritual formulae that differ from con-
ventional business letters but adhere to status-appropriate social protocol.
Part VI: Acquisition
In chapter 17, Bowles and Montrul investigate the efficacy of form-focused instruc-
tion involving explicit rule presentation and practice with explicit corrective feedback.
Speciﬁcally their instruction focuses on intermediate-level second-language (L2) learn-
ers of Spanish and differential object marking in Spanish. Results show positive effects
for the instruction, with signiﬁcant improvements in the learners’ability to distinguish
between grammatical and ungrammatical uses of the target structure (as measured by
a grammaticality judgment test) and increased ability to produce the target structure in
obligatory contexts (as measured by a controlled written production test). Results pro-
vide support for Schwartz and Sprouse’s (1996) claim that learners can overcome the
structure imposed by their ﬁrst language (L1) and restructure their interlanguages ac-
cordingly. The authors present implications for future research and pedagogy.
In chapter 18 de la Fuente addresses the ﬁeld of instructed discourse language
development of advanced L2 learners. In particular, her study examines the effect of
type of focus on form task (explicit, i.e., consciousness-raising [C-R] vs. implicit, i.e.,
input enrichment that is meaning [content] focused) on the acquisition of discourse
markers, and some of the processes that take place when students orally produce the
5
INTRODUCTION

language in these pedagogical tasks. Participants were twenty-four adult college
learners of Spanish randomly assigned to pairs in one of the two experimental con-
ditions. The quantitative analyses reveal that the C-R task was more effective at pro-
moting attention to and noticing of discourse markers, as shown by the higher levels
of both comprehension (meaning, function) and production (form) of the items. This
superior performance is supported by the results of the qualitative analyses: They re-
veal that although input enrichment tasks seem to promote some level of effective at-
tention to and noticing of discourse markers in the L2 input, C-R tasks seem more
effective by focusing learners’ attention on their forms, meanings, and uses and con-
sequently raising learners’ awareness of such forms. In addition, during C-R tasks,
learners negotiate meaning of L2 forms by formulating hypotheses and testing them.
De la Fuente concludes that, given the lack of salience of L2 discourse markers, ex-
plicit learning (via C-R tasks) and metalinguistic awareness may be necessary cog-
nitive steps to learn such linguistic items in the input.
Kupisch et al. discuss in chapter 19 different approaches to the omission of ar-
ticles in early child speech: the nominal mapping parameter and prosodic accounts.
She analyzes data from the four Germanic languages—English, German, Norwegian,
and Swedish—showing that children acquiring the Scandinavian languages omit
fewer articles in obligatory contexts than mean length of utterances (MLU)-matched
children acquiring English or German. Kupisch and colleagues conclude that the nom-
inal mapping parameter does not predict these results while they can be accommo-
dated in prosodic models of article omission.
In chapter 20 Dye investigates the status of functional elements in ﬁrst language
acquisition by focusing on the status of auxiliaries in child French. Based on analy-
ses of a new child French corpus including cross-sectional speech samples from
eighteen normally developing monolingual children (ages 1;11–2;11), which reveal
a continuum in the surface realization of auxiliary forms, Dye argues that early pro-
ductions are not as impoverished as typically assumed and that children may have
greater grammatical knowledge than previously thought.
References
Alsina, Alex. 1997. Causatives in Bantu and Romance. In Complex predicates, ed. Alex Alsina, Joan Bres-
nan, and Peter Sells, 203–46. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Chomsky, Noam. 1995. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Fraser, Bruce. 1996. Pragmatic markers. Pragmatics 6 (2): 167–90.
———. 2006. Towards a theory of discourse markers. In Approaches to discourse particles, ed. K. Fis-
cher. Bremen: Elsevier.
Kay, Paul, 1990. Even. Linguistics and Philosophy 13:59–111.
Krifka, Manfred. 1998. The origins of telicity. In Events and grammar, ed. Susan Rothstein, 197–235. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic.
Ormazábal, Javier, and Juan Romero. 1998a. Attract-F. A case against case. Paper presented at the 21st
GLOW Colloquium, Tillburg, April 16.
———. 1998b. On the syntactic nature of the me-lui and the person-case constraints. Anuario del Semi-
nario de Filologia Vasca Julio de Urquijo 32:415–34.
———. 2007. The object agreement constraint. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 25:315–47.
Schwartz, B., and R. Sprouse. 1996. L2 cognitive states and the Full Transfer/Full Access model. Second
Language Research 12:40–72.
6
Ronald P. Leow, Héctor Campos, and Donna Lardiere

I
History


2
From “Two” to “Both”
Historical Changes in the Syntax and Meaning of Oba in Slavic
AGNIESZKA ¯LAZORCZYK AND ROUMYANA PANCHEVA
University of Southern California
WE MAKE THE NOVEL OBSERVATION that Old Church Slavonic (OCS) oba, the historical coun-
terpart of the modern Slavic “both,” meant simply “two.” We propose an account of
the syntactic reanalysis of oba and the accompanying change in its meaning and dis-
cuss the broader implications of our ﬁndings.
Old Church Slavonic
The grammatical descriptions of OCS (e.g., Huntley 1993; Lunt 2001) as well as dic-
tionaries and glossaries consistently give the meaning of oba as “both.”1 This is prob-
ably so for two reasons: oba does mean “both” in the modern Slavic languages, and
the meanings of “both” and “two” overlap and are difficult to distinguish in deﬁnite
contexts that allow a distributive interpretation. Thus, whereas the contrast between
The two girls sang together and *Both girls sang together shows that both is neces-
sarily distributive, predicates that are not obligatorily collective can mask the seman-
tic distinction between both and the two, for example, The two girls sang and Both
girls sang.
OCS oba, however, could not have meant “both.” First, oba could be used to form
complex numerals, as shown in (1).2 Clearly, the only semantic contribution oba can
have in such cases is its cardinality of 2. It was no different than the other numerals
from 1 to 9, which similarly participated in the formation of complex numerals, for ex-
ample, ˇcetyre na desete, “fourteen,” literally “four on ten,” and sedmь na desete, “sev-
enteen,” literally “seven on ten.”
(1) sije
oba na desete posъla isъ.
zapovˇedavъ
imъ gle.
these two on ten
sent
Jesus having-ordered them saying . . .
“These twelve Jesus sent out with the following instructions . . .”
(Matt. 10:5)
Second, oba could be used with collective predicates, as exempliﬁed in (2),
which is also an environment where both is prohibited.
(2) I
prilˇepitъ se
ˇzenˇe svoei . I
bodete oba vъ plъtь edino.
and will-cling REFL wife self’s and will-be two in body one
9

“And he will cling to his wife, and the two will become one ﬂesh.” (Matt. 19:5)
cf. English And he will cling to his wife, and *both/the two will become one
ﬂesh.
Finally, oba could be the complement of a partitive preposition, as shown in (3).
Again, this is not an environment where both is acceptable.
(3) ky
otъ obojo sъtvori voljo otьˇco?
which of
two
did
will of-the-father
“Which of the two did what his father wanted?”
(Matt. 21:31)
cf. English Which of *both/the two (of them) did what his father wanted?
These examples show clearly that the OCS oba must have been simply a numeral
“two.” In Codex Marianus there are forty-one cases of the use of oba in environments
such as (1)–(3), where it clearly did not mean “both.” The remaining thirteen occur-
rences did not distinguish between a “both” and a “two” interpretation.
In addition to the semantic arguments for treating OCS oba as a numeral, there
is also evidence from word order pointing to the same conclusion. Oba could co-
occur with demonstratives (OCS did not have a deﬁnite article), and in such cases
it followed the demonstrative, as in (4):
(4) vь seju
oboju zapovˇediju .
vesь zakon ъ i
proroci
visetь .
in these two
commandments all
law
and prophets hang
“All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.” (Matt. 12:24)
In English both appears before determiners, as in both these commandments or in Bris-
son’s (1998, 18) example Both the girls went to the gym.3
In sum, both semantic and syntactic arguments suggest that oba was a numeral.
Interestingly, it was restricted to deﬁnite contexts.4 Even when oba appeared without
a determiner, its nominal phrase was interpreted as deﬁnite. Another numeral, dъva,
also meaning “two,” was used in both deﬁnite and indeﬁnite contexts, though it was
more typically found in indeﬁnite ones (ninety-seven out of one hundred uses in
Codex Marianus).
The Modern Slavic Languages
The situation with oba in the modern Slavic languages is markedly different from
OCS. Oba is found in all the modern languages in the family except Bulgarian and
some dialects of Macedonian, and in all the languages that have it, oba means “both.”
In that function, oba unambiguously marks distributive readings.
As a distributive marker, oba is no longer found in complex numerals in mod-
ern Slavic. This is shown in (5). The only possible numeral in this context is dva. (Ex-
amples are from a representative language from the west, east, and south branches
of the Slavic family, respectively.)
(5) a. Polish
I
usiadl¯szy,
przywol¯al¯ dwunastu i
rzekl¯ im . . .
and having-sat-down called
two-on-ten and said them
10
Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva

b. Russian
I
sev,
on pozval dvenadtsat’ i
skazal im . . .
and having-sat-down he called two-on-ten
and said
them
c. Serbian
Seo je i
pozvao dvanaestoricu i rekao im . . .
sat is and call
two-on-ten
and said
them
“And having sat down, he called the twelve and said to them . . .”
In the modern languages, oba cannot be used with collective predicates, as ex-
empliﬁed in (6) and (7). Again, in this respect, modern oba differs from its OCS
predecessor.
(6) a. Polish
pol¯aczy sie
z
z˙ona swoja, i
beda
ci
dwoje/*oboje jednym 
will-join REFL with wife self’s and will-be these two/*both
one 
cial¯em
body
b. Russian
soedenitsa
so
svoej ˇzenoi, i
dvoe/*oba stanut
odnoi plot’iu.
will-join-REFL with self’s wife
and two /*both will-become one
ﬂesh
c. Serbian
sjediniti se
sa
zenom svojom i
bic´e
njih dvoje/*oboje jedno 
will-join REFL with wife
self’s
and will-be these two /*both
one 
telo
body
“(For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,)
and the two will become one ﬂesh.”
(7) a. Polish
Obie kobiety przyszl¯y (*razem).
both women came
together
b. Russian
Obe zhenshchiny prishli (*vmeste).
both women
came together
c. Serbian
Obe ˇzene
su dosˇle (*zajedno).
both women are came together
“(*Both) women came together.”
Last, just like both, oba cannot be a complement of a partitive preposition, as ex-
empliﬁed in (8). Again, recall that in this syntactic context OCS oba was acceptable.
11
FROM “TWO” TO “BOTH”

12
Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva
(8) a. Polish
Który z
tych dwóch/*obu wypel¯nil¯ wole ojcowska?
which from these two /*both
fulﬁlled will of-father
b. Russian
Kto iz
etikh dvoikh/*oboikh sdelal to,
chto khotel otets?
who from these two /*both
did
this what wanted father
c. Serbian
Koji od njih
dvojice/*obojice/*oba je uˇcinio   sˇta     
which from these two /*both
is fulﬁlled what
je njegov otac   ˇzeleo?
is his       father wanted.
“Which of these two did what his father wanted?”
As these examples show, in the languages that have preserved oba, it no longer
functions as the numeral 2. Instead, it is a distributive quantiﬁer corresponding to Eng-
lish “both.”5 The question arises how this historical change from a numeral to a dis-
tributive quantiﬁer came to be and what factors contributed to it.
An additional question stems from the fact that, in Bulgarian and certain dialects
of Macedonian, oba was lost as a lexical item. The function of “both” is fulﬁlled by
the phrase “and the two,” as exempliﬁed in (9).
(9) Bulgarian
I
dvamata studenti dojdoha (*zaedno)
and the-two students arrived together
“Both students arrived (*together).”
A distributive-marking syntactic construction is a cross-linguistically available
alternative for languages that do not have a lexicalized both, for example, Greek,
French, Turkish, and, of course, OCS. Moreover, it is available for any numeral, not
just “two.” The exact syntactic structure used may differ from language to language,
though a deﬁnite article and an additive particle, as in (9), are common elements. It
is of interest to ﬁnd out whether there is a principled reason behind the different his-
tory between the two groups of Slavic languages—Polish, Russian, Serbian, and oth-
ers versus Bulgarian and dialects of Macedonian.
The Semantics and Syntax of “Both”
Before we present our analysis of the historical change in the meaning and syntax of
oba, let us review brieﬂy the accounts of the semantic and syntactic function of both
as they have been proposed for English.
An important early account can be found in Barwise and Cooper (1981), who
propose that both is a determiner with the same meaning as “the two.” However, we
already know that these two expressions are not equivalent. This is also indicated by
examples such as *One of both children sneezed and One of the two children sneezed,
which have been used to criticize Barwise and Cooper’s account.

13
FROM “TWO” TO “BOTH”
In response to this problem Ladusaw (1982) proposes that both has a distribu-
tive component, which makes it impossible inside partitives and incompatible with
collective predicates, as in *Both students are a happy couple and The two students
are a happy couple. This idea is further developed in Roberts (1987) and Landman
(1989), who argue that both is equivalent to the distributive universal quantifier
each/every but with the addition of a cardinality presupposition of 2. Brisson (1998)
does not analyze both as a quantiﬁer but rather as a modiﬁer to nominal phrases. It
is licensed in the presence of a distributive operator and has the semantic function of
a maximizer—it picks up the maximal individual denoted by (the rest of) the nomi-
nal phrase and disallows exceptions
With respect to the syntax of both, it has been analyzed by Sportiche (1988),
Schwarzschild (1996), and others as an adjunct to determiner phrases (DPs) that can
be stranded after the DP moves, for example, The children have both seen the movie.
An analysis along the lines of Shlonsky (1991) puts both in the head of a functional
projection that selects the DP as a complement, while still allowing stranding after
the DP moves. Doetjes (1997) and Fitzpatrick (2006) do not adopt a stranding analy-
sis of ﬂoating both but analyze it as a VP-adverbial, composed of an adnominal both
either adjoined to a null DP or in a functional projection selecting a null DP. Another
type of analysis treats both as a cross-categorial modiﬁer in the nominal and verbal
domain, that is, a DP-adjunct or a VP-adjunct (e.g., Brisson 1998; Bobaljik 2003;
Dowty and Brodie 1984).
Last, it should be mentioned that, as many authors have pointed out (e.g., Brisson
1998; Edmondson 1978; Progovac 1999; Schwarzschild 1996; Stockwell, Schachter,
and Partee 1973), the word both in English also functions as a conjunction-reduction
marker, whose presence signals strictly distributive, multiple event readings, for exam-
ple, Adam both acts and directs  Adam acts and Adam directs; The idea is both new
and clever  The idea is new and the idea is clever; Both Peter and Paul read the book
 Peter read the book and Paul read the book.
While the ﬂoated quantiﬁer both may be amenable to a uniform adnominal analy-
sis, in one of its various instantiations as a stranded DP-adjunct (Sportiche 1988), or
a stranded Q-head (Shlonsky 1991), or an adjunct/speciﬁer/higher head with a null
DP (Doetjes 1997; Fitzpatrick 2006), the function of both as a conjunction-reduction
marker is not easily given such an analysis. Rather this use of both is a strong moti-
vation to treat it as a cross-categorial adjunct and to extend that analysis to the use
of both with nonconjoined nominals. We can conclude that both is uniformly an ad-
junct, to DPs or to conjunctions of various categories, and that it is associated with
(a) distributivity, (b) cardinality of 2 (of individuals or events), and (c), in the case
of DP-adjoined both, deﬁniteness.
Historical Changes in the Syntax and Semantics of Oba
Returning to the previous discussion of Slavic, we can assume the structure as in (10)
for OCS, where oba is a numeral with a deﬁniteness presupposition, merging in the
speciﬁer of the number phrase (NumP). The speciﬁer position is adopted for uniformity
with complex numerals, which, we assume, have phrasal syntax. Oba lacks quantiﬁca-
tional force of its own; it is a cardinality expression. The grammar of dъva, the other
numeral 2, is the same, except for the fact that D0 can be speciﬁed [deﬁnite] or not.

(10)
In Polish, Russian, Serbian, and the other languages, apart from Bulgarian and
dialects of Macedonian, oba was reanalyzed from a numeral, a nonquantiﬁcational
cardinality expression, to a quantiﬁer associated with distributivity. Syntactically,
that meant that oba would no longer merge as a speciﬁer of the NumP. But does it
merge as an adjunct to the DP, as posited for English, or does it appear in a func-
tional projection selecting the DP as a complement? It needs to be noted that Slavic
oba cannot be used in conjunction reduction structures. Rather the conjunction i,
“and,” is used to introduce conjunction reduction in Slavic (cf. Progovac 1999). The
example in (11) shows that this construction was already available in OCS.
(11) boite ˇze se
paˇce . mogosˇˇcaago i
dsˇo i
te˘lo pogubiti v ъ Ge(enne˘
OCS
fear but REFL more being-able
and soul and body kill
in hell
“Rather, be afraid of the one who can kill both soul and body in hell.”
(Matt.10:28b)
Because oba is not used with conjunctions, we propose to treat it as a speciﬁer of a
quantiﬁer phrase (QP) head in the extended nominal projection, but we acknowledge
that the alternative, adjunct-to-DP analysis, is also possible. The head of QP has a null
distributive operator, a justiﬁed move, as distributive readings are possible without any
overt marking. We cannot offer here a complete theory of the grammatical represen-
tation of distributivity (see, e.g., Brisson 1998; Schwarzschild 1996). Nor do we have
an explanation for why oba had to be associated with a distributive interpretation. The
syntactic reanalysis of oba yielded the present-day situation as represented in (12).
(12) The Modern Grammar of Oba
14
Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva

In (12) [def] D is null in all the modern languages, except for the dialects of Mace-
donian that have oba, where it is expressed with an overt deﬁnite article.
The fact that oba was promoted to a higher projection, freeing up the numeral
position within the NumP, is evidenced by the fact that some modern Slavic languages
allow the numeral dva to co-occur with oba. Examples of that are given in (13). Ex-
amples like this suggest that modern oba is directly merged as a Spec, QP, rather than
ﬁrst being merged as a numeral in Spec, NumP. It agrees with a Num0 speciﬁed for
a cardinality of 2.
(13) a. Polish
Obaj/obydwaj chcieli
zapl¯acic´ za bilet.
both /both-two wanted to-pay
for ticket
“Both (men) wanted to pay for the ticket.”
b. Serbian
Oba/obadva
deˇcaka su ˇzelela
da plate kartu.
both/both-two boys
are wanted to pay ticket
“Both boys wanted to pay for the ticket.”
The position of demonstrative pronouns with respect to oba also indicates that
oba is merged higher than the NumP. As the examples in (14) show, oba must pre-
cede the demonstrative pronoun.
(14) a. Polish
Obaj ci/*ci obaj
chl¯opcy chcieli zapl¯acic´ za bilet.
both these/these both boys
wanted to-pay
for ticket
b. Russian
Oba eti/??eti oba
mal’chika khoteli zaplatit’ za bilet.
both these/these both boys
wanted to-pay
for ticket
c. Serbian
Oba ta/*ta oba
deˇcaka su zelela
da plate kartu.
both these/these both boys
are wanted to pay ticket
“Both these boys wanted to-pay for ticket.”
This contrasts with the position of the numerals, which must follow the demonstrative
pronoun:
(15) a. Polish
*Dwaj ci/ci dwaj
chl¯opcy chcieli zapl¯acic´ za bilet.
two these/these two boys
wanted to-pay
for ticket
b. Serbian
*Dva ta/ta dva
deˇcaka su zelela
da plate kartu.
two
these/these two boys
are wanted to pay ticket
“These two boys wanted to pay for the ticket.”
15
FROM “TWO” TO “BOTH”

These examples show clearly that oba has undergone a change: the original nu-
meral oba, which at ﬁrst merged in the NumP, was moved higher up. The syntactic
change was accompanied by a semantic change into a distributive quantiﬁer.
The Motivation for the Changes
Oba had a marked status in the system of numerals in OCS. It had a counterpart, dъva,
with the same meaning (cardinality of 2), the difference being only that oba could
be used in a subset of the syntactic environments in which dъva could be used (re-
call that although dъva occurred most often in indeﬁnite DPs, it could also be found
in deﬁnite DPs). Furthermore, oba was the only numeral with a deﬁniteness require-
ment. All other numerals were like dъva, neutral with respect to (in)deﬁniteness of
the DP in which they appeared. Thus oba simultaneously stood apart in the system
of numerals and was in competition with a numeral that was an unexceptional mem-
ber of the system. As such, oba was a likely candidate for reanalysis or loss. Both of
these developments occurred in the history of Slavic.
Oba was lost in Bulgarian and in the dialects of Macedonian in contact with Bul-
garian and Greek. This path of development likely occurred due to the emergence of
the deﬁnite article.6 With an overt article present, a deﬁnite DP could be marked un-
ambiguously even with the numeral dъva, something which was not possible earlier,
since the use of bare (article-less) dъva could not distinguish between deﬁnite and
indeﬁnite DPs. In other words, whereas previously oba was competing with a lexi-
cal item dъva for use in syntactic structures such as [deﬁnite]-speciﬁed DP as in (10),
and it had the advantage of unambiguously signaling a deﬁnite DP, now it no longer
had that advantage. This ultimately led to the disappearance of oba in the relevant
language.
Oba was reanalyzed in the rest of the Slavic languages. None of these languages
have developed a deﬁnite article, so oba remained the only way to unambiguously
mark a DP as deﬁnite. This presumably precluded the outright loss of oba. A reanaly-
sis of oba as a distributive quantiﬁer was not inevitable; after all, OCS managed to
do without such a quantiﬁer. But the change fulﬁlled a double function—it appar-
ently met a need, common cross-linguistically, for a distributive dual quantiﬁer and
also resolved the marked status of oba in the grammar.
If languages have a need for a distributive dual quantiﬁer, then why did Bulgar-
ian and dialects of Macedonian not develop one, reanalyzing the otherwise not needed
oba? The answer must lie in the fact that a syntactic alternative was available to the
lexical item strategy. The use of i, “and,” as a distributive marker was already pres-
ent in South Slavic, as seen in (11) in the conjunction reduction strategy. With a def-
inite article present, all the individual pieces of the meaning of both were at hand.
(16) and 
+ the 
+ two
(DISTRIBUTIVITY marker, as seen also
[DEFINITENESS]
[DUALITY]
in conjunction reduction structures)
The and the n strategy is cross-linguistically attested, and it is a general one, as it
could be used with any numeral, not just 2. So, in the presence of a syntactic con-
struction expressing exactly the same meaning, and with a wider applicability (i.e.,
16
Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva

not restricted to cardinality of 2), a distributive dual quantiﬁer, a lexical item, was
not developed. This state of affairs may also have been reinforced through inﬂuence
from Greek, which lacked a lexical item meaning “both” but had the syntactic means
of expressing this meaning through the and the n construction.
Implications for Other Indo-European Languages
The fact that OCS oba was originally a numeral and that it became a marker of dis-
tributivity later, in the process of historical change, is of consequence not only to
Slavic but also to the larger Indo-European (IE) language family. The lexical item
oba derives from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) word *ambho:, with its other de-
scendants being both (English), beide (German, Dutch), ambos (Spanish), and so on.
Given that in other languages the cognates of oba are commonly understood to be
distributive, the OCS facts suggest two paths of development from *ambho: to both,
beide, oba, ambos, and so forth.
(17) a. distributive *ambho: 
→
distributivity lost in OCS, distributivity
regained & kept in other IE languages in Modern Slavic
b. nondistributive *ambho:
→
parallel developments in the meaning of
both, beide, oba, ambos, and so on.
In order to decide which of the two pathways represents the actual development
of *ambho:, we must naturally look beyond Slavic. More concretely, we need to look
for the use of the cognates of oba in the numeral function in other IE languages, in-
cluding the ancient ones. While careful investigation into non-Slavic IE languages is
beyond the scope of this work, some preliminary evidence in favor of (17-b) can be
found in Modern German and Dutch. In both these languages, as it turns out, the
meaning of beide alternates between the distributive “both” reading and a numeral 2
reading. The latter reading is found whenever beide is preceded by a deﬁnite article
(D. Büring, B. Schwarz [pc]):
(18) German
Welcher von ?(die) beiden hat gewonnen?
which
of
(the) both
has won
“Which of the two won?”
(19) Einer von ?(die) beiden wird gewinnen.
one
of
(the) both
will win
“One of the two will win.”
(20) Die beiden Männer haben diese zwei Frauen geheiratet.
the both
men
have these two women married
“The two men married the two women.” (collective reading possible)
cf.
(21) Beide Männer haben diese zwei Frauen geheiratet.
both
men
have these two women married
“Both men married the two women.”
(distributive reading only)
17
FROM “TWO” TO “BOTH”

These German examples in conjunction with the OCS data indicate that the ances-
tor of oba and beide, that is, *ambho: was in fact not a distributive quantiﬁer but
meant something like “the two” and that the distributive function of both, beide, mod-
ern oba, and so on was a later, parallel development in the individual languages. In
other words, our ﬁnding that OCS did not have a distributive dual quantiﬁer may in
fact be a more general ﬁnding about some of the early IE languages. If this is in-
deed so, it will suggest that a change from “two” to “both” is a natural development
for grammars.
Summary
The OCS word oba, a relative of both, beide, and so forth, was a numeral with a def-
initeness presupposition, not a distributive quantiﬁer. That numeral has been either re-
analyzed or lost in all modern Slavic languages. In those languages where it has been
preserved, it acquired a distributive quantiﬁer function. In languages where it was lost,
it was replaced by a periphrastic construction with a more general functionality.
These ﬁndings are of importance for more than just the history of oba in Slavic.
They show the primacy of grammar, in the structures it generates and the system of
relationships it determines, over lexical items (oba was lost when the syntactic means
of expressing its meaning became available). They also show that marked elements
are susceptible to change (oba did not replace dъva, but rather dъva replaced oba in
its deﬁnite use, making oba redundant and therefore subject to reanalysis).
The history of Slavic “both” also suggests that the meaning of the PIE word
*ambho:, from which oba, both, and other corresponding words in different IE lan-
guages are derived, may not have had a distributive component and that the distrib-
utive-marking function of such words observed in the modern IE languages was a
later development.
NOTES
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation grant on “The Historical Syntax of Medieval
South Slavic” (BCS 0418581) to Roumyana Pancheva. We would like to thank the following people for
helpful comments, suggestions, and language data: Daniel Büring, Tania Ionin, Jelena Krivokapic, Ljil-
jana Progovac, Don Ringe, Joseph Salmons, Barry Schein, and Bernard Schwarz. Any remaining errors
are naturally ours.
1. OCS is the oldest recorded Slavic language. Although it belongs to the South Slavic branch of the
family, it is thought to be sufficiently similar to, and thus a good representative of, Common Slavic,
the common predecessor of all the Slavic languages (e.g., Lunt 2001, 1; Schenker 1995, 71, 185–86).
2. The data are from Codex Marianus, an eleventh century AD text of the four Gospels. We used the
annotated text of the Codex in Pancheva et al. (2007), which in turn is based on the electronic edi-
tion of Codex Marianus in Jouko Lindstedt’s Corpus Cyrillo-Methodianum Helsingiense: An Elec-
tronic Corpus of Old Church Slavonic Texts.
3. The alternate order appears to be possible only in very restricted cases, perhaps dialectal, such as
the both of us.
4. Morphosyntax does not distinguish between determiners and numerals. They all inﬂect like adjec-
tives, agreeing in number, gender, and case with the head noun. Thus demonstrative t ъ “this”’ had
the same inﬂectional affixes in the dual as did oba.
5. The term “quantiﬁer” is used rather descriptively here. English adnominal both has been argued to
be either a quantiﬁcational determiner with a generalized quantiﬁer meaning or, alternatively, a mod-
iﬁer that eliminates exceptions to the maximality interpretation of plural deﬁnites.
18
Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk and Roumyana Pancheva

6. We assume here that the deﬁnite article was introduced before the reanalysis of oba. The completed
development of the article is dated rather early, in the twelfth to thirteenth centuries (Duridanov et
al. 1993, 555), whereas the OCS texts are from the eleventh century, so this is not an implausible
assumption.
REFERENCES
Barwise, Jon, and Robin Cooper. 1981. Generalized quantiﬁers and natural language. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy 4:159–219.
Bobaljik, Jonathan. 2003. Floating quantiﬁers: Handle with care (revision of 1998 Glot article). In The
second Glot international state-of-the-article book, ed. Lisa Cheng and Rint Sybesma, 107–48.
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Brisson, Christine. 1998. Distributivity, maximality and ﬂoating quantiﬁers. PhD diss., Rutgers Univer-
sity.
Doetjes, Jenny. 1997. Quantiﬁers and selection: On the distribution of quantifying expressions in French,
Dutch, and English. HIL diss., The Hague.
Dowty, David, and Belinda Brodie. 1984. The semantics of ﬂoated quantiﬁers in a transformational gram-
mar. In Proceedings of WCCFL III, ed. Susannah MacKaye, Mark Cobler, and Michael Wescoat,
75–90. Stanford, CA: Stanford Linguistic Association.
Duridanov, Ivan, et al. 1993. Gramatika na starobulgarskija ezik. [Grammar of Old Bulgarian]. Soﬁa: Iz-
datelstvo na Ba˘lgarskata akademija na naukite.
Edmondson, Jerold A. 1978. On how to get both in categorial grammar. Studies in Language 2 (3):
295–312.
Fitzpatrick, Justin. 2006. The syntactic and semantic roots of ﬂoating quantiﬁcation. PhD thesis, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology.
Huntley, David. 1993. Old Church Slavonic. In The Slavonic languages, ed. Bernard Comrie and Greville
Corbett, 125–87. London: Routledge.
Ladusaw, William. 1982. Semantic constraints on the English partitive construction. Proceedings of 
WCCFL I, ed. Susannah MacKaye, Mark Cobler, and Michael Wescoat, 231–42. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford Linguistic Association..
Landman, Fred. 1989. Groups, I. Linguistics and Philosophy 12:559–605.
Lunt, Horace. 2001. Old Church Slavonic grammar. 7th rev. ed. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Pancheva, Roumyana, Agnieszka ¯Lazorczyk, Jelena Krivokapic, and Yulia Minkova. 2007. Codex Mari-
anus. In USC parsed corpus of Old South Slavic (an electronic resource).
Progovac, Ljiljana. 1999. Events and economy of coordination. Syntax: A Journal of Theoretical, Exper-
imental and Interdisciplinary Research 2 (2): 141–59.
Roberts, Craige. 1987. Modal subordination, anaphora and distributivity. PhD diss., University of Mass-
achusetts, Amherst.
Schenker, Alexander M. 1995. The dawn of Slavic: An introduction to Slavic philology. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Schwarzschild, Roger. 1996. Pluralities. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Shlonsky, Ur. 1991. Quantifiers as functional heads: A study of quantifier float in Hebrew. Lingua
84:159–80.
Sportiche, Dominique. 1988. A theory of ﬂoating quantiﬁers and its corollaries for constituent structure.
Linguistic Inquiry 19 (3): 425–49.
Stockwell, Robert, Paul Schachter, and Barbara Partee. 1973. The major structures of English. New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Wilson.
19
FROM “TWO” TO “BOTH”


3
When Small Words Collide
Morphological Reduction and Phonological Compensation in Old Leonese Contractions
MINTA ELSMAN AND D. ERIC HOLT
University of South Carolina
THE PHENOMENON of the grammaticalization of lexical words into function words has re-
ceived much attention in various ﬁelds of linguistics (Hopper and Traugott 1993,
among numerous works). While grammaticalization usually results in the phonolog-
ical reduction of the words in question, this reduction does not usually lead to the
loss of semantic recoverability. However, function words are inherently phonologi-
cally short, so any reduction resulting from grammaticalization would incur a pro-
portionally greater loss to the surface realization of their meaning. An example of
such grammaticalization comes from Medieval Leonese, and a close analysis of this
data suggests that, as function words are grammaticalized and undergo phonological
reduction, individual features take on a correspondingly greater role in distinguish-
ing meaning that was previously represented by entire segments.
The following section presents the Leonese preposition  article contraction data
that motivate the theoretical claims of the article, subsequent sections lay out our for-
mal assumptions and present tableaux and explications of the varying success of the
competing candidates across related forms and dialects, and the ﬁnal section offers
a summary and concluding remarks and discusses avenues for further research.
Leonese Preposition  Article Combinations 
and Grammaticalization
Tuten (2003) discusses the contraction of preposition  article sequences into single
words in various regions of Medieval Spain, and here we focus our attention on Leonese,
which we have decomposed for expository purposes into palatalizing and nonpalatal-
izing varieties.1 (Data adapted from Tuten 2003, 115–17, based mainly on Menéndez-
Pidal 1964, 330–39, and Staaff 1907, 253–58. Note that nn  []; ll  [ʎ].)2
In the contractions listed above, the preposition and article form a single word
that is in some instances phonologically distinct from either of its components; for
example, despite the existence of the contraction connas (table 3.1) there exists no
preposition conn or article nnas or as.
The data by Tuten represent a unique case of grammaticalization of function
words into even smaller morphemic units, and the phonological reduction that results
21

threatens the surface representation of these forms. In what follows, we show how
the burden of morphological representation shifts from the segmental to the featural
level to prevent the complete loss of surface forms that are already short.
Theoretical Preliminaries/Constraints
The phonological changes that resulted from preposition  article contraction sug-
gest that the underlying forms of these contractions violated certain highly-ranked
markedness constraints that mandated phonological simplification of the surface
form.
(1) *#l: no word initial [l]; initial l- tends to palatalize in Leonese (Menéndez-
Pidal 1962, 64–68).
*#nn: no word-initial palatal []: word-initial palatal [] is rare in modern
Spanish, appearing much less frequently than palatal [ʎ] or nonpalatal [n].
*PAL: Palatal consonants are marked (Bakovic´ 2001; Zubritskaya 1997).
SYLCON: Sonority may not rise across a syllable boundary (Gouskova 2001;
Hooper 1976; Murray and Vennemann 1983).
In the case of grammaticalization of “little words” to bound morphemes presented
here, phonological changes that might satisfy the above markedness constraints
threaten the adequate representation of meaning, as the deletion or alteration of a sin-
gle segment severely reduces the surface forms of morphemes that are already quite
small. Thus faithfulness constraints are required to ensure that meaning is repre-
22
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt
Table 3.1
“Palatalizing” Leonese
Basic 
por 
de 
a 
con 
en 
Forms
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
m. sg.
llo
pollo
del
al
conno, collo
enno, enne
f. sg.
lla
polla
de la
a la
conna, colla
enna
m. pl.
llos
pollos
de los
a los
connos, collos
ennos
f. pl.
llas
pollas
de las
a las
connas, collas
ennas
Table 3.2
“Nonpalatalizing” Leonese
Basic 
por 
de 
a 
con 
en 
Forms
Article
Article
Article
Article
Article
m. sg.
elo, lo
polo
del
al
cono
eno, ene, 
no
f. sg.
ela
pola
de la
a la
cona
ena, na
m. pl.
elos
polos
de los
a los
conos
enos, nos
f. pl.
elas
polas
de las
a las
conas
enas, nas

sented in the output via the preservation of entire segments [by the constraints in (2)]
or individual features [by the constraints in (3)].
(2) MAX: Input segments must have output correspondents (McCarthy 1995).
DEP: Output segments must have input correspondents (McCarthy 1995).
COALESCE: No element of the output has multiple correspondents in the input
(McCarthy 1995, “UNIFORMITY”).
CONTIGSTEM: Stem morphemes contiguous in the input must be contiguous in
the output (“No epenthesis between stems”).
(3) MAX-FMS: The input features of a monosegmental morpheme must be
preserved in the output (adapted from Casali 1997).
MAX-[C-Place]: C-Place nodes in the input must be present in the output (see
Lombardi 2001 for Max-F constraints).
The features relevant to the analysis here are [nasal], which distinguishes palatal
nasals from palatal laterals, [DOR], which distinguishes between nasals, and [cont],
which distinguishes between rhotics. Also relevant is the number of C-Place nodes,
which distinguishes palatal from alveolar nasals and laterals. (Features that distinguish
pairs of segments are indicated in bold.)
By focusing on the featural level, faithfulness constraints such as MAX-FMS and
MAX-[C-Place] may preserve some surface representation of a meaningful segment,
even when the segment itself is deleted. In addition, the selection of the morpheme
to be preserved may be determined based on its function, as formalized in the fol-
lowing constraint.
23
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE
Figure 3.1 Structural Representation of Nasals, Laterals, and Rhotics

24
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt
(4) MAX-FMORPHSYN: Input features of syntactic morphemes must be preserved
in the output.
This constraint is consistent with the fact that functional morphemes are often
shorter than lexical morphemes and therefore subject to proportionately greater loss
at the level of phonological representation. In the contractions examined here, the gen-
der (o/a) and number (s) affixes found on the deﬁnite articles are considered “syn-
tactic” morphemes, as they link constituents within a clause by marking agreement
between nouns and their articles. The prepositions are similarly syntactic, in that they
act as case markers (Penny 1991, 194) for determiner phrases and noun phrases, link-
ing them with a verb in the clause. In contrast, the deﬁniteness morpheme (l) of the
articles does not link syntactic constituents but rather serves a discourse/pragmatic
function of marking speciﬁcity. The distinction between syntactic versus nonsyntac-
tic morphemes plays a crucial role in the selection of the optimal forms, as explained
in the following section.
Tableaux and Explications
The constraint ranking proposed for Palatalizing Leonese (PL) is as follows:
*#l,*#nn, SYLCON, *ContigStem, MAX-[C-Place] »
Max-FSynMorph, Max-FMS, Coalesce » Dep » *Pal
Although the proposed constraints are ranked within groups, two constraint re-
lations uniquely distinguish the PL dialect. First, MAX-[C-Place] » *PAL determines
that, all other things being equal, palatalization, though marked, is permitted if it pre-
serves a C-Place node that is deleted in all nonpalatalized candidates. Second, the lack
of a relative ranking between MAX-FSYNMORPH and MAX-FMS gives equal priority
to the preservation of the features of syntactic morphemes and those of all monoseg-
mental morphemes, syntactic or not. The effects of both of these relationships can
be seen in the output form of the contraction /con  la/.3
When con and la come together, the abutting segments violate syllable contact
restrictions, ruling out [conla]. All other candidates avoid this violation, either by
/con  la/
conla
*!
conela
*!
*
cona
*!
*
*
cola
*!
*
*
☞colla [ʎ]
*
*
*
☞conna []
*
*
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
MAX- 
[C-Place]
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
COALESCE
DEP
*PAL
Tableau 3.1 con  la  colla, conna

25
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE
epenthesis ([conela]), loss ([cona], [cola]), or coalescence-cum-palatalization ([colla],
[conna]). The latter are evaluated as optimal because they violate no high-ranking
constraints, and the palatalized output best preserves the input features of both the
syntactic morpheme con and the deﬁniteness morpheme l. [colla] violates MAX-
FSYNMORPH, because [nasal] is part of the syntactic (case-marking) preposition but
does not violate MAX-FMS, as the features of the monosegmental deﬁniteness mor-
pheme l are present in surface ll [ʎ]. [conna] violates MAX-FMS, because the [cont]
feature of l is lost but does not violate MAX-FSYNMORPH, as the [nasal] feature of
/n/, part of the syntactic (case-marking) con, remains intact. Figures 3.2 and 3.3 il-
lustrate this.4
Because MAX-FSYNMORPH and MAX-FMS are unranked relative to each other,
and because colla and conna each violates only one of these constraints while vio-
lating none of the higher-ranked constraints, either output is possible. (For variation
in optimality theory [OT], see Anttila 2002.) These forms are also preferred to [cona]
and [cola], because cona and cola fail to preserve the C-Place of both the preposi-
tion and article consonants, which conna and colla do, due to the low ranking of
*PAL.5
Given the connacolla variation, it is reasonable to expect similar patterns for en
 la and por  la, yet each of these contractions has only one optimal form. First, en
 la is expected to yield both [enna][ella], yet only the former is grammatical. We
propose that the underlying form of the preposition en in the PL preposition  article
Figure 3.2 Structural Blending of con  la  colla
Figure 3.3 Structural Blending of con  la  conna

26
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt
contractions is not /en/ but /n/ (a hypothesis that receives further support from the non-
palatalizing dialect, which shows na).
The realization of /n  la/ as [nla] violates SYLCON, which the other candidates
avoid, through epenthesis ([nela]), deletion ([na], [la]), or coalescence via palataliza-
tion ([nna], [lla]). Candidate [lla] is less optimal than [nna], as it violates both MAX-
FSYNMORPH and MAX-FMS by deleting the [nasal] feature of [n], which is both a
syntactic and monosegmental morpheme; likewise for [ella]. Although [nna] avoids
these violations, it violates highly ranked *#nn, which is resolved via word-initial
epenthesis, yielding the winning candidate enna.
For /poɾ  la/, despite the fact that [ɾ] and [l] are both liquids, the consonant se-
quence in [poɾla] is marked (tableau 3.3). Note that in ﬁgure 3.1, [l] is characterized
by a V-Place node that is [cont], a property that contributes to sonority and that [ɾ]
/n  la/
nla
*!
nela
*!
*
na
*!
*
*
la
*!
*!
*
*
*
nna
*!
*
*
*
lla
*(!)
*
*
*
ella
*(!)
*
*
*
*
☞enna
*
*
*
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
MAX-
[C-Place]
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
COALESCE
DEP
*PAL
Tableau 3.2 (e)n  la  enna
/poɾ  la/
poɾla
*!
poɾela
*!
*
poɾa
*!
*
*
pola
*!
*
*
pora
*!
*
*
*
☞polla [ʎ]
*
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
MAX-
[C-Place]
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
COALESCE
DEP
*PAL
Tableau 3.3 por  la  polla

27
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE
lacks. Therefore contracting por  la results in a rise of sonority across a syllable
boundary, violating SYLCON. The remaining candidates avoid this violation, again
by epenthesis ([porela]), loss ([pola], [pora]), or coalescence via palatalization
([polla]), and this latter form wins, as it alone preserves the C-Place of each input
segment (figure 3.4) without violating any of the highly-ranked constraints. Given
the connacolla alternation observed for [con  la], one might expect an analo-
gous alternation of [porra][polla] for por  la. However, figure 3.5 illustrates that
colla:conna :: polla:porra is not an accurate analogy: while both ll and nn are
palatal sounds, characterized by dual C-Place articulations, rr is simply the [cont]
correlate of singly articulated tap r.
The remaining contractions, de  la and a  la, are unproblematic, as the fully
faithful output forms (dela and ala) do not violate SylCon and are therefore optimal.6
Finally, the surface form of the bare article itself remains to be explained, given
that its underlying form is posited as /la/.
The form la is ruled out by top-ranking *#l. Although [ela] and [ella] avoid this
violation via epenthesis, this results in violations of DEP not incurred by [lla].7 The
remaining competitor, [a], is ruled out by MAX-FMS, since it deletes the entire mono-
segmental deﬁniteness morpheme l.
Figure 3.4 Structural Blending of por  la  polla
Figure 3.5 Structural Blending of por  la  porra Disallowed

28
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt
“Nonpalatalizing” Leonese
The constraints operating in “Nonpalatalizing” Leonese (NPL) are identical to those
operating in PL; however, the differing ranking of the constraints in NPL yields dif-
ferent output forms.
#l,*#nn, SYLCON, *ContigStem, *PAL, MAX-FSYNMORPH »
MAX-F MS, MAX-[C-Place], COALESCE » DEP
The most obvious difference is the undominated ranking of *PAL, which disal-
lows palatalization, even when it otherwise would preserve a speciﬁc feature. The
second unique characteristic of NPL is that it ranks MAX-FSYNMORPH above MAX-
FMS, which allows (potentially complete) deletion of a nonsyntactic morpheme’s
features, if such deletion results in an output form that satisfies higher-ranked
markedness constraints and preserves the features of a syntactic morpheme, as il-
lustrated in tableau 3.5.8
As in PL, the contraction of con  la results in a violation of SYLCON, which is
resolved in the remaining candidates via epenthesis ([conela]), deletion ([cona],
/la/
la
*!
☞lla
*
a
*!
*
ela
*!
ella
*!
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
MAX-[C-
Place]
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
COALESCE
DEP
*PAL
Tableau 3.4 la  lla
/con  la/
conla
*!
conela
*!
*
☞cona
*
*
*
cola
*!
*
*
colla
*!
*!
*
conna
*!
*
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
*PAL
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
MAX-[C-
Place]
COALESCE
DEP
Tableau 3.5 con  la  cona

[cola]), and coalescence resulting in palatalization ([colla], [conna]). The high rank-
ing of *PAL in this dialect rules out the palatalized forms, while the high ranking of
*CONTIGMORPH rules out conela. Of the remaining candidates, [cona] is preferred to
[cola] because the latter deletes the [nasal] feature from the syntactic morpheme con,
fatally violating MAX-FSYNMORPH.
The output form of en  la ([ena]) is selected as that of the output form for con
 la ([cona]).9
For the contraction of por  la, it is reasonable to predict that the contraction
will yield *pora, as both con  la and en  la yield simplified cona and enana,
where SYLCON is resolved by deleting the definiteness morpheme. However, the
optimal form is in fact pola. Recall that in PL the maximum number of features
is preserved via the coalescence that results in palatalization, an option not avail-
able in NPL due to the undominated ranking of *PAL. However, there is no un-
dominated constraint prohibiting other types of coalescence. The realization of the
[ɾ  l] sequence as [l], though different from palatalization, still constitutes a case
of coalescence, because [l] preserves all of the input features of [ɾ] (figure 3.8 and
tableau 3.6).
While realizing /ɾ  l/ as [l] constitutes an additive process, realizing /ɾ  l/ as
[ɾ] is a subtractive one, as [l] loses both its [DOR] and its [cont] features (ﬁgure 3.9),
making [pora] suboptimal to pola, which preserves all of the input features.
29
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE
Figure 3.6 Structural Simpliﬁcation of con  la  cona
Figure 3.7 Structural Simpliﬁcation of con  la  *cola Disallowed

30
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt
Figure 3.8 Structural Blending of por  la  pola
/poɾ  la/
poɾla
*!
poɾela
*!
*
☞pola
*
*
poɾa
*!
*
*
polla
*!
*
pora
*!
*
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
*PAL
MAX-F
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
MAX-
[C-Place]
COALESCE
DEP
Tableau 3.6 por  la  pola
Figure 3.9 Structural Simpliﬁcation of por  la  *pora Disallowed

The realization of the contractions /de  la/ and /a  la/ in NPL as dela and ala
is just as in PL, because, as in PL, the fully faithful forms do not incur any violation
of SYLCON.
Finally, the realization of /la/ as ela in this dialect is due to the dominance of
*PAL » DEP.
Conclusions and Open Questions
In accounting for the preposition  article contractions attested in Medieval Leonese,
this analysis shows a systematic relationship between morphology and phonology: The
impetus from grammaticalization and markedness constraints to reduce the phonolog-
ical form of short function words conﬂicts with the need for sufficient surface repre-
sentation to ensure recoverability of meaning. This conﬂict is resolved by associating
meaning not with individual segments but with individual features, a strategy that pre-
serves sufficient phonological input to recover meaning despite the phonological
shortening imposed by grammaticalization and markedness (ﬁgure 3.10).
If this solution resolved the tension between grammaticalization and preserva-
tion of meaning in Medieval Leonese, why did it not survive? Why didn’t the con-
tracted forms of the prepositions become productive morphemes, combining with
other word classes, such as bare nouns? As Tuten (2003) notes, speakers of various
dialects of Spanish (including Leonese) began to settle in Castile in the ninth cen-
tury. The variety of dialects resulted in a koine in which no contraction occurred and
which later became the standard. Although the constraint rankings particular to other
Medieval Spanish dialects have yet to be analyzed, Tuten (2003, 115–17) lists di-
alects in which little or no contraction occurred and suggests that these analytical
31
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE
/la/
la
*!
lla
*!
a
*!
*!
☞ela
*
ella
*!
*
*#l
*#nn
SYLCON
CONTIG
STEM
*PAL
MAX-F-
SYNMORPH
MAX-FMS
MAX-[C-
Place]
COALESCE
DEP
Tableau 3.7 la  ela
Figure 3.10 Model of Phonological Compensation for Morphological Reduction

and “transparent forms” were easiest for L1 speakers to acquire in this multidialec-
tal setting. Due to the interference from competing dialects, it is impossible to tell
how the Leonese morphological and phonological shortening would have pro-
gressed. Nonetheless, the data from the contraction of “small words” in Medieval
Leonese provide insight into the relationship between the morpheme length and
featural function.
NOTES
We owe thanks for comments and questions of substance, approach, and data to members of the audiences
at GURT and at the 45th International Linguistic Association meeting (New York City, 2007), among them
Loren Billings, Héctor Campos, Tom Cravens, Francisco Fernández Rubiera, Michael Ferreira, Gregory
Guy, Regina Morin, Joel Rini, Donald Tuten, and José del Valle. The authors are responsible for any short-
comings of the present work.
1. Galician/Portuguese, Aragonese, and La Riojan show varying degrees of contraction. Leonese was
selected for discussion because of its closer historical ties to Castilian, the national standard, being
one of the strongest contributors to the medieval koine that emerged in Castile.
2. Interpretation of double nn and ll is somewhat problematic. Tuten is silent on what the double letter
represents, and we interpret them as palatals. Menéndez-Pidal’s El dialecto leonés (1962) seems to
support this, though direct, clear statements are lacking—when mentioned directly, he refers to as-
similation (-n  l-  nn; -r, -s se asimilan a la l- del artículo, o se pierde). Statements about ll seem
clearer. For instance, there are data cited from Lena such as pagayos (pegarles), potcho (pollo  por
lo) (pp. 87–88; potchas also, as well as cometcho  comello  comerlo, p. 94, and dache  da-le
 darle, p. 127; additional data cited throughout). The forms with palatal y or affricate tch plausi-
bly and straightforwardly would result from the palatal lateral. For initial position, while palataliza-
tion of l- to ll- is abundantly attested, n-  nn-  ñ also occurs, ño, ñunca, and so on (Menéndez-Pidal
1962, p. 64, fn. 96; and Zamora Vicente 1967, 130–31).
3. We assume for all contractions the underlying form of la. Although it is reasonable to posit an un-
derlying form of lla, given that this is the bare article form (table 3.1), such an analysis leaves un-
explained its realization as la in contraction with de and a. We employ the feminine singular article
as an exemplar throughout our analysis as all other article forms (with some minor exceptions for
the masculine singular, ignored here) exhibit the same contraction patterns.
4. We assume that any identically valued feature in the input is sufficiently represented by a single oc-
currence in the output, perhaps as an instance of OCP-induced merger.
5. Bradley (2007) has pursued a similar line of argumentation in his gestural overlap account of Nor-
wegian clusters, applying a Dispersion-Theoretic approach to coalescence of apicoalveolar /ɾ/ with
laminals /t, s, n, l/, which are realized as [, , , ], where blending of adjacent tongue gestures ob-
tains. In both this case and the case of coalescence-cum-palatalization in Leonese, recoverability is
ensured, because, though distinct from underlying form, the surface form allows the listener to dis-
cern the features of the input segments; this is crucial for Leonese, as the input segments belong to
different, and syntactic, morphemes.
6. We assume that de la and a la are phonologically contracted and orthographic variants of dela and
ala, which are amply attested.
7. While a constraint prohibiting word-initial l may seem odd, especially when this constraint is satis-
ﬁed by the marked process of palatalization, consider the structure of palatal [ʎ] versus nonpalatal
[l] in ﬁgure 3.1. The fact that [ʎ] is characterized by two C-Places, while [l] is characterized by a
C-Place and a V-Place, suggests that [l] is more sonorous and vowel-like than [ʎ], making [ʎ] a bet-
ter choice for a syllable onset, as it yields a steeper sonority cline.
8. We again assume underlying form of la. Although it is reasonable to posit an underlying form of
/ela/, given that this is the bare article form (table 3.2), such an analysis leaves unexplained the ab-
sence of forms such as *conela, *porela, and so on.
32
Minta Elsman and D. Eric Holt

9. We posit that the alternation between ena and na (table 3.2) is due to differing underlying forms of
the preposition en, /en/ and /n/, the latter of which represents a more advanced stage of the gram-
maticalization of the preposition en, as it occurs only as a bound form in these contractions.
REFERENCES
Anttila, Arto. 2002. Variation and phonological theory. In The handbook of language variation and change,
ed. J. K. Chambers, Peter Trudgill, and Natalie Schilling-Estes, 206–43. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Bakovic´, Eric J. 2001. Nasal place neutralization in Spanish. In U Penn working papers in linguistics 7.1:
Proceedings of the 24th annual Penn linguistics colloquium, ed. Michelle Minnick Fox, Alexander
Williams, and Elsi Kaiser, 1–13. Philadelphia: PWPL.
Bradley, Travis G. 2007. Morphological derived-environment effects in gestural coordination: A case
study of Norwegian clusters. Lingua 117:950–85.
Casali, Roderick F. 1997. Vowel elision in hiatus contexts: Which vowel goes? Language 73:493–533.
Gouskova, Maria. 2001. Falling sonority onsets, loanwords, and syllable contact. In CLS 37: Papers from
the 37th annual regional meeting of the Chicago linguistic society. Chicago: CLS.
Hooper, Joan Bybee. 1976. An introduction to natural generative phonology. New York: Academic Press.
Hopper, Paul J., and Elizabeth Closs Traugott. 1993. Grammaticalization. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Lombardi, Linda. 2001. Why place and voice are different: Constraint interactions and feature faithful-
ness in optimality theory. In Segmental phonology in optimality theory: Constraints and represen-
tations, ed. Linda Lombardi, 13–45. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, John. 1995. Extensions of faithfulness: Rotuman revisited. Rutgers Optimality Archive.
Menéndez-Pidal, Ramón. 1962. El dialecto leonés. Oviedo: Instituto de Estudios Asturianos.
———. 1964. Orígenes del español: Estado lingüístico de la Península Ibérica hasta el siglo XI. 5th ed.
Madrid: Espasa-Calpe.
Murray, Robert W., and Theo Vennemann. 1983. Sound change and syllable structure [: Problems] in Ger-
manic phonology. Language 59:514–28.
Penny, Ralph. 1991. A history of the Spanish language. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Staaff, Erik. 1907. Etude sur l’ancien dialecte léonais. Uppsala. Almqvist and Wiksell.
Tuten, Donald. 2003. Koineization in Medieval Spanish. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Zamora Vicente, Alonso. 1967. Dialectología española. Madrid: Gredos.
Zubritskaya, Katya. 1997. Mechanism of sound change in optimality theory. Language Variation and
Change 9:121–48.
33
WHEN SMALL WORDS COLLIDE


II
Phonology


4
Distinguishing Function Words from Content
Words in Children’s Oral Reading
CAROL LORD, ROBERT BERDAN, AND MICHAEL FENDER
California State University, Long Beach
BY THE TIME they enter ﬁrst grade, children acquiring language in a home where Eng-
lish is spoken typically show the English prosodic pattern in which content words re-
ceive stress but function words do not. However, when some of these children read
text aloud, it is perceived as choppy, awkward, and word-by-word, without meaning-
ful phrasal groupings and lacking appropriate expression, as if they are reading a word
list (Weber 2006). A major factor contributing to the impression of word-by-word
reading appears to be the lack of a stress distinction between content words and func-
tion words.
To investigate this interpretation, we performed acoustic analyses on recordings
of samples of oral reading by nonﬂuent children, ﬂuent children, and adults. We
measured nuclear vowels in monosyllabic function words and content words for
acoustic correlates of stress, including vowel length, intensity, pitch, and vowel qual-
ity. We found that the nonﬂuent children’s function words tended to be relatively
longer, louder, and higher in pitch, and their vowels were less likely to be reduced to
schwa. Compared with the proﬁcient readers, there was less distinction between their
pronunciations of function words and content words.
Prosodic Features of Function Words
In many languages, possibly all, there is a distinction between lexical categories and
functional categories. In English, lexical categories include nouns, verbs, and adjec-
tives—that is, content words that carry the dominant semantic weight of utterances.
Functional categories include prepositions, articles, auxiliaries, modals, complemen-
tizers, and conjunctions as well as other particles; these signal relationships among con-
tent words. Content words contain at least one stressed syllable. If a function word
appears in a list, it receives the same stress as a content word; for example, for and four
are pronounced the same, as are him and hymn and to and two. However, in discourse
context the function words typically occur without stress; exceptions occur when the
function word is focused or phrase-ﬁnal (Bolinger 1975; Selkirk 1996; Sweet 1891).
Perception of stress in English appears to depend on a few major acoustic cor-
relates: vowel duration, intensity, and pitch (Fry 1955, 1958; Hayes 1995; Tamburini
37

38
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan, and Michael Fender
and Caini 2005). Unstressed vowels in English typically are reduced to schwa, as in
the ﬁrst syllable of about and connect, and in the last syllable of comet and medicine
(Shi et al. 2005). These are the acoustic correlates we examined and compared in func-
tion words and content words in this study.
Function Words and Fluent Reading
Once a reader is able to recognize individual words quickly and automatically, cog-
nitive resources can be focused on text comprehension (LaBerge and Samuels 1974).
In order to read a text aloud with appropriate stress patterns and intonation, the reader
needs to group words into phonological phrases and to structure the syntactic and se-
mantic elements to create a mental parse (Chafe 1988; Dowhower 1991; Kintsch 1998;
Kuhn and Stahl 2003; Miller and Schwanenﬂugel 2006).
Prosodic patterns in oral speech provide information that helps the hearer construct
a mental parse. In oral speech, function words are typically distinguished by lack of
stress; however, English orthography provides the reader with no overt marking indi-
cating presence or absence of stress. Function words constitute a signiﬁcant portion of
English discourse. Although there are only a few hundred function words in English,
they make up at least 50 percent of the word tokens in everyday speech (Cutler 1993).
Evidence suggests that ﬂuent readers may process function words differently from
content words. In letter detection tasks conducted during reading, mature ﬂuent read-
ers are much better at noticing and marking a target letter (e.g., t) in content words
than in function words. In contrast, younger novice readers do not show a distinction
between content and function words on these tasks (Greenberg, Koriat, and Vellutino
1998; Saint-Aubin, Klein, and Landry 2005). Research with ﬂuent readers using eye-
tracking shows that function words are much more likely to be skipped than content
words (Saint-Aubin, Klein, and Landry 2005). They are less likely to receive direct
eye ﬁxations, and they receive much shorter ﬁxations (Rayner and Pollatsek 1989;
factors such as word length and word frequency may account for some of these dif-
ferences). Overall, studies suggest that ﬂuent reading shows rapid lexical access for
function words compared with content words (Segalowitz and Lane 2004).
In contrast, children learning to read may ﬁnd function words difficult to mas-
ter. One study found that children read function words less accurately than content
words, whether in lists or in connected text (Blank 1985). Beginners as well as older
delayed readers may read orally word-by-word, giving uniform stress to content and
function words, due to difficulties in word identiﬁcation or integration of meaning
(Clay and Imlach 1971; Pinnell et al. 1995).
In reading research, reading ﬂuency has been measured in terms of judgments
of a reading sample, using a rubric with a four- to six-point scale (Kuhn and Stahl
2003; Pinnell et al. 1995; Rasinski 2003). Most recently, the Oral Reading Fluency
Study of the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) used a four-level
holistic rubric for rating fourth-grade oral reading ﬂuency, focusing on three key el-
ements: (a) grouping of words in phrases (manifested by intonation and pausing); (b)
adherence to the author’s syntax, indicating an awareness of the ideas expressed in
the text; and (c) presence of expressive interpretation (Daane et al. 2005). With this
rubric, a key element in student success is the use of appropriate stress patterns on
function words.

Comparing Fluent and Nonﬂuent Readers
In this study, reading samples were collected from adults and children, and prosodic
features of function words and content words were analyzed.
The children in our study were third graders in an urban public school in Cali-
fornia. The school’s average reading scores were at the thirty-eighth percentile on state
reading assessments, and most of the children qualiﬁed for free or reduced-price
school lunches, based on family income level. Six children were identiﬁed by their
teachers as falling in the lower two quartiles in reading proﬁciency, with reading speed
ranging from approximately seventy-ﬁve to one hundred correct words per minute.
In addition, teachers identiﬁed six children with reading achievement scores at or
above grade level. All children were classiﬁed as either native speakers of English or
English proﬁcient. The six adult readers were all college graduates. There was a mix
of gender and ethnicity in all three groups.
The subjects were asked to read aloud two short narratives of about 250 words
each; these were Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) pas-
sages at the second-grade reading level (Hintze, Ryan, and Stoner 2002). Digital
recordings were made. In each narrative we identiﬁed thirty monosyllabic function
words: the ﬁrst ten prepositions, the ﬁrst ten instances of inﬁnitival to, and the ﬁrst
ten articles (a, an, the). We also identiﬁed thirty monosyllabic content words (nouns,
verbs, and adjectives).
Using Praat software’s acoustic display, we demarcated the beginning and end of
the vowel nucleus of each target function word and content word (Boersma and
Weenink 2007). Then, for each word, we made computational measures of vowel du-
ration, intensity, pitch, and vowel quality. Vowel duration measures were in millisec-
onds. Intensity was measured in decibels at the midpoint of each vowel. To compensate
for different recording levels across reading sessions, the mean intensity was calculated
for each reading/recording session. This value was then subtracted from the midpoint
vowel intensity of each token to produce the intensity values analyzed here. For each
vowel, peak pitch was measured in hertz; these frequencies were subjected to a log
transformation to linearize the scale and then standardized for each reader, giving a dis-
tribution of values for each reader with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. For
vowel quality judgments, raters listened to all instances of the to inﬁnitive and judged
whether the vowel quality was a tense [u] or a reduced, centralized schwa vowel. Tense
vowels were coded as 1 and all others as 0; each reader’s score was the proportion of
[u] pronunciations in his or her story. To obtain a comparable acoustic measure of ex-
tent of vowel reduction, we plotted formant 1 values against formant 2 values.
Results
Differences between adults and nonﬂuent children were found in comparisons of
content and function word duration, intensity, pitch, and vowel quality.
Vowel Duration
For all three reader groups, the vowels of function words were shorter than the vow-
els of content words. However, the difference between content and function words
was greatest for the adults. For these readers the duration of function word vowels
was about 41 percent that of content words. For the ﬂuent children the duration was
39
DISTINGUISHING FUNCTION WORDS FROM CONTENT WORDS IN CHILDREN’S ORAL READING

40
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan, and Michael Fender
about 60 percent, and for the nonﬂuent children it was about 72 percent. The mean
duration values in milliseconds are shown in table 4.1.
Analysis of variance for group by word class by story (3  2  2) shows all
main effects to be highly signiﬁcant. The group effect ( f[2, 204]  183.5, p  .0001,
eta  .643) shows signiﬁcant difference in mean vowel length across the three groups
of readers. Post hoc analysis (Scheffé) shows each group of readers to be signiﬁcantly
different from the other two groups: nonﬂuent readers with the longest mean vowel
duration, adults with the shortest vowels, and ﬂuent children in between. For all three
groups, word class is also signiﬁcant ( f [1, 204]  304.4, p  .0001, eta  .599):
Vowels in the function words are shorter than vowels in the content words. The two-
way interaction of word class and group is also signiﬁcant: Adults shorten vowels of
function words more than children do. Vowel length for function words is essentially
unchanged across the two stories.
The relative duration of content word and function word vowels is shown in ﬁg-
ure 4.1, where the slope of the lines shows that the greatest difference between con-
tent words and function words is for adults.
Table 4.1
Mean Vowel Duration by Word Class and Group
Group
Content
Function
Content  Function
Nonﬂuent (6)
201.4 ms (34.0 SD)
146.7 ms (33.6 SD)
174.0 ms
Fluent (6)
147.6 ms (30.0 SD)
87.9 ms (25.0 SD)
117.7 ms
Adults (6)
128.3 ms (37.1 SD)
52.2 ms (12.6 SD)
90.2 ms
All (18)
159.1 ms
95.6 ms
127.3 ms
Figure 4.1 Vowel Duration by Group and Word Class

Vowel Intensity
Measures of vowel intensity show that all readers produced louder vowels in content
words than in function words (see table 4.2).
The difference among the reading groups in mean vowel intensity was signiﬁ-
cant ( f [2, 204]  20.43, p  .0001, eta  .167). Post hoc analysis (Scheffé) shows
that this difference is between the adults and the two groups of children, with chil-
dren showing greater vowel intensity, relative to the full reading session, than the
adults. There is also a signiﬁcant effect for word class ( f [1, 204]  61.07, p  .0001,
eta  .230): Vowels in content words are spoken with greater intensity than vowels
in function words. This differential is greater for adults than for either of the two
groups of children. The story effect is not signiﬁcant.
As ﬁgure 4.2 illustrates, the content words were louder than function words for
all readers; however, the difference was greater for the adults.
Vowel Peak Pitch
A comparison of the peak pitch of content word and function word vowels showed
that the function words were spoken at a lower pitch by the adults and the nonﬂuent
41
DISTINGUISHING FUNCTION WORDS FROM CONTENT WORDS IN CHILDREN’S ORAL READING
Table 4.2
Mean Vowel Intensity by Word Class and Group
Group
Content
Function
Content  Function
Nonﬂuent (6)
2.85 db (1.84 SD)
1.41 db (3.07 SD)
2.13 db
Fluent (6)
3.02 db (1.48 SD)
0.77 db (2.51 SD)
1.90 db
Adults (6)
1.70 db (1.97 SD)
1.83 db (2.21 SD)
0.07 db
All (18)
2.53 db
0.12 db
1.32 db
Figure 4.2 Vowel Intensity by Group and Word Class

children; the difference between content and function words was smaller for the non-
ﬂuent children (see table 4.3).
Analysis of variance of the transformed pitch variable showed no signiﬁcant ef-
fects for group of readers, for word class, or for story. In the interaction between
reader group and word class ( f [2, 204]  5.184, p  .006, eta  .048), adults and
nonﬂuent children showed quite similar behavior, each with lower mean pitch on
function words than on content words. The ﬂuent children, however, show exactly
the opposite relationship, with higher mean pitch on function words than on content
words.
As the difference in the slope of the lines in ﬁgure 4.3 illustrates, adults made
greater pitch distinctions between content and function words than did the nonﬂuent
children.
42
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan, and Michael Fender
Table 4.3
Mean Standardized Peak Pitch by Word Class and Group
Group
Content
Function
Content  Function
Nonﬂuent (6)
.099 (.534 SD)
.023 (.600 SD)
.038
Fluent (6)
.122 (.401 SD)
.157 (.570 SD)
.017
Adults (6)
.159 (.480 SD)
.029 (.326 SD)
.065
All (18)
.045
.034
.040
Figure 4.3 Peak Vowel Pitch by Group and Word Class

Vowel Quality
Pronunciation of the [u] vowel in inﬁnitival to differed strikingly across the three
reader groups, as shown in table 4.4. Adults consistently reduced the vowel, and non-
ﬂuent children did not.
Analysis of variance shows large and signiﬁcant differences in the mean propor-
tion of [u] pronunciations across the three reading groups ( f [2, 204]  104.948, p
 .0001, eta  .875). For the nonﬂuent readers, about 95 percent of the vowels were
unreduced [u], and examination of individual readers shows that half of the children
in this group used [u] categorically. The ﬂuent children used [u] just under half of the
time, and the adults used the unreduced form in only about 7 percent of the instances
of inﬁnitival to. Each group of readers is signiﬁcantly different from the other two
groups. Figure 4.4 illustrates the large differences between reader groups.
A representation of the extent of vowel reduction using Praat acoustic measures
is shown in ﬁgure 4.5. Normalized values for formant 1 are on the vertical axis, with
formant 2 on the horizontal axis. The resulting scatterplot approximates relative po-
sition on a vowel quadrilateral, with centralized/reduced instances appearing on the
lower left. The circles represent adult pronunciations, and the squares represent non-
43
DISTINGUISHING FUNCTION WORDS FROM CONTENT WORDS IN CHILDREN’S ORAL READING
Table 4.4
Vowel Quality in Inﬁnitival to, by Group
Group
Mean Proportion of [u]
Nonﬂuent (6)
.955 (.069 SD)
Fluent (6)
.487 (.231 SD)
Adults (6)
.073 (.071 SD)
All (18)
.505
Figure 4.4 Mean Proportion of [u] by Group

ﬂuent child pronunciations. As the ﬁgure shows, many of the adult vowels were sig-
niﬁcantly reduced, while the nonﬂuent children’s were not. (For reasons of graphic
clarity, we have not included the ﬂuent children’s pronunciations in this display; their
formant values showed reduced, unreduced, and intermediate instances.)
Discussion
This study found that adults reading aloud consistently differentiated function words
from content words with respect to measures that are considered to be acoustic cor-
relates of stress: duration, intensity, and pitch. Function word vowel nuclei were
shorter, not so loud, and lower in pitch than content word vowel nuclei. The results
also showed that the differences between function and content words along these pa-
rameters were greater for adults than for children and that the differences were greater
for the nonﬂuent children than for the ﬂuent children. The difference between adults
and children was strongest for vowel duration. For pitch, there was a small difference
between adults and nonﬂuent children; however, the results for the proﬁcient children
are puzzling and bear further investigation, since they do not follow the trend of the
other measures. The complex algorithm for pitch measures could have led to com-
putational errors (Tamburini and Caini 2005).
The measures of vowel quality for inﬁnitival to showed that adults typically re-
duced the vowel toward schwa, according to the pattern for unstressed syllables in
English. In sharp contrast, nonﬂuent children rarely reduced the vowel, and ﬂuent chil-
dren showed a mixed pattern.
In identifying the nature and extent of differences in stress on function words,
this study has served to clarify a key contributor to the perceived pattern of word-by-
44
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan, and Michael Fender
Figure 4.5 Vowel Quality of Inﬁnitival to

word prosody in the oral reading performance of nonﬂuent readers. These are the stu-
dents who receive low ratings on our current national assessments of reading ﬂuency.
How can we account for the word-by-word reading pattern? Function words in
English are short, high-frequency lexical items, but they are more likely than content
words to be spelled in ways that violate phonics generalizations (consider, e.g., func-
tion words the, of, to). Students are often drilled on these as “sight words,” but, nev-
ertheless, students who can read them readily in word lists often show the patterns
we have described when reading them in connected text.
Some insight may be found from studying what these children are looking at
while they are reading aloud. To read ﬂuently with appropriate stress, a reader must
be looking ahead in the text in order to construct appropriate phrasal word groups.
In pilot studies using eye tracking, we have found consistent differences between ﬂu-
ent and nonﬂuent readers. In our limited sample, the eyes of ﬂuent readers are gen-
erally two to four words ahead of the voice. However, for the nonﬂuent third graders
that we have been observing, the eyes are often ﬁxated on the word that follows the
word being spoken. This may be an indication that cognitive resources are focused
on next-word recognition and that there are too few words in the look-ahead queue
to assign phrasal groupings.
A child takes approximately 400–600 ms to say a one-syllable content word. With
a one-word look-ahead, if the reader spends 400–600 ms saying the word, this allows
400–600 ms to recognize the following word, which is apparently sufficient, for a child
reading at a rate of 60–80 words per minute. A ﬂuent adult takes only 75–150 ms to
say a one-syllable function word. If the nonﬂuent child takes only 75–150 ms to say
a word, the strategy of eyes-on-the-next-word is unlikely to provide adequate time
for next-word recognition. Thus, by failing to de-stress function words, the child is
able to maintain the spoken word stream and minimize between-word pauses in his
or her oral performance.
The absence of a stress distinction between function words and content words
by nonﬂuent readers deserves further study, particularly as these children gain in ﬂu-
ency, so that we can better understand the child’s reading process. With clearer un-
derstanding, we may be able to assist reading professionals in developing more
effective interventions.
NOTE
The authors acknowledge and appreciate the assistance of Nancy Caplow and Hide Okuno on this study.
REFERENCES
Blank, Marion. 1985. A word is a word—or is it? In Biobehavioral measures of dyslexia, ed. David B.
Gray and James F. Kavanagh, 261–77. Parkton, MD: York Press.
Boersma, Paul, and David Weenink. 2007. Praat: Doing phonetics by computer (ver. 4.5.16) [Computer
program]. www.praat.org/ (accessed March 1, 2007).
Bolinger, Dwight. 1975. Aspects of language. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Chafe, Wallace. 1988. Punctuation and the prosody of written language. Written Communication
5:396–426.
Clay, Marie M., and Robert H. Imlach. 1971. Juncture, pitch, and stress as reading behaviour variables.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 10:133–39.
45
DISTINGUISHING FUNCTION WORDS FROM CONTENT WORDS IN CHILDREN’S ORAL READING

Cutler, Anne. 1993. Phonological cues to open- and closed-class words in the processing of spoken sen-
tences. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 32(2): 109–31.
Daane, Mary C., Jay R. Campbell, Wendy S. Grigg, Madeline J. Goodman, and Andreas Oranje. 2005.
Fourth-grade students reading aloud: NAEP 2002 special study of oral reading (NCES 2006-469).
U.S. Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Sta-
tistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Dowhower, Sarah L. 1991. Speaking of prosody: Fluency’s unattended bedfellow. Theory into Practice
30:165–75.
Fry, D[ennis] B[utler]. 1955. Duration and intensity as physical correlates of linguistic stress. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 27:765–68.
———. 1958. Experiments in the perception of stress. Language and Speech 1:126–52.
Greenberg, Seth N., Asher Koriat, and Frank R. Vellutino. 1998. Age changes in the missing-letter effect
reﬂect the reader’s growing ability to extract the structure from text. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology 69 (3): 175–98.
Hayes, Bruce. 1995. Metrical stress theory: Principles and case studies. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Hintze, John M., Amanda L. Ryan, and Gary Stoner. 2002. Concurrent validity and diagnostic accuracy
of the dynamic indicators of basic early literacy skills and the comprehensive test of phonological
processing. http://dibels.uoregon.edu/techreports/DIBELS_Validity_Hintze.pdf (accessed August 10,
2003).
Kintsch, Walter. 1998. Comprehension: A paradigm for cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kuhn, Melanie R., and Steven A. Stahl. 2003. Fluency: A review of developmental and remedial practices.
Journal of Educational Psychology 95 (1): 3–21.
LaBerge, David, and S. Jay Samuels. 1974. Toward a theory of automatic information processing in read-
ing. Cognitive Psychology 6:293–323.
Miller, Justin, and Paula J. Schwanenﬂugel. 2006. Prosody of syntactically complex sentences in the oral
reading of young children. Journal of Educational Psychology 98 (4): 839–53.
Pinnell, Gay S., John J. Pikulski, Karen K. Wixson, Jay R. Campbell, Phillip B. Gough, and Alexandra S.
Beatty. 1995. Listening to children read aloud. Report No. 23-FR-04. Washington, DC: National Cen-
ter for Educational Statistics.
Rasinski, Timothy V. 2003. The ﬂuent reader: Oral reading strategies for building word recognition, ﬂu-
ency, and comprehension. New York: Scholastic Professional.
Rayner, Keith, and Alexander Pollatsek. 1989. The psychology of reading. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Saint-Aubin, Jean, Raymond M. Klein, and Tina Landry. 2005. Age changes in the missing-letter effect
revisited. Experimental Child Psychology 91:158–82.
Segalowitz, Sidney J., and Korri Lane. 2004. Perceptual ﬂuency and lexical access for function versus con-
tent words. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27 (2): 307–8.
Selkirk, Elisabeth. 1996. The prosodic structure of function words. In Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from
speech to grammar in early acquisition, ed. James L. Morgan and Katherine Demuth, 187–213. Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Shi, Rushen, Bryan Gick, Dara Kanwischer, and Ian Wilson. 2005. Frequency and category factors in the
reduction and assimilation of function words: EPG and acoustic measures. Journal of Psycholinguis-
tic Research 34 (4): 341–64.
Sweet, Henry. 1891. A handbook of phonetics. Oxford: Henry Frowde.
Tamburini, F., and C. Caini. 2005. An automatic system for detecting prosodic prominence in American
English continuous speech. International Journal of Speech Technology 8:33–44.
Weber, Rose-Marie. 2006. Function words in the prosody of ﬂuent reading. Journal of Research in Read-
ing 29 (3): 258–69.
46
Carol Lord, Robert Berdan, and Michael Fender

5
Motivating Floating Quantiﬁers
LISA ROCHMAN
Ben Gurion University
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN information structure and prosody on the one hand, and the
placement of “little words” on the other, is being explored in many languages in re-
lationship to many different linguistic phenomena. In this chapter ﬂoating quantiﬁers
(FQs) are shown to be a prime example of little words that are inﬂuenced by both
prosody and information structure.1 FQs in English are of particular interest because
they are among a minority of elements that display some freedom in their placement
in this ﬁxed word-order language. This chapter investigates the relationship between
FQs, information structure, and prosody and shows that FQs mark the focus and can
be viewed as a type of focus marker whose placement is impacted by the prosody of
the language.
Floating Quantiﬁers
There are three quantiﬁcational words in English that can appear in noncanonical po-
sitions, reportedly without a change in meaning: all, both, and each (Sportiche 1988).2
(1) All the children have greeted the teacher.
(2) The children (all) have (all) greeted the teacher.
In (1) the quantiﬁer is in the canonical position for determiner quantiﬁers.3 In con-
trast, the positions in (2) can only be occupied by FQ, as other quantiﬁers are ruled
out, for example, (3).
(3) The children (*some/*many/*every) have (*some/*many/*every) greeted the
teacher.
Although informants note no difference in sentences with an FQ as opposed to a non-
ﬂoating quantiﬁer, there are consistent patterns of usage in natural speech. The exis-
tence of these patterns indicates that the choice between the nonﬂoating and ﬂoating
word order is not haphazard or stylistic. This chapter addressed the following two
questions regarding FQs:4
(4) a. What motivates the change in word order?
b. What determines where the moved element occurs?
47

While a large body of work on FQ exists, its focus has been on syntactic accounts of
how the FQ comes to occupy its noncanonical position.5 The following section ad-
dresses question (4a), the motivation for the use of the ﬂoated word order. It is shown
that information structure is the motivating factor in quantiﬁer ﬂoating (q-ﬂoat); FQs
precede foci. The subsequent section then investigates question (4b), the positions
where the FQ can occur, and concludes that this is determined by prosody.
Floating Quantiﬁers as Focus Markers
Focus Structure and Meaning of all
Before investigating what motivates q-ﬂoat, this section presents the model of infor-
mation structure used. Some of its concepts play a crucial role in the meaning that
the FQ contributes to the sentence, and an informal approach to the semantics of all,
based on Bobaljik (1995) and Dowty and Brodie (1984), is presented here. It is
shown that all forces the predicate to be maximal in relationship to the subject, and
this “maximalizing” interacts with focus structure in that it produces a contrastive
focus that results in a sentence that has a reduced tolerance for alternatives.
Bobaljik (1995), based on Dowty and Brodie (1984), argues that the FQ all
“causes the predicate to be maximal with respect to a group (or mass) argument”
(Bobaljik 1995, 194).6 Bobaljik views this as a type of strengthening—reducing the
predicate’s tolerance to weakening (1995, fn. 3, 201). Compare the following:
(5) The reporters harangued the candidate.
(6) The reporters all harangued the candidate.
(Bobaljik 1995, 198, citing Dowty 1986)
Sentence (5) is true if the majority of reporters harangued the candidate; the sen-
tence is not falsiﬁed by a few reporters who did not participate in the haranguing.
On the other hand, (6) is argued to be falsiﬁed by even one reporter not participat-
ing in the haranguing. I propose an addition to Bobaljik’s claim: FQs also reduce
the tolerance for alternatives.7 This will be shown to produce the equivalent of a con-
trastive focus within which the alternative member(s) of the set have been eliminated
as possible answers. It is the interaction of the FQ and the focus that contributes this
contrastive interpretation. Some information structure basics are in order at this
point.
This chapter adopts Erteschik-Shir’s (1997) model of information structure
termed focus structure (f-structure). Within this approach, every sentence contains
both a main topic and a main focus and may contain subordinate (embedded) focus
structure with further non–main topics and foci. Topic is deﬁned as what the sentence
is about, the pivot for assessment, while focus is what the speaker intends to direct
the hearer’s attention to, the answer to a wh-question. Crucial for us is Erteschik-Shir’s
restrictive and contrastive foci.
With contrastive foci, as in (7a), there is direct contrast between the members
of the set, here Janet and Ann (underlining signals focus). And selection of one mem-
ber results in the elimination of the other members (7b) of the set as a possible
answer.
48
Lisa Rochman

(7) Q: Who wants to marry John, Janet or Ann?
A: Janet wants to marry John.
B: #Janet wants to marry John. And I think Ann wants to also. (Erteschik-Shir
1997, 12)
Janet is selected from the set of {Janet, Ann}, and Ann is eliminated as a possible
answer.
Restrictive foci require a speciﬁed contrast set to be available in the discourse,
as in (8), but the contrast does not need to be direct, and the selection of a member
of the set does not result in the elimination of other members as possible answers (8b).
(8) Q: Which one of John’s friends wants to marry John?
A: Janet wants to marry John.
B: Janet wants to marry John. And I think Ann wants to also. (Erteschik-Shir
1997, 12)
Janet is selected from a set of possible (female) friends of John’s, and the other mem-
bers of the set remain as possible answers.
We turn now to see how f-structure inﬂuences q-ﬂoat. The following examples
show that FQs precede foci and the maximalizing function of all interacts with f-struc-
ture resulting in potential alternatives being eliminated.8 In this way, all delineates
the focus but also eliminates the possibility for alternatives.
Floating Quantiﬁer Usage
The proliferation of FQ in sentences with pronouns, but not with full DPs, serves as
an initial indicator that there may be an association between FQ and f-structure. Pro-
nouns, when not used deictically, necessarily refer to something already in the dis-
course and therefore are obligatorily topics. Results obtained from analysis of a
corpus showed that the frequency of FQs ﬂoated from pronouns make up over 96 per-
cent of the cases, while FQs ﬂoated from full DP encompass less than 3 percent of
the cases of FQs found in my investigation of a natural speech corpus.9
In the following examples we see the usage of ﬂoating and nonﬂoating quanti-
ﬁers in conjunction with pronouns and full DPs. All examples are taken from natu-
ral speech corpora in order to ensure that the data obtained are representative of how
speakers actually use FQ.
Example (9) is the quintessential example of an FQ and a pronoun; the quanti-
ﬁer ﬂoats from a pronoun and occurs before the predicate that is the focus.
(9) . . . and the brothers in that apartment, they were gonna go out and knock on
all the doors, in their apartment, invite people to come to the worship service,
cause no one could get out, they were all snowed in. (SBC ﬁle 20)
The focus of the sentence in (9) is snowed in: this implies “unable to leave.” All
strengthens the predicate and eliminates any other possible meanings such as “leav-
ing,” “leaving being difficult but possible,” “leaving being delayed but possible,” and
49
MOTIVATING FLOATING QUANTIFIERS

so on. Although there is no overt contrast set here, all eliminates the possibility of
any alternatives to the focus.
Example (10) is another case of an FQ and a pronoun.
(10) He—but was such a wimpy
Kim: physically . . . weak, uh person
Evelyn: and they all had asthma (SBC 022)
In the discourse prior to this excerpt several family members were introduced. In (10)
Kim states that the people under discussion were physically weak. This introduces a
restrictive set of reasons for physical weakness, perhaps something such as {ill health,
asthma, emotional inﬂuences, etc.}. Asthma is selected from this restrictive set. The
FQ facilitates the elimination of the other members of the set.
We turn to a case with a nonﬂoated quantiﬁer and a full-DP subject.
(11) a. it was not a clean broadcast system
b. Like everything in the room,
c. all the metal objects would be receiving it constantly. (SBC 017)
In (11) the metal objects is being speciﬁed; what has been contextually established
is that there are things in the room (11b), and then the speaker speciﬁes which of these
things are under discussion (11c) and eliminates the other things in the room. There-
fore in this sentence the DP the metal objects functions as a contrastive focus, and
we note that the quantiﬁer does not ﬂoat.
In the previous examples we saw FQ ﬂoated from pronouns but not from full
DPs and a correspondence between the information structure and the use of the
ﬂoated or nonﬂoated word order. Here we explore those cases that defy the pattern
of FQ ﬂoating from pronouns but not full DPs and look for an explanation that holds
across the nonstandard cases. The explanation is found in the f-structure status of the
constituent following the FQ.
In example (12), the subject, my family, is the topic of the sentence, and the ob-
ject, the location Indiana, is the contrastive focus of the sentence.
(12) Lajuna: I won’t go to Indiana, see I don’t have any family in Wisconsin
My family’s all in Indiana. (SBC 044)
In this case we have a contrastive focus with the set encompassing {Wisconsin, In-
diana}. Note the degraded status of the following continuation:
(13) I won’t go to Indiana, see I don’t have any family in Wisconsin
#My family’s all in Indiana except for a few relatives in Wisconsin.
The continuation in (13) is degraded because all forces the second member of the
set, Wisconsin, to be eliminated upon focusing the alternative member of the contrast
set, Indiana. While FQs in natural speech usually ﬂoat from pronouns, this example
shows that when a speaker wants to emphasize the focus and create a contrastive fo-
cus they may opt to use an FQ. In this sentence the contrastive focus was direct, but
50
Lisa Rochman

what about cases where there is no overt contrast set speciﬁed before the focus? Such
a case, taken from a natural speech corpus, is shown in (14).
(14) when you start pumping if your well has a large enough diameter,
the water’s all coming from the well, it’s not coming from the aquifer.
The focus of this sentence is the place the water is coming from, the well. Because
the speaker is contrasting water coming from the aquifer with water coming from the
well, this is a case of contrastive focus. I would venture to say that all in this case
alerts the listener that a contrastive focus follows and thus the contrast set occurring
after the focus is not a problem.
In (15), like (14), we have a full DP and an FQ, and the restrictive set is speci-
ﬁed after the selection of one member.
(15) . . . like the kids are all into pokemon right now
and it uh they have these fads that go through
(Pitt et al. 2006, 1702b)
The speaker is selecting Pokémon from a set of possible fads. In this sense there is
contrast between Pokémon and other fads, and it is a contrastive focus. Note that the
following continuation does not follow well.
(16) # . . . but like the kids are all into pokemon right now and into Barney as well.
This continuation is odd because the sentence seems to be saying that the current fad
is Pokémon and not something else. The same sentence as (16) without the FQ is per-
ceived as better. The subject, the kids, is the topic. What we have here is a topical
subject with an FQ occurring before a contrastive focus. These examples show that
it is not the presence of a pronoun (or absence of a full DP) that dictates q-ﬂoat but
instead the f-structure roles of the elements involved.
The opposite case also occurs: a quantiﬁer not ﬂoating from a pronoun. In the
following sentence the subject is a contrastive focus and the object is the topic.
(17) a. LORI: Who was at Howard’s End at the end?
b. I thought it was Helen and the little boy.
c. Linda: No, . . . all of em were at Howard’s End. (SBC 023)
In (17c) the contrastive focus of the sentence is all of them. It is the quantiﬁer itself,
which is the contrastive element. In the discourse already are the members of a par-
ticular family, and these members form a restrictive set. The ﬁrst speaker selects two
members, and the second speaker contrasts these selected members with the entire
group. In (17c) the focus of the sentence is the subject, and a nonﬂoated quantiﬁer
is employed. Because the focus is not in the predicate, there is no motivation for
q-ﬂoat.
The behavior of quantiﬁers and pronouns occurring sentence ﬁnally is an inter-
esting test case for the idea proposed here. We have already discussed the tendency
for FQ to ﬂoat from pronouns. When we ﬁnd pronouns and quantiﬁers occurring at
the ends of sentences, we frequently find the nonfloated quantifier, although the
51
MOTIVATING FLOATING QUANTIFIERS

ﬂoated order is perfectly acceptable.10 In (18) we have a pronoun and a nonﬂoating
quantiﬁer occurring sentence ﬁnally.
(18) JOANNE: how can you remember all of them. (SBC 015)
This tendency for nonﬂoated quantiﬁers occurring sentence ﬁnally is a reﬂex of the
fact that FQs occur ﬂoated before foci. Sentence ﬁnally, there is no motivation for
ﬂoating. If we take the FQ to occur in order to mark the following constituent as the
focus, sentence ﬁnally q-ﬂoat is not motivated.
Last, we look at one more set of data that illustrates that informants perceive what
follows the FQ to be the focus, and in particular a contrastive focus. In order to en-
sure that informants do perceive the FQ as marking what comes after it as focal, in-
formants were given sentences and asked to choose the question that they
corresponded to. In view of the fact that the foci can be identiﬁed by a wh-question
(as mentioned earlier), these results show the determination of the focus based on the
presence of the FQ. Informants were presented with sentences similar to (19).
(19) The children put the dogs all in cages.
The possible questions were as follows:
(20) Who put the dogs in cages? (subject focus)
(21) Did the kids put the dogs in boxes? (contrastive indirect object focus)
(22) What did the kids put in cages? (direct object focus)
(23) Where did the kids put the dogs? (indirect object focus)
(24) What did the children do? (VP focus)
(21) and (23) were most frequently selected as the most likely possible questions cor-
responding to the answer in (19). In order to ensure that it is the FQ that creates this
interpretation, informants were asked to correlate (25), without the FQ, to one of the
previously mentioned questions.
(25) The children put the dogs in cages.
The majority of informants opted for (24), which asks for a VP focus. Evidently, the
presence of the FQ ensures that the focus is on the indirect object (IO), while in the
absence of the FQ there is no favoring toward IO focus (see Göbbel 2005).
Examples (9) through (18) are representative of the use of ﬂoating/nonﬂoating
quantiﬁers in natural speech. The predominance of FQ with pronouns and correspond-
ing lack of FQ with full DPs indicate minimally that there is a correlation between
pronouns and quantiﬁer ﬂoating and full DPs and nonﬂoating. Bosˇkovic´ (2004, 706)
proposes that DP objects overtly shift in English and that pronouns undergo further
movement (cliticisation) to a higher position.11 Q-ﬂoat occurs when the pronoun
raises higher, and this accounts for the lack of q-ﬂoat with full-DPs. A puzzling is-
sue here is that in natural speech we ﬁnd weak pronouns and no q-ﬂoat (all‘v’em),
particularly sentence ﬁnally. The weak pronoun is expected to raise. We also ﬁnd q-
ﬂoat from nonweak pronouns, again unexpected in an approach of this type. An f-
52
Lisa Rochman

structure approach predicts that FQ will be found more frequently with subject pro-
nouns because, if the subject is the topic, most likely the focus will occur in the pred-
icate, and FQs occur before foci. Examples (19) and (25) ensure that it is indeed
f-structure that determines the use of the FQ. What we have seen is that there is a
strong correlation between the f-structure of a sentence and the presence and absence
of an FQ.
The FQ all in a sentence leads to the results in which the following constituent
is interpreted as a contrastive focus. As such, the FQ can be viewed as a focus marker.
F-structure, though, plays no role in determining the exact position of the FQ within
the linear string. In the next section I explore the positions that FQs occur in and show
that that is determined by the prosody.
The Phonology of Quantiﬁer Float
In this section I turn to the second question posed at the outset of this paper: What
determines where the FQ can occur? In the previous section I showed that the deter-
mination to use the ﬂoated or nonﬂoated order was based on the information struc-
ture of the sentence. The determination to use the ﬂoated order still leaves open the
exact linear position in which the FQ occurs. I take the syntactically allowed posi-
tions as a starting point and show that the position of the FQ in the linear string is
determined by the prosody of the language. For reasons of space, I limit the discus-
sion to sentences with full-DP subjects and auxiliary verbs. The idea that prosody
plays a determining role when the syntax allows more than one word order is not new
(see Guasti and Nespor 1999, among others). Moreover, I show that the patterns of
FQ placement in natural speech are a result of prosodic constraints in the language,
and this in turn can explain the absence of certain word orders in natural speech.
The prosodic structure of English is crucial to understanding FQ placement, so
ﬁrst I present a very brief overview of it. Syntax-prosody mapping is often couched
in Optimality Theoretic constraints, and here I brieﬂy present a few mapping con-
straints: Align-XP/R and Wrap-XP (Selkirk 2000; Truckenbrodt 1995, 1999).The for-
mer states that for every XP there is a phonological phrase such that the right edge
of the XP corresponds to the right edge of the phonological phrase. Wrap-XP states
that every XP is contained in one phonological phrase.12 In addition to these con-
straints, there is the Align-Focus, R, a constraint requiring the alignment of the right
edge of a focus constituent with the right edge of a prosodic phrase. Within each
phonological phrase there must be, minimally, one accented syllable (Selkirk 2000,
among many others). In English the default position for the phrase level accent is
rightmost.
An additional constraint, outside the optimality theory (OT) framework, on Eng-
lish prosody is discussed by Speyer (2005), who notes a rule of English intonation
that he termed the Trochaic Requirement (TR). This rule requires a weak element be-
tween two accents:
(26) (o) Ó o Ó o . . .
(Speyer 2005, 7)
Following Speyer, this weak element can be either a phonologically weak word or a
pause.
53
MOTIVATING FLOATING QUANTIFIERS

Summarizing the effect of these constraints on English, thus far we know that
we commonly ﬁnd the following:
(27) a. The subject is in its own phonological phrase while the object can phrase
with the verb
b. There is a prosodic boundary to the right of the focus
c. Every phrase must have an accent
d. There cannot be two adjacent accents (TR)
What does this predict for sentences with an FQ? First, I note that the syntax allows
the FQ to occur in several positions.13
(28) The children (all) might (all) have (all) greeted the teacher.
Because none of these positions result in an ill-formed sentence, we expected to ﬁnd
instances of all these word orders in natural speech. But that is not the case. FQs only
occur in the last position in natural speech. I explore the absence of FQ in the two
nonutilized positions in turn.
Example (29) illustrates the ﬁrst possible position that the FQ can occur in; the
FQ occurs to the right of the DP.
(29) The children all have greeted the teacher.
We could logically conceive of two possible ways that this could be phrased, with the
DP separate from the FQ (30) or with the DP phrased with the FQ (31).
(30) (The children) (all . . .)
(31) (The children all)
Brisson (1998), among others, has shown that the pronoun  FQ unit does not form
a constituent. The same can be shown of DP  FQ—it does not form a constituent.
Therefore there is no reason to assume that the DP  FQ must phrase together. The
prosodic strength of FQ has been noted repeatedly (McCloskey 2000, among others).
FQs are consistently pitch accented. Because FQs are not prosodically weak, they can-
not be phrased with the DP, which is usually pitch accented, without violating TR.
Welby (2003, citing Nakatani 1997) notes that the literature shows that even nonfo-
cused DP subjects are frequently pitch accented and occur in their own phonologi-
cal phrase (PPh). Thus, not surprisingly, we ﬁnd informants use (30) and not (31).
This predicts that if there is an auxiliary verb the FQ will phrase with the weak
auxiliary verb, as in (32), and thereby avoid any prosodic violations.
(32) (The children) (all have seen the movie).
Natural speech conﬁrms that when there is an FQ and a full DP the quantiﬁer occurs
phrased with the auxiliary verb and not the full DP. But the word order we get is not
the one in (32). Instead, the FQ occurs to the right of the auxiliary verb.14
(33) (The children) (have all . . .)
(34) (The children’ve)(all . . .)
54
Lisa Rochman

If there are several weak function words, the FQ occurs to the right of the ﬁnal one,
as in (35).15
(35) (The children) (might have all . . .)
This could stem from a preference to place heavier elements at edges (Selkirk 1995).
For example, Guasti and Nespor (1999) discuss the preference in coordinated struc-
tures to place the heavier element second (to the right). Because informants ﬁnd no
meaning difference or grammatical problem with the FQ in any position in regards
to the auxiliaries, the syntax and semantics must be neutral to the placement of the
FQ, and it is the prosodic/phonological component determining the placement. The
FQ occurs to the right of the auxiliaries because it is the heavier constituent of this
group and heavy constituents are preferred rightmost—as close to the edge as pos-
sible.16 Because we frequently get a prosodic boundary following the FQ, this place-
ment provides an added bonus that may not be haphazard—a boundary between the
topic and focus is formed.
Conclusion
The relationship between FQ and information structure has been overlooked in the
literature on quantiﬁer ﬂoat. This chapter has explored the motivation for q-ﬂoat and
showed that it is f-structure that provides this motivation. Quantiﬁers that occur in
ﬂoated positions do so in order to mark a focus that follows them. The ﬁnal place-
ment of FQ has been shown to be determined by the prosody of the language. FQs
are dependent on information structure for determining if their presence is warranted,
syntax for determining their possible positions, and prosody for determining their ﬁ-
nal position. This forces us to assume that their position is ﬁxed at the phonetic form
(PF) interface.
NOTES
I would like to thank Nomi Erteschik-Shir for her help and support during this research. This work also
beneﬁted from the comments and feedback of the participants of GURT 2007.
1. I persist with the tradition of using the term “ﬂoating quantiﬁers” to identify all, both, or each lo-
cated in non–determiner phrase (non-DP) initial position. I use the term nonﬂoating quantiﬁers to
identify those that occur DP initially but could occur in a noninitial position.
2. It is argued that there are scope differences. See Bosˇkovic´ (2004) for a syntactic account of this and
Rochman (unpublished manuscript) for an information structure account of the scope differences.
3. The status of all (determiner, quantiﬁer, etc.) will not be dealt with here.
4. This chapter conﬁnes itself to all, for reasons of space.
5. For a survey of the work on FQs, see Bobaljik (2001). The questions of motivation and placement
have been addressed for Korean, where it was shown that the hierarchical focal status of the quan-
tiﬁer in reference to other constituents determines its location (Han 1999). McCloskey (2000) dis-
cusses the role of prosody in q-ﬂoat in West Ulster English. In exploring the semantics of all, ﬂoated
and none, some researchers have dealt with meaning differences that could be interpreted as moti-
vation for using an FQ.
6. See Brisson’s (1998) arguments that it is the sentence without all that can be subject to pragmatic
weakening while the sentence with all is not vulnerable to this. (See also Bobaljik 1995, 199 fn 2.)
7. This in some ways is similar to the claim made for any by Kadmon and Landman (1993). But they
propose that any differs from all in that only the former has the widening effect that causes the re-
duced tolerance for exceptions.
55
MOTIVATING FLOATING QUANTIFIERS

8. The interaction is presented informally; the formal semantics of this interaction need to be ﬂeshed out.
9. This is based on a count in the Santa Barbara Corpus (Du Bois et al. 2000; Du Bois et al. 2003; Du
Bois and Englebretson 2004). Some utterances were not included in the statistics. Due to space con-
straints, I refer the reader to Rochman (unpublished manuscript) for a full explanation of the criteria.
10. See Rochman (unpublished manuscript) for a breakdown of the behavior of sentence final
pronouns/FQ in natural speech.
11. Lasnik (1999) uses height test to show that object pronouns are higher than full DPs (Bosˇkovic´ 2004).
12. In English, Wrap-XP and Align-XP, R, are argued to be equally ranked (Selkirk 2000).
13. FQs that occur in positions that result in syntactic violations are completely ill formed and judged
as impossible by informants (see McCloskey 2000).
14. Note that phrasing could be as in (a) as the addition of the weak auxiliary prevents any violations of
TR. See Rochman (unpublished manuscript) for a discussion of this.
(a) (The children’ve all) (seen the movie).
15. With the exception of been.
16. For an account of how the FQ comes to occupy this position, see Rochman (unpublished manuscript).
REFERENCES
Bobaljik, Jonathan D. 1995. Morphosyntax: The syntax of verbal inﬂection. PhD diss., Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology.
———. 2001. Floating quantifiers: Handle with care. In The second Glot international state-of-the-
article book, ed. Lisa Cheng and Rint Sybesma, 107–48. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bosˇkovic´, Zeljko. 2004. Be careful where you ﬂoat your quantiﬁers. Natural Language and Linguistic The-
ory 22:681–742.
Brisson, Christine. 1998. Distributivity, maximality, and ﬂoating quantiﬁers. PhD diss., Rutgers University.
Dowty, David. 1986. A note on collective predicates, distributive predicates and “all.” In Proceedings of
the third Eastern State Conference on Linguistics, ed. Fred Marshall, Ann Miller, and Zhengsheng
Zhang, 97–115. Columbus: Ohio State University.
Dowty, David, and Belinda Brodie. 1984. A semantic analysis of “ﬂoated” quantiﬁers in a transformation-
less grammar. In Proceedings of the Third West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed. Mark
Cobler, Susan MacKaye, and Micheal Wescoat, 75–90. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Du Bois, John W., Wallace L Chafe, Charles Meyer, and Sandra A. Thompson. 2000. Santa Barbara cor-
pus of spoken American English, Part 1. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Du Bois, John W., Wallace L. Chafe, Charles Meyer, Sandra A. Thompson, and Nii Martey. 2003. Santa
Barbara corpus of spoken American English, Part 2. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Du Bois, John W., and Robert Englebretson. 2004. Santa Barbara corpus of spoken American English,
Part 3. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Erteschik-Shir, Nomi. 1997. The dynamics of focus structure. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Göbbel, Edward. 2005. Focus in double object constructions. Linguistics 43:237–74.
Guasti, Maria Teresa, and Marina Nespor. 1999. Is syntax phonology-free? In Phrasal phonology, ed. René
Kager and Wim Zonneveld, 73–98. The Netherlands: Nijmegen University Press.
Han, Jeonghan. 1999. Grammatical codings of information structure in Korean: A role and reference
grammar account. PhD diss., University of Buffalo.
Kadmon, Nirit, and Fred Landman. 1993. Any. Linguistics and Philosophy 16:353–422.
Lasnik, Howard. 1999. Chains of arguments. In Working minimalism, ed. Samuel David Epstein and Nor-
bert Hornstein, 189–215. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McCloskey, James. 2000. The prosody of quantiﬁer stranding under wh-movement in West Ulster Eng-
lish. Unpublished ms.
Nakatani, Christine. 1997. The computational processing of intonational prominence: A functional prosody
account. Unpublished PhD diss., Harvard University.
Pitt, Mark A., Laura Dilley, Kyle Johnson, Scott Kiesling, William Raymond, Elizabeth Hume, and Eric
Fosler-Lussier. 2006. Buckeye corpus of conversational speech. Columbus: Department of Psychol-
ogy, Ohio State University.
56
Lisa Rochman

Rochman, Lisa. The role of f-structure and intonation in quantiﬁer ﬂoating. PhD diss., Ben Gurion Uni-
versity of the Negev.
Selkirk, Elisabeth O. 1995. Sentence prosody: Intonation, stress, and phrasing. In The handbook of phono-
logical theory, ed. John A. Goldsmith, 550–69. Cambridge: Blackwell.
———. 2000. The interaction of constraints on prosodic phrasing. In Prosody: Theory and experiment,
ed. Merle Horne, 231–61. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sportiche, Dominique. 1988. A theory of ﬂoating quantiﬁers and its corollaries for constituent structure.
Linguistic Inquiry 19:425–49.
Speyer, Augustin. 2005. Topicalization and the trochaic requirement. Penn Working Papers in Linguistics
10 (2): 243–56.
Truckenbrodt, Hubert. 1995. Phonological phrases: Their relation to syntax, focus, and prominence. PhD
diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
———. 1999. On the relation between syntactic phrases and phonological phrases. Linguistic Inquiry
30:219–55.
Welby, Pauline. 2003. Effects of pitch accent type and status on focus projection. Language and Speech
46 (1): 53–81.
57
MOTIVATING FLOATING QUANTIFIERS


III
Syntax


6
Applicative Phrases Hosting Accusative Clitics
LUIS SÁEZ
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
IN THIS CHAPTER I offer an explanation for the puzzling behavior exhibited in certain en-
vironments by a particular class of standard Spanish “little words”: accusative
pronominal clitics. Those environments derive from the presence of a special sort of
Spanish verbs that I will call “ayudar-verbs”; they are illustrated in (1):
(1) Ana ayudó / perjudicó / molestó a la
chica.
“Ana helped / harmed / bothered
the girl.”
Ayudar-verbs resemble standard dyadic monotransitives in the sense that they
manifest a single internal object bearing accusative case. Accusative case assignment
is evidenced in (2), where the object of (1) is substituted for by the accusative pronom-
inal clitic la.1
(2) Ana la
ayudó.
Ana 3.sg.fem.AccCL helped.3.sg.
“Ana helped her.”
Therefore, at ﬁrst glance, any standard conﬁguration for monotransitives might
also be considered to be adequate for ayudar-verbs. In spite of this, in this chapter I
will offer several pieces of evidence showing that a double object construction (DOC)
underlies these verbs. This proposal will eventually explain the puzzling behavior ex-
hibited by accusative pronominal clitics in these environments.
Puzzling Behavior of Accusative Clitics in 
Ayudar-Verb Environments
The problem I will focus on here has to do with the so-called me-lui constraint (Perl-
mutter 1971). As is well known, this constraint dictates that a dative pronominal
clitic cannot co-occur with a ﬁrst-/second-person accusative clitic, as illustrated in
(3) for Spanish:
(3) Tú
se
la/*me/*te
enviaste a Juan.
you 3.sg.DatCL 3/1/2.sg.AccCL sent.2.sg. to Juan
“You sent it/her/me/you to Juan.”
61

Romero (1997) and Ormazábal and Romero (1998a, 1998b) offer an account of
this phenomenon centered around the [animate] feature. First, they assume De-
monte’s (1995) proposal showing that Spanish sentences containing a triadic verb with
a dative clitic are the correlates of English DOCs, where, as is well known, the da-
tive (a goal) tends to be animacy related. The parallelism with English DOCs can be
checked by comparing the grammatical English glosses in (4a) (“you sent a book to
Ana/you sent a book to Madrid”) with the ungrammatical English gloss (“*you sent
Madrid a book”) appearing in (4b):
(4) a. Tú enviaste un libro a Ana /Madrid.
you sent.2.sg. a
book to Ana/Madrid
“You sent a book to Ana/Madrid.”
b. Tú le
enviaste un libro a Ana / *Madrid.
you 3.sg.DatCL sent.2.sg. a
book to Ana/Madrid
“You sent Ana/*Madrid a book.”
Further facts lead Ormazábal and Romero to proposing an exhaustive featural char-
acterization of pronominal elements centered around the [animate] feature: As pre-
viously observed, dative clitics are [animate]; however, direct-object strong
pronouns in verb-related argumental positions are [animate] too. First-/second-per-
son accusative clitics are also marked for [animate], as they refer to the human pro-
tagonists of discourse (speaker and hearer). By contrast, third-person accusative
clitics are [-animate]. Once provided with this featural characterization, Ormazábal
and Romero explain the ungrammaticality in (3) as the result of two pronouns (the
dative se and the ﬁrst/second accusative me/te) competing for checking their [ani-
mate] feature with one single animacy-related functional head.
A relevant feature of this approach concerns the fact that ungrammaticality arises
when the competing [animate] pronouns are co-arguments. For instance, let us con-
sider the analytical causative constructions in (5), where two [animate] pronouns co-
occur: a dative clitic me, “me,” referring to the ﬁrst-person causee subject, and an
accusative strong pronoun, ella, “her,” interpreted as the patient role of the causee verb
conocer, “to know.” In such a situation, ungrammaticality results only when restructur-
ing has taken place, that is, when a monoclausal conﬁguration has been obtained. Such
restructuring is not necessary in (5a), where the accusative clitic la, “her,” doubling the
strong pronoun undergoes enclisis to the causee verb; however, restructuring is neces-
sary in (5b), where the accusative clitic has undergone clitic climbing. As shown in (5c),
the grammaticality is restored if the strong pronoun is removed; as previously stated,
direct object strong pronouns are characterized by Ormazábal and Romero as [ani-
mate], thus differing from third-person accusative clitics in this respect:
(5) a. Tú
me
hiciste
conocerla
a ella. (biclausal)
you 1.sg.AccCl made.2.sg. know.INFIN-3.sg.fem.AccCL to her
“You made me know her.”
b. *Tú me 
la hiciste conocer 
a ella. 
(restructuring)
c. Tú me la hiciste conocer. (restructuring)
62
Luis Sáez

I propose that it is in these particular constructions, analytical causatives, that
ayudar-verbs reveal signiﬁcant peculiarities that distinguish them from other transi-
tive verbs. Let us consider the examples in (6) and compare them to the ones in (5).
(6) a. Tú     me  hiciste  ayudarla
a  ella.
(biclausal)
you   1.sg  .AccCl made help.INFIN-3.sg.fem.AccCL to her
“You made me help her”
b. * Tú  me     la hiciste ayudar                                            a  ella.
(restructuring)
c. * Tú  me     la hiciste ayudar.
(restructuring)
(6a) is predictably grammatical, because, although there are two [animate] pro-
nouns, they belong to different clauses, hence competition between them does not take
place. (6b) is predictably ungrammatical, because both pronouns belong to the same
clause and, as a consequence, compete for checking. Surprisingly, (6c) shows that, un-
like (5c), the grammaticality of the monoclausal conﬁguration cannot be restored by
simply omitting the offending strong pronoun. This is a very striking fact that, as far
as I know, has been totally bypassed in the theoretical literature concerning DOCs.2
Of course, such ungrammaticality means that a second offending [animate] element
still remains after omitting the strong pronoun. The only conceivable candidate for car-
rying this offending feature must be another pronominal element, obviously the third-
person accusative clitic itself (la). However, recall that (5c) clearly showed that
third-person accusative clitics cannot be inherently marked as [animate]. As a way
out of this puzzle, I propose that the third-person accusative clitic of ayudar-verbs in-
herits that feature from the particular conﬁguration displayed by these verbs.
The Conﬁguration Displayed by Ayudar-Verbs
I propose that ayudar-verbs display the DOC conﬁguration represented in (7):
(7)
According to such a conﬁguration, in ayudar-verbs a Vº is selecting an ApplP,
and ayudar-verbs are the result of “conﬂating” a nominal head (a kind of cognate
theme), the null applicative head and Vº. “Conﬂation” is a process that has ﬁgured
prominently in Hale and Keyser’s work on argument structure (see Hale and Keyser
63
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS

2002, chap. 3, for details). They deﬁne it as a “fusion of syntactic nuclei,” that is, a
process according to which the phonological matrix of the head of a complement,
say n, ends up located in the head X governing such a complement. The process may
involve more than two heads: Given a sequence of heads X, . . . , n  1, n, each
one governing the complement headed by the next, the phonological content of the
most embedded one (say n) may end up under the highest one (X) provided that
X . . . n  1 lack phonological content. In (5), X  Vº governs the complement
headed by n  1  Applº, and n  1  Applº governs the complement headed by n
 Nº. As a consequence, the phonological matrix of the cognate theme Nº, for in-
stance ayuda, “help,” ends up in Vº, giving rise to the verb ayudar, “to help.”
As for the location of the ApplP in (7), proper justiﬁcation can be provided.
Pylkkänen (2002) distinguishes two sorts of ApplPs: high ApplPs and low ApplPs.
Low ApplPs are selected by Vº [as in (7)]; high ApplPs are higher than VP, as in the
conﬁguration represented in (8):
(8)
In high ApplPs, Applº selects a VP, that is, an event; therefore they are compat-
ible with both transitive and intransitive verbs and may host a dative pronoun refer-
ring to the benefactive of the event. This is illustrated in (9) for Albanian.
(9) I
vrapova.
3.sg.Dat.CL run.1.sg.
“I ran for him.”
High ApplPs do not exist in Spanish, as shown by (10), the Spanish correlate of (9).
(10) *le
corrí
yo.
3.sg.Dat.CL ran.1.sg. I
In low ApplPs, Applº obligatorily selects a theme object; therefore they are only
compatible with transitive verbs. Spanish only has low ApplPs (although see Cuervo
2003 for a different view), as shown by the fact that once the verb correr, “run,” in
(10) is transitivized by adding los cien metros, “the hundred meters,” the dative le is
possible.
(11) Le
corrí
yo los cien
metros.
3.sg.Dat.CL ran.1.sg. I
the hundred meters
“I ran the hundred meters for him.”
However, the benefactive interpretation of le in (11), coupled with my claim that
Spanish only has low ApplPs, might seem to conﬂict with Pylkkänen’s typology for
ApplPs, because she relates the benefactive interpretation to high ApplPs and a source
(possessive)/recipient interpretation to low ApplPs. I claim, though, that there is no
64
Luis Sáez

actual conﬂict, as the benefactive interpretation of (11) is a mere inference obtained
from a more basic source/possessive interpretation. According to this interpretation,
the hundred meters are initially “related to” (or “belong to”) a person as a task, and
the task ends up transferred to a different person [in (11), the speaker]. This new way
of looking at the interpretation of sentences like (11) explains that, as shown in (12),
the direct object of (11) must be deﬁnite, that is, conceived as a distance previously
assumed to “belong to” somebody else (the referent of the pronominal clitic le) as a
task to be performed:
(12) *Le
corrí
yo cien
metros.
3.sg.Dat.CL ran.1.sg. I
hundred meters
“I ran hundred meters for him.”
Moreover, the task to be transferred might be of a static nature, which makes the
prediction, borne out by (13a), that Spanish low ApplPs could also be compatible with
static predicates. This fact apparently escapes Pylkkänen’s second test distinguishing
high and low ApplPs. According to this test, low ApplPs are incompatible with static
predicates, as in (13b), as they convey a transfer-of-possession interpretation incom-
patible with static predicates. I propose instead that (13b) is ungrammatical because,
as has been commonly observed, English lacks source ApplPs.
(13) a. Le
sostuve yo la
bolsa.
him.Dat.CL.3.sg. held
I
the bag
“I held the bag for him.”
b. *I held him the bag.
(Pylkkänen 2002, 24)
I conclude, then, that Spanish ApplPs in ayudar-verb environments are also se-
lected by Vº, that is, they are low ApplPs too. As shown in (7), the accusative clitic of
ayudar-verbs is generated in the speciﬁer of the low ApplP. In this position it obtains
the goal interpretation in the conceptual-intentional interface, according to a conﬁgu-
rational interpretation of theta-roles à la Hale and Keyser (1993). Therefore, in order
to derive the ungrammaticality of (6c) by relying on Ormazábal and Romero’s (1998a,
1998b) approach, it may be proposed that the feature [animate] is part of the bundle
of features forming the applicative head and that, as a consequence, the pronominal
clitic located in the speciﬁer of the ApplP must inherit such a feature in some way, thus
giving rise to animacy competition in monoclausal causative environments.
Further Arguments in Support of the Conﬁguration in (7)
One piece of evidence supporting the idea that the object of ayudar-verbs is actually
the goal argument of a masked DOC is the fact that they never co-occur with a da-
tive element. (14) shows their incompatibility with a possessor dative (al equipo, “to
the team”):
(14) Juan (*le)
ayudó
a los miembros del
/ *al
equipo.
Juan 3.sg.DatCl helped.3.sg. to the members of the/ to the team
“Juan helped the team members.”
65
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS

The fact that ayudar-verbs are never possible with a dative constituent can be
derived from my proposal that the internal object of these verbs is a DOC goal, be-
cause, as is well known, indirect objects can never coexist with further datives. For
instance, (15) shows the incompatibility of the indirect object al niño, “to the child,”
with a possessor dative like a Ana:
(15) *Juan le
dio
un beso al
niño a Ana.
Juan
3.sg.DatCl gave.3.sg. a kiss to the child to Ana
“Juan kissed Ana’s child.”
A new argument in support of the conﬁguration in (6) relies on research by
Bosque and Masullo (1997) focusing on a particular interpretation of quantiﬁca-
tional adverbs such as mucho, “very much.” With intransitive verbs, adverbs like mu-
cho may have three main interpretations: the eventive one, the durative one, and the
inherent one. I illustrate these three interpretations with the example in (16):
(16) Llueve
mucho.
“It is raining very much.”
In this example, the eventive interpretation of mucho conveys the existence of
many events of raining; that is, the sentence would mean that it rains very often. Ac-
cording to the durative interpretation, there is an event of raining, and that event is
lasting for a very long time. The inherent interpretation conveys an evaluation of the
amount of fallen rain (there is a lot of water). Bosque and Masullo (1997) propose
that this interpretation results from a structure similar to (17).
(17)
In this structure, the unergative verb llover, “rain,” is the result of conﬂating a
nominal head meaning “rain” and a light verb. This process also involves a quantiﬁ-
cational head providing a variable for the VP modiﬁer mucho, thus enabling the in-
herent reading.
Leaving aside the technical details, the interesting point for this chapter of Bosque
and Masullo’s proposal is that the inherent reading of mucho reveals the existence of
a nominal element in the syntax performing as the complement of a light verb. This
proposal correctly predicts that transitive verbs should prevent the inherent interpre-
tation for adverbs like mucho, as these verbs already have an overt object, and as a
consequence, there is no room for the quantiﬁed nominal complement. This incom-
patibility is illustrated in (18).
66
Luis Sáez

(18) Autorizaron
(*mucho) una manifestación
authorized.3.pl very much a
demonstration
“They authorized a demonstration (*very much).”
However, Bosque and Masullo point out that certain transitive verbs, such as ayu-
dar, “to help,” do admit the inherent interpretation of mucho; this compatibility is il-
lustrated in (19).
(19) Ana ayudó
a la
chica mucho.
“Ana helped
the girl
very much.”
Bosque and Masullo relate the exceptional behavior of verbs like ayudar to the
fact that they alternate with light verb constructions; for instance, ayudar alternates
with the equivalent expression dar ayuda, “provide help.” As represented in (20), my
proposal for ayudar-verbs provides room for both the overt accusative object (the goal)
and the abstract correlate of the light verb constructions pointed out by Bosque and
Masullo, that is, an abstract noun meaning “help.” This abstract noun may now be
selected by a quantiﬁer head, which explains the exceptional availability of the in-
herent reading of mucho with these transitive verbs.
(20)
A third argument in support of the conﬁguration in (7) has to do with depictives.
Pylkkänen (2002) points out that depictive secondary predicates are incompatible with
indirect objects in English. For instance, (21), where the depictive hungry tries to at-
tribute a property to Mary, is completely ungrammatical:
(21) *I gave Mary the meat hungry.
Pylkkänen derives this impossibility from the incompatibility between the seman-
tic type of depictives and the semantic type of the low ApplP hosting indirect objects
(see Pylkkänen 2002 for details). Therefore the ungrammatical result triggered by the
presence of a depictive constitutes a test for the presence of low ApplPs.
Ayudar-verbs are incompatible with depictives, as illustrated in (22):
(22) *Juan ayudó a María enfadada.
“Juan helped
Mary angry.”
67
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS

As a consequence, it is reasonable to conclude that the transitivity of these verbs
hides a low ApplP hosting the accusative constituent in its speciﬁer.
Case Assignment
I have proposed that ayudar-verbs display a DOC conﬁguration with a low ApplP.
As represented in (7), this explains that their complement must be taken into consid-
eration for animacy competition in analytical causative environments, as ApplPs con-
vey a [animate] feature. However, this hypothesis must deal with a case-related
problem that immediately arises. Demonte (1995) and Romero (1997) show that sen-
tences such as (23a), where the clitic le is doubling the goal a María, “to María,” are
the Spanish correlates of English DOCs. However, such a clitic exhibits dative case,
and, moreover, the goal cannot become a subject under passivization, as illustrated
in (23b):
(23) a. Juan le
dio
a María el libro.
Juan 3.sg.DatCL gave.3.sg to María the book
“J. gave M. the book.”
b. *María fue dada un libro.
“María was given a
book.”
Consequently it must be concluded that, in Spanish DOCs, goals exhibit dative
case. However, recall that the goal of constructions with ayudar-verbs exhibits accu-
sative case, as it may be replaced by an accusative clitic, as illustrated in (2). More-
over, it may become a subject under passivization, as illustrated in (24):
(24) Ella fue ayudada.
“She was helped.”
It seems, then, that the goals of ayudar-verbs are the faithful counterpart of Eng-
lish DOC goals as far as case properties are concerned; indeed, the grammaticality
of the English gloss of (23b) shows that English DOCs may passivize with no prob-
lem and that, as a consequence, their goal is invariably marked with accusative case.
Of course, the two phenomena observed with regard to ayudar-verb environ-
ments—the existence of theme conﬂation and the availability of accusative case and
raising-to-subject for goals—cannot be two independent facts unrelated to each other.
Informally speaking, it seems as if, when theme conﬂation takes place, the accusative
case usually assigned to the theme can now be “transferred” to the goal argument.
I will derive the apparently exceptional behavior of these goals from the princi-
ple in (25), a version of the one proposed by Alsina (1997) in relation to Romance
causatives:
(25) Dative case can only be assigned to the (thematically) more prominent of two
internal arguments.
According to (25), structural dative case cannot be assigned if there is only one
internal argument in the predicate. I will assume that (25) is a severe case restriction
holding for case assignment in Spanish. As an effect of (25), a constituent in the spec-
68
Luis Sáez

iﬁer of an ApplP must regularly receive dative case, because it normally co-occurs
with a theme argument. However, in certain instances where the theme does not
structurally manifest itself, as in the conﬂation cases analyzed here, the goal must re-
ceive accusative case.
One piece of evidence supporting (25) concerns, of course, the case behavior of
causee subjects in causative constructions; recall that it is in connection to causative
constructions that Alsina puts forth a principle similar to (25).
Under restructuring, the clitic corresponding to the causee subject in Spanish
causative constructions exhibits dative case if the causee verb selects an object rep-
resented by an accusative clitic undergoing clitic climbing; by contrast, if no accu-
sative clitic is selected by the causee verb, the clitic corresponding to the subject of
the causee verb manifests itself as accusative. I illustrate these contrasting facts with
the examples in (26)/(27). We have obtained (26b) from (26a) through substitution
for the low argumental phrases of (26a) by a clitic, plus a restructuring process (no-
tice that clitic climbing has taken place). As a result, we observe that the causee sub-
ject in (26a) must be replaced by a dative pronominal clitic se, because it co-occurs
with a predicate-mate accusative clitic replacing the theme object la canción, “the
song.” By contrast, the causee subject in (27a) may only be replaced by an accusa-
tive clitic la in (27b), as the causee verb is intransitive.
(26) a. Juan hizo        cantar  la canción a María.
Juan made.3.sg to.sing the song    to María
b. Juan se
la                  hizo          cantar.
Juan 3.sg.DatCL. 3.sg. AccCL made.3.sg to.sing
“Juan made Mary/her sing the song/it.”
(27) a. Juan hizo
cantar a María.
Juan made.3.sg to.sing to María
b. Juan la
hizo
cantar
Juan 3.sg.AccCL. made.3.sg to.sing
“Juan made Mary/her sing.”
In these examples it is possible to see that the same restriction holding for the
speciﬁer of an ApplP also holds for subjects of causee verbs when they become in-
ternal arguments of the causer verb, provided that a theme predicate-mate is present.
Therefore we can say that (25) is a general principle holding for case assignment to
internal arguments.
A further piece of evidence supporting (25) concerns the behavior of Spanish
verbs like pagar, “pay”/servir, “serve.” These verbs must assign dative case to their
goals if the theme object is present, as shown in (28a); by contrast, when the theme
is absent, as in (28b), the goal must obtain accusative case.
(28) a. le/*la
serví
a ella el café.
3.sg.DatCL/3.sg.fem.AccCL served.1.sg. to her the coffee
“I served her a coffee.”
69
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS

b. La serví.
“I served her.”
Therefore, it seems reasonable to conclude that a principle like (25) is constrain-
ing structural case assignment in Spanish.
Inanimate Objects
The presence of an animacy-feature in the ApplP selected by ayudar-verbs seems to
be seriously compromised by the fact that those verbs are sometimes able to appear
with nonanimate complements, as illustrated in (29).
(29) Esas
cosas perjudican la salud.
“Those things harm
the health.”
Consequently a modiﬁcation of my original hypothesis relying on a concept dif-
ferent from “animacy” but preserving the fundamental role of ApplP would be highly
desirable. Luckily, this new perspective is provided by Ormazábal and Romero (2007)
in their updated account for the me-lui constraint. Ormazábal and Romero (2007) no-
tice that ApplPs are not inherently related to animacy; they illustrate this fact with
the example in (30):
(30) Le
pongo
la
pata a la mesa.
3.sg.DatCL put.1.sg. the leg
to the table
“I will assemble the leg on the table.”
Importantly, even though the clitic le in environments like (30) is not related to
animacy, it triggers me-lui constraint effects, as illustrated in (31b) [which contrasts
with (31a)]:
(31) CONTEXT: I’m fed up; if you mention that the table is missing a leg once
again and do nothing to ﬁx it . . .
a. . . . te
pongo
a ti (de pata) en la mesa.
. . . 2.sg.AccCL put.1.sg
you as leg
in the table
b. *. . . te
le
pongo
a ti (de pata) a la mesa.
. . . 2.sg.AccCL 3.sg.DatCL put.1.sg
you as leg
to the table
“I assemble you as a leg in the table.”
(Ormazábal and Romero 2007)
This means that an account of the me-lui constraint based on animacy competi-
tion cannot be true. Instead, Ormazábal and Romero propose the constraint in (32),
coupled with the empirically (and cross-linguistically) well-supported claim that an-
imacy always triggers object agreement and the reasonable assumption that indirect
object clitics are a manifestation of applicative object agreement (2007; see their work
for details):
(32) Object Agreement Constraint (OAC): If the verbal complex encodes object
agreement, no other argument can be licensed through verbal agreement.
70
Luis Sáez

The reason why Spanish third-person accusative clitics do not trigger me-lui
constraint effects [recall example (3)] is that they are instances of determiner cliti-
cization, which explains that they cannot be doubled [see (33)]; instead, Spanish da-
tive (and first-/second-person accusative) clitics necessarily trigger such effects,
because, as evidenced by their availability to undergo doubling [see (34)], they are
instances of agreement:
(33) *La
vimos
la casa.
3.fem.AccCL saw.1.sg the house
“We saw the house.”
(Ormazábal and Romero 2007)
(34) Les
compré
un libro a los primos.
3.pl.DatCL bought.1.sg. a
book to the cousins
“I bought my cousins a book.”
(Ormazábal and Romero 2007)
Clearly, the accusative clitic located in the speciﬁer of ayudar-verbs is not a man-
ifestation of applicative object agreement, as no doubling is possible in these cases:
(35) *La
ayudé a una chica.
3.sg.fem.AccCL helped to a
girl
“I helped a girl.”
As a consequence, accusative clitics hosted by ApplPs are determiners undergo-
ing cliticization. However, I also claim that this process simultaneously triggers oblig-
atory abstract applicative object agreement. The abstract nature of this agreement is
quite natural, given that the accusative clitic is cliticizing to the verbal head, thus pre-
venting the overt manifestation of applicative agreement most probably due to mor-
phological reasons.
It is the combination of abstract applicative agreement and animacy-related ob-
ject agreement that explains the ungrammaticality of (6c) as a violation of the prin-
ciple in (32).
The situation just described concerning accusative clitics with ayudar-verbs sig-
niﬁcantly resembles the behavior of goal clitics in Spanish “laísta” dialects. In these
dialects, accusative clitics may be interpreted as goals, as illustrated in (36), where
the feminine accusative clitic la is referring to the recipient of the book:
(36) Juan la
dio
un libro.
Juan 3.sg.AccCL gave a
book
“Juan gave her a book.”
Romero (2001) offers several pieces of evidence supporting the proposal that sen-
tences like (36) are the Spanish equivalent of English DOCs, where the goal exhibits
accusative case too. If this is true, we could say that the accusative clitic in examples
like (36) occupy the speciﬁer of an ApplP in the same way that ayudar-verb goals
do. Importantly, although it is located in the ApplP, the clitic cannot be doubled, a
fact also pointed out by Romero.
71
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS

(37) *Juan la
dio un libro a una chica.
Juan 3.sg.AccCL gave a
book to a
girl
“Juan gave a girl a book.”
Moreover, no agreement clitic may show up co-occurring with the accusative
clitic either:
(38) *Juan la
le
dio un libro.
Juan 3.sg.AccCL 3.sg.DatCL gave a book
“Juan gave her a book.”
As a consequence, it is reasonable to conclude that both “laísta” goal clitics and
standard Spanish ayudar-verb goal clitics are instances of the same phenomenon: De-
terminer cliticization takes place in an ApplP environment, and, as a result, the ap-
plicative agreement morpheme heading the ApplP must remain silent, presumably due
to morphological reasons.
NOTES
I thank the audience of GURT 2007, as well as Ignacio Bosque and Juan Romero. Of course, all errors
are my own. This work has been ﬁnanced by the Servicio de Investigación of the Universidad Com-
plutense de Madrid as a result of the author’s taking part of the research group “Relations between Lexi-
con and Syntax in Spanish” (Departamento de Lengua Española y Teoría de la Literatura y Literatura
Comparada, Facultad de Filología).
1. Spanish has a series of four third-person nonreﬂexive accusative clitics (neu./masc. sg. lo, fem.sg.
la, masc.pl. los, fem.pl. las) and a series of two third-person nonreﬂexive dative clitics (sg. le, pl.
les), plus one special third-person nonreflexive dative clitic, the “spurious” se, unmarked for
gender/number and restricted to co-occurring with other clitics.
2. As for the descriptive literature, the contrast between cases like (4b) and (5b) has also been almost
totally ignored. One exception is Cano (1987, 353), who points out the difference between his pair
of examples in (1) [with innocuous restructuring in (1b)] and the pair in (2) [with restructuring trig-
gering ungrammaticality in (2b)]:
(1) a. Lo
vi
manejarlo.
3.sg.masc.AccCL saw.1.sg drive.INFIN-3.sg.masc.AccCL
b. Se
lo
vi
manejar.
3.DatCL 3.sg.masc.AccCL saw.1.sg drive.INFIN
“I saw him drive it.”
(2) a. Lo
vi
castigarlo.
3.sg.masc.AccCL saw.1.sg punish.INFIN-3.sg.masc.AccCL
b. *Se
lo
vi
castigar.
3.DatCL 3.sg.masc.AccCL saw.1.sg punish.INFIN
“I saw him punish him.”
REFERENCES
Alsina, Alex. 1997. Causatives in Bantu and Romance. In Complex predicates, ed. Alex Alsina, Joan Bres-
nan, and Peter Sells, 203–46. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Bosque, Ignacio, and Pascual J. Masullo. 1997. On verbal quantiﬁcation in Spanish. In Studies on the syn-
tax of Central Romance languages, ed. Olga Fullana and Francesc Roca, 9–64. Girona: Universitat
de Girona.
Cano, Rafael. 1987. Estructuras sintácticas transitivas en el español actual. Madrid: Gredos.
Cuervo, María Cristina. 2003. Datives at large. PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
72
Luis Sáez

Demonte, Violeta. 1995. Dative alternation in Spanish. Probus 7:5–30.
Hale, Kenneth, and Samuel Jay Keyser. 1993. On argument structure and the lexical expression of syn-
tactic relations. In The view from building 20, ed. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 53–109.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 2002. Prolegomenon to a theory of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ormazábal, Javier, and Juan Romero. 1998a. Attract-F. A case against case. Paper presented at the 21st
GLOW Colloquium, Tilburg, April 16.
———. 1998b. On the syntactic nature of the me-lui and the person-case constraint. Anuario del Semi-
nario de Filología Vasca Julio de Urquijo 32:415–34.
———. 2007. The object agreement constraint. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 25:315–47.
Perlmutter, David. 1971. Deep and surface structure constraints in syntax. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Pylkkänen, Lina. 2002. Introducing arguments. PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Romero, Juan. 1997. Construcciones de doble objeto y gramática universal. PhD diss., Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid.
———. 2001. A note on case (mis)match in Spanish. Cuadernos de Lingüística VIII: 97–104.
73
APPLICATIVE PHRASES HOSTING ACCUSATIVE CLITICS


7
The Little DE of Degree Constructions
REMUS GERGEL
Universität Tübingen
THIS CHAPTER ANALYZES one function of the Romanian “little word” de. I claim that it serves
as a morphosyntactic exponent in degree constructions. The ﬁrst two sections illus-
trate problematic outcomes for a standard (universal) representation of degree con-
structions employing diagnostics used, for example, in Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki
(2004). The next two sections discuss the pertinent morphosyntactic properties of Ro-
manian and the paradox arising from a positive setting for degrees as far as the ba-
sic morphological and syntactic facts of the language are concerned together with
some apparent negative outcomes, for example, in questions and subcomparatives.
The paradox is resolved in the penultimate section. I propose an analysis for the role
of the morpheme de as an exponent inserted in the relevant degree constructions un-
der a functional degree-sensitive head, implemented here as Deg°. The ﬁnal section
analyzes an independent domain involving the adjectival de.
Degree Analysis(/es)—Essentials
This section introduces the minimal tenets of the standard representation of compara-
tives (and degree constructions more generally) that will be relevant in the discussion
later. As there is a good deal of work supporting the view of degree representations in
syntax-semantics for languages like English (cf. Kennedy 1999; Klein 1991; von Ste-
chow 1984), we will not go into the details of the analysis of those languages. As we
are concerned here with syntactic facts, we simply introduce one common analysis in
this respect (following, e.g., Kennedy 1999, in main outline). A gradable adjective bears
a relationship to a degree. The minimal assumption is that a degree element is a sister
to a gradable adjective phrase (AP). In Kennedy’s (1999) terms the adjective has an ex-
tended projection, a familiar pattern syntactically. One possibility, then, is (1).
(1)
75

The decisive question for my purposes will be whether and where speciﬁcally degree
representations originate in the syntax and how their dependencies become visible
morphosyntactically. Where degree elements structurally end up is well known: Fol-
lowing Chomsky (1977), previous investigations of comparatives argued that they
have representations akin to wh-clauses. A basic dependency is (2).
(2)
Problems with the Standard Analysis: The Case of Japanese
A series of recent studies point to particular types of cross-linguistic variation within
comparative constructions (cf. Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki 2004; Reglero 2007; Snyder
1995; Snyder, Wexler, and Das 1995, among others). For example, Beck, Oda, and
Sugisaki (2004) point out that the traditional degree-based analysis cannot explain
crucial Japanese data pertaining to comparative structures. Among them, one ﬁnds
subcomparatives and degree questions, cornerstones of the standard degree-based
views [cf. (3) and (4)].
(3) *Kono tana-wa [ano doa-ga hiroi yori (mo)] (motto) takai.
this shelf-Top [that door-Nom wide YORI (mo)] (more) tall
This shelf is taller than that door is wide.
(Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki 2004)
(4) a. How smart is John?
b. John-wa dore-kurai
kasikoi no?
John-Top which degree smart
Q
To which degree is John smart?
(Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki 2004)
The subcomparative is ruled out in Japanese, and the degree question is a paraphrase.
A language L may then have (English-style) deg-variables—or, for example, use non-
compositional, pragmatic strategies instead. Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki propose the pa-
rameter in (5).
(5) Degree abstraction parameter
(DAP; Beck, Oda, and Sugisaki 2004)
A language {does/does not} have binding of degree variables in the syntax.
Starting from the essential variationist observation, there are two main issues that re-
quire further exploration from a morphosyntactic perspective. First, how is (5) real-
ized in a given L? Second, how can it be realized? More speciﬁcally, what shows, for
example (to a learner of L), that there is a possible degree-based representation in a
syntactic derivation of L? The following section focuses on these questions for Ro-
manian and argues that a morphosyntactically overt function word is involved. Thus
while Romanian does not seem to show any unusual type of comparison strategy (i.e.,
from the wider typological perspective; see Stassen 1985), it can nonetheless be in-
76
Remus Gergel

structive for how a particular surfacing realization ties in with the diagnostics of vari-
ationist research on degrees. Next it provides a test of the representation of degree
constructions at various levels and argues that—despite some conﬂicting appear-
ances—it is positive (with a number of crucial cases represented through an overt ex-
ponent).
Essentials of Low- and High-Degree Morphosyntax
This section gives the basic facts relating to the syntactic locus from which a Deg-
head could project (namely, adjectival morphology) and the level where it could end
up (clausal wh-syntax) to test for potential sources of a different parameter setting.
Adjectival Morphology
Romanian has the pattern sketched in (6) for the absolute and the comparative.
(6) a. Ion e inteligent.
b. Maria e mai inteligenta˘
(decât Ion).
Ion is intelligent
Maria is more intelligent.FEM (than Ion)
There is, of course, nothing a priori unusual about such patterns. The language has
(analytic only) comparative morphology. Beyond that, in the adjectival domain one
ﬁnds a series of otherwise usual morphological facts obtaining in Romance (also be-
yond comparative morphology; e.g., including adjectival agreement patterns).1 A
ﬁrst conjecture would be that mai, “more,” is a good candidate for a comparative Deg-
head. A second conjecture would be that a silent absolute Deg° is available in the other
(mai-less) cases [cf. (6a), as usually assumed, e.g., for English (Kennedy 1999)].
Wh-clauses
At the clausal level, the morphosyntactic facts of the language do not give rise to sus-
picion either. Although there is multiple wh-movement, wh-phrases essentially move
to the left edge of the clause in Romanian [with superiority in conjunction with the
D-linking-based “violations” applying; Comorovski 1996; cf. (7) and (8)].
(7) Cine ce (crezi ca˘) a va˘zut?
who what (think.2sg. that) has seen
Who (do you think) saw what?
(8) *Ce (pe) cine (crezi ca˘) a va˘zut?
what PE who (think.2sg. that) has seen
Who (do you think) saw what?
Moreover, certain pied-piping effects obtain (cf. Grosu 1994 and references therein).
Comparative “Complementizer(s)”
Romanian has two main ways to introduce comparatives. One is decât, “than,” which
is felicitous with clausal and phrasal comparatives. More colloquial is the ca ver-
sion of “than,” felicitous with phrasal comparatives. This is, again, a not uncommon
situation cross-linguistically (namely, with essentially two types of comparative
77
THE LITTLE DE OF DEGREE CONSTRUCTIONS

introducers; Hankamer 1973).2 In particular, I will focus on the clausal type of com-
paratives in the language to test crucial data that become visible at the sentential level.
To sum up: From the evidence at the structurally lowest and highest syntactic lev-
els, that is, word-level and clausal syntax, we would expect a syntactic degree pa-
rameter to be set positively.
Puzzles in the Middle
If a language has a Deg-head, and given the previously detailed essentials, one ex-
pects such phenomena as the following: (a) Deg-questions, (b) subcomparative struc-
tures, and (c) comparatives behaving uniformly in the language. This section makes
the observation that despite the regular comparative morphology and the available
(movement-based) wh-syntax, degree constructions in Romanian seem to share some
of the unwelcome consequences (for a standard analysis) evidenced by Japanese.
Main Puzzle 1: Degree Questions
The ﬁrst problem encountered, if we tried to follow the previously mentioned reason-
ing, is that Romanian does not have simplex degree questions.3 Merging an appro-
priate wh-word to a licit declarative structure fails, as in (9a). Moreover, controlling
for potentially interfering movement does not yield grammatical structures either [cf.
(9b) through (9f)].
(9) a. *Cât Ion e inteligent?
d. *Cât Ion inteligent e?
b. *Cât inteligent e Ion ?
e. *Cât inteligent Ion e?
c. *Cât e inteligent Ion?
f. *Cât e Ion inteligent?
WH Ion is intelligent (and permutations for constituents Xi, 2  I  4 above)
How intelligent is Ion?
The position of the wh-word is constant at the left edge in the examples in (9).
Main Puzzle 2: Subcomparatives
The same is true of subcomparatives, that is, a simple Merge strategy of the usual
lexical items does not yield the results usually expected. Merging two degree-based
clauses does not yield a well-formed subcomparative. Sentence (10) illustrates this
fact.
(10) *Raftul e(ste) mai lung decât camera e lata˘.
shelf.the is more long than room.the is wide
The shelf is longer than the room is wide.
Trying to allow for more ﬂexibility in word order (e.g., focus movement; see Reglero
2007 for persuasive argumentation for some Spanish cases)4 is not applicable as such
in Romanian either. In particular, structures like (11) are ungrammatical.5
(11) *Raftul e(ste) mai lung decât lata˘ e (ste) camera.
shelf.the is more long than wide is room.the 
The shelf is longer than the room is wide
78
Remus Gergel

Two predictions of the standard analysis do not seem to be borne out. One might con-
jecture the opposite from the previous section, for example, that Romanian lacks syn-
tactic degree representations. However, there is evidence to the contrary, which the
following section explores.
“DE-Support”
This section argues that despite the apparent deﬁcient outcomes observed earlier, there
is, crucially, a morphosyntactically well-motivated strategy used in the language (i.e.,
Merge of a little word), which salvages the problematic derivations. More speciﬁcally,
the overt morphological form de is merged to the gradable adjective and saves the
relevant derivations, that is, degree questions and subcomparatives in particular. The
descriptive claim is stated as follows. We suggest that the overt morpheme de is last-
resort merged to the Deg position and marks it as such [cf. (12)].
(12)
Repair in Degree Questions
With the exponent de merged, degree questions are grammatical, as in (13a). The same
repair effect obtains in the pied-piping variants, as shown in (13b).
(13) a. Cât e de inteligent Ion?
b. Cât de inteligent e Ion?
how is DE intelligent Ion
how DE intelligent is Ion
How intelligent is Ion?
How intelligent is Ion?
In differential degree questions (cu cât, “by how much”), where mai is necessarily
present, a ﬁrst indication for the complementary distribution of mai and de is ob-
served. Thus the (predicted) incompatibility between de and mai obtains [cf. (14)].
(14) Cu cât e mai (*de) inteligenta˘ Maria?
with how much is more (DE) intelligent.FEM Maria
By how much is Maria more intelligent?
The same holds on the multiplicative scale [de cîte ori, “how many times”; cf. (15)].
(15) De
câte
ori
e mai (*de) scump un iaz decît un om?(web-based)
DE(NUM) how-many times is more DE expensive a lake than a man
Moreover, de/mai competition is also evidenced beyond degree questions (see next
section).
While the particular phenomena in Romanian are language speciﬁc, last-resort
mechanisms are more general and well known in other domains and languages.6 In
this connection, it is worth considering do-support brieﬂy, which is not found in the
English form in the Germanic cognates. Nonetheless subset effects of it are detectable
79
THE LITTLE DE OF DEGREE CONSTRUCTIONS

elsewhere (cf., e.g., Houser et al. 2006, among many others). An interesting counter-
part to the asymmetric Germanic situation can be found in some areas in Romance,
for example, if we compare Romanian with Spanish. Spanish does not have de-sup-
port (in the Romanian pattern); it shows it, however, in a subset of the environments,
for example, in some degree questions [cf. (16) through (17) with data from (Chilean)
Spanish provided by Héctor Campos (p.c.)].7
(16) Cómo es Juan de inteligente?
(17) Cómo de inteligente es Juan?
how    is Juan of  intelligent 
how    of intelligent  is Juan
Repair in Subcomparatives
Recall that simple subcomparatives are not licensed. There are, however, repair strate-
gies that improve their acceptability. While the issues posed by subcomparatives in
general overload the scope of this chapter, I focus here on one ingredient in their struc-
ture, namely, Merge of degree de. The existence of subcomparatives, as of degree
questions, has previously been noted in the literature. However, this has happened
without analyzing the role played by de as a degree head in the relevant contexts
[which was also not the focus of the previous contributions concerned with the is-
sues; cf. (18)].
(18) Maria e cu mult mai des¸teapta˘ decât e Zamﬁra de frumoasa˘.
Maria is with much more clever.F than is Zamﬁra DE beautiful.FEM
Maria is far cleverer than Zamﬁra is beautiful.
(adapted from Grosu 1994)
While there is a series of factors involved in such examples, they are syntactically of
a relevant sort, and the reported examples involve the morpheme de.8
The Relationship to the Comparative Morpheme
The supportive de and the grammaticalized comparative mai, “more,” do not co-oc-
cur. Certain co-occurrence restrictions thus extend beyond Deg-questions [cf. (19)].9
(19) a. *Radu e mai de inteligent.
b. *Radu e de mai inteligent
Radu is more DE intelligent.
Radu is more DE intelligent.
On the Status of the Absolute
Having seen the basic distribution in conjunction with mai, “more,” note that degree-
based de is in complementary distribution with the silent absolute [cf. (20)].
(20) * Ion e  de inteligent.
I.    is DE intelligent.
This is corroborating evidence for a hypothesis in favor of an exponent of a degree-
based functional little word—de merged to grammaticalized degree morphemes
makes the derivations crash.10 But how do we then account for the complementary
set of de-examples seen, that is, those the acceptability of which increases with de
merged? The ﬁrst idea that comes to mind is that an overt head is needed. However,
this is neither empirically sufficient in general [e.g., (20) does not show this neces-
80
Remus Gergel

sity] nor theoretically satisfactory. As Corver (1997, 130) points out, a step that would
try to motivate last resort this way would be but a sheer stipulation.11 A somewhat
more developed hypothesis would be that de-Merge is last resort. Applied to our case,
the morpheme de would then not be possible in a simple (predicative) position, but
it would come to rescue derivations when special conditions call for it. Considering
the nature of the contexts in which the morpheme appears, a more speciﬁc venue
recommends itself even more strongly, namely, one inspired by Distributed Morphol-
ogy (DM; cf. Embick and Noyer 2001, on do-support and references therein). While
classical theories of do-support involve failure of affix lowering, in some cases it
seems that broader generalizations may be gained via DM. For current purposes,
let us recall, for instance, that Romanian comparatives are not affixal and that
A´-properties are involved in degree constructions in general. The point we capital-
ize on is that abstract morphemes are largely determined by syntactico-semantic con-
ﬁgurations. This offers a theoretically motivated venue for phrasing the ﬁndings. The
exponent de marks degree dependencies of adjectives in the contexts discussed
earlier (and in at least one additional case to be discussed later). Merging de can
then be envisaged as late insertion of the same abstract morpheme over the relevant
contexts.
Independent Evidence and de-“Repair”
In questions or subcomparatives, the structurally low member of the dependency is
marked via de-insertion. Under the copy theory of movement, one can ask whether
there are conﬁgurations in which a structurally high copy is marked similarly.
Predicate doubling (PD) is a well-known cousin of topicalization. Arguably, PD
leaves (parts of) both the foot and the head of a chain spelled out at the level of phono-
logical form (PF). PD is well known, for example, from verb doubling in Romance
(but also, e.g., from Germanic/African/Semitic and indeed other varieties). Some va-
rieties of Spanish have the construction in (21) (cf. Vicente 2007 on detailed recent
discussion).
(21) Comprar, Juan ha comprado un libro.
(Vicente 2007)
buy.INF J has bought a book but later not CL has read
As for buying, Juan has bought a book, although he didn’t read it later.
To illustrate the current connection, we ﬁrst raise the question of whether PD appears
with adjectival predicates. Call this type PDA. Although not a necessary condition
in general, in Romanian PDA there is a connection to degree constructions through
the exponent used. PDA is licit only with the de-exponent merged. Further, the rel-
evant de involved is degree sensitive: gradable adjectives (absolute and relative ones)
are licit [cf. (22) through (23)], while nongradable ones are in general disallowed
[cf. (24)].
(22) *(De) înalta˘/bogata˘ nu e înalta˘/bogata˘.
DE tall/rich.FEM NEG is tall/rich. FEM
She is not tall/rich.
(Tall/rich she is not.)
81
THE LITTLE DE OF DEGREE CONSTRUCTIONS

(23) *(De) strîmba˘ nu e strîmba˘.
DE bent NEG is bent
It is not bent.
(24) *(*De) american/mort nu-i american/mort.
DE American/dead not is American/dead
He is not American/dead.
The two asterisks in (24) indicate that besides the ungrammatical de-less variant, with
nongradable predicates, as the ones given in (24), de cannot attach and the construc-
tion is not felicitous. Though the two classes of phenomena have certain distinctive
features (e.g., notably in Spell-out), in Romanian they also have a clear connection.
This fact offers the opportunity to analyze the little-word exponent of present con-
cern in a somewhat different environment.
The three key factors involved in PDA are gradability, topicalization, and dou-
ble Spell-out, with de attaching to the structurally higher adjective. While the class
of the (gradable) adjective may speak for itself, notice also that it is not the case that
topicalization per se clashes with adjectives like mort, “dead” [cf. (25)].
(25) Moarta˘ nu-i.
dead.FEM NEG-is
She is not dead.
It is also not the case that doubling per se is ruled out with predicates with such mean-
ings. The following, using a verbal predicate (plus a different, that is, supine, de), is
just as acceptable (cf. also other languages/varieties with verbal doubling via the
inﬁnitive).
(26) De murit n-a murit.
die.SUP has not died
As for dying, (s)he has not died.
Let us next consider the phrase-structural status of the fronted adjectives. Comple-
ments do not participate in PDA [cf., e.g., (27) through (28)].
(27) *Mîndru de ﬁca˘-sa nu-i mîndru de ﬁca˘-sa.
proud of daughter-his NEG-is proud of daughter-his
He’s not proud of his daughter.
(28) *Dependent‚i de petrol nu sunt dependent‚i de petrol.
dependent.PL on gas NEG are dependent.PL on gas
They do not depend on gas.
Similarly, speciﬁers do not move along with the adjective. Only heads then move. We
may hypothesize that A moves to Deg. But how does the complex A  Deg head then
move on? Recalling that A´-properties are involved in questions and subcomparatives,
the issue is: Does the same hold for the less orthodox PDA? On closer inspection,
82
Remus Gergel

the global properties of PDA reveal themselves as being also in line with A´-move-
ment. We can show this through the following examples, illustrating that PDA is not
clause bounded and that it obeys all the major island constraints on movement.
(29) De bogat nu cred ca˘-i bogat.
DE rich NEG believe that-is rich
I don’t believe that he’s rich.
(30) *De bogat n-am auzit poves¸tile ca˘-i bogat.
DE rich NEG have heard stories.the that-is rich
I didn’t hear the stories that he’s rich.
(31) ?*De bogat am cunoscut un fotbalist care-i bogat.
DE rich I have known a soccer player who-is rich
I have known a soccer player who is rich.
(32) *De bogat s¸i-a cumpa˘rat o vila˘ dupa ce a aﬂat ca˘ e bogat.
DE rich SE-has bought a villa after that has learnt that is rich
He acquired a villa after he learnt that he was rich.
(33) ?*De bogat nu e nici bogat nici sa˘rac.
DE rich NEG is neither rich nor poor
He’s neither rich nor poor.
The combined results we have obtained so far amount to the structure given in (34).
(34)
Let’s note at this point that while under traditional syntactic assumptions the struc-
ture may raise syntactic-ontological questions, namely regarding the status of heads
and phrases, it is not clear that these questions are well motivated (cf. Chomsky
[1995] and Vicente [2007]). The present ﬁndings may well support the latter views.
The crucial part from the discussion of PDA for present purposes is that the ad-
jectival process only occurs when a de-exponent marks the adjectival dependency.
In sum, despite regular morphology, the Romanian adjective does not seem to in-
variably “project up” by itself (cf. the status of simplex degree question and subcom-
paratives); de-Merger salvages such structures. Descriptively this happens through last
resort, possibly for the consistent setting of a parameter of degree-based representations.
The realization of the parameter is tied to the presence of the relevant functional head
and its appropriate exponent in accordance with the syntactico-semantic environment.
83
THE LITTLE DE OF DEGREE CONSTRUCTIONS

NOTES
I am indebted to the colleagues who offered their valuable feedback in Chicago (University of Illinois at
Chicago), Georgetown (GURT 2007), Philadelphia (University of Pennsylvania), and Tübingen (Compar-
ative Constructions project 2006, 2007), and in particular S. Beck, J. Bobaljik, H. Campos, M. den Dikken,
D. Embick, E. Göbbel, K. González-Vilbazo, J. Kabatek, L. López, M. Romero, as well as my consult-
ants. All errors are fully mine.
1. But cf. the distinct determiner system; see Campos (2005) for a thorough discussion.
2. See Price’s (1990) tensed verb constraint for Spanish, but cf. subcomparatives as (a):
(i) María leyó más libros que revistas leyó Juan.
Maria read more books than journals read Juan.
(Reglero 2007)
3. By simplex, we mean exactly what happens in languages like English: (Re)Merge the appropriate
wh-word at the left edge of the clause to form a degree question.
4. Reglero’s discussion (2007) focuses on number-based subcomparatives. It would be interesting to
ascertain whether the movement strategies may be transported to degree subcomparatives; some
speakers report structures as (a) as (only) marked as “literary.” Notice that even if the focus strategy
does not turn out to transfer to degree adjectives, this is not a limitation of Reglero’s approach, which
is not concerned with them.
(a) ?Juan es más alto que gorda es Maria.
Juan is more tall than fat
is Maria
Turning back to Romanian, fronting the adjective does not improve subcomparatives.
5. Using verb movement and a low subject (cf. Cornilescu 2000), we obtain a distinct inversion struc-
ture, which we apply later with the overt morphosyntactic support.
6. For last resort in another domain in Romanian, cf. the discussion in Campos (2005).
7. To be sure, not every wh-word has the same distribution: e.g., cuánto (literally “how much”) does
not allow both variants, as evidenced by (Modern) Spanish (i).
(i) a. Cuánto es Juan de inteligente?
how
is Juan of intelligent
b. *Cuánto de inteligente es Juan?
Héctor Campos (p.c.)
Due to limited space, I must abandon discussion of different uses of de and its cognates. Though
there may be a cognitive connection to Deg-constructions (plus the historical one), the distributions
are, based on my preliminary investigation, distinct. A particularly striking example is the number-
based de of French (cf. Snyder 1995).
8. One of the factors is that the two properties are not compared on the same scale or dimension. The
pragmatic effect of this alteration is considerable (cf. Kennedy 1999). However, many attested sub-
comparatives are of this type [cf. also English (a)].
(a) This practice stems from the fact that it is almost impossible to write questions that are more
difficult than the questioner is smart (Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, vol.
22, 1997).
I suggest with Klein (1991) a (structure-preserving) homomorphism from the relevant degree scales
to real numbers, in which case comparisons will be sanctioned. This does not mean equaling degree
scales with real numbers. While they may have similar structures (e.g., density in some cases), they
are not identical in general. Thus number-based and adjective-based degree constructions may be-
have distinctly, as they do. There are additional factors that I must leave out because of space con-
siderations. Turning back to Romanian, while there are additional syntactic and semantic points in
such examples, conservative and liberal speakers (with regard to subcomparatives) that were con-
fronted with relative judgments conﬁrmed an improvement on structures involving de in pragmati-
cally less elaborate structures, if more subtly, too [cf. (b)].
(b) ?Raftul e mai lung decît e camera de lata˘.
shelf.D is more long than room.D is DE wide
The shelf is longer than the room is wide.
84
Remus Gergel

A further remark is that since alternative nominalizations of the adjectives may be invoked, one might
wonder whether a generalized blocking (descriptively) obtains.
9. Equatives, unlike genuine comparatives, co-occur with the morpheme de [cf. (a)].
(a) Radu e la fel de inteligent.
R. is at sort DE intelligent
Radu is (just) as intelligent.
Some of the speciﬁc differences may indeed have to do with grammaticalization. Note that (the rel-
evant) mai, “more,” is an overt morpheme relatively clearly associated in the language with a mor-
pheme of superiority. It is plausible to assume that no need to mark a degree-sensitive morpheme
can be invoked (including the crucial perspective of a learner). The circumlocution construction la
fel, on the other hand, has some distinct properties: for example, it can be used with other related
meanings; conversely, and perhaps more importantly, it has competitors as an equative; ﬁnally, it is
transparent (cf. glosses). While these points involve additional issues, discussion of which would lead
the present study too far aﬁeld, overall there is no clear one-to-one identiﬁcation of a degree-sensi-
tive exponent. Thereby no “competition” of two exponents arises, and the exponent de would be re-
quired for a licit degree construction. An alternative is that de is incorporated.
10. Cf. also *foarte de  A. Foarte, “very,” is bleached of other meanings in Romanian.
11. I use Corver’s general observation without transferring his solution. A theta-theoretic postulation is,
in particular, irrelevant for the processes at hand.
REFERENCES
Beck, Sigrid, Toshiko Oda, and Koji Sugisaki. 2004. Parametric variation in the semantics of comparison:
Japanese vs. English. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 13:289–344.
Campos, Héctor. 2005. Noun modiﬁcation and last resort operations in Arvantovlaxika and in Romanian.
Lingua 115:311–47.
Chomsky, Noam. 1977. On wh-movement. In Formal syntax, ed. Peter Culicover, Thomas Wasow, and
Adrian Akmajian, 71–132. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Comorovski, Ileana. 1996. Interrogative phrases and the syntax-semantics interface. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Cornilescu, Alexandra. 2000. The double subject construction in Romanian. In Comparative studies in Ro-
manian syntax, ed. Gabriela Alboiu and Virginia Motapanyane, 83–133. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Corver, Norbert. 1997. Much-support as last resort. Linguistic Inquiry 28:119–64.
Embick, David, and Rolf Noyer. 2001. Movement operations after syntax. Linguistic Inquiry 32:555–95.
Grosu, Alexander. 1994. Three studies in locality and case. London: Routledge.
Hankamer, Jorge. 1973. Why there are two “than”s in English. Proceedings of the 9th annual meeting of
the Chicago Linguistics Society. Chicago, IL, 179–91.
Houser, Michael, Line Mikkelsen, Ange Strom-Weber, and Maziar Toosarvandani. 2006. Gøre-support in
Danish. Paper presented at the 21st CGSW, University of California, Santa Cruz, April 1.
Kennedy, Christopher. 1999. Projecting the adjective: The syntax and semantics of gradability and com-
parison. New York: Garland.
Klein, Ewan. 1991. Comparatives. In Semantics. An international handbook of contemporary research,
ed. Arnim von Stechow and Dieter Wunderlich, 673–91. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Price, Susan. 1990. Comparative constructions in Spanish and French syntax. London: Routledge.
Reglero, Lara. 2007. On Spanish comparative subdeletion constructions. Studia Linguistica 61:130–69.
Snyder, William. 1995. Language acquisition and language variation: The role of morphology. PhD diss.,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Snyder, William, Kenneth Wexler, and Dolon Das. 1995. The syntactic representation of degree and quan-
tity: Perspectives from Japanese and child English. In Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on
Formal Linguistics XIII, ed. Raul Aranovich, William Byrne, Susanne Preuss, and Martha Senturia,
581–96. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Stassen, Leon. 1985. Comparison and universal grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stechow, Arnim von. 1984. Comparing semantic theories of comparison. Journal of Semantics 3:1–77.
Vicente, Luis. 2007. The syntax of heads and phrases. PhD diss., Leiden.
85
THE LITTLE DE OF DEGREE CONSTRUCTIONS


8
The Complementizer The
HEATHER LEE TAYLOR
University of Maryland, College Park
THIS CHAPTER CONCERNS comparative correlatives [in (1) and (2)] and the “little word” the
that obligatorily begins both phrases/clauses. The syntactic structure of such expres-
sions is far from apparent.
(1) The more a student studies, the better grades she will receive
(2) The longer the storm lasts, the worse the damage is
A comparative correlative looks like two nominals, obligatorily headed by the de-
terminer the, with no clear indication of what the relationship between these two
“nominals” is. English comparative correlatives consist of two phrases, no more and
no less, as seen in (3) through (5). This characteristic is not limited to comparative
correlatives in English; to the extent that comparative correlatives have been docu-
mented cross-linguistically, all languages require that exactly two phrases/clauses
be present.1
(3) *The more a student studies
(4) *The better grades she will receive
(5) *? The more a student studies, the better grades she will receive, the better job
she’ll land
Because we do not have evidence at this point to make a distinction between the two
parts of the comparative correlative or to determine their syntactic status in terms of
a category, I will temporarily refer to them as phrases, and individually to the “ﬁrst
phrase” and the “second phrase” as it corresponds to their linear order, as in (6). This
terminological issue will be resolved below.
(6) The more a student studies, the better grades she will receive
ﬁrst phrase
second phrase
In English, both the ﬁrst phrase and the second phrase obligatorily begin with
the little word the. The unacceptability of (7a) is due to the absence of the in the ﬁrst
87

clause, in (7b) in the second clause, and last, in (7c), the absence of the in both clauses
unsurprisingly also results in unacceptability.
(7) a. * More a student studies, the better grades she will receive
b. * The more a student studies, better grades she will receive
c. * More a student studies, better grades she will receive
Another characteristic of comparative correlatives (CCs) is that A´-movement
of a constituent within either the ﬁrst or the second phrase can occur (Culicover
and Jackendoff 1999). To see this clearly, consider (8) through (10) [Culicover and
Jackendoff’s examples (68) through (70)]. Both the ﬁrst and the second phrase in
the CC in (8) have an object of a verb, this problem and the folks up at corporate
headquarters, respectively, and these objects can be targeted for A´-movement out
of its phrase. In (9) we see movement of each for the purpose of forming a relative
clause, and in (10) each object can be topicalized. Culicover and Jackendoff argue
that movement of a wh-phrase in order to form a question is not possible, but in
(11), when a CC is embedded under a certain class of predicates (think, believe,
say), each object can be replaced with an appropriate wh-phrase and A’- moved to
form a question.2
base sentence
(8) The sooner you solve this problem, the more easily you’ll satisfy the folks up
at corporate headquarters.
relative clause
(9) a. ✓This is the sort of problem which1 the sooner you solve t1, the more
easily you’ll satisfy the folks up at corporate headquarters.
b. ✓The folks up at corporate headquarters are the sort of people who1 the
sooner you solve this problem, the more easily you’ll satisfy t1.
topicalization
(10) a. ✓This problem1, the sooner you solve t1, the more easily you’ll satisfy the
folks up at corporate headquarters.
b. ✓The folks up at corporate headquarters1, the sooner you solve this
problem, the more easily you’ll satisfy t1.
wh-question formation
(11) a. ✓Which problem1 do you think that the sooner Bill solves t1, the more
easily he’ll satisfy the folks up at corporate headquarters
b. ? Who1 do you think that the sooner that Bill solves this problem, the more
easily he’ll satisfy t1?
These collective characteristics of CCs provide some clues to what the syntac-
tic structure of the expressions is and what the nature of the word the turns out to be.
What I suggest here is that the word the that obligatorily appears at the start of both
the ﬁrst and the second phrase of the English CC is a complementizer. The CC con-
88
Heather Lee Taylor

sists of two CPs, the ﬁrst adjoined to the second. The complementizer selects for a
FocusP (FocP), something we would expect of a complementizer phrase (C0) and not
of a determiner.
This chapter is broken into ﬁve sections. The ﬁrst considers a treatment of CCs
as a type of equative and explores the lack of empirical support for that analysis. The
next section is a presentation of other analyses of the English CC’s the. The follow-
ing section contains the analysis that the the in English CCs is in fact a complemen-
tizer. The next section expands this proposal by providing evidence from Nominal
Extraposition expressions in English and cross-linguistic evidence from CCs in
Basque. The ﬁnal section presents my conclusions.
Comparative Correlatives as Equatives
Cross-linguistically, CCs consist of exactly two phrases. In English, both of these
phrases obligatorily begin with the word the. These two characteristics hold for equa-
tives as well, as exempliﬁed in (12). An equative consists of two and only two argu-
ments of a copular verb, and those arguments are nominals that can begin with the
determiner the. The structure of an equative, using the lexical items in (12) to demon-
strate, is that in (13).
(12) The president of AT&T is (also) the president of Cingular
(13)
If CCs are a type of equative, this suggests that its structure consists of a main
verb, a null copula, which takes two arguments, the ﬁrst and second phrases. Thus
the structure of the CC in (14) would look much like the structure of the equative in
(12). This is illustrated in comparing (13) and (15).
(14) The more a student studies, the better grades she will receive
89
THE COMPLEMENTIZER THE

(15)
Evidence for This Analysis
One unusual characteristic of equatives is that movement out of both the subject and
object is permitted, as in (16) and (17). This mirrors extraction behaviors observed
for CCs in (8) through (11). This appears to offer support for a similar analysis of
both types of expression.
(16) [Which company]1 is the president of t1 also the president of Cingular?
(17) [Which company]2 is the president of AT&T also the president of t2?
Treating CCs as a type of equative would explain the observations made at the
beginning of the chapter. CCs have two, but not one or three or more phrases, be-
cause a copular verb takes only two arguments. Movement out of the phrases of a CC
would be permitted the same way that it is in equatives. Last, and most important to
the investigation here, the word the that appears at the start of each phrase could be
classiﬁed as a determiner, the D0 that heads the DP.
Strong Evidence against the Equative Analysis
As it turns out, this analysis has been considered, and rejected, in the literature. Culi-
cover and Jackendoff (1999) present two strong pieces of evidence maintaining that
this analysis cannot be correct. First, when a CC hosts a tag question, it is the sec-
ond phrase that obligatorily hosts this tag, as in (18), (19), and (20).
(18)
The earlier Bill arrives home, the more time the kids spend with him
(19) * The earlier Bill arrives home, the more time the kids spend with him,
doesn’t he?
(20) ✓The earlier Bill arrives home, the more time the kids spend with him, don’t
they?
90
Heather Lee Taylor

Second, when the CC is embedded under a predicate that triggers subjunctive
mood, that mood is hosted on the verb in the second phrase, not the ﬁrst. Culicover
and Jackendoff (1999) provide evidence from English, reproduced here in (21) and
(22). Though morphological evidence of subjunctive mood in English is weakly used
by most speakers, the judgments for (21) and (22) are robust. Furthermore, cross-lin-
guistically, languages that contrast indicative and subjunctive mood by use of mor-
phological marking also display this use of subjunctive mood on the second clause.
(21) a. ✓I demand that the more John eats, the more he pay(s)
b. * I demand that the more John eat, the more he pay(s)
(22) a. ✓It is imperative that the more John eats, the more he pay(s)
b. * It is imperative that the more John eat, the more he pay(s)
Given this evidence, it is clear that the two phrases of the CC are not on equal
standing. The second phrase displays all the characteristics of a main clause, and
the ﬁrst phrase does not. If CCs had a structure like equatives, these characteristics
of a main clause would be seen in different constituents: tag questions would form
on the null copula and the subject, and subjunctive mood would be hosted on the
null copula (or rather not heard at all because the verb would be null). Further, even
if an analysis of CCs as a type of equatives did not suffer the previously stated prob-
lems, this analysis still does not provide an explanation for why the arguments in
the CC require the determiner the. This is not a general property of equatives; the
internal structure of the two arguments in equatives can have a wide array of struc-
tures, with or without the deﬁnite determiner (see Adger and Ramchand [2003] for
extensive discussion of this point). Thus if CCs are a type of equative and the word
the is a determiner, the treatment of the word the would still require some special
explanation.
It appears that treating CCs as a type of equative is the wrong way to proceed.
The evidence we have just seen forces us to conclude that CCs consist of a main clause
(the second) and a subordinate clause (the ﬁrst). Yet now the word the seems very cu-
rious. A word normally classiﬁed as a determiner is obligatorily appearing at the start
of something that is not a nominal (the entire ﬁrst or second clause).
Previous Analyses of CCs’ the
Perhaps it is the case that the in CCs is not a determiner at all but a lexical item of
some other category. If this were the case, it would provide a way to label the main
clause (the second) and the subordinate clause (the ﬁrst) something other than DP.
Two separate proposals for English CCs are reviewed here, Culicover and Jackend-
off (1999) and den Dikken (2005).
Culicover and Jackendoff (1999) treat the comparative as a quantiﬁer and the
word the as a determiner of that quantifier (following Bresnan 1973), sitting in
Spec,QP. This quantiﬁer phrase (QP) is in the speciﬁer of an XP, which in turn is in
the speciﬁer of a complementizer phrase (Spec,CP). The XP is coindexed with a trace
in inﬂection phrase (IP), where this constituent is logically understood. The structure
is illustrated in (23).
91
THE COMPLEMENTIZER THE

(23)
Den Dikken (2005) instead treats the in English as a degree head (Deg0), and the mor-
pheme more/less/-er is part of an AdjP, the complement of this degree head.
(24)
These prior detailed analyses have three key components. First, the word the is
given a label other than determiner. These two analyses differ in a number of ways,
yet both conclude that the cannot be an instance of the deﬁnite determiner. Second,
the morpheme more/less/-er is treated as something other than a degree head. Last, in
both of these analyses, Spec,CP of both clauses is ﬁlled, allowing no possibility for
A´-movement out of a clause to proceed successive cyclically. The proposal put forth
in the next section will address each of these components. As in these analyses, the is
analyzed as something other than the deﬁnite determiner. In contrast to these analy-
ses, though, the morpheme more/less/-er is a degree head (following Kennedy 1997),
and the structure has an available Spec,CP position in both the main and subordinate
clauses so that successive cyclic A´-movement out of the clauses is permitted.
The Is a Complementizer
Proposal for the Structure of CCs
Both of the clauses of the English CC obligatorily begin with the word the. I propose
that this the is a complementizer and that both clauses of the CC are CPs. The ﬁrst
clause, the subordinate clause, is adjoined to the main clause. In both the main and
subordinate clauses, the complementizer the takes a FocP complement.3 The mor-
pheme more/less/-er and the constituent it modiﬁes occupy Spec,FocP. FocP imme-
diately dominates IP. The entire structure is given immediately following as it is
92
Heather Lee Taylor

abstractly construed for any CC in English [in (25)], and then speciﬁcally [in (26)]
as it applies to the CC in (1).
(25)
(26)
The structure of degree phrase (DegP) that I adopt here is Kennedy’s (1997), in (27).
If the modiﬁed constituent is adjective phrase (AdjP), adverb phrase (AdvP), or IP, it
is this DegP that occupies Spec,FocP. In the case of IP modiﬁcation, Deg0 has no com-
plement. In the case of noun phrase (NP) modiﬁcation, DegP is adjoined to NP (fol-
lowing Kennedy and Merchant’s [2000] proposal for attributive comparative deletion),
and as with IP modiﬁcation, Deg0 has no complement. In the case of NP modiﬁcation,
then, it is the NP to which the DegP is adjoined that holds the position of Spec,FocP.
(27)
93
THE COMPLEMENTIZER THE

Why not classify the as a deﬁnite determiner so that it is part of the comparative
constituent in Spec,FocP? I follow Taylor’s (2006) proposal that the comparative con-
stituent in Spec,FocP has been base-generated in its canonical position and A´-moved
to this higher position. Further evidence for this is the existence of almost synonymous
expressions to CCs, like that in (28). These have been referred to as CC´ (Culicover
and Jackendoff 1999) and ICC (Inverted Comparative Correlative; Culicover and Jack-
endoff 2005, 505). In ICCs, the main clause appears ﬁrst linearly, and the subordinate
clause follows. Also in ICCs, the word order of the main clause is different from the
word order of the main clause in the CC. In (28) and (29), the main clause contains the
compared constituent worse (suppletive form of “bad”  “more”). In (28), this com-
pared constituent has raised to Spec,FocP and is preceded linearly by the. But in (29),
where the compared constituent appears in its base-generated position, the word the is
missing. If it is assumed that CCs and ICCs are derivationally related, the absence of
the word the in the ICC suggests that it is not a part of the comparative constituent.
(28) The damage is worse, the longer the storm lasts
(29) The longer the storm lasts, the worse the damage is
The Induces that-trace Effect
As proposed, the complementizer the is phonologically overt, therefore it should have
the same effect as an overt complementizer . . . and it does—it induces that-trace ef-
fect. (30d) and (30e) are unacceptable. If we hypothesize that this unacceptability is
also due to a that-trace effect induced by the C0 the, then the presence of a heavy
AdvP between the comparative string and the wh-trace should improve the expres-
sion. Indeed, this is exactly what happens, as can be seen in (30f) and (30g).
(30) a.
I said that the more Bill eats vegetables, the less Mary wants sweets
b. ✓What1 did I say that the more Bill eats t1, the less Mary wants sweets
c. ✓What1 did I say that the more Bill eats sweets the less Mary wants t1?
d. * Who1 did I say that the more t1 eats vegetables, the less Mary wants
sweets?
e. * Who1 did I say that the more Bill eats vegetables, the less t1 wants
sweets?
f. ✓Who1 did I say that the more for all intents and purposes t1 eats
vegetables, the less Mary wants sweets?
g. ?? Who1 did I say that the more Bill eats vegetables, the less for all intents
and purposes t1 wants sweets?
More Evidence for the Proposal
If the word the in CCs is a complementizer, a bolster for this claim could be found
in two kinds of empirical observations. First, thus far the complementizer the is
unique to CCs. We would be fortunate if this complementizer could be found in other
types of expressions in English. Second, no other language for which CCs have so
far been documented begins both clauses with what looks like a deﬁnite determiner
94
Heather Lee Taylor

(but see Beck [1997] for a proposal that German je and umso/desto can be glossed
as “the,” and Roehrs, Sprouse, and Wermter [2002] for a more lengthy discussion of
the contrast between these two lexical items in comparative correlatives). However,
if another language used a lexical item that was unique to CCs, this would suggest
that the relatively unique lexical item the of English CCs is not so ad hoc. As it turns
out, both of these bolsters exist.
The Complementizer the in Other Expressions in English
The examples in (31) are named nominal extraposition (NE) by Michaelis and Lam-
brecht (1996), who examined the data in detail. The sentences appear to consist of a
saturated expression (It’s amazing/perfect/sickening), followed by head noun and a rel-
ative clause, as evidenced by the data in (32). But if the apparent relative clauses in
(31) are indeed relative clauses, this constitutes a problem for the selectional proper-
ties of the predicates that precede them. Normally, the predicates amazing, perfect, and
sickening subcategorize for a CP, as in (33). If the predicate is followed by a nominal
other than the apparent relative clauses in (31), the result is unacceptable, as in (34).
(31) a. It’s amazing the people you see here these days
b. It’s perfect the way the sun sets in the winter
c. It was sickening the amount of waste there was
(32) a. [The people you see here these days] are weird
b. [The way the sun sets in the winter] is beautiful
c. Please give me a report of [the amount of waste there was]
(33) a. It’s amazing [CPthat [we survived]]
b. It’s perfect [CPthat [the weather cooperated]]
c. It was sickening [CPthat [the waste was so excessive]]
(34) a. * It’s amazing the people/that person/those people/a person/some people
b. * It’s perfect the way/that way/those ways/a way/some ways
c. * It was sickening the amount/that amount/those amounts/an amount/some
amount
If we treat the the at the start of these apparent nominals as a complementizer,
then these clauses are CP complements of the predicates. It is not that the predicates
amazing, perfect, and sickening in NEs have taken a complement other than CP, or
that a relative clause has been right dislocated; rather, the predicates in NEs have taken
a CP complement just as they do in expressions like (32). Further evidence that the
word strings beginning with the in (31a) through (31c) are CPs comes from NEs that
take other kinds of CPs, such as (35), and Michaelis and Lambrecht’s (1996) virtu-
ally synonymous examples (32a) and (32b), reproduced here as (36a) and (36b).4
(35) It was sickening [how much waste there was]
(36) a. It’s amazing [what things children say]
b. It’s amazing [the things children say]
95
THE COMPLEMENTIZER THE

Cross-linguistically, we see many languages (Dutch, Spanish, Brazilian Portuguese,
and Latin, as reported by den Dikken [2005], for example) use a morpheme mean-
ing “how much/how more” to introduce the adjunct clause of a CC. Russian and Turk-
ish introduce the ﬁrst clause with a similar type of string—a wh-item corresponding
to what  much is used [see (41) and (42)].
(37)
Dutch
Hoe meer je
leest, hoe meer je
begrijpt
How more you read how more you understand
“The more you read, the more you understand”
(38)
Spanish
Cuantos
Más problemas resolvió Joan, mejor puntuación recibió
How-much more problems solved
Joan better score
she-received
“The more problems Joan solved, the better score she received”
(39)
Br. Portuguese
Quanto
mais problemas a
Joana resolve, melhores notas ela recebe
How-much more problems the Joana solves
better
scores she receives
“The more problems Joan solved the better score she received”
(40)
Latin5
Quanto
in pectore hanc rem
meo magis voluto, tanto
mi 
How-much-ABL in heart
this matter my more ponder that-much-ABL me 
aegritudo auctior est in animo
grief
greater is in spirit
“The more I turn this matter over in my mind, the greater grief is in my soul”
(41)
Russian
Chem
bol’she vina,
tem
veseleye
What-INST more
wine-GEN that-INST merrier
“The more wine, the merrier”
(42)
Turkish
Ne
kadar rahatla-r-
sa-
k, o kadar vakit kaybed- er-
iz
what much relax
aorist COND. 1P it much time lose-
aorist 1P
“The more we relax, the more we waste time”
Unique Lexical Items in Languages Other Than English
In Basque CCs, two lexical items, gero and eta, appear together and introduce both
clauses of the CCs, as in (43). Gero eta is unique to CCs. Elsewhere in Basque, gero
and eta appear independent of one another—gero is an adverb meaning “after,” and
eta is a conjunction meaning “and.” Within CCs the two words must both be pres-
ent, and they must be adjacent; to restate, nothing can intervene between the two in
96
Heather Lee Taylor

a CC, and neither gero nor eta can occur alone in the CC. Yet there is nothing com-
positional about the lexical items that would render a meaning in the CC equivalent
to that of “the more” in English. This suggests that Basque speakers treat the gero
eta in CCs as a single lexical item and one that exists only in CCs.
(43)
Basque
Gero eta Jonek
sagar gehiago bildu, gero eta pastel gehiago egiten 
CC
John-ERG apples more
pick, CC
pies
more
did
zituen
bere amak
AUX-TRNS-PAST his mom-ERG
“The more apples John picked, the more pies his mother baked”
Conclusion
This chapter has largely looked at the microsyntax of one speciﬁc word, the, in Eng-
lish comparative correlatives. But from this investigation of one small lexical item,
the syntactic structure of this type of expression can be understood as very similar
to other expressions in the grammar. Further, another unusual type of expression, nom-
inal extrapositions, can also be analyzed without proposing anything special within
the grammar. From this analysis, the question arises as to what it means for a single
lexical item to have two different category types. Semantic analyses of the deﬁnite
determiner have encoded features such as maximality and uniqueness, and perhaps
these features are part of the compositional semantics of comparative correlatives.
Work on this question as it relates to these data and elsewhere in the grammar re-
mains to be investigated.
NOTES
1. The languages thus far are Maltese (Beck 1997), Standard Arabic (Taylor 2006), Berber (den Dikken
2005), Hebrew (Beck 1997), Turkish (Taylor 2006), Khalkha Mongolian (den Dikken 2005), Basque
(Taylor 2006), Malayalam (Taylor 2006), Spanish (Taylor 2006; Abeillé, Borsley, and Espinal 2006),
Italian (Taylor 2006), Portuguese (Brazilian and European) (Taylor 2006), French (den Dikken 2005;
Beck 1997; Abeillé, Borsley, and Espinal 2006), Latin (Michaelis 1994; den Dikken 2005), German
(McCawley 1988; Beck 1997; Roehrs, Sprouse, and Wermter 2002; den Dikken 2005), Dutch (Beck
1997; den Dikken 2005), Danish (Beck 1997), Swedish (Culicover and Jackendoff 1999), Russian
(Beck 1997; den Dikken 2005), Polish (Borsley 2003; den Dikken 2005), Bulgarian (Beck 1997),
Greek (Taylor 2006), Hindi (den Dikken 2005; Taylor 2006), Japanese (den Dikken 2005; Taylor
2006), Korean (Beck 1997), Mandarin Chinese (McCawley 1988), and Hungarian (Beck 1997; den
Dikken 2005).
2. For more extensive discussion of this point, see Taylor (2006) and Taylor (unpublished manuscript).
3. This FocP was simply “FP” in prior writings by this author, meaning “functional projection.” How-
ever, there is evidence from Greek that this functional projection is indeed a Focus projection
(Kapetangianni and Taylor 2007). I follow the analysis in that paper and assume that this functional
projection in English in FocP, just as it is in Greek.
4. Michaelis and Lambrecht (1996) provide these examples to contrast NEs with Right Dislocation,
such as (i-a) and (i-b).
(i) a. ✓They’re amazing, the things children say.
b. * They’re amazing, what things children say.
Despite the presence of the examples in (9a) and (9b) in their paper, they do not consider the possi-
bility that the is a complementizer rather than a determiner.
97
THE COMPLEMENTIZER THE

5. This example is originally given by Michaelis (1994) and is repeated as example (10) by den Dikken
(2005).
REFERENCES
Abeillé, Anne, Robert Borsley, and Maria-Teresa Espinal. 2006. The syntax of comparative correlatives
in French and Spanish. In Proceedings of the HPSG06 conference, ed. Stefan Müller, 6–26. Bulgar-
ian Academy of Sciences, Varna, Bulgaria: CSLI Publications.
Adger, David, and Gillian Ramchand. 2003. Predication and equation. Linguistic Inquiry 34:325–59.
Beck, Sigrid. 1997. On the semantics of comparative conditionals. Linguistics and Philosophy 20:229–71.
Borsley, Robert. 2003. On the Polish periphery: Comparative correlatives in Polish. In GLiP-5: Proceed-
ings of ﬁfth Generative Linguistics in Poland conference, ed. Piotr Banski and Adam Przepiórkowski,
15–28. Warsaw: Polish Academy of Science.
Bresnan, Joan. 1973. Syntax of the comparative clause construction in English. Linguistic Inquiry
4:275–343.
Culicover, Peter, and Ray Jackendoff. 1999. The view from the periphery: The English comparative cor-
relative. Linguistic Inquiry 30:543–71.
———. 2005. Simpler syntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dikken, Marcel den. 2005. Comparative correlatives comparatively. Linguistic Inquiry 36:497–532.
Kapentangianni, Konstantia, and Heather Lee Taylor. 2007. Comparative correlatives in Greek: The syn-
tax of oso. Presented at Workshop on Greek Syntax and Semantics, at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, May 20–22. http://the-source.dlp.mit.edu:16080/greeksynsym/papers/Kapetangianni_
Taylor.pdf (accessed August 23, 2008).
Kennedy, Christopher. 1997. Projecting the adjective: The syntax and semantics of gradability and com-
parison. PhD diss., University of California, Santa Cruz.
Kennedy, Christopher, and Jason Merchant. 2000. Attributive comparative deletion. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory 18:89–146.
McCawley, James. 1988. The comparative conditional constructions in English, German and Chinese. In
Proceedings of the fourteenth annual meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, ed. Shelly Axmaker,
Annie Jaiser, and Helen Singmaster, 176–87. Berkeley: University of California, Berkeley,
Michaelis, Laura. 1994. A case of constructional polysemy in Latin. Studies in Language 18 (1): 45–70.
Michaelis, Laura, and Knud Lambrecht. 1996. Toward a construction-based theory of language function:
The case of nominal extraposition. Language 72:215–47.
Roehrs, Dorian, Rex Sprouse, and Joachim Wermter. 2002. The difference between desto and umso: Some
mysteries of the German comparative correlative. Interdisciplinary Journal for Germanic Linguis-
tics and Semiotic Analysis 7:15–25.
Taylor, Heather Lee. 2006. Out on good syntactic behavior. Generals paper, University of Maryland, Col-
lege Park. http://www.ling.umd.edu/htaylor/Taylor_895.pdf (accessed June 2006).
———. Unpublished manuscript. Moving out of adjuncts. University of Maryland at College Park.
98
Heather Lee Taylor

9
What Is There When Little Words 
Are Not There?
Possible Implications for Evolutionary Studies
LJILJANA PROGOVAC
Wayne State University
THE GOAL OF THIS CHAPTER is to provide a theoretical argument, using the tools of the syn-
tactic framework of minimalism (e.g., Chomsky 1995), that certain small clauses (syn-
tactic objects with no or few “little words”), which can be found in root contexts as
well as in other unexpected uses, may represent “living fossils” from a root small-
clause stage in language evolution (see Jackendoff 2002 for the idea of syntactic fos-
sils). In addition to the root small-clause stage, the clausal development may also have
gone through a protocoordination stage, on its way to developing speciﬁc functional
categories. These claims are consistent with (a) a syntactic analysis of what counts
as an increase in complexity, (b) well-known grammaticalization processes, (c) “liv-
ing fossil” evidence, and (d) stages in language acquisition. Not only does this ap-
proach help situate syntax in an evolutionary framework, but it also sheds light on
some crucial aspects of syntax itself, as will be shown.
Grammar without Little Words: Root Small Clauses
Consider the following utterances with no (or almost no) little words [(1), (3), and
(5)], rarely discussed in the syntactic literature, and compare them with full ﬁnite
counterparts [(2), (4), and (6)]. (In this chapter I only consider small clauses with one
argument, in order to abstract away from the factor of transitivity, which involves an
additional layer of morphosyntactic structure.)
Mad Magazine/incredulity clauses
(Akmajian 1984)
(1)
a) Him retire!?
b) John worry?!
c) Her happy?!
Cf. (2) a) He is going to retire.
b) John worries.
c) She is happy.
“Irrealis” clauses expressing wishes/commands
(3)
Me ﬁrst!/Family ﬁrst!/Everybody out!
Cf. (4) I am ﬁrst./Family should be ﬁrst./Everybody must go out.
Clauses anchored in a context (e.g., here-and-now, photograph, etc.)
99

(5)
Class in session./Problem solved./Case closed./Me in Rome.
Cf. (6) The class is in session./The problem is solved./The case is closed./I am in
Rome.
In contrast to the corresponding ﬁnite sentences, the clauses in (1), (3), and (5) show
no evidence of tense or nominative case checking: The verb is either entirely absent
or surfaces in a nonﬁnite form, while the pronouns exhibit default (accusative) case
in English (Akmajian 1984; see also Roeper 1999 and Schütze 2001 for default
grammars/default case). In the spirit of the widely accepted analysis of embedded
small clauses proposed by Stowell (1983), adopted in Chomsky (1995), and in the
spirit of Barton’s (1990) approach to nonsententials in general, Progovac (2006) an-
alyzes (1), (3), and (5) as tenseless root small clauses (RootSCs), where the seman-
tic consequence of no tense is argued to be the prevalence of nonindicative/irrealis
interpretations among such clauses [(1), (3)].1
This approach explains why RootSC subjects in (5) occur without articles, which
are obligatory in full sentential counterparts (6): The absence of articles in this case
signals the absence of a determiner phrase (DP), reinforcing the idea that RootSCs
do not check structural case. In current syntactic theory DP is required for structural
case checking (e.g., Longobardi 1994). In other words, the realizations of RootSC
syntax illustrated earlier are shorter by at least two categories of little words, in com-
parison to their full sentential counterparts: tense bearers (including copulas and ﬁ-
nite auxiliary verbs) and articles.
Moreover, small clauses with default case subjects cannot embed (are not recur-
sive), providing a challenge for the hypothesis put forth in, for example, Chomsky
(2005) and Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch (2002) that Merge alone can account for all
the recursive power of language (see Pinker and Jackendoff 2005 for a reply).
(7) a) *Him worry [me ﬁrst]?!/b) *I consider [case closed]./c)*I want [problem
solved].
Notice that the embedded clauses in (7b) and (7c) would become grammatical if an
article were used, suggesting that they check structural case, the so-called exceptional
case marking (ECM). Appropriate functional categories/projections/relations need to
be available in order to license embedding of any kind, whether an ECM mechanism
for small clauses, or complementizer phrase (CP) for ﬁnite subordination (see Pro-
govac 2007b for elaboration; also Deutscher 2000 and references cited there; Progo-
vac et al. 2006). I return to this issue later in the chapter.
In sum, small clauses are found both as embedded ECM complements, with
structurally case-marked subjects, and as RootSCs, whose subjects carry default case
(no case). The next section speculates on the reasons for the existence of small clauses
in general, and of RootSCs in particular.
Evolutionary Perspective
It is often assumed that syntax is all or nothing, the stand summarized in the follow-
ing quote from Berwick (1998, 338–39; see also Bickerton 1998): “In this sense, there
is no possibility of an ‘intermediate’syntax between a non-combinatorial one and full
100
Ljiljana Progovac

natural language—one either has Merge in all its generative glory, or one has no com-
binatorial syntax at all.” However, if my analysis of RootSCs is correct, then a co-
herent grammar with much less syntactic complexity than full sentential grammar is
not only possible but also is still in relatively productive use (see Progovac 2007a on
how syntactic complexity can be measured and how it can evolve). Indeed, the exis-
tence of RootSCs opens up a possibility to consider the evolution of syntax in a grad-
ualist fashion, in the spirit of Pinker and Bloom (1990).
In this perspective, one can see RootSCs as “living fossils” from an evolution-
ary stage of syntax dominated by RootSCs (see Jackendoff 2002 for the idea of a syn-
tactic fossil). Ridley (1993, 525) deﬁnes “living fossils” as species that have changed
little from their fossil ancestors in the distant past, such as lungﬁsh, and that have
continued to coexist with more complex species. What I consider here to be preserved
is the RootSC syntax, and our ability to tap into it, rather than particular details of
modern-day realizations of such syntax. For example, while the absence of structural
case is the deﬁning property of this grammar, the particular realizations of non-case-
marked subjects will vary across languages.
Initial plausibility for a RootSC evolutionary stage comes exactly from the ex-
istence of these living fossils found in modern-day languages (more realizations of
such fossilized syntax will be discussed in the following sections). Further corrobo-
rating evidence comes from language acquisition. The so-called two-word stage in
ﬁrst language (L1) acquisition abounds in subject–predicate utterances that can be
analyzed as RootSCs, as well as by probable absence of Move(ment) (see, e.g.,
Lebeaux 1989; Ouhalla 1993; Platzak 1990; Potts and Roeper 2006; Radford 1990).2
Lock and Peters (1996) conclude that recent views on the relationship between on-
togeny and phylogeny permit using ontogeny to corroborate evolutionary inferences.
Furthermore, the emergence of tense/tense phrase (TP) in children parallels the
historical development (grammaticalization) of tense/indicative from injunctive in
pre–Indo-European (Progovac 2006). According to Kiparsky (1968), the unmarked
tense/mood form, injunctive, was initially able to express both indicative and non-
indicative meanings, but once tense and indicative emerged in pre-IE, injunctive spe-
cialized only for nonindicative/irrealis readings. This indicates not only that it is
possible to proceed from a pre-TP stage to a TP stage but also that this developmen-
tal scenario can lead to the division of labor in mood expression that is attested to-
day in adult speech between RootSCs and their ﬁnite counterparts.
Suppose now that functional projections (e.g., aspect, light verb phrase (vP)
shell for transitivity, tense) started to be added over the layer of the small-clause core,
perhaps in order to make precise the hierarchy of thematic roles through case rela-
tions, as well as to render the expression of time and truth automatic and precise. In
this sense, the layers of more recently emerged functional projections were superim-
posed over the layers of more ancient structures, letting the latter survive but in mar-
ginalized roles. Similar stratification accounts have been proposed for brain
development, as well as for the development of complexity in general, where newly
emerged patterns become dominant and “rework” older patterns into conformity with
them (see Rolfe’s [1996] “recency dominance”; also Vygotsky 1981). This idea of
evolutionary layering of syntax is explored further in Progovac (2007a). The next two
101
WHAT IS THERE WHEN LITTLE WORDS ARE NOT THERE?

sections extend the evolutionary perspective to shed light on the existence of small
clauses elsewhere.
Why Every Sentence Begins as a Small Clause
It is a remarkable discovery on the part of linguists, and a recent one, too, that every
sentence in its underlying representation is in fact a small clause, which gets trans-
formed into a sentence only upon subsequent merger of tense and/or other compara-
ble functional projections (see, e.g., Burzio 1981; Chomsky 1995; Kitagawa 1986;
Koopman and Sportiche 1991; Stowell 1981). For example, the sentence with a cop-
ular verb such as “John is tall” derives from the underlying small clause “John tall,”
where the subject “John” moves from the subject position of the small clause to the
speciﬁer position of the sentence (TP):
(8) [TP is [SC John tall]]. →[TP John [T’ is [SC t tall]]]
Similarly, as illustrated in (9), the sentence/TP “He will worry” starts out as a small
clause “He worry,” which gets transformed into a full sentence (TP) only upon the
merger of Tense (“will”) and upon the subsequent Move of “he” into the speciﬁer of
TP to check nominative case:
(9) [TP will [SC he worry]]. →[TP he [T’ will [SC t worry]]]
Notice that the verb worry is selected without any tense or case features here.
Parker (2006, 285) raises the question of why one should have Move in the syn-
tactic theory, in addition to Merge, given that even in the minimalist framework Move
is considered to be more costly than Merge. This question can be related to that of
why every sentence should begin as a small clause in the ﬁrst place. But if the small
clause core of the sentence can be seen as a vestige of the evolutionary tinkering with
building sentential structure, then Move can be seen as a force that connects differ-
ent layers of sentential derivation, as determined by such evolutionary tinkering. In
other words, the building of the sentence bottom up, from small clause to TP, may be
seen, metaphorically, as retracing the steps of the evolutionary development of the
sentence. Neither bottom-up sentence building, nor small-clausal beginnings of the
sentence, nor Move would then need to be considered as conceptual necessities.
Why There Are Bare Small Clauses in Parataxis/Adjunction
and Coordination
In addition to the root contexts, bare small clauses (i.e., small clauses whose subjects
are not structurally case marked, in contrast to ECM small clauses) are also found
with parataxis/adjunction and with coordination, exhibiting similar morphosyntactic
properties as RootSCs, including the lack of tense and the lack of structural case on
subjects.
Even though, as pointed out in the ﬁrst section, bare small clauses do not em-
bed within each other, they can participate in loose, typically binary paratactic com-
binations, usually found in proverbs or wisdoms:
(10) Nothing ventured, nothing gained./Easy come, easy go.
102
Ljiljana Progovac

When two small clauses combine paratactically in this fashion, they appear to be on
an “equal footing” with respect to each other, and their relationship is then interpreted
as one of temporal ordering and/or causation, expressed iconically by the relative or-
dering of the two clauses. On the other hand, when a bare small clause attaches para-
tactically to a finite sentence/TP, such a small clause is perceived as an
adverbial/adjunct, which again usually receives temporal/causal interpretation, as in
(11) and (12) (these are discussed in Jackendoff [2002] to suggest a possible pre-TP
stage in the evolution of human language):
(11) [Us having left], he reverted to his old ways.
(12) [Him having gone to Rome], I can now focus on my work.
However, the interpretation in this case is no longer determined by the relative or-
dering of the two clauses but is at least partly determined by their grammatical sta-
tus: The ﬁnite clause is the main clause regardless of the order.
Bare small clauses also occur coordinated with full ﬁnite clauses, again in posi-
tions in which their subjects have no way of receiving structural case (example from
Jespersen 1954):
(13) I am not going to have any woman rummaging about my house, and [me in bed].
Examples such as these would be characterized as involving “unlike coordination,”
violating the coordination of likes constraint (CLC), the principle that allows only
phrases/clauses of the same type to coordinate (see, e.g., Chomsky 1957). It may well
be that this unexpected coordination possibility is yet another example of vestigial
treatment of small clauses as root clausal objects. The following section discusses pos-
sible stages in the evolutionary development of clauses, which include not only para-
tactic RootSC stage but also a protocoordination stage.
Possible Stages in the Evolution of Clauses: 
Multiple Breakthroughs
The grammaticalization of ﬁnite subordination typically takes parataxis as a starting
point and proceeds through a(n intermediate) coordination stage (see, e.g., Deutscher
2000; Traugott and Heine 1991, and references cited there). Here I tentatively sug-
gest that predication/clause may also have gone through a similar sequence of stages
in its evolutionary development: RootSC stage, protocoordination stage, and then a
speciﬁc functional category stage, as illustrated below. This sequence constitutes a
progression from least syntactically integrated (parataxis), to more integrated (coor-
dination), to most integrated (specialized functional categories/projections).
Parataxis with Intonation/Prosody: Suprasegmental Glue
If the presyntax stage of language (protolanguage, in the sense of Bickerton [1998])
utilized only single-word utterances, then the ﬁrst syntactic stage may have combined
two such utterances into a meaningful two-word utterance (see, e.g., Deutscher 2005;
Jackendoff 2002). Such initial combinations may not have 5 distinguished from a se-
quence of one-word utterances by much more than prosody. Nonetheless this ability
103
WHAT IS THERE WHEN LITTLE WORDS ARE NOT THERE?

to Merge would have marked a great breakthrough in the evolution of language—it
would have made possible a more precise expression of relationships between
words/concepts.
(14) Presyntax: John. Happy./Me. First. Syntax: John happy./Me ﬁrst!
According to Burling (2005, 170), intonation/prosody likely served as the ﬁrst type
of glue to hold two words together in a single utterance. Interrogatives in English can
still be expressed either solely by prosody [rising intonation (15a)] or by both rising
intonation and “rising syntax” [the raising to C, in (15b)], resulting in substantial re-
dundancy:3
(15) a. Mary is already at home?
b. Is Mary already at home?
There are reasons to believe that intonation and prosody were available before
syntax. Piattelli-Palmarini and Uriagereka (2004, 354) mention that intonation,
prosody, and emphasis, which are modulated analogically rather than discretely, have
nonnegligible analogs in other species (see also Burling 2005; Deacon 1997; Pulver-
müller 2002, and references cited there). Moreover, while lesions in certain left-
hemispheric areas of the brain cause severe language impairments, right-hemispheric
lesions usually lead to more subtle language-related difficulties affecting prosodic and
pragmatic processing (Joanette, Goulet, and Hannequin 1990, 40).
Deacon (1997, 234) points out that vocal communication has inherited many fea-
tures of a partly automatic, partly controllable motor system, so that most speech
sounds involve both muscle systems: automatic and controlled. Most tonal variation
plays a paralinguistic role in speech prosody, and most of this occurs subconsciously
and automatically with the corresponding shifts in affect. “It is as though we haven’t
so much shifted control from visceral to voluntary means but superimposed one upon
the other” (Deacon 1997, 244, emphasis added). This situation in phonology is rem-
iniscent of the idea of the layering of grammar, where the layer of TP gets superim-
posed upon a layer of small clause, a more primary structure.
Note in this respect that irrealis small clauses in (1) and (3) are characterized by
exaggerated intonation.
Coordination:All-Purpose Segmental Glue
Here, I tentatively explore the possibility that, just as seems to be the case with ﬁnite
subordination, predication may have gone through a coordination stage, that is, a stage
in which the subject and the predicate were connected with more than just supraseg-
mental glue (prosody). Suppose that Merge was so advantageous to language users
that it was beneﬁcial to signal it redundantly and robustly, not only by relatively tran-
sient prosodic cues but also by a segment dedicated solely to that purpose, a proto-
coordinator. It could have been only much later that this all-purpose glue got
differentiated into speciﬁc functional categories and projections, such as tense, as-
pect, and so on (see next section).
In fact, in some languages one still ﬁnds vestiges (“living fossils”) of coordina-
tors in predicative functions. For example, the incredulity clauses in German can op-
tionally feature a conjunction (Potts and Roeper 2006; see also Progovac et al. 2006):
104
Ljiljana Progovac

(16) Ich (und) Angst haben?!
I
and fear
have-INF
“Me afraid?!”
Next, Deutscher (2000, 33–34) argued that Akkadian (Semitic language spoken be-
tween c. 2500 to 500 BC) used the coordinative particle ma in predicative functions (17).
There was no verbal copula in Akkadian, which may imply the use of root small clauses.
(17) Napisˇtsti ma¯t-im      eql-um-ma
soul.of    land-GEN ﬁeld-NOM-MA
“The soul of the land is the ﬁeld.”
Thus both German and Akkadian can use a coordinator to connect the subject with
the predicate.
Moreover, Bowers (1993) analyzes English as as a realization of the head of
Pr(edication) P(hrase), which is used in embedded small clauses (18):
(18) She regards [Mary as a fool]./She regards [Mary as crazy].
English as (as well as Akkadian ma) can serve not only to cement predication (inter-
clausally) (18) but also as coordinator connecting clauses (19):
(19) Peter will come to the party, as will John./As she was approaching, the door
opened.
The emergence of this kind of protocoordinator would have provided another cru-
cial breakthrough in the development of the clause: a little word without much mean-
ing of its own but that would have performed an important function in solidifying the
advantages of the ﬁrst major syntactic breakthrough—Merge.
Some corroborating evidence for a protocoordination stage may come from lan-
guage acquisition, but much further research is needed to substantiate the plausibil-
ity of this idea. It is frequently reported in acquisition literature that some children
use “ﬁllers” in places where one would expect functional categories. While researchers
sometimes attribute the presence of these ﬁllers to the presence of speciﬁc functional
categories, a more conservative approach may be that these are just all-purpose con-
nectors (protocoordinators), serving to connect words into utterances (see, e.g., Pe-
ters and Menn 1993; Veneziano and Sinclair 2000, and references cited there).
According to these researchers, the ﬁllers are vocalizations that do not correspond to
particular words/morphemes and that initially seem to range over various kinds of
functional categories/positions. It is only later that they differentiate and specialize,
starting to occur in speciﬁc positions. Such ﬁllers are often a syllabic nasal [m] or an
ə, as the following example illustrates (Peters and Menn 1993):
(20) [m] pick [ђ] ﬂowers. (English learning boy, age 1;6)
Speciﬁc Functional Category Stage
Finally, such protocoordinators (such as ma or as) could have then differentiated/gram-
maticalized into speciﬁc functional categories, such as predication head, tense head,
105
WHAT IS THERE WHEN LITTLE WORDS ARE NOT THERE?

aspect head, and so on. This would have constituted another syntactic breakthrough
and the beginning of modern syntax, which can now not only use little words as all-
purpose glue to connect words/clauses but also use them to build specialized func-
tional projections, introducing a variety of specialized grammatical meanings.
According to Chomsky (2005) and Hauser et al. (2002), the principle of Merge
was the only important evolutionary breakthrough for syntax: Once Merge was in-
troduced, it was able to apply recursively and to account for all recursion, including
subordination. My proposal here is that additional breakthroughs (and intermediate
stages) were necessary to lead to modern syntax, including possibly the one that pro-
vided all-purpose segmental glue (protocoordination) and the one that provided spe-
cialized functional glue with which to build specialized functional projections. One
such specialized functional breakthrough would have been the development of ﬁnite
subordination, the emergence of the CP layer, yet another layer of structure over the
TP domain.
There are (at least) two reasons to consider such gradual emergence of syntax
in evolution: well-deﬁned stages in language acquisition and living fossils, as dis-
cussed in this chapter, which in fact are not subject to syntactic subordination (see
Progovac 2007a, 2007b for additional reasons).
Concluding Remarks
This evolutionary approach, which sees small clauses as vestiges/“living fossils” of
the evolutionary development of syntax, not only makes it possible to situate syntax
in a gradualist evolutionary framework (in the spirit of Pinker and Bloom 1990) but
also begins to shed light on the very nature of syntax. First of all, it can explain why
bare small clauses (small clauses with default case subjects) are found in root con-
texts, as well as with coordination and parataxis/adjunction. This approach also pro-
vides some rationale for the otherwise unexpected ﬁnding in theoretical syntax that
every sentence is built upon a layer of small clause. Decomposing/unpacking syntax
into simpler (evolutionary) stages/layers may also derive some subjacency effects, as
I argue elsewhere (Progovac 2007b).
In this approach, it was the little words, or more precisely their gradual gram-
maticalization, that enabled humans to avail themselves of complex syntax, rather than
the other way around.
NOTES
Thanks to the Wayne State University Humanities Center for the travel grant to pursue this project. For
many good comments and discussions regarding various ideas in this paper, I am very grateful to Martha
Ratliff, Relja Vulanovic´, Eugenia Casielles, Ellen Barton, Kate Paesani, Pat Siple, David Gil, Dan Seeley,
Natasha Kondrashova. My thanks also to the audiences at 2007 GURT; 2007 ILA, New York; 2007 Max
Planck Workshop on Complexity, Leipzig; 2007 ISU Conference on Recursion; and 2007 FASL, Stony
Brook, especially Rafaella Zanuttini, Richard Kayne, Eric Reuland, John Locke, Tecumseh Fitch, Stephanie
Harves, and Ken Saﬁr. All errors are mine.
1. But see Cardinaletti and Guasti (1995) for alternative views of small clauses.
2. For references and discussion of alternative views, see, e.g., Guasti (2002).
3. Also, focus and topic/comment in English are rarely signaled by syntactic movement but typically
solely by prosody.
106
Ljiljana Progovac

REFERENCES
Akmajian, Adrian. 1984. Sentence types and the form-function ﬁt. Natural Language and Linguistic The-
ory 2:1–23.
Barton, Ellen. 1990. Nonsentential constituents: A theory of grammatical structure and pragmatic inter-
pretation. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Berwick, Robert C. 1998. Language evolution and the minimalist program: The origins of syntax. In Ap-
proaches to the evolution of language: Social and cognitive bases, ed. James R. Hurford, Michael
Studdert-Kennedy, and Chris Knight, 320–40. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bickerton, Derek. 1998. Catastrophic evolution: The case for a single step from protolanguage to full hu-
man language. In Approaches to the evolution of language: Social and cognitive bases, ed. James
R. Hurford, Michael Studdert-Kennedy, and Chris Knight, 341–58. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Bowers, John. 1993. The syntax of predication. Linguistic Inquiry 24:591–656.
Burling, Robbins. 2005. The talking ape: How language evolved. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burzio, Luigi. 1981. Intransitive verbs and Italian auxiliaries. PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Cardinaletti, Anna, and Maria Teresa Guasti, eds. 1995. Syntax and semantics 28: Small clauses. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Chomsky, Noam. 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
———. 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 2005. Three factors in language design. Linguistic Inquiry 36:1–22.
Deacon, Terrence W. 1997. The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the brain. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Deutscher, Guy. 2000. Syntactic change in Akkadian: The evolution of sentential complementation. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2005. The unfolding of language: An evolutionary tour of mankind’s greatest invention. New York:
Henry Holt.
Guasti, Maria Teresa. 2002. Language acquisition: The growth of grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Hauser, Marc, Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch. 2002. The language faculty: What is it, who has
it, and how did it evolve? Science 298:1569–79.
Jackendoff, Ray. 2002. Foundations of language: Brain, meaning, grammar, evolution. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Jespersen, Otto. 1954. A modern English grammar. Part III, Syntax. London: Allen and Unwin.
Joanette, Yves, Pierre Goulet, and Didier Hannequin. 1990. Right hemisphere and verbal communication.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1968. Tense and mood in Indo-European syntax. Foundations of Language 4:30–57.
Kitagawa, Yoshihisa. 1986. Subjects in English and Japanese. PhD diss., University of Massachusetts,
Amherst.
Koopman, Hilda, and Dominique Sportiche. 1991. The position of subjects. Lingua 85:211–58.
Lebeaux, David. 1989. Language acquisition and the form of the grammar. PhD diss., University of Mass-
achusetts, Amherst.
Lock, Andrew, and Charles R. Peters, eds. 1996. Handbook of human symbolic evolution. Oxford: Claren-
don Press.
Longobardi, Giuseppe. 1994. Reference and proper names: A theory of N-Movement in syntax and logi-
cal form. Linguistic Inquiry 25:609–65.
Ouhalla, Jamal. 1993. Functional categories, agrammatism and language acquisition. Linguistiche Berichte
143:3–36.
Parker, Anna R. 2006. Evolution as a constraint on theories of syntax: The case against minimalism. PhD
diss., University of Edinburgh.
Peters, Ann M., and Lise Menn. 1993. False starts and ﬁller syllables: Ways to learn grammatical mor-
phemes. Language 69:742–77.
Piattelli-Palmarini, Massimo, and Juan Uriagereka. 2004. Immune syntax: The evolution of the language
virus. In Variation and universals in biolinguistics, ed. Lyle Jenkins, 341–77. Oxford: Elsevier.
107
WHAT IS THERE WHEN LITTLE WORDS ARE NOT THERE?

Pinker, Steven, and Paul Bloom. 1990. Natural language and natural selection. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences 13:707–84.
Pinker, Steven, and Ray Jackendoff. 2005. The faculty of language: What’s special about it? Cognition
95:201–36.
Platzak, Christer. 1990. A grammar without functional categories: A syntactic study of early child lan-
guage. Nordic Journal of Linguistics 13:107–26.
Potts, Christopher, and Tom Roeper. 2006. The narrowing acquisition path: From expressive small clauses
to declaratives. In The syntax of nonsententials: Multidisciplinary perspectives, ed. Ljiljana Progo-
vac, Kate Paesani, Eugenia Casielles, and Ellen Barton, 183–201. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Progovac, Ljiljana. 2006. The syntax of nonsententials: Small clauses and phrases at the root. In The syn-
tax of nonsententials: Multidisciplinary perspectives, ed. Ljiljana Progovac, Kate Paesani, Eugenia
Casielles, and Ellen Barton, 33–71. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
———. 2007a. Layering of grammar: Vestiges of evolutionary development of syntax in modern-day lan-
guages. Presented at the Workshop on Language Complexity as an Evolving Variable, Max Planck,
Leipzig, April 2007.
———. 2007b. When clauses refuse to be recursive: An evolutionary perspective. Presented at the ISU
Conference on Recursion in Human Languages, Normal, IL, April.
Progovac, Ljiljana, Kate Paesani, Eugenia Casielles, and Ellen Barton, eds. 2006. The syntax of nonsen-
tentials: Multidisciplinary perspectives. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Pulvermüller, Friedemann. 2002. The neuroscience of language: On brain circuits of words and serial or-
der. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Radford, Andrew. 1990. Syntactic theory and the acquisition of English syntax. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ridley, Mark. 1993. Evolution. Oxford: Blackwell Scientiﬁc.
Roeper, Thomas 1999. Universal bilingualism. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 2 (3): 169–86.
Rolfe, Leonard. 1996. Theoretical stages in the prehistory of grammar. In Handbook of human symbolic
evolution, ed. Andrew Lock and Charles R. Peters, 776–92. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Schütze, T. Carson. 2001. On the nature of default case. Syntax 4 (3): 205–38.
Stowell, Timothy. 1981. Origins of phrase structure. PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
———. 1983. Subjects across categories. Linguistic Review 2–3:285–312.
Traugott, Elizabeth C., and Bernd Heine. 1991. Approaches to grammaticalization. Vol. 2, Typological stud-
ies in language 19. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Veneziano, Edy, and Hermine Sinclair. 2000. The changing status of “ﬁller syllables” on the way to gram-
matical morphemes. Journal of Child Language 27:461–500.
Vygotsky, Lev S. 1981. The genesis of higher mental functions. In The concept of activity in Soviet psy-
chology, ed. James V. Wertsch, 144–88. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
108
Ljiljana Progovac

10
Spanish Personal a and the Antidative
OMAR VELÁZQUEZ-MENDOZA AND RAÚL ARANOVICH
University of California, Davis
SPANISH IS OFTEN CONSIDERED to have ﬂexible word order. This ﬂexibility extends to the
relative placement of verbal complements in ditransitive clauses. A theme may pre-
cede a goal, appearing immediately to the right of the verb, as in (1a), or it may fol-
low the goal, as in (1b). There is, however, an intriguing restriction on word order
among complements. When the theme is a pronoun, the goal cannot be placed be-
tween the theme and the verb, as seen in (2).
(1) a. Miguel le entregó sus hijos a la niñera.
V-DO-IO
Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past his children to the nanny
“Miguel gave his children to the nanny.”
b. Miguel le entregó a la niñera sus hijos.
V-IO-DO
Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past to the nanny his children
“Miguel gave the nanny his children.”
(2) a. Miguel se los entregó a ellos a la niñera.
V-DOpro-IO
Miguel 3.sg.dat 3.pl.masc.acc give.past anim them.masc to the nanny
“Miguel gave them to the nanny.”
b. *Miguel se los entregó a la niñera a ellos.
*V-IO-DOpro
*Miguel 3.sg.dat 3.pl.masc.acc give.past to the nanny anim them.masc
“Miguel gave them to the nanny.”
In recent years, the theoretical status of dative arguments in Spanish has gener-
ated intense debate (Cuervo 2003; Demonte 1995). Some studies suggest that Span-
ish has a rule of dative shift (i.e., an applicative rule) similar to the one responsible
for the double object construction in English. While it may be tempting to attribute
the contrast between (2a) and (2b) to a restriction on the application of the applica-
tive rule, we argue instead that variations in word order among verbal complements
in Spanish ditransitives are the result of an antidative rule, following Dryer (1986).
According to this analysis, Spanish objects are sensitive to a distinction between pri-
mary object (PO) and secondary object (SO). The complement that is immediately
adjacent to the verb in ditransitives is a PO. The PO/SO distinction is also relevant
109

for the distribution of personal a, the syntactic particle that marks animate direct ob-
jects in Spanish. Personal a, we argue, cannot occur on SOs, and this is why pronom-
inal themes (which must bear the accusative marker a) are not allowed to appear after
the goal.
In this chapter, ﬁrst we introduce the applicative analysis of the English double
object construction and contrast such analysis with Dryer’s alternative approach. We
deﬁne the notions of PO and SO and then explain the antidative rule. Second, we show
how the antidative analysis accounts for word order variation in Spanish ditransitives
and how the notion of an SO is relevant for the distribution of personal a. Third, we
show that as a consequence of antidative pronominal themes cannot occur in the po-
sition that follows the goal in a ditransitive, thus accounting for the ungrammatical-
ity of (2b). The section that follows offers independent evidence in support of our
analysis, coming from a restriction on relativization in ditransitives. Fifth, we focus
on the analysis of alternations in Spanish ditransitives proposed in Cuervo (2003) and
highlight the differences between her approach and ours. This section is followed by
some concluding remarks.
Applicatives and Antidatives
In English there are pairs of sentences, such as those in (3a) and (3b), in which the
two arguments of a verb like give (theme and goal) occur in different conﬁgurations.
(3) a. John gave the book to Mary.
b. John gave Mary the book.
According to one analysis of these sentences (Larson 1988; Perlmutter and Postal
1983), the theme in (3a) is realized as a direct object (DO) and the goal as an indi-
rect object (IO) (marked by the preposition to). This is often referred to as the “di-
transitive” construction. (3b) is derived by a rule that promotes the IO to DO, placing
it right next to the verb (without the preposition to). The theme in (3b) is a “second
object” often analyzed as an adjunct. We will refer to this construction as the “dou-
ble object” construction.
In this chapter, however, we revisit a different approach to dative alternations,
which is proposed by Dryer (1986).1 In Dryer’s analysis, the double object construc-
tion has an IO (the goal) and a DO (the theme). English, being a primary object lan-
guage, characterizes its IO in a double object construction with the same
morphosyntactic feature as the DO in a monotransitive: immediate adjacency to the
verb. The DO in a double object construction is, then, an SO:
(4) John gave Mary the book.
S
IO
DO
PO
SO
A question remains, however, about the correspondence between (3a) and (3b).
Dryer suggests that there is still a correspondence between (3a) and (3b) but that the
rule relating the two is different: (3a) is the product of a rule (the antidative rule) that
promotes the SO to PO.
110
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich

For the SO to become a PO, a ditransitive clause has to turn into a monotransi-
tive. To achieve this, the goal has to be realized as an oblique in (3a). This is an im-
portant way in which Dryer’s analysis departs from the traditional views about English
ditransitives: the goal, introduced by the preposition to in (3a), is not a surface IO,
and the theme does not change its grammatical function in (3a) and (3b), remaining
as the DO in both cases. This is the essence of Dryer’s Antidative Hypothesis.
It is important for our purposes to highlight the pragmatic value of the PO/SO
contrast. Typically the IO is more topical than the DO, as it tends to be human or one
of the “local” persons (ﬁrst or second). In a ditransitive clause, then, an IO is less
topical than the canonical subject but more topical than the DO. Thus it follows that
the PO function is a grammaticalization of the “secondary topic” notion.
“Antidative” in Spanish
The relative word order of Spanish DOs and IOs is mostly free. Like English, Span-
ish word order in ditransitives allows for either the theme or the goal to immediately
follow the verb, as shown in (5).
(5) a. Miguel le entregó sus hijos a la niñera.
Miguel 3sg.dat give.past his children to the nanny
“Miguel gave his children to the nanny.”
b. Miguel le entregó a la niñera sus hijos.
Miguel 3sg.dat give.past to the nanny his children
“Miguel gave the nanny his children.”
Extending Dryer’s antidative analysis to Spanish, in this chapter we treat sentence
(5b) as basic and sentence (5a) as derived. The structure in (6) shows the relational
network of (5).
(6) a. P
S
SO
PO
----------------------------
entregar Miguel hijos niñera ( 5b)
b. P
S
SO
PO
P
S
PO
Obl
----------------------------
entregar Miguel hijos niñera ( 5a)
Our interpretation of the antidative analysis, now applied to Spanish ditransitives,
is that sentence (5a) is derived from (5b) by the antidative rule that places the origi-
nal PO in chômage, allowing for the promotion of the original SO in the initial stra-
tum as a PO in the ﬁnal stratum. As a consequence of that, the initial PO (a la niñera)
is demoted to oblique.2
Based on the representation of sentences (5a) and (5b) given in (6a) through (6b),
we claim that the antidative rule is responsible for the relative word order of the theme
and the goal. As noted earlier, we analyze the complement sus hijos in (5a) as a PO but
as an SO in (5b), and the argument a la niñera as a PO in (5b) and as an oblique in (5a).
In other words, we propose that the “basic” word order of Spanish ditransitives is
111
SPANISH PERSONAL a AND THE ANTIDATIVE

V-IO-DO and that the V-DO-IO order is derived. While the alternation has no effect on
grammatical relations, it changes the PO/SO status of the arguments: The complement
that directly follows the verb in ditransitive constructions is always a PO, but in derived
sentences (i.e., sentences of the V-DO-IO type), the goal is a demoted PO. Worth not-
ing is that antidative in English assigns a change in the grammatical functions of the
dative goal in derived sentences, whereas antidative in Spanish does not. This is why
the preposition to is included in obliques in English in derived sentences of the type
John gave the book to Mary, in which the goal is an oblique, and excluded in the ba-
sic order John gave Mary the book, in which the goal is a PO. Yet it seems appropriate
at this point to clarify the relationship between POs/SOs and DOs/IOs.
When Dryer introduces the notions of PO and SO, he initially deﬁnes them in
terms of the grammatical relations DO and IO—the PO is the DO in a monotransi-
tive clause and the IO in a ditransitive clause. But when he reevaluates the theoreti-
cal status of the PO and SO functions, he takes a different approach, stating that “it
may be better to view PO and SO as primitive notions on a pair with DO and IO, and
thus to use a principle relating the various primitive notions DO, IO, PO and SO to
each other” (Dryer 1986, 835). In English, the principle relating these notions to each
other states that IOs in ditransitives must be POs. The status of this principle as a lan-
guage universal, however, is not entirely clear. It is possible that languages differ from
each other in the way that the primitive notions are related to each other. What we
are proposing, then, is that Spanish IOs need not be POs, but can also be the equiv-
alent of a PO that has been put en chômage by the advancement of the SO to PO.
Unlike English, Spanish is unable to mark the object primacy of the dative PO
in double object constructions through the exclusion of the preposition a, the dative
marker, because the grammatical functions of Spanish dative arguments do not change
in either of the two word orders. A PO [e.g., a la niñera in (5b)] that is demoted to
oblique and placed after the theme [e.g., a la niñera in (5a)] is still an IO. As shown
in (7a) through (7b), this is why a PO in basic sentences and a demoted PO in de-
rived sentences can be doubled by a dative clitic, regardless of the relative position
of the dative argument within the sentence (refer to section on the applicative accounts
of Spanish ditransitives for the notion of clitic reduplication).
(7) a. Le di el libro a María.
3.sg.dat give.past the book to Mary
“I gave the book to Mary.”
b. Le di a María el libro.
3.sg.dat give.past to Mary the book
“I gave Mary the book.”
Conversely, while no change in the grammatical functions of Spanish IOs takes
place regarding their status as POs or SOs, the morphosyntactic properties of the
Spanish themes do reﬂect a syntactically grammaticalized difference between an ac-
cusative SO in basic sentences and an accusative PO in derived ones. In Spanish, when
the theme follows the verb, if it is animate it may have personal a both in monotran-
sitives [as shown in (8a)] and in ditransitives [as in (8b)].3
112
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich

(8) a. Veo a un vampiro.
1.see anim a vampire
“I see a vampire.”
b. El secretario le contó (a) los obreros al ingeniero.
The secretary 3sg.dat count.past (anim) the laborers to the engineer
“The secretary counted the laborers for the engineer.”
But personal a does not occur in every animate accusative argument. Its pres-
ence is ungrammatical, for instance, in the accusative nominal of the V-IO-DO basic
sentence structure, as (9b) exempliﬁes. For purposes of illustration, we repeat the ex-
amples in (1) and relabel them as (9).
(9) a. Miguel le entregó (a) sus hijos a la niñera
V-DO-IO
Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past (anim) his children to the nanny
“Miguel gave his children to the nanny.”
b. Miguel le entregó a la niñera (*a) sus hijos.
V-IO-DO
Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past to the nanny (*anim) his children
“Miguel gave the nanny his children.”
Thus, by analyzing the theme as a PO when it immediately follows the verb in
a ditransitive such as (9a), we can offer a general statement of the conditions that de-
termine the distribution of personal a:
(10) PO a-marking hypothesis: personal a may or may not occur on POs, but it
cannot occur on SOs.
Therefore a theme that follows a goal [e.g., sus hijos in (9b)] cannot have per-
sonal a, not even if animate. The inability of the accusative theme sus hijos to take
personal a in (9b), we propose, is an indication of this constituent’s status as an SO.
The nominal sus hijos in (9a), conversely, may take personal a due to its PO status.4
If this is the case, it follows that Spanish grammaticalizes the notion of POs/SOs
through the PO a-marking hypothesis, in which personal a introduces highly topical
complements (human noun phrases [NPs], pronouns, deﬁnite complements, etc.) and
thus distinguishes them from less topical object arguments.
But one of the problems that were pointed out in the introduction was that the
ﬂexible word order that Spanish verbal complements display [which was presented
in (1)] becomes rigid when the themes are NPs headed by pronouns, as shown in (2).
For purposes of exempliﬁcation, (2) will be relabeled as (11).
(11) a. Miguel se los entregó a ellos a la niñera.
V-DOpro-IO
Miguel 3.sg.dat 3.pl.masc.acc give.past anim them.masc to the nanny
“Miguel gave them to the nanny.”
b. *Miguel se los entregó a la niñera a ellos.
*V-IO-DOpro
Miguel 3.sg.dat 3.pl.masc.acc give.past to the nanny anim them.masc
“Miguel gave them to the nanny.”
113
SPANISH PERSONAL a AND THE ANTIDATIVE

Unlike NPs headed by common nouns, pronominal themes must always be
preceded by personal a. When this requirement is added to the PO a-marking hy-
pothesis, only the V-DOpro-IO order is grammatical. In other words, when a
pronominal theme follows the verb [as (11a) illustrates], the theme is a PO and may
therefore take personal a. This coincidence aligns with the fact that the accusative
pronoun that heads the theme [in (11a), for example] needs the personal a because
every accusative pronoun needs personal a. This explains the grammaticality of
(11a). However, when a pronominal theme follows the goal, as in (11b), the theme
is an SO. This results in a potential contradiction: As an SO, the theme cannot have
personal a, but it needs personal a because it is still an accusative pronoun. Object
pronouns, then, unlike other NPs, must have personal a. Because SOs cannot have
personal a, this excludes pronouns from being SOs in Spanish. Therefore pronoun
objects cannot follow the goal of a ditransitive, accounting for the ungrammatical-
ity of (11b).
Independent Evidence: Personal a in Relative Clauses
Our analysis of the rigid word order exempliﬁed in the contrast between (11a) and
(11b) rests on the PO a-marking hypothesis. A theme that follows a goal is an
SO, and that is why it cannot be marked by a. This, in turn, excludes pronominal
themes from the position that follows the goal, as pronouns must be marked by a.
The evidence we have used to argue that a complement is an SO, however, comes
primarily from word order facts. Nonetheless, to use the constraints on SOs to ex-
plain word order restrictions in Spanish puts our argumentation in danger of being
circular. To avoid this risk, we provide independent evidence for the status of
a-marked DOs as POs (for the claim that SOs cannot be marked by a), based on
relativization.
The key data are presented in (12). As (12a) shows, a goal can be relativized in
a ditransitive relative clause, but only if the theme does not have the personal a. The
theme, on the other hand, can always be relativized, as shown in (12b).
(12) a. Ésta es la niñera a la que Miguel le entregó (*a) sus hijos.
This.fem is the nanny to the which Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past (*anim) his
children
“This is the nanny Miguel gave her children to.”
b. Éstos son los niños que Miguel le entregó a la niñera.
These.masc are the children that Miguel 3.sg.dat give.past to the nanny
“These are the children that Miguel gave to the nanny.”
The antidative analysis of Spanish ditransitives accounts for this fact in a
natural way. Dryer argues that many grammatical rules are sensitive to the scale
PO  SO. As an example he cites passivization in Yindjibarndi: In this language,
DOs can be turned into the subject of a passive in monotransitives but not in di-
transitives. In the latter, it is the IO that becomes the subject of the corresponding
passive (Dryer 1986, 830, and references therein). That is, Yindjibarndi POs out-
rank SOs as candidates for promotion to subject in passives. The consequence we
114
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich

draw from this is that there may be constructions and syntactic rules that are sen-
sitive to the scale S  PO  SO  Obl.
We suggest that relativization is a perfect candidate to show the effect of this scale
for a couple of reasons. First, relativization is known to be sensitive to hierarchical
distinctions among grammatical relations (Keenan and Comrie 1977). Second, rela-
tive pronouns are typically topics. A conﬂict may potentially arise, then, in languages
that allow for relativization of DOs but not IOs, as IOs are more topical than DOs.
When the higher degree of topicality of the IO over the DO is grammaticalized in
the PO/SO distinction, it is only natural that a language will develop a relativization
rule sensitive to the S  PO  SO  Obl scale instead of to the S  DO  IO 
Obl scale proposed in Keenan and Comrie (1977).
We can now account for the restriction on relativization in (12a). If the theme
has the personal a, it must be a PO. The goal, then, is not a PO in that case, having
been demoted to the functional equivalent of a chômeur (in other terms, the goal is
less topical than the theme). In (12a), the presence of personal a on the theme ren-
ders the sentence ungrammatical because the goal must be a PO to be relativized.
This requires the theme to be an SO and therefore unable to have the personal a. Thus,
chômeurs are below the threshold for relativization in Spanish. (12b), conversely,
shows that the theme can be relativized. This seems to run contrary to the claim that
SOs cannot be relativized if there is a PO in the clause. In such a case, the antidative
rule comes in to ﬁx the problem: The theme in (12b) is in fact the PO while the goal
is a demoted PO.
The constraints on relativization of ditransitives, then, give independent evi-
dence for the antidative analysis of Spanish personal a.
The Applicative Accounts of Spanish Ditransitives
There are some recent analyses of Spanish ditransitives suggesting that Spanish has
a rule of dative shift. The problem those analyses present is that the applicative in-
terpretation on which they are grounded concerns itself with the apparent optional
doubling of the IO by a dative clitic pronoun, as shown in (13).
(13) a. Di libros a los niños.
1.give.past books to the children
“I gave books to the children.”
b. Les di libros a los niños.
3.sg.dat 1.give.past books to the children
“I gave books to the children.”
Cuervo (2003), for example, assumes that the Spanish ditransitive sentences that
present dative clitic doubling [as in (13b)] are derived from those that do not have it
[as in (13a)]. She postulates that sentence (13b) is parallel to the English double ob-
ject construction I gave the children books and that the theme in (13a) is a DO. Fur-
thermore, in her study Cuervo states that a los niños is a locative prepositional phrase
(PP) in (13a) and presumes that, as such, PP cannot be doubled by any dative clitic
115
SPANISH PERSONAL a AND THE ANTIDATIVE

in the same way that the locative constituent a Barcelona in (14) cannot be doubled
by dative le:
(14) (*Le) mandé libros a Barcelona.
(*3.sg.dat) 1.send.past books to Barcelona
“I sent books to Barcelona.”
Her premise is that a dative clitic only doubles a goal when it has been promoted
to DO. Yet her view presents a problem: In sentences with dative reduplication [as in
(13b)], it falls short of explaining why—upon considering the goal to be a ﬁnal DO—
the dative clitic [les in (13b)] is the clitic doubling the full “accusative” complement,
not the accusative clitic los, as expected in full accusative arguments:
(15) (*Los) di libros a los niños.
(*3.pl.masc.acc) 1.give.past books to the children.masc
“I gave books to the children.”
In the strictest terms, the impossibility of sentences like (13) to be doubled by
accusative los and their possibility to be doubled by dative les [as in (13b)] poses a
contradiction to the fact that the goal a los niños in (13b) is, for Cuervo, a ﬁnal DO.
Conversely, in the antidative analysis of Spanish, the goals a los niños of (13a)
and (13b) are IOs. This fact accounts for the licit clitic doubling of such goals, even
if the theme follows the goal:
(16) (Les) di a los niños libros.
(3.pl.dat) 1.give.past to the children books
“I gave the children books.”
The themes libros of (13a) and (13b) are newly advanced POs that are derived
from the promotion of a previous SO in (16), a sentence of the basic V-IO-DO order.
Therefore the compatibility of the goals in (13b) and in (13a) to allow for clitic dou-
bling signals that both of these goals are IOs. In short, what distinguishes the antida-
tive account of Spanish ditransitives from the applicative analysis mentioned earlier
is that it treats sentences (13a) and (13b) as two equivalent constructions in respect
to the grammatical relations of their objects. Thus our interpretation of sentence
(13a) is that its goal is not a DO but a PO chômeur that still remains an IO. Although
our analysis says nothing about the optionality of clitic doubling, it is possible that
the presence or absence of the dative clitic is also sensitive to the PO/SO distinction,
that is, that clitic doubling (or the absence thereof) is a sign of antidative. This is left
for future research.
Conclusions
In this chapter we have proposed an analysis of word order variation among the com-
plements of Spanish ditransitives based on Dryer’s (1986) antidative analysis. We
claimed that whichever complement immediately follows the verb (be it the theme
or the goal) is the PO of the clause. The argument that follows the PO may be an SO
(if the PO is the goal) or a demoted PO (if the PO is the theme). The latter case is
116
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich

derived by application of the antidative rule, a rule promoting the SO to PO. We of-
fered two pieces of evidence in support of this analysis. First, the distribution of per-
sonal a on themes is restricted to those that occur immediately after the verb. This
can be accounted for under the antidative analysis by a constraint that excludes mark-
ing by personal a from SOs. Second, we showed that goals cannot be relativized when
the theme is marked by personal a. This follows from our claim that the goal is not
a PO in these cases, but a demoted PO, and the assumption that only those arguments
at the top of the relational hierarchy S  PO  SO  Chô can be relativized. Both
pieces of evidence address phenomena that are sensitive to the information structure
of the clause in Spanish. Personal a marks complements that are highly topical (hu-
man NPs, pronouns, deﬁnite complements), and relativization also targets topics over
foci. If Dryer’s suggestion that the PO/SO distinction is a grammaticalization of the
functional notion of secondary topic, then it makes sense to state the constraints on
personal a and on relativization in terms of the PO/SO distinction.
A corollary of our analysis is that a surprising exception to the word order ﬂex-
ibility among ditransitive complements in Spanish is explained in a natural way.
Pronominal themes cannot follow the goal because they need to be introduced by per-
sonal a, but as SOs they cannot do so. We are able to account for this restriction on
word order without postulating any sort of rule that changes grammatical relations,
such as the applicative rules proposed in Cuervo (2003). The advantage of this ap-
proach is that it does not require us to stipulate any exceptions to the general rule
that doubles IOs with dative clitics. Our study, then, highlights the importance of “lit-
tle words” such as Spanish a for the study of grammatical relations and syntactic struc-
ture at large. The function of little words is often to make visible the unobservable
processes in the grammar, marking on the surface the results of abstract syntactic
rules. In this case, personal a tells us that Spanish may be on its way to become a
PO/SO language or that it has already arrived there.
NOTES
We are tremendously indebted to Míriam Hernández-Rodríguez, of the University of California, Davis,
for providing us with the spontaneous data of Spanish ditransitives that motivated this study.
1. In his study, Dryer postulates that in direct object languages, the patient patterns with the theme in
ditransitives and that in primary object languages, the goal patterns with the DO of monotransitives.
2. Because the initial PO is demoted to oblique in the ﬁnal stratum, it is not considered a functional
object anymore. This allows for the initial SO to advance to PO in the ﬁnal stratum because it is the
only object argument in the ﬁnal stratum, when the initial PO becomes an oblique.
3. Our claims are supported by the behavior of Spanish personal a (the accusative animacy marker) in
ditransitive environments, whose behavior is not an instance of free variation but a predictable phe-
nomenon, and by the pronominalization restrictions of Spanish complements.
4. In sum, what is expected in this Antidative account of Spanish ditransitives is the deletion of per-
sonal a from SOs and its optional presence in POs:
(1) a. Les describí (a) el profesor a los alumnos.
3.sg.dat 1.describe.past (anim) the professor to the students
“I described the professor to/for the students.”
b. Les describí a los alumnos (*a) el profesor.
3.sg.dat 1.describe.past to the students (*anim) the professor
“I described the professor to/for the students.”
117
SPANISH PERSONAL a AND THE ANTIDATIVE

The surface evidence of Spanish presented in (1) corroborates the prediction that the theme in
version (1a) may take personal a because of its status as a PO, while in version (1b) it cannot be-
cause of its status as an SO.
REFERENCES
Cuervo, María Cristina. 2003. Structural asymmetries but same word order: The dative alternation in Span-
ish. In Asymmetry in grammar, vol. 1, Syntax and semantics, ed. Anna Maria Di Sciullo, 117–44.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Demonte, Violeta. 1995. Dative alternation in Spanish. Probus 7:5–30.
Dryer, Matthew. 1986. Primary objects, secondary objects, and antidative. Language 62:808–45.
Keenan, Edward, and Bernard Comrie. 1977. Noun phrase accessibility and universal grammar. Linguis-
tic Inquiry 8:63–99.
Larson, Richard K. 1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19:335–91.
Perlmutter, David, and Paul Postal. 1983. Some proposed laws of basic clause structure. In Studies in re-
lational grammar I, ed. David Perlmutter, 81–128. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
118
Omar Velázquez-Mendoza and Raúl Aranovich

IV
Semantics


11
Predicting Argument Realization from Oblique
Marker Semantics
JOHN BEAVERS
The University of Texas at Austin
THIS CHAPTER DISCUSSES the role of adpositions and oblique cases (which I group under
a single category P, excluding structural cases and their adpositional equivalents) in
determining argument realization patterns across languages. Consider the Japanese
data in (1) and their English translations, where English clear and Japanese
katazukeru, “clear,” both take agent, theme, and source arguments, yet differ in how
these arguments may be realized. In (1a) the theme is the object and the source is
an oblique marked by from in English and –kara, “from,” in Japanese. In (1b) the
source is the object, but only in English can the theme be realized as an oblique,
marked by of.
(1) a. Ueetaa-wa syokutaku-kara syokki-o
katazuketa.
waiter-TOP table-from
dishes-ACC cleared
“The waiter cleared the dishes from the table.”
b. Ueetaa-wa syokutaku-o (*syokki-de/kara/ni)
katazuketa.
waiter-TOP table-ACC
(*dishes-INST/from/DAT) cleared
“The waiter cleared the table (of the dishes).” (Japanese; Kageyama 1980, 38)
Why should English and Japanese differ in this way? The simplest answer is to
blame it on verbal polysemy: clear and katazukeru both have a variant subcatego-
rized for a theme object and an oblique source, but only clear has a variant selecting
for a location object and a theme oblique [even though (1b) entails the existence of
a theme]. However, this misses signiﬁcant generalizations about why languages dif-
fer in terms of verbal argument structure. A common alternative is to assume that
both Vs and Ps can determine clause structure but in different contexts, yielding dif-
ferent realization patterns (following in the tradition of Hale and Keyser 1993). For
example, Folli and Harley (2004) propose that change-of-state predicates decompose
into a light verb v and a small clause headed by whatever head (V or P) describes
the result. On this approach we might analyze (1b) and its translation as in (2) (fol-
lowing Harley’s [2005], 62, analysis of smear-type locative verbs), where dyadic of
predicates a separation relation between the theme and the source, while monadic
121

katazukeru predicates a “cleared” state of the source (where the English manner root
clear is independently incorporated onto v via manner incorporation, represented by
parentheses).
(2)
While this approach admits a role for P semantics, it has the counterintuitive side
effect that Vs with similar meanings across languages have radically different func-
tions in the clause. Indeed, Harley (2005, 54) analyzes the translation of (1b) more
along the lines of (2b) (modulo word order) with the of-PP as a complement to the
clear root, meaning different locative verbs have different analyses even in English.
I advocate a more symmetric approach wherein all clauses always have a V-head and
all obliques have a P-head. However, following Beavers (2006a), Gawron (1986), and
Wechsler (1995), I argue that V and P are subject to an implicational compatibility
relationship, where the role assigned to the argument by V is a strictly more speciﬁc
version of the role assigned by P, which I refer to as the Oblique Selection Principle
(see Beavers 2006a, 129–32):
(3) Oblique Selection Principle (OSP): The role hV assigned by V to oblique
argument x in event e must imply the role hP assigned by P to x in e, that is,
∀x∀e[hV (e, x) →hP(e, x)].
A quick look at the data shows that both V and P contribute semantic compo-
nents to any clause, consistent with the OSP. First, certain aspects of the role of any
oblique argument are determined solely by V, as the “same” obliques have different
roles with different Vs, as in (4).
(4) a. Sandy loaded the wagon with the hay.
(Theme; loaded)
b. Sandy cut the bread with the knife.
(Instrument; inserted)
c. Sandy chipped the rock with the chisel.
(Instrument; hit bluntly)
Clearly each with-oblique has a role determined by V. In (4a) it is a theme, in
(4b) it is an instrument that moves toward the patient like a theme and then pene-
trates it, and in (4c) it is an instrument that moves into blunt contact with the patient.
These differ from instrument adjuncts (e.g., Sandy ate the grits with a fork) in that
they are entailed to exist by the V. Nonetheless, there is commonality across all of
these with-obliques: they are all “causally intermediate” between the agent and the
patient in the force-dynamic structure of the event (following Croft 1991, 178). This
suggests a uniﬁed semantics for (at least one use of) with that subsumes themes and
instruments, including all of those given in (4). Crucially, the V semantics is always
more speciﬁc than the P semantics (if Sandy loads the wagon with hay she ﬁrst acts
on the hay and then on the wagon, etc.), supporting the OSP as a general constraint
on V  P combinations.
This makes two predictions. First, unsurprisingly, only semantically compatible
V  P combinations are possible; for example, I loaded the wagon above hay is in-
felicitous because about does not encode causal intermediacy and does encode things
122
John Beavers

not entailed by load. However, the OSP is not a sufficiency condition: Some puta-
tively synonymous Ps may not occur marking the same oblique arguments, for ex-
ample, Sandy loaded the wagon with/*by/*via hay (assuming with, by, and via mark
causal intermediacy). This suggests that in addition to the OSP there may still be c-
selectional requirements for speciﬁc V  P combinations.
The second, more interesting prediction, which I explore in depth, is that the pres-
ence/absence of certain Ps in a language determines the possibility of oblique real-
ization of certain arguments of certain verbs. Thus the contrast between (1b) and its
translation may simply reﬂect the independent presence of a class of of-obliques in
English that Japanese systematically lacks. This will involve demonstrating that Eng-
lish of is semantically contentful and that Japanese has no corresponding postposi-
tion. There is in fact evidence for this, as English of is historically derived from Old
English ablative æf (cf. off). Hook (1983) calls its use with clear the “abstrument”:
an instrument in an ablative context, that is, a theme that is moved away from some-
thing. In fact, of is even more general than this. While from marks only sources, of
can mark both abstruments as in (5) and sources as in (6), that is, either side of a
separation relation.
(5) a. The government robbed/deprived them of/*from their jobs.
b. The doctor cured him of/*from his nail biting.
(Marking abstruments)
(6) a. He partook of/?from the salad.
b. We desired it of/from him.
(Marking sources)
The difference between English and Japanese is that Japanese lacks an abstru-
ment marker: -de marks instruments and -kara marks sources, but neither marks an
abstrument. In particular, translations of (5a) follow the pattern in (1), while transla-
tions of (5b) involve a possessive similar to cure his disease (Mika Hama, p.c.):
(7) Isha-ga
kare-no byoki-o
naoshita.
doctor-NOM he-GEN disease-ACC cured
“The doctor cured his disease.” ( cured him of his disease)
(Japanese)
Thus we can assume that the Japanese and English sentences in (1b) have the
same clause structure (modulo word order), but English allows a PP theme because
it has the P of, while Japanese does not because it does not have an equivalent P. Un-
fortunately, I have no deeper explanation for the absence of an abstrument P in Japan-
ese except that its presence in English is a historical oddity. However, in the next two
sections I turn to two cases of systematic variation in argument realization across lan-
guages and show that in each case the variation is correlated with the independent
presence/absence of certain Ps in the relevant languages. Moreover, I show that this
can often be reduced to independent typological variation across these languages, sug-
gesting that these differences are systemic rather than arbitrary. I also show how in
many cases other properties of the languages may provide alternative means consis-
tent with the OSP for capturing some of the functionality of the missing argument
realization pattern, thus further validating this hypothesis.
123
PREDICTING ARGUMENT REALIZATION FROM OBLIQUE MARKER SEMANTICS

Encoding of Goals—Possibilities and Impossibilities
A classic case study of cross-linguistic variation in argument marking is the typol-
ogy of Talmy (2000) for how languages encode directed motion, based on how the
notions path of motion and manner of motion are encoded in a single clause. The cru-
cial distinction is between S(atellite)-framed languages (e.g., English, Russian), in
which manner is characteristically encoded in the V and path in some satellite to V,
and V(verb)-framed languages (e.g., French, Japanese), where path is characteristi-
cally encoded in the V, and manner in some satellite, illustrated in (8).
(8) a. John limped into the house.
(English; S-framed)
b. Je suis entré
dans la maison (en boitant).
I am entered in
the house
in limping
“I entered (into) the house (limping).”
(French;V-framed)
(cf. #J’ai boité dans la maison.)
Traditionally, this distinction has been analyzed in terms of Vs (Talmy 1975, 1985):
In V-framed languages manner Vs are not compatible with path obliques, while in S-
framed languages they are. However, an alternative view is that this contrast instead re-
flects cross-linguistic, motion-independent variation of (among other things)
inventories of Ps (Beavers, Levin, and Wei 2008; Folli and Ramchand 2002; Talmy
2000; Son 2007). For example, in S-framed languages, path/goal Ps (e.g., [in]to) often
have very general uses, even occurring with Vs that do not inherently select for them:
(9) a. John crossed to the other side of the river.
(V implies motion to a goal)
b. John walked/ran/promenaded (in)to the 
store.
(V implies motion but no goal)
c. Ted scrubbed/polished his shoes to a 
healthy shine.
(V implies process to a result)
d. James rubbed the ﬁnish to a dull luster.
(V implies process but no result)
Thus these Ps are more like semantic allative Ps. If the V does not entail a
goal/result as in (9b) and (9d) the oblique adjunctively contributes this semantics,
while if the V does entail a goal/result as in (9a) and (9c) the oblique further speci-
ﬁes it. Conversely, in V-framed languages, goals/results are marked by dative/loca-
tive Ps [dans, “in” in (8b)], but only when the V selects for a goal/result. They may
not occur adjunctively on these readings. This is illustrated in (10) for Japanese -ni,
which has a range of uses marking arguments of Vs (e.g., causees in derived
causatives, logical subjects of passives, recipients of ditransitives; Kuno 1973;
Sadakane and Koizumi 1995) but not adjuncts:
(10) a. John-wa
eki-ni
itta/modotta/?(?)hashitta/??aruita.
John-TOP station-to went/went-up/ran/walked
“John went (up)/walked/ran to the station.”
(Entailed vs. nonentailed goal)
b. Mary-ga
doresu-o
pinku-ni
someta.
Mary-NOM dress-ACC pink-DAT dyed
“Mary dyed the dress pink.”
[Entailed result; Washio 1997, 5, (13b)]
124
John Beavers

c. *John-ga
kinzoku-o
petyanko-ni tataita.
John-NOM metal-ACC ﬂat-DAT
pounded
“John pounded the metal ﬂat.”
[Nonentailed result; Washio 1997, 5, (16b)]
Thus distributionally -ni is not comparable to to, and this is so for other puta-
tive goal/path Ps in V-framed languages (Beavers, Levin, and Tham 2008). Instead,
-ni is more akin to a dative than an allative, marking nonnominative, nonaccusative
verbal arguments, that is, something entailed to exist and possibly directly subcat-
egorized for by the V. So the V/S-framed distinction may derive not from differ-
ences in V inventories but differences in P inventories: S-framed languages have
allative Ps, and V-framed languages do not. The lack of allative Ps in turn follows
from the more general lack of secondary predication in most V-framed languages,
whereas V-framed languages tend to lack productive resultative constructions alto-
gether, including adjectival or adpositional resultatives (see Aske 1989, on Span-
ish; and Washio 1997, on Japanese; although see Son 2007). Thus while the absence
of an abstrument P in Japanese may be just a lexical quirk, the absence of the class
of allative Ps in V-framed languages ties in to a much broader typological param-
eter, with the result that certain ways of realizing an entire class of arguments is
disallowed.
However, there is a curious and very telling exception to the generalization that
V-framed languages disallow S-framed encoding, but one that conforms to and sup-
ports the OSP. It is seldom noted that V-framed languages often do have one P that
can realize goals with manner Vs, namely the P meaning “until.” This is shown in
(11) for the Japanese P -made (similar data is attested in other V-framed languages,
including Spanish, French, and Turkish; Beavers 2008).
(11) John-wa
kishi-made/*ni oyoida/tadayotta.
John-TOP shore-until/to swam/drifted
“John swam/drifted to the shore.”
[Japanese; Beavers 2008, 284, (1b)]
Until-markers are of course not unique to motion constructions but have a range
of uses for marking temporal and numerical boundaries:
(12) a. Ohiru-made kore-o
shite-kudasai.
noon-until
this-ACC do-please
“Please do this until noon.”
b. Yuka-kara yane-made nan-meetoru
arimasu ka?
ﬂoor-from roof-until how-many-meters are
QUES
“How many meters from the ﬂoor to the roof?”
[Kuno 1973, 108–10, (1a), (6)]
Beavers (2008) analyzes such markers as delimiter, adjunctively predicating an
endpoint on some participant in the event/state. A goal of motion, however, is cru-
cially just the endpoint of a path of motion. Thus what -made is doing in (11) is pred-
icating the endpoint of the path, which has the indirect effect of specifying what the
goal of motion is. More crucially, until-markers also show up with path verbs, which
select for a goal argument, exactly as expected by the OSP:
125
PREDICTING ARGUMENT REALIZATION FROM OBLIQUE MARKER SEMANTICS

(13) John-wa
eki-made/ni
itta/modotta.
John-TOP station-until/to went/went-up
“John went/went up to the station.”
[Beavers, 2008, 284, (1a)]
Note that until in English is rarely acceptable as a goal marker (cf. #John walked
until the store). This is not a counterexample to the OSP, as it is not a sufficiency
condition. But in this case there is a simple explanation: English, an S-framed lan-
guage, has a host of speciﬁc goal-marking Ps that presumably block the use of the
far more general until. Thus what we see is that the independent presence of a com-
patible P in V-framed languages opens up the possibility of otherwise disallowed re-
alization options, something such languages can exploit to get around the absence of
allative Ps in a way consistent with the OSP.
Dative Alternations
Following on the goal-marking use of to, English allows a dative alternation in which
a recipient may be realized either as the ﬁrst object of a ditransitive V or as a to-oblique:
(14) a. Kim gave/sent/tossed Sandy the ball.
b. Kim gave/sent/tossed the ball to Sandy.
As has long been noted, there are often information structural constraints on the
alternation, where the element that comes ﬁrst tends to be more topical (Wasow
2002). There is also an interesting semantic effect in this alternation. The ﬁrst object
must be capable of possession, whereas the corresponding to-oblique may be inter-
preted as a (purely locational) goal. This is demonstrated in (15), where inanimate
London cannot be a ﬁrst object unless it is interpreted as capable of possession, for
example, “the London Office” (Beavers 2006a, 188; Green 1974, 103–4).
(15) a. #John sent London a letter.
(OK on “London Office” reading)
b. John sent a letter to London.
(OK on “London Office” or goal reading)
Note that the relevant notion is the capability of possession, not actual posses-
sion, which is often (though not always) an implicature, for example, John sent Mary
a letter, but it never arrived. Other languages have similar alternations. In German
the contrast is between a dative DP and a DP marked by some allative P such as zu
or nach, “to,” whereas in Greek the relevant contrast is between agenitive (or accu-
sative) DP and an oblique marked by a goal-marking P se (Anagnostopoulou 2003).
The general shape of the alternation is always between direct and oblique realization,
however manifested in a given language. However, not all languages allow both vari-
ants. For example, in Finnish the typical way to realize a goal/recipient argument of
a ditransitive V is with the allative case; there is no dative in Finnish, nor is there
genitive object or double object constructions (Kaiser 2002):
(16) Minä
annoin miehelle
kirjan.
I.NOM gave
man.ALL book.ACC
“I gave the man a book.”
[Finnish; Kaiser 2002, (4b)]
126
John Beavers

Conversely, in Japanese the goal/recipient must be realized by dative -ni; as
noted earlier there is no allative in Japanese, following from the more general lack
of secondary predication:
(17) Masao-ga
Akira/Tokyo-ni
syasin-o
okutta.
Masao-NOM Akira/Tokyo-DAT picture-ACC sent
“Masao sent a picture to Akira/Tokyo.” [Japanese; cf. Beavers 2006a, 189, (11)]
In each case the lack of a variant corresponds to the independent absence of some
class of Ps in the language. Interestingly, the information structural and semantic func-
tionality of dative alternations is accomplished through other means in these lan-
guages. For example, in both languages the relatively free word order encodes the
relative topicality of the theme and goal/recipient arguments rather than a morpho-
logical alternation (see Kaiser 2002, on Finnish; and Miyagawa and Tsujioka 2004,
on Japanese). For the semantic contrast the data are more complicated but very
telling. Both Finnish and Japanese in fact do have alternations of sorts, of a differ-
ent form than English or German, yet consistent with the P and structural case in-
ventories of each language. In Finnish a goal can also be realized in the illative “into”
case:
(18) Minä
lähetin kirjan
Suomeen.
I-NOM sent book-ACC Finland.ILLAT
“I sent a/the book to Finland.”
[Finnish; Kaiser 2002, (a), fn.2]
In general the allative encodes capability of possession while the illative is ap-
propriate for locations, mirroring the ﬁrst object/oblique contrast in English (Paul
Kiparsky, Elsi Kaiser, p.c.). However, the allative/illative contrast differs from the Eng-
lish contrast in that it is an oblique/oblique contrast, though one that is consistent with
the presence in Finnish of a great number of locational semantic cases, some of
which are compatible with the semantics selected for by ditransitive verbs.
In Japanese a similar effect can be observed through an interesting contrast in
the relative obliqueness of -ni in different contexts. The contrast between structural
and oblique Ps in Japanese can be probed through a variety of means (see Sadakane
and Koizumi 1995), including their variable behavior under the topic-marking P -wa.
When a nonoblique argument is -wa marked, the corresponding structural case (i.e.,
nominative -ga or accusative -o) is deleted and replaced by -wa as in (19a). But when
an oblique is -wa marked, the P may not be dropped (Beavers 2006a, 190–91, and
2008, 304–5). Interestingly, if we -wa mark the -ni marked recipients in (17) as in
(19b), dropping -ni is optional, but when it is dropped the “London Office” effect
obtains as in the following:
(19) a. John-wa
eki-ni
itta.
John-TOP station-to went
“As for John, he went to the station.” (-ga deleted under topic-marking -wa)
b. Tokyo-ni-wa/#Tokyo-wa
Masao-ga
syasin-o
okutta.
Tokyo-DAT-TOP/Tokyo-TOP Masao-NOM picture-ACC send
127
PREDICTING ARGUMENT REALIZATION FROM OBLIQUE MARKER SEMANTICS

“As for Tokyo, Masao sent a picture to it/#sent it a picture.” (OK on “Tokyo
Office” reading)
This suggests that -ni can be more or less oblique in this construction, forming
an alternation quite similar to the dative alternation (see also Miyagawa and Tsujioka
2004; and Sadakane and Koizumi 1995), though whether this corresponds to two dif-
ferent -ni morphemes or one polysemous morpheme is a murkier question.
However, there is one potential problem. So far I have claimed that recipients
are a more speciﬁc type of goal (and thus may be realized by goal-marking Ps), and
goals are a more speciﬁc type of limit (and thus may be realized by limit marking
until-markers). Thus by the OSP we should expect that recipients can be realized by
until-markers. As far as I am aware no language marks recipients with an until-
marker, contrary to this prediction. This is not a counterexample to the OSP per se,
as again the OSP is not a sufficiency condition. It could simply be that no language
has taken up this option. However, I suggest that this is ruled out on more principled
grounds. As discussed in Beavers (2008), until-markers mostly occur with durative
predicates, while Beavers (2006a, 2006b) note that nearly all ditransitives (in Eng-
lish at any rate) allow only punctual readings. If this is the case, the absence of di-
transitive  until combinations may be due to independent semantic incompatibility.
Tellingly, however, Danish til, “to,” historically connected to until, is used in both alla-
tive/dative and until contexts (Allan, Holmes, and Lundskær-Nielsen 1995, 420–25),
with both punctual and durative readings, suggesting the validity of the correlation
between until-markers and allative Ps.
The Case of Default Ps
Another potential problem involves so-called default Ps that mark arguments of heads
that are unable to check/assign Case (Chomsky 1981, 49ff). The most common can-
didate is English of, which marks complements of nouns (e.g., the founding of Rome)
and adjectives (e.g., fond of Kim), traditionally thought of as unable to assign Case,
as well as complements of certain Ps (e.g., off of the rock) and Vs (e.g., spoke of him).
Default Ps are presumably meaningless (because in principle they can mark any
Caseless argument), and thus any argument of any V could be realized by this P ac-
cording to the OSP. This predicts that we might expect a wide range of direct argu-
ment/default P alternations, as well as arguments in canonical Caseless positions
(e.g., internal arguments of unaccusatives and passivized verbs) being realized via
default Ps. For example, in addition to The vase broke, where the vase merges ﬁrst
as a sister to V and then raises to [Spec,TP] to check Case and the EPP feature on
tense (T), we might expect to ﬁnd something like *It was broken of the vase, where
of is inserted to check Case for the vase and an expletive is inserted to check the ex-
tended projection principle (EPP) feature of T. However, we do not ﬁnd such exam-
ples, and they are conspicuous in their absence.
I suggest here a simple explanation for this: Default Ps do not exist, at least not in
the verbal domain (following Beavers 2005 on argument/oblique alternations). Cru-
cially, all uses of of in the verbal domain correspond to a very limited set of thematic
roles (as a glance through the Oxford English Dictionary suggests), including abstru-
128
John Beavers

ments and sources [as shown in (5) and (6)], material/topic of discussion (e.g., I wrote
of/about him, I was notiﬁed of/about his plans), and basis of comparison (e.g., This soup
tastes of/like mutton, He reminds me of a peacock). This suggests that while of is a few
ways polysemous in the verbal domain, it is not semantically vacuous (and therefore
*It was broken of the vase, even if grammatical, could not mean The vase was broken).
As much as it is a default in the (ad)nominal domain, it is essentially a direct argument
marker (nonverbal objective case) and thus is not subject to the OSP. The use of of to
mark complements of Ps seems primarily restricted to a small class of spatial Ps [e.g.,
off (of) the table, out (of) the house] and might best be viewed as a remnant of a re-
analysis of such Ps from earlier status as adverbs/particles (which do not assign/check
case). Thus there does not appear to be any evidence for a truly default P in English in
the verbal domain, and I am not aware of any such evidence in other languages.
Conclusion
Both V and P assign thematic roles to oblique arguments, but they are constrained by
the OSP, which enforces semantic compatibility between them. This predicts not just
which V  P combinations will surface in a language but also that certain combina-
tions possible in one language will be impossible in another due to the absence of the
appropriate P, a factor that may in turn be reducible to independent typological prop-
erties of a given language. What is crucial, therefore, is that the relevant P or class of
Ps has a semantics that can be independently identiﬁed across a range of constructions.
Of course, the evidence presented here is tentative; future work will involve a more sys-
tematic view of a range of oblique realization options/inventories across languages.
REFERENCES
Allan, Robin, Philip Holmes, and Tom Lundskær-Nielsen. 1995. Danish: A comprehensive grammar. Lon-
don: Routledge.
Anagnostopoulou, Elena. 2003. The syntax of ditransitives: Evidence from clitics. Berlin: Mouton.
Aske, John. 1989. Path predicates in English and Spanish: A closer look. Proceedings of the Berkeley Lin-
guistics Society 15:1–14.
Beavers, John. 2005. A semantic analysis of argument/oblique alternations in HPSG. In HPSG 2005, ed.
Stefan Müller, 28–48. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
———. 2006a. Argument/oblique alternations and the structure of lexical meaning. PhD diss., Stanford
University.
———. 2006b. The aspectual behavior of ditransitives in English. Talk given at the 80th annual meeting
of the LSA, Albuquerque, NM, January 5.
———. 2008. On the nature of goal marking and delimitation: Evidence from Japanese. Journal of Lin-
guistics 44:283–316.
Beavers, John, Beth Levin, and Tham Shiao Wei. 2007. The typology of motion events revisited. Unpub-
lished ms.
Chomsky, Noam. 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Croft, William. 1991. Syntactic categories and grammatical relations: The cognitive organization of in-
formation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Folli, Raffaella, and Heidi Harley. 2004. Consuming results: Flavours of little-v. In Aspectual enquiries,
ed. Paula Kempchimsky and Roumyana Slabakova, 1–25. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Folli, Raffaella, and Gillian Ramchand. 2002. Event structure composition: The case of goal of motion
and resultative constructions in Italian and Scottish Gaelic. In Proceedings of Perspectives on As-
pect Conference, ed. Henk J. Verkuyl, 81–106. Utrecht: OTS.
Gawron, Jean Mark. 1986. Situations and prepositions. Linguistics and Philosophy 9:327–82.
129
PREDICTING ARGUMENT REALIZATION FROM OBLIQUE MARKER SEMANTICS

Green, Georgia. 1974. Semantic and syntactic regularity. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hale, Ken, and Samuel J. Keyser. 1993. On argument structure and the lexical expression of syntactic re-
lations. In The view from building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger, ed. Ken
Hale and Samuel J. Keyser, 53–109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harley, Heidi. 2005. How do verbs get their names? Denominal verbs, manner incorporation, and the on-
tology of verb roots in English. In The syntax of aspect, ed. Nomi Erteschik-Shir and Tova Rapoport,
42–64. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hook, Peter. 1983. The English abstrument and rocking case relations. In Papers from the nineteenth re-
gional meeting, 183–94. Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Kageyama, Taro. 1980. The role of thematic relations in the spray paint hypallage. Papers in Japanese
Linguistics 7:35–64.
Kaiser, Elsi. 2002. The syntax-pragmatics interface and Finnish ditransitive verbs. In ConSOLE IX, ed.
Mario van Koppen, Erica Thrift, Erik van der Torre, and Malte Zimmermann, www.sole.leidenuniv
.nl/index.php3?m14&c6 (accessed October 12, 2008).
Kuno, Susumu. 1973. The structure of the Japanese language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miyagawa, Shigeru, and Takae Tsujioka. 2004. Argument structure and ditransitive verbs in Japanese. Jour-
nal of East Asian Linguistics 13:1–38.
Sadakane, Kumi, and Masatoshi Koizumi. 1995. On the nature of the “dative” particle ni in Japanese. Lin-
guistics 33:5–33.
Son, Minjeong. 2007. Event (de-)composition of directed motion in Korean and English. Talk given at
GURT 2007, Georgetown University, March 9.
Talmy, Leonard. 1975. Semantics and syntax of motion. In Syntax and semantics, vol. 4, ed. J. P. Kimball,
181–238. New York: Academic Press.
———. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical forms. In Grammatical categories and
the lexicon, ed. Timothy Shopen, 57–149. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2000. Toward a cognitive semantics: Typology and process in concept structuring. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Washio, Ryuichi. 1997. Resultatives, compositionality, and language variation. Journal of East Asian Lin-
guistics 6:1–49.
Wasow, Thomas. 2002. Postverbal behavior. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Wechsler, Stephen. 1995. The semantic basis of argument structure. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
130
John Beavers

12
Aspect Selectors, Scales, and 
Contextual Operators: An Analysis of 
by Temporal Adjuncts
MICHAEL F. THOMAS AND LAURA A. MICHAELIS
University of Colorado at Boulder
MANY TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS select for speciﬁc aspectual classes; these adjuncts include meas-
ure adverbials such as for an hour and interval adverbials such as in an hour. While
such adjuncts have traditionally served as diagnostics of telicity, it is only relatively
recently that aspectual theorists have elucidated the relationship between the scalar-
semantic meanings of these adjuncts and the internal structure of the event represen-
tations to which they apply (see Dowty 1979; Herweg 1991; Krifka 1998, among
others). Krifka (1998) proposes that both measure adverbials and interval adverbials
operate on representations that involve motion along a path. It seems entirely plausi-
ble that these adverbials should have path-based meanings, as they concern the “run
times” of processes. It is less clear whether path schemas can be applied to the seman-
tics of aspectually sensitive temporal adverbs in general, and particularly those that de-
note time points. One such adverbial is the by time adverbial (BTA), which will be the
focus of our attention in this chapter. An example of the BTA is given in (1):
(1) But at least Burger King has signed on, and says that by year end it won’t be
using any shell eggs.
(Wall Street Journal)
In (1), the year’s end represents a point at which a state (absence of shell eggs) is sub-
ject to veriﬁcation. In the semantic analysis that we propose here, the BTA resem-
bles another aspectually sensitive temporal adverb, still (Michaelis 1993). Both
adverbial types have apparently paradoxical behavior: They denote time points but
have interval-based semantics. The paradox disappears when we assume that the
BTA, like adverbial still, denotes a point and presupposes an interval, speciﬁcally, a
path schema. In the case of the BTA in particular, we will argue, these path schemas
represent conventional sequences of development, for example, schedules. We will
use corpus data to survey the variety of discourse contexts in which such sequences
are invoked. In this way we further substantiate Krifka’s claim that aspectual mean-
ing involves path structures that represent both movement through space and quali-
tative changes in entities over time.
131

We explore patterns of BTA use by examining tokens from the Wall Street Jour-
nal (WSJ) corpus (Marcus, Santorini, and Marcinkiewicz 1993).1 One fact that is ini-
tially puzzling about the corpus data is that while, for example, English pedagogical
grammars (Fuchs and Bonner 2006, 32–40; Van Zante et al. 2000, 65) focus on its
use in past-perfect predications, perfect-form predications, as in (2), account for only
4 percent of the BTA tokens in the WSJ:
(2) Baron Elie de Rothschild, the family’s elder spokesman, explains that by the
end of the 19th century, Berlin had replaced Frankfurt as Germany’s ﬁnancial
center.
(WSJ)
Other contexts in which BTAs occurred are as follows. Seven percent occurred in sim-
ple past-tense predications, both stative and dynamic, as in (3) and (4), respectively:
(3) The airports in San Jose and Oakland were both fully operational by noon
yesterday, the Federal Aviation Administration said.
(WSJ)
(4) And by late Friday afternoon, actually after the close, we decided that was the
wrong tone to take.
(WSJ)
Two percent occurred in past-tense progressive predications, as in (5):
(5) Japanese stocks dropped early Monday, but by late morning were turning
around.
(WSJ)
Sixteen percent occurred in gerunds and event nominals, as in (6) and (7), respec-
tively:
(6) Some projections show Mexico importing crude by the end of the century.
(WSJ)
(7) Mr. Ehrlich predicted unprecedented famine by 1980.
(WSJ)
Thirty-six percent occurred in to-marked inﬁnitival complements, as in (8):
(8) Hughes said it expects the sale to close by year end.
(WSJ)
Finally, 31 percent occurred in complements of modal verbs, including will, as in (1).
Such examples raise three questions. First, how can we reconcile the BTA’s appar-
ently wide combinatoric potential with the presumption that it selects for a speciﬁc
aspectual class? Second, what accounts for the prevalence of modal and inﬁnitival
predications, as in (1) and (8), respectively, which collectively account for 67 percent
of the BTA tokens? Third, why should an author ever use a BTA when there are more
speciﬁc forms of time reference available, in particular, adverbial expressions such
as on Monday or in the afternoon? We will argue that adequate answers to these ques-
tions require reference to lexical and grammatical aspect (Bickel 1997), frame se-
mantics (Fillmore 1985), pragmatic scales (Kay 1990), and coercion (De Swart 1998).
We claim that the BTA takes a state predication as its argument and that it denotes a
sampling point located just after the potential or actual inception of this state. Fur-
ther, we propose, this state is understood in relation to a contextually evoked path
132
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis

schema, construed as either a schedule or a natural course of development. As a con-
sequence, we suggest, BTAs are contextual operators, in the sense of Kay (1997).
The remainder of this study is structured as follows. In the ﬁrst section we dis-
cuss the sense of by at issue here. The second section discuss the usage patterns that
reference and pedagogical grammars predict for BTAs and how the corpus data fail
to conform to those predictions. In the third section we propose that BTAs select for
the class of states. The fourth section shows that we can assimilate apparently non-
stative BTA tokens to stative examples by regarding them as cases of stative coer-
cion. In the ﬁfth section we argue that BTAs are discourse-indexical expressions,
insofar as they induce the interpreter to retrieve an event sequence or schedule that
includes the denoted state. The last section contains brief concluding remarks.
Which Sense of by?
The second edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) lists thirty-nine adverbial
senses of the preposition by. The sense of interest here is the twentieth sense, in which
by takes a nominal denoting a time point as its argument and the resulting prepositional
phrase (PP) means “no later than.” This sense is distinct from that listed as the seven-
teenth sense of by in the OED, in which the by-phrase indicates “extent,” as in (9):
(9) In point of fact, this catharsis was overdue by decades.
(WSJ)
In (9), the by-headed PP indicates degree of difference, just as the measure expres-
sions two inches and ﬁve dollars do in the comparative expressions two inches taller
and ﬁve dollars cheaper. As it happens, the by-headed PP in (9) was erroneously given
the part-of-speech tag PP-TMP by a Treebank II tagger rather than the appropriate
tag, PP-EXT. This error is understandable, as in both cases the complement of by is
a time expression, but on closer inspection it is obvious that the two by-adverbials
not only have distinct types of complement daughters (time-point noun phrases [NPs]
in the case of BTAs and coextensive-measure NPs in the case of by-adverbials of ex-
tent) but also combine with different types of predicates: Extent-measure by-adver-
bials combine with “predicates of surpassing,” for example, comparative adjectives,
whereas BTAs do not.
How Are BTAs Used?
As mentioned earlier, pedagogical grammars tend to associate the BTA with the past-
perfect construction. Certainly, the BTA and the past perfect interact in a transparent
and compositional way: Assuming the Reichenbachian representation of the past per-
fect (Reichenbach 1947; Hornstein 1990), one would say that the BTA marks the R
point (reference time) that follows an E point (event time). But the use of a past-per-
fect predication is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for BTA use. That it
is not necessary is shown by the fact that of 315 BTA tokens examined, only 12 were
found in perfect-form predications. That it is not sufficient is shown by the fact that
there are otherwise acceptable past-perfect sentences that do not welcome BTAs. One
such sentence is the attested (10), found in a Google search. The past perfect in this
example is a continuative perfect: The sentence asserts the existence of a state phase
(that of unwillingness) whose terminus is 1983:
133
ASPECT SELECTORS, SCALES, AND CONTEXTUAL OPERATORS: AN ANALYSIS OF by TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS

(10) Until 1983, France . . . had been unwilling to extradite ETA members to Spain.
(Google)
If we replace the time adverbial until 1983 with a comparable BTA, the result is anom-
aly, as shown by (10):
(10) *By 1983, France had been unwilling to extradite ETA members to Spain.
Why is (10) anomalous? The reference grammars give some clues. Quirk et al.
(1985, 692) describe BTAs as expressing “the time at which the result of an event is
in existence.” If BTAs mark resultant states, then we can easily explain the anomaly
in (10) by observing that the state of unwillingness is not resultant state and that it
therefore does not satisfy the BTA. At the same time, however, resultant states can-
not be the whole story. As mentioned in the previous section, a plurality (36%) of
BTA tokens appear in inﬁnitival complements. Further, in the vast majority of such
cases, these inﬁnitival clauses are complements of control and raising verbs that pre-
suppose a desired or expected event, for example, require, order, want, hope, expect,
and plan. An additional trend suggesting a close association between the BTA and
futurity is that involving modal verbs. As mentioned in the previous section, the sec-
ond largest group of BTA tokens consists of those with modal head verbs, as in (11)
and (12):
(11) That should happen by today, he said.
(WSJ)
(12) Then it turned up, and by one estimate the number will be up to about 109,000
regulators by next year.
(WSJ)
Thus it would appear that BTAs select states that are not only resultant states but also
desired or predicted states. The latter condition is in fact captured by Huddleston and
Pullum’s (2002, 655) characterization of BTAs as coding “time deadlines.” The fact
that many BTA tokens express literal deadlines seems to validate this characteriza-
tion:
(13) He said Chrysler fully expects to have them installed across its light-truck line
by the Sept. 1, 1991, deadline.
(WSJ)
(14) Mr. Bush has called for an agreement by next September at the latest.
(WSJ)
Frequently, however, it is difficult to characterize the BTA as denoting a deadline. In
(15), for example, the BTA appears instead to encode the ﬁnal state of a process of
accretion:
(15) Some atmospheric scientists think that even if CFCs were released into the
atmosphere at an accelerating rate, the amount of ozone depletion would be
only 10% by the middle of the next century.
(WSJ)
That state of ozone depletion is not one subject to direct human control; thus it seems
inaccurate to characterize the middle of the next century as a deadline. While it might
be accurate to characterize it instead as a point at which the state in question is ex-
134
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis

pected (by atmospheric scientists) to be in force, the expectations of the participants
described play a limited role in examples like (16) through (18):
(16) The incentives boosted sales for a while, but the pace had cooled by last
month.
(WSJ)
(17) By the early 1980s, its glory had faded like the yellow bricks of its broad
façade.
(WSJ)
(18) Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. by yesterday afternoon had already written new
TV ads.
(WSJ)
In (16) through (18), the BTAs appear to denote author-selected rather than partici-
pant-selected sampling points. For example, last month and the early 1980s in (16)
through (17), respectively, are mentioned simply because they are reference times that
are relevant to the narratives in question, not because anyone is aiming to ensure that
the denoted states (slow sales, faded glory) are in force at those times. Further, while
in (18) Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. might have intended to have new TV ads at the
time described as yesterday afternoon, they need not have so intended: Yesterday af-
ternoon is the author’s sampling point and not necessarily a time that ﬁgured in any
participant’s planning. Such sampling points have a retrospective quality to them in
that they are located within a state of aftermath following the occurrence of an event
or event series; this state of aftermath is that denoted by perfect-form predications,
whether they are existential perfects, as in (16), or resultative perfects, as in (17)
through (18) (Herweg 1991; Michaelis 2004). However, the BTA sample is not nec-
essarily taken after the fact, as shown by (19) through (21):
(19) U.S. oil supplies, however, had peaked in 1970 and 1971 and by 1973 were
declining.
(WSJ)
(20) Stunned, Mr. Breeden turned to his market-monitoring computer, which by
then was next to his desk.
(WSJ)
(21) And by the early 1980s U.S. capitalists had ample reason to welcome junk
bonds, to look the other way.
(WSJ)
In (19) through (21), the BTA denotes a point located within, rather than subsequent
to, a process (19) or state [(20) through (21)]. Thus a BTA need not select a state of
aftermath. In addition, as we have seen, the BTA need not denote a time point that
ﬁgured in any participant’s schedule. Instead, we propose, the BTA denotes the ﬁrst
point at which some observer—whether the author or a participant—got, expects to
get, or hopes to get a positive answer to the question Is state x in force?
BTAs as State Selectors
In describing the truth conditions on English progressive predications, Dowty (1977)
proposes the “bet test,” a version of which runs as follows. Say that I wager with a friend
that at midnight it will be snowing, and we later ﬁnd out that midnight was the ﬁrst mo-
ment at which it was snowing. Have I won my bet? For Dowty, the answer is no, be-
cause the semantics of the progressive require reference time to be located during the
135
ASPECT SELECTORS, SCALES, AND CONTEXTUAL OPERATORS: AN ANALYSIS OF by TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS

process denoted by its gerundial complement. The same “noninitial moment” condi-
tion appears to apply to BTAs, but because of the deontic nature of many BTA uses, it
seems ﬁtting to replace the bet with a curfew in the test scenario. Say, for example, that
a soldier is ordered to be back on base by midnight and at midnight is seen returning
to base. Has the soldier violated curfew? We believe that the answer is yes. Thus what
the progressive construction and the BTA have in common is that both constructions
locate reference time within the situation denoted by the lexical verb, prohibiting ref-
erence time from being the ﬁrst moment of that situation. And in both cases, we sub-
mit, this constraint follows from a central property of state predications: States include
the reference times for which they are asserted to hold (Partee 1984).
The progressive and the BTA differ in that the former is a stativizer, while the lat-
ter is a state selector. What does it mean to call the progressive a stativizer? Following
De Swart (1998) and Herweg (1991), we assume that the progressive shifts dynamic
eventualities to states. This characterization is supported by the fact that progressive
predications pass numerous stativity diagnostics, including various tests involving tem-
poral overlap (Michaelis 2004). The same can be said of perfect predications, and thus
we assume that the perfect denotes a state—that state which follows the occurrence of
the event denoted by the participial complement (Herweg 1991; Michaelis 2004).
If the BTA is a state selector, then it stands to reason that it should combine with
progressive predications, as in (19), perfect predications [(16) through (18)], and
simplex state predications [(20) through (21)]. But one puzzle remains: Why should
the BTA combine with verbs that neither denote states nor have undergone stativiza-
tion? Three such combinations are exempliﬁed in (22) through (24):
(22) A slight recovery in the stock market gave currency traders conﬁdence to push
the dollar higher before the unit dropped back by day’s end.
(WSJ)
(23) The big futures buying triggered stock-index buy programs that eventually
trimmed the Dow’s loss to 31 points by 11 a.m.
(WSJ)
(24) That index . . . gained 17.97 % by Sept. 30 this year.
(WSJ)
In (22) through (24), BTAs modify the perfective predicates drop back, trim, and gain,
respectively. If the BTA is in fact a state selector we would expect that the verb forms
in question would be past-perfect forms (e.g., had dropped) or perhaps progressive
forms (e.g., was dropping). A similar problem is raised by the inﬁnitival complements
that collectively account for the majority of BTA tokens in the WSJ corpus: These
tend to be perfective predicates, as in (11): That should happen by today. What then
allows for the appearance of nonstativized perfective verbs in clauses containing
BTAs? A clue is provided by after-clauses. In after-clauses such as that in (25), the
past-perfect and simple-past forms are free variants:
(25) After she (had) caught sight of him, she crossed the street.
In temporal discourse, an after-clause establishes an interval during which the main
clause event takes place, but in order to do so, the after-clause must encode a state,
because only a state can overlap a next-mentioned event. Thus the after-clause in (25)
denotes a state that starts at a time just after the time of the event of her catching sight
136
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis

of him. In other words, when after combines with a dynamic verb like catch sight of,
that verb expresses the initiating event of the after-clause state. A similar analysis can
be applied to the perfective BTA examples in (22) through (24). In the case of (24),
for example, the combination of a perfective verb and the BTA induces the interpreter
to recover a state that starts just after the time at which the index gained 17.97 per-
cent. The time point expressed by Sept. 30 this year is then understood as located
within this inferred state. In the next section, we discuss the mechanism by which
such inferences take place, coercion, and discuss the evidence that supports our con-
tention that BTAs are stative coercion triggers.
Coercion
Coercion effects are semantic enrichments that interpreters perform in order to re-
solve conﬂict between the semantic type selected for by a given operator (construc-
tion) and the semantic type expressed by the lexical item with which that operator
has combined in a given context (De Swart 1998; Jackendoff 1997, chap. 3). Coer-
cion is an interpretive procedure that like presupposition is triggered by linguistic
form. Via coercion, all aspectual-class selectors are also potential aspectual-class
shifters. Examples of coercion include those in which event-denoting predicates are
interpreted as states and vice versa. For example, the state predication I knew the an-
swer receives an inceptive-event reading in combination with the event-selecting ad-
verbial suddenly (De Swart 1998, 359). Conversely, as argued by Michaelis (1996,
2004), the event verb eat gets a resultant-state reading in combination with the state-
selecting adverbial already in (26). Compare the preterite-form sentence with (27),
in which a stativizing construction, the perfect, compositionally yields the stative type
sought by already, and no coercion is required:
(26) I already ate. (coerced state)
(27) I’ve already eaten. (compositionally derived state)
We propose that perfective predications containing BTAs, whether they are tensed,
as in (22) through (24), or tenseless, as in imperatives and inﬁnitival complements,
have coerced resultant-state interpretations identical to that in (26). This proposal uni-
ﬁes BTA uses that otherwise require distinct analyses: BTAs in stative predications,
progressive predications, perfect predications, and perfective predications, both tensed
and inﬁnitival. In addition to this argument from parsimony, there is linguistic evi-
dence that supports the stative coercion proposal. This evidence comes from con-
straints on present-time adverbial reference in simple-past tense perfective
predications, as illustrated in (28) through (29):
(28) You probably already heard this (*by) now. I found out earlier this afternoon. 
(Google)
(29) If you’re a frequent reader, you probably noticed (*by) now that I’m a
passionate guy.
(Google)
The grammaticality contrasts in (28) through (29) show that the BTA by now does
something that the adverb now by itself would not: It imposes a present-perfect reading
137
ASPECT SELECTORS, SCALES, AND CONTEXTUAL OPERATORS: AN ANALYSIS OF by TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS

on a predication that would otherwise have a past-tense perfective reading. This pres-
ent-perfect reading shifts reference time to the present, thereby allowing for present-
time adverbial reference. If we presume that the BTA is a state selector, we can explain
why (28) through (29) have present-perfect readings when the BTA by now is present,
but not otherwise: The BTA selects for a resultant state, and when such a state is lack-
ing in the verb’s Aktionsart representation, the interpreter adds one in the interest of se-
mantic-conﬂict resolution.
BTAs as Contextual Operators
We have already addressed the ﬁrst of the three questions we raised in the introduc-
tion: How can we reconcile the apparently wide combinatoric potential of the BTA
with the claim that it is a state selector? Our answer is that the BTA is not only a state
selector but also a stative coercion trigger. In this section, we address the second and
third questions: What accounts for the strong association between the BTA and fu-
turate (modal and other inﬁnitival) contexts? Why do speakers use BTAs when time-
denoting PPs headed by at provide more precise temporal speciﬁcations and are
equally compatible with state predications? As a ﬁrst step toward answering these
questions, let us consider the contrast in (30) and (31):
(30) At midnight, I was lying on the couch.
(31) By midnight, I was lying on the couch.
While both (30) and (31) assert that a state held at midnight, only (31) requires us to
view that state as one of a series of causally connected states. Thus, we propose that
a BTA instructs the interpreter to map the denoted state to a point on a canonical time
scale. This point is the ﬁrst feasible sampling point described in the third section. By
canonical we mean whatever granularity of intervals the situation requires (e.g., days,
hours, etc). These intervals are associated with situations, each of which represents
a stage within an event series. The event-series characterization applies even in cases
of deontic meaning such as imperatives, for example, Be home by midnight. What is
the event series in this case? It could be the process that culminates in return to one’s
point of origin, which might entail, for example, hailing a cab at 11:30 PM, or a se-
quence of hypothetical returns by the addressee, each of which occurs at a different
time prior to midnight. In either case, midnight represents a ﬁrst feasible sampling
point for the state of being at home. Of course, the speaker who uses the imperative
Be home by midnight intends not merely to observe the time of return but also to in-
ﬂuence it. Because tracking emergent states of affairs generally subserves planning,
it stands to reason that futurate predications, both modal and desiderative, should be
prevalent in the BTA data.
The sampling point denoted by a BTA might be one that, in the speaker’s view,
is seen by most as infeasible (i.e., unlikely to yield a positive result for the state in
question). Thus one potential implicature of an assertion containing a BTA is that the
state is early with respect to some canonical developmental sequence. This is shown
by the following sentences, the latter of which comes from the Switchboard corpus
of conversational English (Godrey, Holliman, and McDaniel 1992):
138
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis

(32) But while traffic was heavy early in the commute over the Golden Gate, by 8
a.m. it already had thinned out.
(WSJ)
(33) Speaker A: Well then, it will be mostly reruns, I guess.
Speaker B: And by the end of February, the way they do it nowadays.
(Switchboard)
As indicated by his use of already, the author of (32) believes that his readers will
be surprised to learn that Golden Gate Bridge traffic is light at 8 AM. Whether or not
they actually are, they will interpret (32) against a frame in which states of traffic
density are associated with times of day. In (33) Speaker B asserts that, perhaps con-
trary to the expectations of Speaker A, February is a point at which a television
viewer will ﬁnd programming that consists largely of reruns. Again, whether or not
February strikes Speaker A as an early eventuation point for this state of affairs, she
must still assess (33) against a canonical developmental sequence—in this case, one
involving the broadcast industry’s normal patterns of program production. Both com-
muting and television broadcasting cycles are frames, in the sense of Fillmore (1985),
that enable the interpreters of these sentences to evaluate them against the appropri-
ate developmental sequences.
In light of these ﬁndings, we propose that BTAs belong to the class as contextual
operators, as described by Kay (1990, 1997). These are lexical items and grammatical
constructions whose “semantic value consists, at least in part, of instructions to ﬁnd in
the context a certain kind of information structure and place the information presented
by the sentence within that information structure” (Kay 1997, 159). Examples of con-
textual operators include even, which instructs the hearer to interpret the asserted propo-
sition as an extreme case along a scale of eventualities (Kay 1990); already, which
instructs the hearer to interpret the denoted state as one that holds prior to the inception
of a process that typically brings it about (Michaelis 1996); and let alone,which instructs
the hearer to interpret the asserted proposition as more informative than a contextually
given proposition within a scalar model (Fillmore, Kay, and O’Connor 1988).
Kay (1990) argues that one can regard the meanings of contextual operators as
conventional implicatures, insofar as they do not alter truth conditions. For example,
as Kay points out, appending even to the front of the sentence John swims in winter
does not change its truth conditions but rather instructs the hearer to evaluate the
proposition against a scalar model of likely swimmers and place the argument “John”
at the low end of this scale (Kay 1990, 53–56). It is debatable whether the BTA can
be treated in a similar vein, as triggering a conventional implicature. If it could be
treated in this manner, it would presumably add its implicature to the meaning ex-
pressed by at-headed PPs such as at midnight. However, (34) and (35) actually do
seem to differ truth conditionally:
(34) She gave the signal at midnight.
(35) She gave the signal by midnight.
Whereas (34) would be false if she had given the signal at, say, 11 PM, (35) would be true
in this situation, as the BTA by midnight merely places an upper bound on signal-giv-
139
ASPECT SELECTORS, SCALES, AND CONTEXTUAL OPERATORS: AN ANALYSIS OF by TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS

ing times.2 We leave open the question of whether the meaning of the BTA is properly
treated as a conventional implicature, but in the meantime we will continue to assume
that it is appropriately treated as a contextual operator, as BTA-bearing predications re-
quire interpreters to retrieve or construct frames containing time series. Like other con-
textual operators, in particular its fellow state selector already (Michaelis 1996), the
BTA can be regarded as pragmatically ambiguous in the sense of Horn (1989): Its se-
mantic structure is schematic in comparison to the rich array of implications it can have
in context. BTAs locate a state relative to a canonical time scale, and there are a variety
of reasons for which one might do this. Thus the sampling point denoted by a BTA might
be an earlier than expected point of eventuation, as in (32) through (33), a deadline, as
in (36), the culmination point of a process, as in (37), or a retrospective assessment point
located within a state of aftermath, as in (38), repeated from (16):
(36) Deadline: Such legislation must be enacted by the end of the month.
(WSJ)
(37) Culmination point: A dollar invested in the stock market in 1926 would have
grown to $473.29 by the end of last June, according to Laurence Siegel,
managing director at Ibbotson Associates Inc.
(WSJ)
(38) Assessment point: The incentives boosted sales for a while, but the pace had
cooled by last month.
(WSJ)
These uses are not distinct at the semantic level but are instead contextual implica-
tions of BTAs.
Conclusion
As Binnick notes, “time adverbials have just begun to be studied” (1991, 300). We
have suggested that one way to advance this ﬁeld of study is to use corpus data, be-
cause corpus examples help us understand why speakers choose the time adverbs they
do. We have shown that intuitions about the use of BTAs found in reference and ped-
agogical grammars are at odds with BTA use patterns in the Wall Street Journal cor-
pus. We have offered a more comprehensive account of the BTA’s function in which
it denotes a sampling point located just after the potential or actual inception of a
state. To account for those examples in which the BTA combines with a perfective
rather than stative verb, we have proposed that it is a coercion trigger: If the predi-
cate with which the BTA combines is nonstative, it is augmented up to a resultant-
state predication. Beyond simply expressing the time at which a given state holds,
BTAs instruct the hearer to interpret the situation described as the end state of a se-
quence of causally connected states. This case study substantiates two general claims
about the meanings of grammatical constructions and the “little words” that they con-
tain: aspectually sensitive constructions may index contextually available knowledge
structures (Michaelis 1996), and such constructions, despite having etiologies that in-
volve semantic “bleaching,” may have rich frame-semantic content (Goldberg 1995).
NOTES
The authors gratefully acknowledge advice and constructive criticism provided by Martha Palmer, Alan
Bell, and an anonymous reviewer.
140
Michael F. Thomas and Laura A. Michaelis

1. The WSJ data used in this study were retrieved from the Penn Treebank II corpus by means of the
search tool Tgrep. Treebank II supplements standard syntactic tags (NP, PP, S, etc.) with functional
tags that express argument-adjunct relations. The Tgrep string used deﬁned BTAs as PPs headed by
by that also bear the functional tag TMP, for “time adverbial.”
2. We presume that BTAs, like interval adverbials, are upward entailing and “downward compatible”
(Herweg 1991). For example, the sentence She ﬁnished the job in two hours entails upward to She
ﬁnished the job in three hours, and is downward compatible (via suspension of its lower-bounding
implicatum) with the assertion In fact, she ﬁnished the job in one hour. Similarly, the assertion She
got home by midnight entails upward to She got home by 1 AM and is downward compatible with the
assertion In fact, she got home by 11 PM.
REFERENCES
Bickel, Balthasar. 1997. Aspectual scope and the difference between logical and semantic representation.
Lingua 102:115–31.
Binnick, Robert. 1991. Time and the verb. New York: Oxford University Press.
De Swart, Henriette. 1998. Aspect shift and coercion. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16:347–85.
Dowty, David. 1977. Toward a semantic analysis of verb aspect and the English “imperfective” progres-
sive. Linguistics and Philosophy 1:45–77.
———. 1979. Word meaning and Montague grammar: The semantics of verbs and times in generative se-
mantics and in Montague’s PTQ. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Fillmore, Charles J. 1985. Frames and the semantics of understanding. Quaderni di Semantica 6:222–54.
Fillmore, Charles J., Paul Kay, and Mary C. O’Connor. 1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical
constructions: The case of let alone. Language 64:501–38.
Fuchs, Marjorie, and Margaret Bonner 2006. Focus on grammar 4: An integrated skills approach (3rd ed.).
New York: Pearson Education.
Godfrey John, Ernest Holliman, and Jane McDaniel. 1992. SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus
for research and development. Proceedings of ICASSP-92. San Francisco, 517–20.
Goldberg, Adele. 1995. Constructions: A construction grammar account of argument structure. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Herweg, Michael. 1991. A critical account of two classical approaches to aspect. Journal of Semantics
8:362–403.
Horn, Laurence. 1989. A natural history of negation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hornstein, Norbert. 1990. As time goes by: Tense and universal grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Huddleston, Rodney, and Geoffrey Pullum. 2002. The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jackendoff, Ray. 1997. The architecture of the language faculty. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kay, Paul. 1990. Even. Linguistics and Philosophy 13:59–111.
———. 1997. Words and the grammar of context. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Krifka, Manfred. 1998. The origins of telicity. In Events and Grammar, ed. Susan Rothstein, 197–235.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Marcus, Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics 19:313–30.
Michaelis, Laura. 1993. The polysemy of adverbial still. Journal of Semantics 10:193–237.
———. 1996. On the use and meaning of already. Linguistics and Philosophy 19:477–502.
———. 2004. Type shifting in construction grammar: An integrated approach to aspectual coercion. Cog-
nitive Linguistics 15:1–67.
Partee, Barbara. 1984. Nominal and temporal anaphora. Linguistics and Philosophy 7:243–86.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A comprehensive gram-
mar of the English language. London: Longman.
Reichenbach, Hans. 1947. Elements of symbolic logic. New York: Macmillan.
Van Zante, Janis, Debra Daise, Charl Norloff, Randee Falk, and M. Kathleen Mahnke. 2000. Grammar
links 3: A theme-based course for reference and practice. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
141
ASPECT SELECTORS, SCALES, AND CONTEXTUAL OPERATORS: AN ANALYSIS OF by TEMPORAL ADJUNCTS


13
Distributive Effects of the Plural Marker –tul
in Korean
JONG UN PARK
Georgetown University
THE PLURAL MARKING PARTICLE –tul in Korean has drawn much attention in the literature
because of its puzzling distributions. First, the particle basically attaches to a noun,
as in (1), whose role is similar to the English plural suffix –s in that it indicates the
plural entities denoted by that noun.1
(1) a. Ai-tul-i
hakko-ey ka-ss-ta.
Child-PL-Nom school-to go-Past-Dec
“The children went to school.”
b. Ku
yeca-ka
ai-tul-kwa
hakko-ey ka-ss-ta.
Dem woman-Nom child-PL-with school-to go-Past-Dec
“That woman went to school with children.”
Second, unlike the English plural suffix –s, the Korean plural marker –tul can
also attach to an adverb and a postpositional phrase (PP), as in (2a) and (2b), respec-
tively. Because it is attached to categories other than nouns, the particle -tul appear-
ing in these environments is often called the non-nominal plural marker.
(2) a. Haksayng-tul-i
tosekwan-eyse yelsimhi-tul
kongpwu-hay-ss-ta.
Student-PL-Nom library-in
laboriously-PL study-do-Past-Dec
Lit. “The students studied laboriously in the library.”
b. Hakasying-tul-i
tosekwan-eyse-tul yelsimhi
kongpwu-hay-ss-ta.
Students-PL-Nom library-in-PL
laboriously study-do-Past-Dec
One might think that the particle –tul attached to the adverb and the PP in (2) is a
morphological realization of syntactic agreement with a plural subject in number. A
number of researchers (cf. Kuh 1987; Lee 1991; Park and Sohn 1993; Yim 2003,
among others) have made such a claim, although the way in which the category host-
ing the non-nominal –tul establishes agreement with the plural antecedent varies de-
pending on the theoretical framework they adopt. If the syntactic agreement approach
were correct, however, we would end up saying that Korean may fall under languages
with syntactic agreement, which is not an uncontroversial conclusion. Furthermore,
143

as will be discussed in the second section of this chapter, even though the syntactic
agreement approach correctly captures a syntactic locality condition imposed on the
non-nominal marker –tul (henceforth NNM –tul) and its plural antecedent, a close
examination of data suggests that the syntactic agreement approach is not sufficient
to account for semantic effects triggered by the NNM –tul.
This chapter will thus claim that the NNM –tul is not simply a reﬂex of syntactic
agreement with subject in number but signals the existence of a plural subject as well
as that of a plural event (in other words, multiple occurrence of an event) denoted by
a predicate (cf. Kim 2005; Park 2005; Song 1997). Particularly, I argue that two types
of distributive readings are available in a sentence with the NNM –tul, an “argument
distributive” and “event distributive” reading, respectively (cf. Oh’s [2002] similar dis-
tinction about distributive readings by –ssik, “each,” in Korean), but each type of read-
ing has a different source. On the one hand, the argument distributive reading is made
possible, regardless of the existence of the NNM –tul, when a distributive operator op-
tionally introduced by a plural noun phrase (NP) distributes each subpart of the plural
subject over subparts of an event denoted by a predicate (contra Kim 1994 and Lee
1991, who claim that the NNM –tul itself is a distributive operator). On the other hand,
the event distributive reading is due to the NNM –tul and arises when variables in the
denotation of the NNM –tul are valued by a given context (cf. Kim 2005).
This chapter is organized as follows. Section 1 reviews a syntactic licensing
condition regulating the distribution of the NNM –tul. Section 2 examines some data
that show systematic patterns of distributive effects, which are derived by the NNM
–tul and the type of predicate that it interacts with. In section 3, under a neo-David-
sonian event semantics, I provide a formal analysis of how the NNM –tul yields
each interpretation in a compositional manner. Section 4 offers some conclusions.
1. Syntactic Licensing Condition on the Non-nominal –tul
Unlike the English plural suffix –s, the Korean plural marker –tul can attach not only
to countable nouns but also to elements other than nouns. However, the distribution
of the NNM –tul is not arbitrary. To begin with, as in (3), the NNM -tul in italic can-
not be used unless a subject to which it relates is plural. However, if we look at the
sentences in (4), it turns out to be insufficient to simply say that the NNM –tul should
take a plural subject as its antecedent.
(3) a. Haksayng-tul-i
kongpwu-lul yelsimhi-tul
hay-ss-ta.
Student-PL-Nom study-Acc
laboriously-PL do-Past-Dec
“The students studied laboriously.”
b. *Han haksayng-i
kongpwu-lul yelsimhi-tul
hay-ss-ta.
One student-Nom study-Acc
laboriously-PL do-Past-Dec
“One student studied laboriously.”
(4) a. John-i [haksayng-tul-i
chayk-ul yelsimhi-tul
ilk-ess-ta]-ko
J.-Nom [student-PL-Nom book-Acc laboriously-PL read-Past-Dec]-
Comp mal-hay-ss-ta.
words-do-Past-Dec
“John said that the students read books laboriously.”
144
Jong Un Park

b. *Haksayng-tul-i [John-i chayk-ul yelsimhi-tul
ilk-ess-ta]-ko
Student-PL-Nom [J.-Nom book-Acc laboriously-PL read-Past-Dec]-
Comp mal-hay-ss-ta.
words-do-Past-Dec
“The students said that John read books laboriously”
(Park and Sohn 1993)
Therefore a ﬁrst hypothesis that can be made from the two data here would be that
in order for the NNM –tul to be licensed, at least two conditions should be met; that
is, an element suffixed with –tul must have a plural subject, and they must be in the
same clause.
Notice, however, that although a plural pronominal subject is in the same clause
as a PP hakkyo-ey, “at school,” in (5), the NNM –tul cannot be licensed. The ungram-
maticality of (5) suggests that the antecedent that is responsible for licensing the NNM
–tul should not only appear in the same clause but also be able to c-command it.
(5) Wuri ai-ka
hakkyo-ey(-*tul) iss-ess-ta.
Our child-Nom school-Loc-PL
exist-Past-Dec
“Our child was at school.”
(Yim 2003)
All in all, the three sets of data thus lead us to propose the syntactic licensing
condition in (6), and any sentence with the NNM –tul that fails to satisfy it will be-
come ungrammatical.
(6) Syntactic Licensing Condition
A constituent to which the non-nominal plural marker –tul attaches must be in
the same clause as a plural subject that c-commands it.
2. Semantic Effects of the Non-nominal –tul
2.1 Distributive Effects and Event Plurality
Whether or not the syntactic agreement approach is pursued, most researchers have
commonly observed that the NNM marker –tul gives rise to distributive effects (Kim
1994; Kim 2005; Lee 1991; Park 2005; Park and Sohn 1993; and Song 1997, among
others). Section 2.1 shows that the non-nominal use of –tul presupposes the existence
of a plural event, which cannot be captured solely by the syntactic licensing condi-
tion in (6).
Let us ﬁrst look at the data in (7). Following Kim (1994), Park and Sohn (1993)
suggest that the third-person singular pronoun kukes, “it,” can be used as a diagnos-
tic for detecting a distributive reading. That is, the legitimate use of the pronoun kukes
in (7a) presupposes the availability of a “collective” reading in the preceding sen-
tence, while the prohibition of the same pronoun in (7b) implies that only a “distrib-
utive” reading can be obtained.
(7) a. Bill-kwa Mary-ka kutul-uy sensayngnim-kkey senmwul-ul kongsonhi
B.-and
M.-Nom they-Gen teacher-Dat
gift-Acc
politely 
tuli-ess-ta.
Kukes/Kukestul-un sikyey-iess-ta.
give-Past-Dec It-Top/They-Top
watch-be.Past-Dec
145
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN

Lit. “Bill and Mary gave a gift to their teacher. It was a watch/they were
watches”
(i) Col: ✓“Bill and Mary together gave a gift.”
(ii) Dist: ✓“Bill and Mary each gave a gift to their teacher.”
b. Bill-kwa Mary-ka kutul-uy sensayngnim-kkey senmwul-ul kongsonhi-tul
B.-and
M.-Nom they-Gen teacher-Dat
gift-Acc
politely-PL 
tuli-ess-ta.
*Kukes-un/Kukestul-un sikyey-iess-ta.
give-Past-Dec It-Top/They-Top
watch-be.Past-Dec
(i) Col: ✗“Bill and Mary together gave a gift.”
(ii) Dist: ✓“Bill and Mary each gave a gift to their teacher.”
(Park and Sohn 1993)
Unlike (7a) in which the preceding sentence can be interpreted ambiguously, when
the NNM –tul is attached to the manner adverb kongsonhi, “politely,” as in (7b), the
singular pronoun kukes cannot be used, suggesting that a collective reading is not
available in the preceding sentence. The contrast (7a) and (7b) leads Park and Sohn
(1993) to a claim that the NNM –tul gets rid of a collective reading but preserves a
distributive reading.
Consider another pair of sentences, in (8), with an inherently collective pred-
icate gurwup, “group” (see Dowty 1987 for a relevant test, in which the author
suggests that the incompatibility of all, a trigger of distributive subentail-
ments, indicates the property as a collective predicate). Notice that if the NNM
–tul is attached to the modifier kacang, “most,” the sentence becomes unnatural,
as in (8b).
(8) a. Wuri pan haksayng-tul-i
hakkyo-eyse kacang kun gurwup i-ess-ta.
Our class student-PL-Nom school-Loc most
big group
be-Past-Dec
Lit. “Students in our class was the most big group.”
b. #Wuri pan haksayng-tul-i
hakkyo-eyse kacang-tul kun gurwup i-ess-
Our
class student-PL-Nom school-Loc most-PL
big group
be-
ta.
Past-Dec
Sentence (8b) obviously satisﬁes the syntactic licensing condition but is nevertheless
semantically anomalous. The unacceptability of (8b) should be attributed to another
source, and I suggest that it is due to a semantic property of the predicate gurwup,
“group,” that does not allow a plural event (cf. Landman 2000; Lasersohn 1995; and
Oh 2002 for the argument that an event can be plural).
If it is the case that the availability of a distributive reading entails the multiple
occurrence of an event, as shown in (7) and (8), it follows that a predicate co-occur-
ring with the NNM –tul should be able to denote a plural event. Therefore a conclu-
sion can be made that the non-nominal use of –tul is allowed only when the
requirements of both a plural subject and a plural event are obeyed.
146
Jong Un Park

2.2 Generalized Patterns of the Semantic Effects of the
Non-nominal –tul
If the semantic function of the NNM –tul is to yield a distributive reading, eliminat-
ing a collective reading, one might predict that it cannot appear with a collective pred-
icate. In section 2.2, however, we will see that this prediction does not hold for every
sentence with a collective predicate. I will instead argue that when combined with
some collective predicates, the NNM –tul yields another type of distributive reading,
which is distinguished from a distributive reading of the kind observed in (7b). As
brieﬂy mentioned in the introduction, on the one hand, in the latter type of distribu-
tive reading (i.e., the argument distributive reading), each of individuals who are mem-
bers of the plural subject is distributed over subparts of an event by the distributive
operator. On the other hand, in the former type (i.e., the event distributive reading),
it is the property of a category to which the NNM –tul attaches that is distributed
over a “plural individual” who is a participant of subevents of an event denoted by a
predicate (cf. section 3.1 for relevant discussion).
Consider (9), where a conjoined noun is predicated of an inherently collective
verb mannata, “meet.” As shown in (9b), unlike the prediction made earlier, the
NNM –tul does not make the sentence ungrammatical or semantically anomalous.
(9) a. Bill-kwa Mary-ka tosekwan-eyse manna-ss-ta.
B.-and
M.-Nom library-in
meet-Past-Dec
“Bill and Mary met in the library.”
(i) Collective: ✓“Bill and Mary met each other in the library.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✗“Bill and Mary each met somebody else.”
b. Bill-kwa Mary-ka tosekwan-eyse-tul manna-ss-ta.
B.-and
M.-Nom library-in-PL
meet-Past-Dec
(i) Collective: ✗“Bill and Mary met each other in the library.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✗“Bill and Mary each met somebody else.”
(iii) Event distributive: ✓“There was an event of Bill and Mary’s meeting
each other and the event of their meeting was repeated more than once
in the library.”
A closer examination of possible interpretations from (9b) enables us to see why the
NNM –tul can still co-occur with the inherently collective predicate. First, because
the predicate is a collective one, we can naturally expect to get a collective reading
from (9a), namely, “There was a single event where Bill and Mary met together”; how-
ever, if the NNM –tul is attached to the locative phrase, the collective reading disap-
pears, as in (9b). Thus we are tempted to conclude that the role of the NNM –tul is
a distributive marker that eliminates a collective reading. However, this conclusion
does not seem to hold because the presence of the NNM –tul in (9b) does not allow
a prototypical distributive reading (called the “argument distributive” reading) either;
that is, we cannot get a reading “Each of John and Mary is distributed over meeting
events that took place in the library.” By contrast, it is not difficult to see another type
of distributive reading (called the “event distributive” reading) arise, as in (9b,iii); in
147
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN

other words, the NNM –tul makes it possible to obtain a reading where the property
of the locative phrase that the marker combines with is distributed over subparts of
the plural subject. Therefore I argue that it is the event distributive reading that makes
the use of the NNM –tul compatible with the collective predicate in (9b).2
Second, look at another pair of examples, where a conjoined subject is predicated
of a verb hwacangha-, “put on makeup,” that can be classiﬁed as an “inherently dis-
tributive” predicate.
(10) a. Mary-wa Jane-un ppalli
hwacang-ul
hay-ss-ta.
M.-with J.-Top
quickly make.up-Acc do-Past-Dec
Lit. “Mary and Jane put on makeup quickly.”
(i) Collective: ✗“Mary and Jane together put on makeup quickly.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✓“Mary and Jane each put on makeup quickly.”
b. Mary-wa Jane-un ppalli-tul
hwacang-ul
hay-ss-ta.
M.-with J.-Top
quickly -PL make-up-Acc do-Past-Dec
(i) Collective: ✗“Mary and Jane together put on makeup quickly.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✓“Mary and Jane each put on makeup.”
(iii) Focus: ✓“It was quickly that an event of Mary’s and Jane’s putting on
makeup each took place.”
Because of the inherent property of the distributive predicate, it is correctly predicted
that while an argument distributive reading is available, as in (10a,ii), a collective read-
ing is not, as in (10a,i). Notice also that even when we attach the NNM –tul to an ad-
verb ppalli, “quickly,” no change appears to arise, at least regarding a collective or an
argument distributive reading, as in (10b,i) and (10b,ii). What is more important is that
unlike the inherently collective verb manna-, “meet,” in (9b), the inherently distribu-
tive predicate hwacangha- fails to induce an event distributive reading even in the
presence of the NNM –tul, and (10b) thus cannot be read as “There was an event of
Mary and Jane’s putting on makeup together and the event took place quickly more
than once.” Instead, the sentence triggers a focus reading, as given in (10b,iii). I sug-
gest that the reason for which an event distributive reading is absent from (10b) is that
the distributive effect of the plural marker –tul becomes vacuous due to the semantic
property of the inherently distributive predicate (similar to how Fox’s [2000] Scope
Economy works).
Third, one more set of sentences where both a collective reading and a distribu-
tive reading are available in the absence of the NNM –tul can make the same point;
for convenience’s sake, I will call this class of verbs “ambiguous” predicates al-
though they are the residue of inherently collective or inherently distributive predi-
cates. Given the patterns that are found in the ﬁrst two sets of examples in (9) and
(10), we would predict that the use of the NNM –tul gets rid of a collective reading
while it allows an event distributive reading. This prediction turns out to be correct,
as illustrated in (11).
(11) a. John-kwa Mary-ka tosekwan-eyse nonmwun-ul sse-ss-ta.
J.-and
M.-Nom library-Loc
paper-Acc
write-Past-Dec
148
Jong Un Park

Lit. “John and Mary wrote a paper in the library.”
(i) Collective: ✓“John and Mary together wrote a paper in the library.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✓“John and Mary each wrote a paper in the
library.”
b. John-kwa Mary-ka tosekwan-eyse-tul nonmwun-ul sse-ss-ta.
J.-and
M.-Nom library-Loc-PL
paper-Acc
write-Past-Dec
(i) Collective: ✗“John and Mary together wrote a paper in the library.”
(ii) Argument distributive: ✓“John and Mary each wrote a paper in the
library.”
(iii) Event distributive: ✓“There was an event of John and Mary’s writing a
paper together, and the event was repeated more than once in the
library.”
On the one hand, in sentence (11a) without the NNM –tul, either a collective or a dis-
tributive reading is available. In sentence (11b) with the NNM –tul, on the other hand,
the argument distributive survives, but the collective reading cannot. More important,
besides the argument distributive reading, we can get another interpretation from
(11b), that is, an event distributive reading, which is described in (11b,iii).
The three sets of data in section 2.2 conﬁrm the long-standing observation that
the NNM –tul gives rise to distributive effects. In particular, the data led me to sug-
gest that the distributive effects appear in two different forms: The ﬁrst type corre-
sponds to an argument distributive reading and another type to an event distributive
reading. At ﬁrst glance, both types of distributive readings appear to be due to the
existence of the NNM –tul. With a closer look at the data, however, one can easily
see that the event distributive reading comes from the NNM –tul, while the argument
distributive reading has another source.
To sum up, it has been revealed in section 2 that, along with the syntactic require-
ment of a plural subject, the requirement of a plural event must be satisﬁed in order
for the NNM –tul to generate distributive effects. I have particularly shown that there
are two types of distributive readings, an argument distributive reading and an event
distributive reading, and the availability of the latter is determined by the interaction
of the NNM –tul with the type of predicate. Because many of the previous analyses
fail to capture these facts, we need to ﬁnd out an alternative approach, which neces-
sarily combines the syntactic perspective with the semantic one. I will take up this is-
sue, advancing an eclectic approach to the behaviors of –tul, in section 3.
3. Two Types of Distributivity Revisited
3.1 Basic Assumptions
Recall that the purely syntactic agreement approach adopting (6) fails to capture the
distributive effects triggered by the NNM –tul, and the previous semantic approach
does not distinguish an argument distributive reading from an event distributive one.
Therefore I claim that both approaches should be combined to account for both the
syntactic distribution of the NNM –tul and the generalized patterns of its semantic
interpretations as reported in section 2.2.
149
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN

As a preliminary step to explain the distributive effects by the NNM plural
marker –tul, this chapter makes a couple of assumptions. First, an analysis that I ad-
vance here is based on a neo-Davidsonian event semantics, which treats every verb
as a one-place predicate taking an event argument (cf. Parsons 1990). Unless events
are included in semantic representations, it would be hard to explain how distribu-
tive effects are derived.
Second, regarding the notion of plurality, this chapter assumes with Link (1983)
that a plural noun is similar to a mass noun in that both are cumulative. For example, if
a is water and b is water, then the sum of a and b is also water. Likewise, if animals in
a certain barn are horses and animals in another barn are horses, then the sum of the en-
tities in both barns are also animals (cf. Link 1983, 303). This cumulative property can
be represented in the following way (where a symbol ∪I stands for cumulation of indi-
viduals): [[animals]]  {x, y, z, x∪Iy, x∪Iz, y∪Iz, x∪Iy∪Iz}. In particular, the plural-
ity deﬁned in terms of cumulativity will be called “individual plurality.” Furthermore,
if the notion of plurality is deﬁned by cumulativity, then it is possible to extend this no-
tion to conjoined nouns, regardless if each conjunct is singular or plural. For example,
a conjoined noun phrase John and Mary can be represented as follows, as it denotes not
only two individuals but also one cumulative entity called “plural individual”: [[John
and Mary]]  {John, Mary, John∪IMary} where the former two members are atomic
parts (which is not an uncontroversial assumption, as the reviewer points out).
Third, it is assumed that every plural NP, including bare plurals or conjoined nouns,
can optionally induce a distributive operator DOp (cf. Kim 2005; Link 1983; Park 2005),
which will be defined in the following way: [[DOp]]  kPkxke∀y[y  x →
∃e’[e’e∧P(e’)(y)]]. Recall that there are two types of distributive readings, an argu-
ment reading and an event distributive reading, and that the latter is due to the NNM
–tul, while the former has to do with the occurrence of the distributive operator. In par-
ticular, the argument distributive reading is a byproduct of scope interactions between
a distributive operator and a plural subject. To be more speciﬁc, the argument distrib-
utive reading is obtained when atomic parts of a plural subject can be distributed by
the distributive operator over an event that is denoted by the whole predicate.
Fourth, I suggest that as deﬁned in (12), the plural marker –tul consists of a null
pro1 whose referent is determined by a c-commanding plural subject and a context-
dependent variable R2 whose referent is fed by a context-sensitive variable assign-
ment gc (cf. Cooper’s [1979] analysis for E-type pronouns, and Kim’s [2005] analysis
for the NNM –tul). In (12), R2 represents the relation between subparts of a plural
subject and the property of an event.
(12) [[tul]]  ∃R ∀z[zpro1 →R2(z)].
Building on the assumptions made here, I provide a compositional analysis of
how the generalized patterns of the semantic effects of the NNM –tul can be derived
in section 3.2.
3.2 A Compositional Analysis of Distributive Effects
3.2.1 Interpretation patterns of ambiguous predicates.
Let us consider how interpretation patterns
from an ambiguous predicate can be explained under the current analysis. For this
150
Jong Un Park

purpose, I analyze the examples in (11), which will not be repeated here due to space
issues. As observed in section 2.2, the ambiguous predicate ssu-, “write,” allows both
a collective and an argument distributive reading even in the absence of the NNM
–tul, as in (11a,i) and (11a,ii), respectively. As in (11b), when the NNM –tul is added,
a collective reading disappears, but an argument distributive reading is preserved,
which lends support for the current claim that an argument distributive reading does
not come directly from the NNM –tul. Figure 13.1 illustrates the abstracted syntac-
tic structure as well as the semantic representation for the collective reading in (11a,i).
Notice that, following Kratzer (1996), I assume that an agent argument is not part of
the meaning of a predicate but is introduced by a separate node labeled VoiceP and
that when the VoiceP combines with the external argument, the rule event identiﬁca-
tion applies.
The representation in ﬁgure 13.1 can be read as “There was an event of John and
Mary’s writing a paper together in the library.” In particular, as discussed in section
3.1, in order for the collective reading to be available, the external argument should
behave like a plural individual, that is, John∪IMary; otherwise, the sentence be-
comes pragmatically anomalous. Note, however, that the collective reading will dis-
appear when the NNM –tul attaches to the PP in the library, as in (11b,i), because
the meaning of the NNM –tul alters the collective reading into an event distributive
one, which will be discussed shortly.
Let us see how the argument distributive reading in (11a,ii) is obtained. As em-
phasized earlier, it is not the NNM –tul but the distributive operator that gives rise to
an argument distributive reading. In particular, the reading arises when the distribu-
tive operator applies to the VoiceP, distributing each individual over subparts of an
event, as in (13).
(13) “John and Mary each wrote a paper in the library.” [ (11a,ii)]
a. [[DOp]]([[VoiceP]])
 kPkxke∀y[y  x →∃e’[e’  e∧P(e’)(y)]](kxke[Agent(x,e)
∧Locative(l,e)∧wrote(e)∧Theme(p,e)])
 kxke∀y[y  x →∃e’[e’  e∧kxke[Agent(x,e)∧Locative(l,e)
∧wrote(e)∧Theme(p,e)](e’)(y)]]
151
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN
Figure 13.1 Representation for (11a,i)

 kxke∀y[y  x →∃e’[e’e∧Agent(y,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)∧wrote(e’)
∧Theme(p,e’)]]
 kxke∀y[y  x →∃e’[e’e∧Agent(y,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)∧wrote(e’)
∧Theme(p,e’)]]
b. [[(13a)]]([[John and Mary]])
 kxke∀y[y  x →∃e’[e’  e∧Agent(y,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)∧wrote(e’)
∧Theme(p,e’)]]({John, Mary})
 ke∀y[y  {John, Mary} →∃e’[e’  e∧Agent(y,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)
∧wrote(e’)∧Theme(p,e’)]]
 ∃e∀y[y  {John, Mary} →∃e’[e’  e∧Agent(y,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)
∧wrote(e’)∧Theme(p,e’)]]
(13a) is the step-by-step derivation that shows the way in which the distributive op-
erator DOp applies to the VoiceP. After that, the result obtained from (13a) is com-
bined with the plural individual John and Mary, as in (13b), and what we get in the
last line is the argument distributive reading in (11a,ii). Because the NNM –tul has
nothing to do with an argument distributive reading, the argument distributive read-
ing in (11b,ii) will be derived in the same way as in (11a,ii).
Turning to an event distributed reading, given the current assumption that it is due
to the NNM –tul, the event distributive reading in (11b,iii) can be obtained by valu-
ing the two variables, pro1 and R2, which are components of the denotation of the
NNM –tul in (12). On the one hand, the plural subject John and Mary will determine
the value of pro1, because the former can c-command the latter, thereby establishing
the syntactic binding relation between them. On the other hand, the variable R2 whose
denotation is given in (14a) should represent a relation between a plural subject and
the property of an event that is denoted by the part of a predicate. In particular, a func-
tion f in (14a) denotes the meaning of a category to which the NNM –tul attaches, and
another function P corresponds to the meaning of VoiceP from which f is excluded.
The step-by-step derivation for the meaning of the NNM –tul is illustrated in (14b).
(14) “There was an event of John and Mary’s writing a paper together, and the event
was repeated more than once in the library.” [ (11b, iii)]
a. [[R2]]  gC2  kP∈D<s,t> kf∈D<s,t> kx∈De∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧P(e’)(x) →
f(e’)]] (|e|  1)
b. [[tul]]  ∃R ∀z[z  pro1 →R2(z)]
 ∃R ∀z[z  J∪IM →R(z)]
 ∀z[z  J∪IM →kP∈D<s,t> kf∈D<s,t> kx∈De ∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧P(e’)(x) →
f(e’)]](z)]
 ∀z[z  J∪IM →kP∈D<s,t> kf∈D<s,t> ∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧P(e’)(z) →f(e’)]]]
 ∀z[z  J∪IM →kf∈D<s,t> ∃e[∀e’[e’ 
e∧kxke[Agent(x,e)∧wrote(e)∧Theme(p,e)](e’)(z) →f(e’)]]]
 ∀z[z  J∪IM →kf∈D<s,t>∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧Agent(z,e’)∧wrote(e’)
∧Theme(p,e’) →f(e’)]]]
152
Jong Un Park

 ∀z[z  J∪IM →∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧Agent(z,e’)∧wrote(e’)∧Theme(p,e’) →
ke[Loc(l,e)](e’)]]]
 ∀z[z  J∪IM →∃e[∀e’[e’  e∧Agent(z,e’)∧wrote(e’)∧Theme(p,e’) →
Loc(l,e’)]]]
What is obtained in the last line in (14b) is the event distributive reading in (11b,iii),
which can be read as “For all z that is part of the plural individual John and Mary,
there was an event of z’s writing a paper such that it took place in the library more
than once.” Notice also that just like the case of the collective reading in (11a,i), the
plural subject John and Mary should not be treated as atomic subparts but as a plu-
ral individual.
3.2.2 Interpretation patterns of collective predicates.
Turning to the interpretation patterns of the
NNM –tul occurring with a collective predicate, let us consider the examples in (9),
which will not be repeated here. First, the collective reading in (9a,i) whose repre-
sentation is given in (15) disappears when the NNM –tul is attached to the PP in the
library, as in (9b,i). This is because a variable pronoun pro in the denotation of the
NNM –tul requires a nonatomic plural subject, forcing an event distributive reading.
(15) ∃e[Agent(B∪IM,e)∧Locative(l,e)∧met(e)] [ (9a,i)]
Second, regardless of the appearance of the NNM –tul, the argument distributive
reading whose representation is given in (16) is not available in both (9a) and (9b).
(16) ✗∃e∀x[x  B∪IM →∃e’[e’ e∧Agent(x,e’)∧Locative(l,e’)∧met(e’)]]
Recall our assumption made in section 3.1 that the argument distributive reading is
derived from the distributive operator, distributing subparts of the plural subject over
subevents denoted by the whole predicate. As shown in (16), however, the inherently
collective predicate manna-, “meet,” by deﬁnition, requires its plural subject Bill and
Mary to be a plural individual Bill∪IMary, so the distributive operator cannot dis-
tribute the plural subject. That is why the argument distributive reading is unavail-
able in both (9a) and (9b).
Third, when we add the NNM –tul to the PP, the event distributive reading, which
is represented in (17), becomes available, as in (9b,iii).
(17) ✓∀z[z  B∪IM →∃e[∀e’[e’  e →Agent(z,e’)∧met(e’) →Locative(l,e’)]]]
[ (9b,iii)]
Observe that the sentence in (9b) satisﬁes the syntactic requirement of a plural sub-
ject, and its counterpart without –tul in (9a) basically allows a collective reading.
Therefore nothing is incompatible with the meaning of the NNM –tul, which is de-
ﬁned in (12), and once the two variables pro1 and R2 are valued, the event distribu-
tive reading can be obtained.
3.2.3 Interpretation patterns of distributive predicates.
Finally, consider the examples in (10),
which will not be repeated here, to see how the interpretation patterns of a distribu-
tive predicate with the NNM –tul are derived. First, the collective reading whose rep-
resentation is given in (18) can be obtained in neither (10a) nor (10b), as the inherently
153
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN

distributive predicate, by deﬁnition, does not allow that reading. Recall that the in-
herently distributive predicate requires its plural subject to be atomic, while the col-
lective reading is possible only when an event denoted by the whole predicate is
distributed over a plural individual.
(18) ✗∃e[Agent({M, J},e)∧quickly(e)∧put-on-makeup(e)]
Second, the argument distributive reading, represented in (19), can be obtained
in both (10a) and (10b), regardless of whether the NNM –tul attaches to the adverb.
(19) ✓∃e∀x[x  {M, J} →∃e’[e’  e ∧Agent(x,e’)∧quickly(e)∧put-on-
makeup(e’)]] [ (10a/b,ii)]
Notice that the inherently distributive predicate by deﬁnition requires its plural sub-
ject to be atomic, so the distributive operator can distribute the atomic parts of the
plural subject Mary and Jane over an event denoted by the whole predicate, that is,
the event of putting on makeup quickly.
Finally, even when the NNM –tul attaches to the adverb ppalli, “quickly,” the
event distributive reading, which can be represented as in (20), is not available, as
shown in (10b,iii).
(20) ✗∀z[z  {M, J} →∃e[∀e’[e’  e →Agent(z,e’)∧put-on-makeup(e’) →
quickly(e’)]]]
The unavailability of the event distributive reading in (10) immediately follows from
the current analysis. To begin with, in order for an event distributive reading to arise,
the predicate should be able to allow a collective reading, but the inherently distrib-
utive predicate hwacangha-, “put on makeup,” does not obviously allow such a read-
ing. Furthermore, as mentioned in section 2.2, the distributive effect of the NNM
plural marker –tul becomes vacuous due to the semantic property of the inherently
distributive predicate. Instead, a focus reading is imposed on the category to which
the NNM –tul attaches.
4. Conclusion
This chapter provided the generalized patterns of interpretations that are drawn from
the NNM –tul and its interactions with different types of predicates. In particular, I
showed that there are two distinct types of distributive effects, an argument reading
and an event distributive reading, and that only the latter is due to the presence of the
NNM plural marker –tul, while the former is due to the distributive operator intro-
duced by a plural subject. In order to explain the generalized patterns, I proposed the
eclectic approach under the neo-Davidsonian event semantics, which combines both
the syntactic agreement approach and the semantic approach.
NOTES
An earlier version of this chapter was presented at the Linguistic Society of America (LSA) 2007 annual
meeting. I am very grateful to Michael Diercks, Sun Hee Hwang, Elena Herburger, and Raffaella Zanut-
tini for their helpful comments and encouragement. My thanks go to the audiences at both the LSA and
GURT conferences and, particularly, to an anonymous reviewer of GURT ’07 Proceedings for pointing
out many unclear issues. All remaining errors are mine.
154
Jong Un Park

1. Note that other categories such as VPs and CPs host the non-nominal –tul in Korean, but our dis-
cussion will be limited to the cases where the marker attaches to adverbs or PPs.
2. Brisson (2003) classiﬁes collective predicates into collective I and collective II in terms of whether
they contain direct objects (DO) in their event composition where a distributive operator resides. The
former include collective activity and accomplishment predicates that allow the distributive opera-
tor to be inserted either in a DO subpart (that triggers a collective reading) or in a verb phrase (VP)
part (that yields a distributive reading). The latter include collective state and achievement ones, and
because they do not contain DO in their event composition, a distributive reading is obligatory. No-
tice, however, that when a conjoined subject is predicated of a verb falling into Brisson’s collective
I in Korean, only a collective reading survives. This chapter does not have an appropriate account
of such disparity and will disregard Brisson-style subclassiﬁcation of collective predicates.
REFERENCES
Brisson, Christine. 2003. Plurals, all, and the nonuniformity of collective predication. Linguistics and Phi-
losophy 26:129–84.
Cooper, Robin. 1979. The interpretation of pronouns. In Syntax and semantics, vol. 10, Selections from
the third Groningen round table, ed. Frank Heny and Halmut Schnelle, 61–92. New York: Academic
Press.
Dowty, David. 1987. A note on collective predicates, distributive predicates, and all. In Proceedings of the
third ESCOL, ed. Fred Marshall: 97–115.
Fox, Danny. 2000. Economy and scope interpretation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, Chong-Hyuck. 2005. The Korean plural marker tul and its implications. PhD diss., University of
Delaware.
Kim, Yookyung. 1994. A non-spurious account of “spurious” Korean plurals. In Theoretical issues in Ko-
rean linguistics, ed. Young-Key Kim-Renand, 303–23. Stanford, CA: CLSI Publication.
Kratzer, Angelika. 1996. Severing the external argument from its verb. In Phrase structure and lexicon,
ed. Johan Rooryck and Laurie Zaring, 109–37. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kuh, Hakan. 1987. Plural copying in Korean. In Harvard studies in Korean linguistics, vol. 2, ed. Susumu
Kuno, Ik-Hwan Lee, John Whitman, Sung-Yun Bak, and Young-Se Kang, 239–50. Seoul: Hanshin.
Landman, Fred. 2000. Events and plurality. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lasersohn, Peter. 1995. Plurality, conjunction and events. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lee, Han-Gyu. 1991. Plural marker copying in Korean. In Harvard studies in Korean linguistics, vol. 4,
ed. Susumu Kuno, Ik-Hwan Lee, John Whitman, Joan Mailing, Young-Se Kang, and Young-joo Kim,
513–28. Seoul: Hanshin.
Link, Godehard. 1983. The logical analysis of plural and mass term: A lattice theory approach. In Mean-
ing, use and interpretation of language, ed. Rainer Bäuerle, Christoph Schwarze, and Arnim von Ste-
chow, 302–23. Berlin: de Gruyer.
Oh, Sei-Rang. 2002. Distributivity in an event semantics. Paper presented at SALT XI, May 13, 2001.
Park, Myung-Kwan, and Keun-Won Sohn. 1993. A minimalist approach to plural marker licensing in Ko-
rean. In MITWPL 20, 193–208. Cambridge, MA: MITWPL.
Park, So-Young. 2005. So-called plural marking –tul and distributivity. Paper presented at Harvard Inter-
national Symposium on Korean Linguistics, August 6.
Parsons, Terence. 1990. Events in the semantics of English. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Song, Jae Jung. 1997. The so-called plural copy in Korean as a marker of distribution and focus. Journal
of Pragmatics 27:203–24.
Yim, Changguk. 2003. Subject agreement in Korean: Move F, attract F, or agree? In TLS 5 Proceedings,
ed. William Earl Griffin, 147–56. Austin: Texas Linguistics Forum.
155
DISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF THE PLURAL MARKER –TUL IN KOREAN


V
Pragmatics


14
The Pragmatics of the French Discourse
Markers donc and alors
STÉPHANIE PELLET
Wake Forest University
SPOKEN FRENCH relies heavily on a vast array of discourse markers, small words that help
speakers in situating discourse at the referential, structural, interpersonal, and cog-
nitive levels (Maschler 1998) and illustrating the import of pragmatics in interactions.
This study focuses on the two French discourse markers donc and alors (both equiv-
alent to the English so in some contexts) in native speaker conversations. Highly fre-
quent in spontaneous speech, donc and alors represent important means of managing
conversation. While several studies have shown that donc and alors express various
discourse functions, the underlying assumption has been that they both broadly ex-
press consequence (i.e., conclusions and results), as in (1):
(1) [nf1 speaks about her lack of experience with the American way of life]1
NF1: J’suis pas là d’puis longtemps alors / donc y’a des choses
NF1: I’ve not been here for very long, so there are things
In this utterance, taken from the native corpus used for the study, there is no way
of saying, from the outset, that either discourse marker is preferable. In fact, past re-
search emphasizes the functional overlap between alors and donc. According to
Hansen (1997), the fact that the two markers may occur together indicates “partially
overlapping distributions” (162). Barnes (1998) also sees common discourse func-
tions between alors and donc. In her second language (L2) study, she asserts that
“donc and alors mark a relation of consequence or a discourse transition” (193);
speciﬁcally, “both alors and donc may mark a shift from one level of the discourse
to another, for example, from descriptive background or commentary to the main story
line” (193). For Barnes, donc and alors are so functionally identical that, at least in
this second language acquisition (SLA) research, she collapses them into one cate-
gory: marking consequence and transition. Finally, in a Canadian French L2 study,
Rehner (2002) grouped together donc, alors, ça fait que (an expression typical of this
variety of French), and so, suggesting that they are form-function equivalents. In fact,
she assigns the same function labels to donc and alors (organizational/transitional,
clariﬁcation/expansion, turn-yielding signal, emphasizer, and punctor).
159

I argue that these two French discourse markers are not functional equivalents
in conversations and that a form-function analysis of recorded interactions between
pairs of native speakers reveals that, to a large extent, donc and alors occur in com-
plementary distribution. Speciﬁcally I argue that donc is used to assert the validity
of a speaker’s viewpoint and occurs within a turn-at-talk (monologal use). By con-
trast, alors is used to preface a reaction to new information usually presented by the
interlocutor and tends to occur turn-initially (dialogal use). In other words, donc
marks continuity, whereas alors marks a shift and indexes a reactive move.
Discourse Markers and Analytical Frameworks
Discourse markers do not have propositional meaning and do not explicitly con-
tribute new information (Brinton 1996; Jucker and Ziv 1998). Neither content words
nor function words, they fulﬁll two main pragmatic functions in spoken discourse:
First, discourse markers guide the interlocutor toward a correct interpretation of the
propositional content of an utterance as well as indicate the speaker’s position with
regard to the utterance (epistemic orientation). They also play an important role in
sequence structuring and turn management. Analytically, binary approaches essen-
tially distinguish between a discourse content function and a discourse management
function (Brinton 1996; Moeschler 2002; Rehner 2002).2 Other approaches can be
viewed as “multiplane”: Schiffrin’s (1987) ﬁve-plane model; Östman’s (1982) tripar-
tite model (anchoring vs. implicitness vs. expressiveness); Roulet’s (1997) modular
model applied to French; or Maschler’s (1998) four-domain approach (referential,
structural, interpersonal, and cognitive) applied to Israeli Hebrew. While binary ap-
proaches may help to sort functions more easily, multiplane approaches better address
overlapping and gray areas that arise because of the typical multifunctionality of dis-
course markers. Hence I ﬁnd that Maschler’s framework best categorizes the differ-
ent pragmatic functions of discourse markers.3
Because discourse markers are said not to contribute new information, narrow
deﬁnitions exclude them from having any referential function. Within the referential
domain, they express logical relationships (causal, coordinative, disjunctive) between
utterances. In other words, when donc marks a consequence, it functions as a gram-
mar word (conjunction of coordination) not a discourse marker.4 Nonetheless, to sort
out the referential and nonreferential (or literal vs. pragmatic) uses of donc and alors
with respect to one another, their referential use must be included: although a dis-
tinction exists between connectives (referential function) and other “pragmatic” func-
tions of the same linguistic form, it is situated at an abstract plane. The functions are
not clearly distinguished in the minds of the speakers—in fact, the distinction is
made post facto by linguists. Thus it is possible to hypothesize some sort of interac-
tion between the unique form of a discourse marker and its different functions.
The Corpus
This study is based on an analysis of a corpus of three pairs of native speakers
(three men, three women) who discussed two topics for ten minutes, for a total of
one hour of recordings. The native-speaker data was part of a larger study involv-
ing language learners; therefore the task and type of interaction were designed to
160
Stéphanie Pellet

serve that purpose. The main criterion for the study design was to obtain conver-
sational data. Because discourse markers are a trademark of informal oral expres-
sion, creating an informal context would be more conducive to their production
and allow the participants equal opportunities to use them at different conversa-
tional points, for instance, embedded in a question or prefacing an answer to a ques-
tion. In fact, both alors and donc are used at these junctures with specific speaker
intent. If the data do not qualify as “naturally occurring” (participants volunteered
for the study and did not choose the topics for their semiguided interaction), the
study situation did resemble a natural conversation in that there was no
interviewer/interviewee structure, which often leads to unequal participation and
power issues.
The topics for the two conversational tasks tapped into everyday situations, re-
quiring no speciﬁc knowledge: participants were ﬁrst led to express their opinions
on French perceptions of Americans; they then had to plan a trip to France together.
The two tasks provided some degree of cross-task validation (see Chaudron 2003)
and created more opportunities for openings and closings, typically signaled by dis-
course markers (Andersen et al. 1999).
Results
The results of the distribution of donc and alors with respect to their turn position
are given in table 14.1. The numeric results conﬁrm at least the position component
of the hypothesis for the corpus under analysis: alors occurs more often at the be-
ginning of a turn (thirteen out of nineteen occurrences), and donc more often within
a turn (forty-nine out of ﬁfty-nine occurrences). A striking result is the three times
greater frequency of donc over alors, which held not only overall but also across par-
ticipants, despite individual variation, as indicated by table 14.2.5 The study’s small
sample cannot address individual variation, but the nature of the task (conversation)
161
THE PRAGMATICS OF THE FRENCH DISCOURSE MARKERS DONC AND ALORS
Table 14.1
Distribution of alors and donc with Respect to Turn
Turn Initial 
Within Turn 
Marker
(dialogal %)
(monologal %)
Total
alors
13 (68)
6 (32)
19
donc
10 (17)
49 (83)
59
Table 14.2
Distribution of alors and donc per Participant
Marker
Nf1
Nm1
Nf2
Nm2
Nf3
Nm3
Total
alors
2
1
2
2
9
3
19
donc
20
14
3
4
8
10
59

may explain the differential frequency: alors, because it can mark sequentiality, is
particularly important in oral narratives, which usually follow a chronology, whereas
donc is likely to dominate interactions.
Alors
According to the hypothesis, alors is preferred at the beginning of a turn to preface
a reaction to newly received information. There were nineteen occurrences of alors
in the native corpus under study; thirteen occurred at the beginning of a turn, with
only six occurring within a turn.
Alors turn-initial (thirteen occurrences).
When alors is turn-initial, its discourse functions fall
into two broad categories. First, it fulfills the function of “attaque de discours”
(Bouacha 1981), or discourse opening, for which donc is never used in my data. This
function is illustrated in examples (2) and (3):
(2) Alors, les vacances en France . . .
So, vacation in France . . .
(3) Alors . . . Sur le matérialisme des Américains . . . ben . . . c’est vrai . . .
So . . . About the materialism of the American people . . . well . . . it’s true . . .
Because alors opens the discursive sequence, it is obviously turn-initial. It shifts the
interlocutors from [0] (i.e., no discourse) to [purpose for the interaction]. There can-
not be continuity here as there is no preceding discourse.
Second, alors is a reactive marker and functions as an anaphoric to reprise the
information just given by the interlocutor to present a different perspective or an al-
ternative proposal, or to take issue with the interlocutor’s position or information. For
instance, in (4) Nm3 presents an alternative:
(4) NF3: Je veux partir, je veux voir aut’chose.
NM3: Ben alors pourquoi pas dans l’Nord?
NF3: I want to leave, I want to see somethin’else.
NM3: Well then why not in the North?
The reactive aspect of alors is particularly evident in the English equivalent, which
better translates the marker as then rather than so. As it occurs at the beginning of
the turn, alors emphasizes that the alternative proposal (here, going to northern
France) directly derives from the information just shared by the interlocutor.
Taking up an issue after just-shared information is often reinforced with the co-
occurrence of the contrastive marker mais. There were three such instances in this
corpus, as in (5):
(5) NF3: /attends/ si on prend l’autoroute A-un . .
NM3: Ben voilà.
NF3: c’est direct y’a deux heures.
NM3: Ben voilà. On est en Normandie sans problème.
162
Stéphanie Pellet

NF3: Ouais mais alors c’est pareil en Normandie va y’avoir tous les touristes
pour le D-day pour euh la plage du débarquement . . .
NF3: /wait/ if we take the highway A-one . . .
NM3: Well there you go.
NF3: It’s direct it’s two hours.
NM3: There you go. We’re in Normandy without any problem.
NF3: Yeah but then it’s the same thing in Normandy there’s going to be all the
tourists for the D-day for uh the landing beach . . .
In fact, the preferred format of response with alors at the beginning of the turn is
with another marker. The sequence can comprise up to three markers preceding alors
and forming one single intonation unit: (1) a “receptive” marker (receiving or taking
in the information); (2) an optional phatic marker; with (3) a contrastive marker, fol-
lowed by alors, as, for example, (6):
(6) NF3: Après euh . . . toi tu t’occupes de l’organisation?
NF3: Ben ouais mais alors comment j’fais moi pour trouver un gîte?
NM3: After uh . . . you, you take care of the organization?
NF3: Well yeah but then how do I do, me, to ﬁnd lodging?
Ben ouais forms a subunit that sets the stage for marking the speaker’s different per-
spective. Its apparent function is to signal that the interlocutor’s contribution (a co-
operative move in surface) is taken into account. At the same time, ben speciﬁcally
indexes the contribution as containing evident information, or information that does
not give a complete perspective. Affirmative ouais (as opposed to standard oui) is
not a neutral phatic response but signals the speaker’s mitigated attitude, which is con-
ﬁrmed when the speaker brings up the issue of lodging. Mais alors forms the second
subunit and prefaces the upcoming disagreement with, or at least objection to, the
information just received by the speaker. Alors anaphorically evokes and reacts to the
information by marking the speaker’s distancing from its propositional content.
Example (7) represents an exception. The speaker presents her interlocutor with
a problem following just-heard information, yet alors is utterance-ﬁnal:
(7) NF3: On a la forêt, on a le lac, on va faire une petite randonnée en vélo.
NF3: On va pouvoir prendre les vélos alors?
NM3: We’ve got the forest, we’ve got the lake, we’re going to a little bike ride.
NF3: We’re going to be able to take the bikes then?
In fact, example (4) could be rephrased as (4) yet carry out the same pragmatic func-
tion:
(4) NF3: Je veux partir, je veux voir aut’chose.
NM3: Ben pourquoi pas dans l’Nord alors?
NF3: I want to leave, I want to see somethin’else.
NM3: Well why not in the North then?
163
THE PRAGMATICS OF THE FRENCH DISCOURSE MARKERS DONC AND ALORS

Although alors is utterance-ﬁnal in (7), it is still dialogical: It occurs at a point of
turn taking and is uttered by the speaker who regains the ﬂoor. This question has a
yes/no answer, and as is typical of spoken French, the speaker resorts to intonation
rather than subject-verb inversion to signal the interrogative value. Because there is
no interrogative word, I believe that moving alors to the end of the utterance rein-
forces the rising intonation pattern associated with a question. One more reason to
consider (7) dialogal is that a question inherently, if brieﬂy, returns the ﬂoor to the
interlocutor. In (7), alors shifts the focus from the interlocutor’s proposal of riding
bikes to taking bikes. By contrast, (4) does contain a question word, so there is no
need to mark the interrogative pattern. Alors does not have to carry that burden (sig-
naling a question), and (4) is therefore preferred. Note that in (4) ben and alors are
split, which certainly occurs in conversations but may not be the preferred format.
In sum, alors used at the beginning of a turn is a reactive marker that presents
the interlocutor with a problem that he or she had not taken into account but that de-
rives from his or her newly presented information. In this sense, the discursive alors
does not represent a consequence or conclusion but a new perspective, often involv-
ing a problem. Alors allows the speaker to realize a shift of focus.
Alors within a turn (six occurrences).
In my data, alors within a turn fell into three categories.
First, it marked a shift to a new topic, as in (8):
(8) NF3: enﬁn . . . c’est un petit peu comme ça. Alors après on nous demande . . .
[continues]
NF3: I mean . . . it’s a little bit like that. So after we’re being asked . . .
[continues]
Second, in a narrative, it marked a return to the foreground (another type of shift),
as in (9):
(9) NF1: Et j’étais chez des amis, et le 31 d . . . le 31 au soir . . . alors on sort et
tout euh . . .
NF1: And I was at a friend’s place, and the 31st d . . . the 31st in the evening
. . . so we got out and all uh . . .
Third, in if constructions, alors introduced the apodosis (a consequence and/or con-
clusion), a function that cannot be assumed by donc (Hansen 1997), so no overlap is
possible.
(10) NF3: Bon déjà si les Américains sont très conformistes, une conclusion serait
peut-être: la vie aux Etats-Unis est artiﬁcielle alors. Mais alors est-ce
que ça aussi/
NF3: OK for one thing is the Americans are very conformists, a conclusion could
be: life in the United States is artiﬁcial then. But then does that too/
The second instance of alors (co-occurring with the contrastive marker mais) is
not functionally identical and indexes a focus shift. This time, the speaker is reacting
to what she just said. In all three instances, alors functions anaphorically, as it often
164
Stéphanie Pellet

does, to refer back to a newly presented (potential) situation. More important, alors
marks a shift in focus: In (10), although we don’t know exactly what Nf3 is about to
say, the question marker “est-ce que” indicates that she is considering a new perspec-
tive. In other words, alors does not entail continuity here but rather a rupture (a shift).
In sum, when alors occurs within a turn, it usually marks a shift to a (sub)topic
and, in narration, to the next chronological event (sequencing). In the only instance
when alors marked a conclusion (if constructions), donc could not be used, so there
is no overlap with donc.
Donc
The argument made for donc is that, because of its ability to index continuity, it pref-
erentially appears within a turn to assert the validity of a speaker’s viewpoint (dis-
course content function). By extension, donc is also used to keep the ﬂoor (discourse
management function), although at times it can be used to relinquish it. Its forty-nine
within-turn occurrences out of ﬁfty-nine indicate that the native speakers of this cor-
pus markedly prefer this placement (monologal use), and the difference between di-
alogal (turn-initial) and monologal occurrences is even more marked (in the reverse
direction) than for alors.
Donc turn-initial (ten instances).
The marked preference for the monologal use of donc ﬁnds
an unexpected conﬁrmation in a particular set of turn-initial occurrences: where the
initial use of donc marked a new turn, ﬁve of the ten occurrences should be reana-
lyzed as instances of monologal use. There, the interlocutor gives a phatic response
to encourage the speaker to pursue, which is exactly what happens:
(11) NM3: En France on aime beaucoup plus se poser contre ce qu’on nous dit
NF3: Mmm
NM3: Donc euh /dans c’cas-là/ y’a p’t-être moins d’conformisme
NF3: /Mais pas forcément . . . /
NM3: In France we like much better to take an opposing stance to what we’re
told
NF3: Mmm
NM3: So uh /in that case/there may be less conformism
NF3: /But not necessarily . . . /
By indexing topic continuity, donc legitimizes the speaker’s regaining the ﬂoor with,
in the previous instance, the blessing of the interlocutor.
Donc is therefore used at two levels: Its discourse content function marks topic
continuity through the indexing of a consequence, and, more strategically, its discourse
management function allows the speaker to keep the ﬂoor. To some degree, donc
overtly marks topic continuity as a connector, but pragmatically, as a discourse marker,
it operates somewhat covertly as a conversational strategy. Native speakers may not
be conscious of it, but their use of donc demonstrates that playing off its overt/covert
functions is part of their pragmatic competence (Svartvik 1979).
165
THE PRAGMATICS OF THE FRENCH DISCOURSE MARKERS DONC AND ALORS

The cumulating of the two functions is apparent in the next instance, where the
two speakers compete to gain the ﬂoor:
(12) NM1: ouais ouais mais bon /j’veux dire/
NF1: /donc/ après y’a une distance [inaudible] ils créent un cercle d’amis
NM1: yeah yeah but well /I mean/
NF1: /so/ after there’s a distance [inaudible] they create a circle of friends
The speaker using donc does get the ﬂoor; its ability to index continuity asserts the
right of the speaker to pursue his idea.
Donc turn-initial can have a dialogal function when used to mark a conﬁrmation
request:
(13) NF1: Enﬁn tout l’sud quoi j’connais pas l’nord.
NM1: Ouais.
NF1: Donc toi tu . . . t’organises toi?
NF1: Well the entire South DM I don’t know the North.
NM1: Yeah.
NF1: So you . . . you . . . you organize, you?
Donc again expresses topic continuity—checking whether the interlocutor’s assertion
and the speaker’s understanding of it match. Donc can also be used to mark a reca-
pitulation, the effect of which is to verify agreement between the interlocutors (here,
planning a vacation in France) before moving on.
(14) NF1: Ouais d’accord.
NM1: Bon. Donc Marseille. Oui mais d’la Corse, euh ok
NF1: Yeah all right.
NM1: Ok. So Marseille. Yes but from Corsica, uh ok
Therefore not only is donc turn-initial rare in my data, but also it is used as a con-
versational strategy to regain the ﬂoor through its ability to index continuity rather
than mark a consequence. Conceptually, consequence and continuity are not unre-
lated, which explains how donc can take on discourse functions such as prefacing con-
ﬁrmation requests and recapitulations.
Donc within a turn (forty-nine occurrences).
Donc was overwhelmingly used within a turn
(83%). It was used argumentatively to mark conclusions and results in 50 percent of
the cases, which means that in the other half, it was used for other functions, giving
even less ground for functional overlap with alors. The ability of donc to index con-
tinuity is reinforced by its use to stress the truth condition of the utterance with et,
c’est vrai que, ﬁnalement, and c’est clair que (and, it’s true that, ﬁnally, and it’s clear
that, respectively), as in examples (15) and (16):
(15) NF1: On a cette idée-là par rapport à l’image en fait que les Etats-Unis veulent
véhiculer d’eux au reste du monde. Donc c’est vrai que le système de
santé, ben euh, il est permissible
166
Stéphanie Pellet

NF1: We have this idea with respect to the image in fact that the United States
want to present to the rest of the world. So it’s true that the health system,
well uh, it’s permissible
(16) NM3: En plus là on est en train d’parler d’vacances d’été donc c’est clair que
euh . . . [laughs] y’aura du monde partout [pause] y’a qu’chez soi où y’a
personne ﬁnalement!
NM3: In addition here we’re talking about summer vacation so it’s clear that uh
. . . [laughs] it will be crowded everywhere [pause] there’s only at home
that there’s no one in the end!
Such terms also reinforce the validity of the speaker’s point of view. The use of the
contrastive marker mais as a repair strategy after using donc is an indirect conﬁrma-
tion that donc indexes topic continuity or validation of the viewpoint, as in (17):
(17) NF1: Ah oui parce que les Parisiens sont plus . . . sont plus à Paris donc
ﬁnalement mais euh . . .
NM1: Y’a qu’des touristes! Y’a qu’des touristes, américains entre autres euh ou
allemands
NF1: Ah yes because the Parisians are no longer . . . are no longer in Paris so
ﬁnally but uh . . .
NM1: There are only tourists! There are only tourists, American among others
uh or German
In this example, ﬁnalement is in line with donc and marks continuity of the argument,
whereas the adjacent mais allows the speaker to back out of this continuity. In fact,
the interlocutor ﬁlls in the counterargument that is missing in Nf1’s turn.
Donc can also preface a recapitulation (Hansen 1997; Pellet 2005) at the begin-
ning of a turn and within a turn. By marking that a decision has been reached, the speak-
ers may progress toward the completion of their conversational agenda, as in (18):
(18) NM3: C’est pas un problème. Euh bon ben donc on a décidé le gîte. On peut
p’t-être aller visiter quelques châteaux . . .
NM3: That’s not a problem. Uh ok well so we decided on the lodging. We can
maybe go and visit a few castles . . .
Within a frameshift, as in example (19), donc reestablishes topic continuity after the
disjunctive or contrastive marker mais and thus establishes the speaker’s right to con-
tinue.6 The use of the interactive marker tu vois encourages the interlocutor to share
the speaker’s viewpoint:
(19) NM1: C’est une région qu’est extrêmement belle au point de vue nature c’est
une région qu’est pas plate parce que j’en ai marre des régions plates
mais donc tu vois c’est un peu vallonné y’a des . . . euh des pas des
précipices y’a des huh des p’tites montagnes, des collines . . .
NM1: It’s a region that’s extremely beautiful nature-wise it’s a region that’s not
ﬂat because I’m sick of ﬂat regions but so you see it’s a little hilly there
are . . . uh some not canyons there are uh small mountains, hills . . .
167
THE PRAGMATICS OF THE FRENCH DISCOURSE MARKERS DONC AND ALORS

Finally, donc is used to signal that the speaker is engaged in a cognitive process (see
Schourup 2001 for well) with the practical result of allowing the speaker either to
retain or to yield the ﬂoor. Donc marks the speaker’s intention to pursue a thought
that is not yet formulated. In fact, the speaker may give up on further elaboration,
and in this case, the use of donc followed by either a pause or a hesitation particle
offers the interlocutor a point of entry, as (20) illustrates:
(20) NM1: Parce que qu’tu prennes euh que tu prennes un hôtel et que tu restes dans
cet hôtel pendant huit jours ou qu’tu prennes des hôtels différents et qu’tu
. . . ça r’vient à peu près au même prix donc euh . . .
NM1: Because whether you take uh whether you take a hotel and you stay in
this hotel for eight days or whether you take different hotels and you . . .
it comes more or less to the same price so uh . . .
This processing use of donc within turn (twelve instances in the corpus, or 25%) may
be viewed as an exceptional case. Donc seems to occur at the end of a turn, but the
interlocutor is indirectly encouraged to ﬁll in with the unstated but obvious conclu-
sion. The concluding thought “va de soi,” that is, “goes without saying,” is acted out
here literally. Besides this discourse content function, processing donc may simulta-
neously have the discourse management function of a yield signal. Note that the
English so functions similarly.
Conclusion: Alors donc
In this corpus, French native speakers strongly associate donc with marking the va-
lidity of their own viewpoint because it indexes continuity through its core value of
inferential evidential; that is, it asserts that something logically follows from what
has just been said. The corollary is that it can assume a discourse management func-
tion by indexing (logical) continuity. Donc can be and is used to keep the ﬂoor, and
argumentative donc is therefore used within a turn-at-talk, which explains why, in (21),
donc is possible but not alors:
(21) C’est le cousin de ma femme, et donc / *alors mon cousin par alliance
(from Jayez 1988, 136, cited in Hansen 1997)
He is my wife’s cousin, and so my cousin by marriage.
By contrast, native speakers associate alors with the processing of just-heard in-
formation. Alors manifests a change of orientation following an assessment of the
interlocutor’s newly shared perspective on a topic in progress. At the discourse con-
tent level, alors allows the speaker to index a reactive move or even to mark a dis-
tancing from the interlocutor’s position. At the conversation management level, the
marker gives the speaker an opportunity to interject and (or in order to) get the ﬂoor,
and thus alors is favored in a dialogal context, at the beginning of a turn, which ex-
plains why, in (22), alors is possible but not donc:
(22) Tu sais tout, alors / * donc donne-moi le tiercé
(from Roulet 1997, 151)
You know everything so give me the three winning numbers for the 
horse-race
168
Stéphanie Pellet

There were no instances of the compound form alors donc in my data, and the
compound is far less frequent than each individual marker. It is a known fact that donc
alors cannot occur, but why? I contend that when the markers occur together, alors
functions at the structural level, while donc functions at the content level. In other
words, alors operates sequentially to mark forward movement, whereas donc marks
the end of a previous aside and continuity with the previous topic. The latter is im-
portant because it justiﬁes the speaker’s going on. Therefore alors must occur before
donc. As there were no instances of alors donc in my corpus, I explored the DELIC
corpus (www.up.univ-mrs.fr/delic/corpus/index.html ) for alors donc and found that
it occurs more frequently within turn (sixteen out of twenty-seven occurrences) than
at the beginning (twelve out of twenty-seven occurrences).
The corpus used for this study was limited in sample size and duration of inter-
action. The pair format also favored a cleaner interactional pattern. With multiple
speakers, the turn-taking dynamics would change, and the conversational structure,
fairly linear with two speakers, would likely become messier.7 More competition to
get the ﬂoor might lead to cooperation issues among speakers and to the possible
emergence of a dominant speaker. Nonetheless, the semantics and patterns of the use
of donc as a marker indexing continuity, evidentiality, and inferentiality should hold
true, just as alors is foremost a marker indexing sequentiality and focus shift.
NOTES
1. Nf1 reﬂects the coding system used: N stands for native speaker, f for female, and the number sim-
ply reﬂects the order of recording sessions.
2. More recently, Netz and Kuzar (2007) also make the case for content versus management discourse
functions beyond discourse markers.
3. Maschler relies on single form-function equivalences to explain her model, while of course, in real-
ity, each discourse marker fulﬁlls several, usually related discourse functions.
4. The distinction between function and content words is not helpful here because discourse markers
obviously fulﬁll functions at the pragmatic level.
5. Individual variation along with age (see Andersen 2001) and gender (see Brinton 1996) character-
ize the use of discourse markers.
6. “Frameshift” is a term usually associated with narratives, meaning that the speaker returns to the
main point of the story or ends a digression, both of which are signaled with a marker.
7. Each speaker implicitly recognizes that the turns will alternate.
REFERENCES
Andersen, Elain S., Maquela Brizuela, Beatrice DuPuy, and Laura Gonnerman. 1999. Cross-linguistic ev-
idence for the early acquisition of discourse markers as register variables. Journal of Pragmatics
31:1339–51.
Andersen, Gisle. 2001. Pragmatic markers and sociolinguistic variation: A relevance-theoretic approach
to the language of adolescents. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Barnes, Betsy K. 1998. The acquisition of connectors in French L2 narrative discourse. French Language
Studies 8:189–208.
Bouacha, Ali. 1981. Alors dans le discours pédagogique: Epiphénomène ou trace d’opérations discursives?
Langue Française 50:39–52.
Brinton, Laurel. 1996. Pragmatic markers in English: grammaticalization and discourse functions. New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Chaudron, Craig. 2003. Data collection in SLA research. In The handbook of second language acquisi-
tion, ed. Catherine J. Doughty and Michael H. Long, 762–828. Oxford: Blackwell.
169
THE PRAGMATICS OF THE FRENCH DISCOURSE MARKERS DONC AND ALORS

Hansen, Maj-Britt. 1997. Alors and donc in spoken French: A reanalysis. Journal of Pragmatics 28:153–87.
Jayez, Jacques. 1988. Alors: Description et paramètre. Recherches Pragmatiques sur le Discours 9:133–75.
Jucker, Andreas, and Yael Ziv. 1998. Discourse markers: Introduction. In Discourse markers: Description
and theory, ed. Andreas Jucker and Yael Ziv, 1–12. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Maschler, Yael. 1998. Rotsè lishmoa kéta? “Wanna hear something weird/funny [lit. ‘a segment’]”?: The
discourse markers segementing Israeli Hebrew talk-in-interaction. In Discourse markers: Descrip-
tion and theory, ed. Andreas Jucker and Yael Ziv, 13–60. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Moeschler, Jacques. 2002. Pragmatics and linguistic encoding: Evidence from the conceptual/procedural
distinction. www.unige.ch/lettres/linge/moeschler/publication_pdf/pragmatics.pdf (accessed Octo-
ber 15, 2004).
Netz, Hadar, and Ron Kuzar. 2007. Three marked theme constructions in spoken English. Journal of Prag-
matics 39 (2): 305–35.
Östman, Jan-Ola. 1982. The symbiotic relationship between pragmatic particles and impromptu speech.
In Impromptu speech: A symposium, ed. Nils E. Enkvist, 147–77. Abö: Abö Akademy.
Pellet, Stéphanie. 2005. The development of competence in French interlanguage pragmatics: The case of
the discourse marker “donc.” PhD diss., University of Texas, UMI.
Rehner, Katherine. 2002. The development of aspects of linguistic and discourse competence by advanced
second language learners of French. PhD diss., University of Toronto, UMI.
Roulet, Eddy. 1997. A modular approach to discourse structures. Pragmatics 7 (2): 125–46.
Schiffrin, Deborah. 1987. Discourse markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schourup, Lawrence. 2001. Rethinking well. Journal of Pragmatics 33 (7): 1025–60.
Svartvik, Jan. 1979. Well in conversation. In Studies in English linguistics for Randolph Quirk, ed. Sid-
ney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech, and Jan Svartvik, 162–77. London: Longman.
170
Stéphanie Pellet

15
“Little Words” in Small Talk: Some
Considerations on the Use of the Pragmatic
Markers man in English and macho/tío in
Peninsular Spanish
LAURA ALBA-JUEZ
Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia
PRAGMATIC MARKERS are linguistic forms that are very common and frequent in sponta-
neous conversation, and, as Carranza (1997) points out, they can signal not only
some kind of attitude on the part of the speakers toward their interlocutor(s) but also
the limits and relationships between different parts of the text or discourse.
In this chapter I present, discuss, and analyze (both qualitatively and quantita-
tively) the different uses and discourse functions of the pragmatic markers man in
English (E) and macho tío in Peninsular Spanish (PS), including some reﬂections on
and analysis of their feminine counterpart (tía and “macha”) in Spanish.
The corpus used for the analysis has been taken from different sources, such as
the online concordances of oral language of the British National Corpus (BNC) in
Variation in English Words and Phrases (VIEW; Davies 2005) and US TV Talk, as
well as some American radio interviews and movies. For Spanish, the main source
has been the oral section of the Corpus de Referencia del Español Actual (CREA),
which includes television and radio shows, telephone conversations, and face-to-face
oral interactions among friends, workmates, or members of a family. The recording
and transcriptions of some conversations in Spanish, carried out by the researcher and
author of this article, have also been made use of.
Following Fraser’s (1996, 2006) taxonomy, we could label the markers man (E)
and macho/tío (PS) as parallel pragmatic markers, “whose function is to signal an
entire message in addition to the basic message” (1996, 21). I also follow Fraser in
his view of pragmatic markers as expressions that occur as part of a discourse seg-
ment but are not part of the propositional content of the message conveyed and that
do not contribute to the meaning of the proposition per se.
Within parallel markers, macho/tío (PS) and man (E) belong to the subclass of
vocatives, but, as will be shown with examples in the following sections, they can
also be found fulﬁlling the functions of any of the other three subclasses in Fraser’s
171

taxonomy, namely speaker displeasure markers, solidarity markers, and focusing
markers.
Other authors, such as Gille (2006) refer to these markers as a kind of “conver-
sational appendix,” a term deﬁned as a mechanism that is typically conversational in
nature and that is used in order to modify the original, basic message or to make sure
that the appropriate interactive effect is conveyed. Within the class of conversational
appendices, Gille classiﬁes the Spanish macho as an “intersubjectivity appendix”
(apéndice de intersubjetividad), which is a kind of appendix that addresses the inter-
locutor(s) and consequently regulates the ongoing interaction.
As authors like Gili Gaya (1970) or Martín Zorraquino (1998) point out, prag-
matic markers1 can be associated to different communicative registers. Some mark-
ers are normally associated with the written registers and others with the spoken
ones. The markers being analyzed herein (man [E] and macho/tío [PS]) are normally
found in spoken, informal registers in both English and Spanish, and, as the results
of this study show, they very frequently form part and are features of the so-called
small talk. The underlying perspective of small talk in this study adheres to that of
Coupland (2000) and many other authors who, far from considering this kind of
talk as “small,” view it as a useful tool in helping individuals accomplish social goals
such as building solidarity and connection with their interlocutors, putting people
at ease, or winning the listener’s approval of their own perspective (among other
functions). Small talk then acts as a catalyst for “big talk,” also called (according
to Tracy and Naughton 2000) “information exchange,” “formal remarks,” or “real
business” (63).
An important feature of small talk is the fact that, in some way or another, the
speakers always tend toward the use of conversational strategies that entail a certain
degree of solidarity. As will become apparent, the markers studied herein very fre-
quently carry a solidarity message that is independent from, but at the same time ac-
companies, the basic propositional message of the utterance. This fact makes the study
of these markers a fertile ground for their analysis from the linguistic politeness per-
spective. In the examples found in the corpus, these markers tend to be used within
positive politeness strategies (Brown and Levinson 1987), in order to mark the affil-
iation (Bravo 1999) bonds between the interlocutors. However, on some occasions
they may also become markers of a greater or lower degree of impoliteness (in the
sense given to it by Kaul de Marlangeon 1995; Culpeper 1996; or Alba-Juez 2006,
2007), as well as of disapproval or disbelief.
Another interesting function of the markers man (E) and macho/tío (PS) is their
turn-changing function (Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson 1974), that is, they are very
frequently found at the beginning or end of an utterance, where they clearly mark the
change of a turn in the ongoing conversation. This function is related to the above-
mentioned view (Gille 2006) of these markers as interaction regulators.
It is interesting and important to point out that these expressions, as well as any
other pragmatic markers, are versatile, multifunctional, and polysemous, for they
communicate not only one message but also different and various messages, depend-
ing on the context and situation in which they are found.
172
Laura Alba-Juez

Some similarities and differences between the use of man in English and
macho/tío in Spanish will be commented on as well, although I do not intend to ar-
rive at deﬁnitive or ﬁnal contrastive conclusions.
Man (E) and Macho/Tío (PS) as Parallel Pragmatic Markers
When used as pragmatic parallel markers, the “little words” man (E) and macho/tío (PS)
may occur in initial, middle, or ﬁnal position in the utterance, as illustrated in table 15.1.
According to Fraser (1996), there are a number of small classes of parallel mark-
ers, of which he presents the following four: (a) vocative markers, (b) speaker dis-
pleasure markers, (c) solidarity markers, and (d) focusing markers. It is evident that
the markers man (E) and macho/tío (PS) belong to class a, that is, to the class of voca-
tive markers. However, apart from being clearly vocative, in some situations they can
also be classiﬁed as speaker displeasure, solidarity, or focusing markers. Examine the
following examples:
(1) (Scene: in the limousine)
Lee and Carter land in the back. Slam into their seats and try to catch their
breath. The TWO MEN START TO LAUGH when they realize they’re alive!
CARTER: We made it, man.
LEE:
No problem.
(Movie Script: Rush Hour 2, by Jeff Nathanson)
Example (1) is one of many instances where the marker man has been found to be
used not only as a vocative but also as a solidarity marker. Here both men are happy
because they ﬁnally beat their enemies, and therefore the language and expressions
they use are an explicit sign of solidarity and friendship.
But many other times this vocative marker can be used with a very different, al-
most opposite, meaning, as is the case in example (2), where Lucy Lawless shows
her anger after the New Orleans ﬂoods in 2005:
(2) LUCY :
You know the best thing to come out, the only good thing that can
come out of this, is this is our wake up call to consciousness, man;
you gotta be awake for what’s coming. Consciousness is going to
stop us all being lazy, intellectually, emotionally, in our
173
“LITTLE WORDS” IN SMALL TALK
Table 15.1
Examples of the Different Markers in Initial, Middle, and Final Position
Marker
Initial Position
Middle Position
Final Position
Man (E)
Man, I’m scared!
We were, er . . . man,
Watch out, man!
accused of robbery.
Macho/tío (PS)
Tío/macho, ¿qué te 
Te digo, macho/tío,
Cállate, macho/ tío!
pasa?
que te calles la boca.

relationships with our neighbors. Also politically, socially, stopping
lazy, let’s stop anaesthetizing ourselves with BeniFer or Michael
Jackson or Nancy Grace in my case.
HARRISON: [chuckles] At least you admit it, that’s step 1.
LUCY:
Yeah, man, recognize your own shit. I think that’s really important.
We can’t ﬁx anything while all this disinformation, all the nonsense
about “let’s not point the ﬁnger” moment. BS! Man, you are going
to use your anger to springboard you into action. THERE’S NO
HOPE WITHOUT ACTION. So get off our arses and start making a
difference in our own lives and everyone else.
(Interview with Lucy Lawless on Harrison on the Edge radio show, September
18, 2005, AUSXIP)
The three occasions on which Lucy uses the marker man are instances in which she
shows her deep anger and displeasure, and, even though we may say that man is a
vocative and she is addressing Harrison, in fact her anger is directed toward the gov-
ernment and the desperate situation of the city at that moment. Thus we may place
the marker man into the speaker displeasure category here, and, at least in the last in-
stance where it is used (“Man, you are going to use your anger to springboard you
into action”), we may also classify it as a focusing marker, because Lucy is trying to
incite the listeners to take action. In addition, it is worth noticing that this is one of
few instances in the corpus where a woman uses the marker man, which, according
to the ﬁndings of this study, seems to be much more widely used by men in general,
as shown by the quantitative analysis results in table 15.2.
Man may also co-occur with other vocatives (as in John man, please shut up!),
with other classes of pragmatic markers or with other subclasses of parallel marker.
Examine (3):
(3) SARAH: Look, I’ll show you, right. It’s right to save, yeah. Nationwide that . . .
wow, see man, that’s, that’s just, just what, that’s what I put in and take
out do you get me. Hi you see, you know er . . . how much are you
taking out?
(BNC, 3691 KPY)
Here man is used together with an interjection (wow, a lexical basic marker) and an-
other parallel marker of the focusing type ([you] see):
174
Laura Alba-Juez
Table 15.2
Use of the Marker man according to Gender (%)
Occurrence in the English Corpus
Male addressing male
85.6
Male addressing female
1.8
Female addressing male
10.8
Female addressing female
1.8

In Spanish, macho or tío may also co-occur with other pragmatic markers, such
as pues2 and mira (4). Mira functions here in a way similar to Fraser’s focusing par-
allel markers in English:
(4) . . . ¿De dónde la has sacado? ¡De mis contactos! ¡Pues, macho mira, me lo
pidió Diseprosa. Entonces una cosa, una cosa dime. . . .
(CREA, párrafo nº 5, Conversación telefónica en una empresa, 20/03/91)
Solidarity and Gender
As pointed out in the introductory remarks, the analysis made through the concor-
dances of the markers macho and tío in the CREA corpus (as well as that of the marker
man in the English corpus) sheds light on the fact that, in the majority of cases, these
little words are used as markers of solidarity. In most of these cases, the solidarity
message is given from a man to another man or boy, but there are a few instances in
which a woman uses the markers when she addresses men. When women address
other women in Spanish, they can use the feminine tía, which is not an uncommon
feature of Peninsular Spanish. Also, in everyday conversation in Spain, I have been
able to observe that some women are now using the marker macho when addressing
other women, which sounds surprising when ﬁrst hearing it, considering the feature
of masculinity attached to the meaning of the word. Probably that is the reason why,
mainly among female teenagers, one can sometimes hear utterances like (5), which
still sound a bit contradictory, for the feminine of macho in Spanish is hembra. How-
ever, hembra would sound rude or rough to the ears of a native speaker, because it is
normally associated with animals, not people.
(5) A: “Macha, ¿te vienes conmigo o te quedas?”
Table 15.3 shows the percentages of occurrence of all these possibilities in the Span-
ish corpus used for this study. As can be observed, of all occurrences, the marker ma-
cho used by men addressing men is the most frequent (33.7%). Second in order of
frequency is the use of the marker tía used by women addressing women (20.4%).
Thus macho seems to be the most frequent choice for men, and tía for women, leav-
ing the use of tío in second place for men and macha for women. In instances of men
addressing women, tía seems to be the preferred option (10.2%) and tío the most com-
mon choice for women addressing men (7.14%), in cases where they decide to use
a marker of the kind.
175
“LITTLE WORDS” IN SMALL TALK
Table 15.3
Use of the Different Markers in Spanish according to Gender (%)
macho
macha
tío
tía
Male addressing male
33.7
0
14.3
0
Male addressing female
0
4.08
0
10.2
Female addressing male
1.02
0
7.14
0
Female addressing female
3.06
5.1
0
20.5

The Use of These Markers as Elements of Small Talk
Because of the inherent spoken/colloquial quality of the markers in question, they are
very frequently found within episodes of small talk in both English and Spanish. As
stated previously, small talk is a type of talk that helps the interlocutors achieve cer-
tain social goals, such as building rapport, putting people at ease, or winning power,
approval, or support. In the corpora examined, it is clear that the use of the markers
man (E) and macho/tío (PS) is a strategy that contributes to these goals, in combina-
tion with other strategies of small talk, such as (a) use of narratives of personal expe-
rience/use of the vernacular language, (b) deviation from the norm in the use of
journalistic talk (conversationalization [Fairclough 1995] of journalistic talk), (c) jok-
ing (humor and irony), (d) gossiping, and (e) cursing/use of impoliteness markers.
We very frequently ﬁnd instances of the use of the markers man (E) and macho/tío
(PS) in combination with, or as substrategies of, one or more of the above-mentioned
strategies. Example (6) presents an instance of tío (PS) used in a radio program in
Spain, within a kind of talk that has been conversationalized and consequently does
not strictly follow the norms of formal journalistic discourse. We can also observe a
certain degree of gossiping and humor in the conversation, and thus it can be said
that there is a combination of strategies b, c, and d:
(6) A: Bueno, pero lo que te he dicho, que hoy les voy a tener que dar esquinazo a
las periquitas. Porque tengo mucha prisa que esta tarde tengo una boda. Que
me han dicho los novios que estás invitado.
B: Pero, pero si no sé ni quiénes son los novios, no los conozco, ni sé si los
conozco, ni sabía nada de esta boda.
A: Pero yo pero, pero tío, ellos a ti sí te conocen, sí. Además yo te he hablado
de la novia ¿si? Si te he hablado en otras emisiones ¿si? Te he hablado de la
novia que es la madre de mi amigo el orejones López. ¡Anda! Que no, que
no parece una madre porque está superbuena.
B: Mira tío, ésa no es manera de hablar de las madres de un amiguito.
(Adapted from CREA, párrafo nº 4, A vivir que son dos días, Madrid, 02/11/96,
Cadena SER)
Example (7) contains an instance of the marker man used within a narrative of
personal experience (strategy a), where the vernacular language (Labov 1972) is used:
(7) Then we had bayonet practice. And er, then, we was all sorted out, this was the
staple for the Home Guard, we was sorted out er to go to er, er man, the guns at
Sutton-on-Sea, the er, girder rockets. And er I was er one that was sorted out to
go, but they wouldn’t let me go because er, I couldn’t get , they couldn’t get me.
(Adapted from BNC, 279 FY2)
In spite of the fact that man (E) and macho/tío (PS) are normally markers of a
high degree of solidarity and rapport, on some occasions they may accompany some
curse words and rude language. However, even when used with rude language, they
may be markers of solidarity or rapport, by showing that the speakers have a high de-
gree of familiarity or closeness with their interlocutors, which makes them feel com-
176
Laura Alba-Juez

fortable enough to allow for the use of a kind of language that would otherwise be
used in private or intimate conversations.
The data analyzed exhibit innumerable cases of these markers within the infor-
mal context and language of small talk. The examples in this section are only a small
sample illustrating the fact and making the point that man in English and macho or
tío in Spanish are also used as strategic markers that fulﬁll important discursive func-
tions, to which I now turn.
Discourse Functions
The study of the different and numerous occurrences of the markers man (E) and ma-
cho/tío (PS) in the corpora has shed light on the fact that these markers are normally
used in one or more of the following three ways: (a) as markers of (im)politeness,
(b) as markers of turn change (interaction regulators), and (c) as alerters (focusing
or warning function).
a) Markers of (im)politeness: These markers always show a given attitude on the
part of the speakers toward their interlocutor(s), and consequently some degree
of politeness force can always be ascribed to them. In the majority of occurrences
studied in the corpora, both in Spanish and in English, these markers are used
within a positive politeness context (Brown and Levinson 1987) showing some
kind of affiliation (Bravo 1999), where the speakers are willing to express feel-
ings or emotions such as rapport, encouragement, admiration, or bewilderment
(91% of occurrences in English and 84.7% in Spanish; see table 15.4), as illus-
trated in (8) and (9).
(8) 75 WINSTON: Oh, you were brilliant, man!
DAVID:
Nah, not really
(Adapted from US TV Talk 26:871)
(9) A: Venga, elijan lo que más les guste, señores, Oye, guarda, guarda. El conejito
o el perrito pon-pon. El de los lunares. Toma, tío, para la colección. Mira,
mira, así, venga, y sorteamos. Toma, ﬁguritas. Para toda aquella persona que
no tenga.
B: No me ha tocado nada, tía.
(Adapted from CREA, párrafo nº 39, Conversación en Talleres de Inspección Téc-
nica de Vehículos, Madrid, 23/12/91)
177
“LITTLE WORDS” IN SMALL TALK
Table 15.4
Frequency of Use of the Different Markers according to Discourse Function (%)
Interaction
Focusing
Rapport
Impoliteness
Regulators
Function
Man (English)
91
9
53.2
35.1
Macho/a // tío/a (Spanish)
84.7
15.3
42.9
44.9
Markers of (Im)politeness

As stated earlier, these vocative parallel markers can also be used to indicate some
degree of impoliteness (9% of occurrences in English and 15.3% in Spanish; see table
15.4), conveying some negative thoughts or feelings such as threat, warning, disap-
proval, disappointment, or disbelief, as examples (10) and (11) show:
(10) BOBBY: You’re dead, man, you’re dead!
(US TV Talk, 52:604)
(11) A: ¿Negocio? ¡Me cago en la puta! Chungo, tío, me he limpiado nada más que
un coche en todo el día!
B: Limpia, que me has dejado aquí una caca de pájaro! Pero, ¿cómo es posible,
hombre? ¡Si tienes aquí el negocio del siglo!
A: ¿Qué negocio? ¡Pero si todo el mundo baja y me da de hostias! ¿Qué no
puedo limpiar ni un coche, macho! Pero, quítate de ahí, me cago en la puta!
Venga hombre, con el cubo, hostia!
Mira, mira, mira el pie, me han chafado veinticinco veces ya . . .
(Adapted from CREA, párrafo nº 22, No te rías que es peor, Madrid, 19/12/91,
TVE 1 A)
b) Markers of turn change/Interaction regulators: One very noticeable and fre-
quent function of the markers man in English and macho/tío in Spanish is the
function of regulating the interaction by marking turn change. Consider exam-
ple (12):
(12) (Conversation about a video game):
A: Oh this is so rubbish, man.
B: You can only see like his back, his legs an, and the back of running. They’re
copycats, man.
A: So shit, man.
B: Mm, Sega’s better. Sega are blatantly better.
(BNC, 3248 KNV)
The marker man is found at the end of each turn except for the last, where the cul-
mination of the term is marked by yeah, a lexical basic marker expressing agreement
(Fraser 1996). In some of the conversations analyzed this is taken to such an extent
that we ﬁnd repeated instances of the marker at the end of almost every tone group
uttered by the same person, in which case the function is not marking turn change
but change of tone group, as in (13):
(13) Get your knees under the table and ‘move them, ’man. You take up all the
‘space, ’man. ‘Yeah, dark ’horse. ’Right.
(BNC, 4108 KSN)
Table 15.4 shows that man is used as an interaction regulator in 53.2 percent of oc-
currences in the English corpus, and macho/a or tío/a in Spanish are used in 42.9
percent of occurrences in the Spanish corpus fulﬁlling the same function, which
178
Laura Alba-Juez

makes it the second most frequent function in English and the third most frequent in
Spanish. As we shall see, the focusing function (see following discussion) occurs
slightly more frequently in Spanish, and many times both interaction regulation and
focus can be attributed to the same marker in the same instance.
c) Alerters/Focusing function: The markers man (E) and macho/tío (PS) are also
used on occasions at the beginning of an utterance with the intention of calling
the attention of the speaker to focus on the message. Many times the marker also
carries a threatening tone, the meaning behind the marker being something like
“pay attention to what I’m going to say or else,” as is the case with Lucy Law-
less in (14):
(14) LUCY: Yeah man, recognize your own shit. I think that’s really important. We
can’t ﬁx anything while all this disinformation, all the nonsense about
“let’s not point the ﬁnger” moment. BS! Man, you’re going to use your
anger to springboard you into action. THERE’S NO HOPE WITHOUT
ACTION. So get off our arses and start making a difference in our own
lives and everyone else.
(Interview with Lucy Lawless on Harrison on the Edge radio show, September 18,
2005, AUSXIP)
Of all three functions, the use of these expressions as markers of positive po-
liteness (rapport) is by far the most frequent, the least frequent being their use as
markers of impoliteness (9% for man and 15.3% for macho/a or tío/a). Table 15.4
displays these results, as well as the fact that on most occasions the marker is ful-
ﬁlling more than one function at a time (considering that the sum of the subtotals is
higher than 100%).
Conclusions and Comparison
Both the qualitative and quantitative ﬁndings of this study suggest that there are
probably more similarities than differences between the use of the marker man in Eng-
lish and the markers macho and tío in Spanish. In both cases they are characteristic
of oral, colloquial, and informal conversation, and consequently they are common fea-
tures of small talk. The three markers in question may appear at the beginning, mid-
dle, or end of an utterance and can be classiﬁed as parallel pragmatic markers that
carry out important functions in discourse, such as building solidarity and rapport,
changing turn or regulating the interaction, or, when at the beginning of the utter-
ance, focusing on or alerting the speaker about some aspect of the ongoing discourse.
In spite of all the similarities, the use of macho and tío in Spanish might be qual-
iﬁed as “more colorful” and varied than the use of man in English, due to the fact
that both Spanish words have the possibility of undergoing grammatical gender
change, however ridiculous the word “macha” might sound to anyone’s ears. The fact
is that macha is nonetheless used, especially among adolescents or very young peo-
ple in general. I do not have any records of the word woman used in English as a
pragmatic marker in the same way as man is. The word girl, however, could be con-
sidered as the feminine counterpart in this case. Also, the different examples of man
179
“LITTLE WORDS” IN SMALL TALK

in the corpus show that both women and men may use the marker man when address-
ing men or women indistinctly.
The present study has only been an initial approach to the study of these mark-
ers, and therefore they have been analyzed in a very general way, without taking into
account other variables that might intervene in their use, such as, for instance, social
class or race. The results have shed some light on the inﬂuence of the gender, strat-
egy, and discourse function variables, as shown by the examples analyzed and the
quantitative analysis results in tables 15.2, 15.3, and 15.4.
In addition, I am conscious of the fact that man in English and macho/a and tío/a
in Spanish are not the only markers of this kind that are in use nowadays. These were
chosen for being the most general and standard, but many interesting conclusions
could be drawn if we also researched (and made comparisons among) similar mark-
ers, such as dude in English or tronco in Spanish, which, at ﬁrst sight, seem to be-
long exclusively to the younger people’s repertoire.
NOTES
1. Notice, however, that neither of these authors uses the term “pragmatic marker”: Gili Gaya writes
about “partículas” (particles), and Martín Zorraquino speaks of “marcadores del discurso” (dis-
course markers), the latter being more in agreement with Schiffrin’s (1987, 2001) view of the phe-
nomenon.
2. The marker pues has been labeled differently by different authors. Bello (1847) refers to it as a “con-
tinuative particle.”
REFERENCES
Alba-Juez, L. 2006. Some pragmatic markers of impoliteness in British English and Peninsular Spanish.
In A pleasure of life in words: A festschrift for Angela Downing, ed. Marta Carretero, Laura Hidalgo
Downing, Julia Lavid, Elena Martínez Caro, JoAnne Neff, Soledad Pérez de Ayala, and Esther
Sánchez Pardo, 403–19. Madrid: Universidad Complutense.
———. (2007). On the impoliteness of some politeness strategies: A study and comparison of the use of
some pragmatic markers of impoliteness in British English and American English, Peninsular Span-
ish and Argentine Spanish. Chap. 2 in Pilar Garcés-Conejos, Manuel Padilla Cruz, Reyes Gómez
Morón, and Lucía Fernández Amaya, eds., Studies in intercultural, cognitive and social pragmatics.
New Castle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars.
Bello, Andrés. 1847. Gramática de la lengua castellana destinada al uso de los americanos. Con las no-
tas de Ruﬁno José de Cuervo. Estudio y edición de Ramón Trujillo. 2 vols. Madrid: Arco Libros,
1988.
Bravo, Diana. 1999. ¿Imagen “positiva” vs. Imagen “negativa”?: Pragmática socio-cultural y componentes
de face. Oralia. Análisis del Discurso Oral 2:155–84.
Brown, Penelope, and Stephen Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Carranza, Isolda. 1997. Conversación y deixis de discurso. Córdoba, Argentina: Universidad de Córdoba.
Coupland, Justine, ed. 2000. Small talk. London: Pearson Education.
———. 2003. Small talk: Social functions. Research on Language and Social Interaction 36:1–6.
Culpeper, J. 1996. Towards an anatomy of impoliteness. Journal of Pragmatics 25:349–67.
Davies, Mark. 2005. VIEW (Variation in English Words and Phrases). Salt Lake City: Brigham Young Uni-
versity. Concordances from the BNC. http://view.byu.edu/.
Fairclough, Norman. 1995. Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. Harlow: Longman.
Fraser, Bruce. 1996. Pragmatic markers. Pragmatics 6 (2): 167–90.
———. 2006. Towards a theory of discourse markers. In Approaches to discourse particles, ed. K. 
Fischer, 189–204. Bremen: Elsevier.
180
Laura Alba-Juez

Gili Gaya, Samuel. 1970. Curso superior de sintaxis Española. Barcelona: Biblograf.
Gille, Johan. 2006. “Este hombre se debe de mover, vamos”: Un primer acercamiento a los apéndices con-
versacionales. Actas del XVI Congreso de Romanistas Escandinavos. CD-ROM.
Kaul de Marlangeon, Silvia. 1995. “La fuerza de cortesía-descortesía y sus estrategias en el discurso
tanguero de la década del ’20.” Revista de la Sociedad Argentina de Lingüística 3:7–38.
Labov, William, ed. 1972. The transformation of experience in narrative syntax. In Language in the inner
city, 354–405. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Martín Zorraquino, María Antonia. 1998. Los marcadores del discurso desde el punto de vista gramati-
cal. In Los marcadores del discurso: Teoría y análisis, ed. María Antonia Martín Zorraquino, and
Estrella Montolío Durán, 19–53. Madrid: Arco Libros.
REAL ACADEMIA ESPAÑOLA: Banco de datos (CREA) [online]. Corpus de referencia del español ac-
tual. www.rae.es (accessed October 24, 2006).
Sacks, Harvey, Emanuel Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. 1974. A simple systematics for the organization
of turn-taking in conversation. Language 50 (4): 696–735.
Schiffrin, Deborah. 1987. Discourse markers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2001. Discourse markers: Language, meaning, and context. In The handbook of discourse analy-
sis, ed. Deborah Schiffrin, Deborah Tannen, and Heidi Hamilton, 54–75. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Tracy, Karen, and Julie M. Naughton. 2000. Institutional identity-work: A better lens. In Small talk, ed.
Justine Coupland, 62–83. London: Pearson Education.
Web Concordancer: US TV Talk & BNC. 2005. WorldNet entries for man. www.lextutor.ca/concordances/
concord_ehtml (accessed October 26, 2006).
181
“LITTLE WORDS” IN SMALL TALK


16
Little Words That Could Impact One’s
Impression on Others
Greetings and Closings in Institutional E-mails
SIGRUN BIESENBACH-LUCAS
Georgetown University
IN ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS, much of the interaction between students and professors oc-
curs face-to-face—in class meetings and during office hours. Computer technology
has, however, opened other communication venues in academia for which rules of
interaction are less clearly deﬁned, such as electronic mailing lists, discussion boards,
chats, and electronic mail. While the former principally serve to enhance informa-
tion distribution and unconventional course content delivery, e-mail has become a ma-
jor alternative for students to consult with their professors (Biesenbach-Lucas 2005;
Martin, Myers, and Mottet 1999). While Americans in general place value on egali-
tarianism, relationships between students and faculty in academic institutions are
nevertheless hierarchical: Faculty are in the higher-up position, which needs to be ap-
propriately acknowledged in status-congruent ways by students (Bardovi-Harlig and
Hartford 1990). E-mail, as a medium where visual and paralinguistic clues between
interlocutors are lacking (Lea and Spears 1992), is often perceived as promoting in-
formal language where the politeness requirements of face-to-face interaction do not
so stringently apply. However, there is evidence that students in e-mail communica-
tion with faculty do attempt to observe relational hierarchies by crafting messages
that are status congruent and polite; but the text-only context of e-mail presents lin-
guistic challenges to native speakers (NSs) as well as non-native speakers (NNSs) of
English, resulting in a range of linguistic choices that evidence not only status-inap-
propriate linguistic forms but also new, emerging e-mail conventions (Biesenbach-
Lucas 2007).
One aspect in which e-mail writers can signal their understanding of the perceived
relationship between themselves and their addressee is in the opening salutation.
While the conventional business letter template Dear  name signals appropriate def-
erence when addressing a higher-up, examinations of e-mail greetings have shown
that this opening move is not perceived as necessary by many e-mail writers (Gains
1999; Y. Li 2000; Waldvogel 2007). Similarly, closing moves, such as Regards or Sin-
cerely yours, and signatures, while a staple in conventional business letters, are seen
183

by many e-mail writers as dispensable (Sherblom 1988; Waldvogel 2007), likely be-
cause that information is already included in the from line in the e-mail envelope in-
formation.
Recent investigations into e-mail greetings and closings suggest that they are,
however, important politeness markers (Bunz and Campbell 2002), which set the tone
for subsequent face-to-face and cyberspace interaction (Kankaaranta 2006; Waldvo-
gel 2007) and also reﬂect e-mail writers’ uncertainty about message greetings and
closings they send (TechScribe 2006). Clearly e-mail writers do need speciﬁc advice
on “little words” such as greetings and closings, as is evident in numerous online ref-
erences and blogs on e-mail etiquette (e.g., E-variations in email salutations 2006;
Gaertner-Johnston 2006).
Waldvogel (2007, 1–2) maintains that “the [e-mail] greeting is one means by
which the writer constructs his or her social and professional identity and relation-
ship with the addressee(s). A closing can help consolidate the relationship and estab-
lish a relational basis for future encounters.” However, little research has investigated
the use of greetings and closings in e-mails sent from university students to their pro-
fessors. The student–professor relationship is marked by professors’ higher institu-
tional status over students and by relatively low social distance between them due to
regular face-to-face contact in the classroom. In addition, while some research has
compared student–professor e-mail messages from NSs with those from NNSs within
the context of request speech acts (Biesenbach-Lucas 2005, 2006; Hartford and Bar-
dovi-Harlig 1996), a systematic comparison of NS and NNS e-mail greetings and clos-
ings is missing. The present study examines the impact of faculty’s higher status and
relative social distance on the use of greetings and closings in student–professor e-
mail communication, as it is in students’ best interest to project a positive image of
themselves and to maintain a positive relationship with their professor (Boxer 2002).
The study conducts an analysis of linguistic realizations of greetings and closings and
compares the linguistic patterns used by NS and NNS students. Findings can shed
light on whether the e-mail medium might develop conventions different from those
associated with traditional business letter templates and how this might affect the im-
pressions that students’ e-mail messages leave on faculty recipients.
Background
Background is provided on two relevant research areas: how one’s impression on oth-
ers is formed in online environments and existing research on greetings and closings
in e-mail.
Online Impression Formation
There is evidence that linguistic and paralinguistic choices impact one’s impression
on others in face-to-face encounters (e.g., Bradac 1989). Accents, dialects, and con-
comitant choices of syntax, semantics, and vocabulary lead to positive or negative
evaluations of speakers by their interlocutors. While inappropriate, or nonconven-
tional, linguistic and paralinguistic choices can cause communicative stumbling
blocks and miscommunication in any type of communicative domain among NSs of
English (Boxer 2002), lexical and grammatical selections are often particularly prob-
184
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas

lematic for NNSs of English and can lead to speakers’perception as being either rude
or far too polite (Bardovi-Harlig and Hartford 1990; Bodman and Eisenstein 1988).
Communication in cyberspace presents yet another communicative hurdle be-
cause conventions long established for oral interaction may or may not be transferred
to the electronic medium, in which a lack of visible context clues further exacerbates
negotiation of self-image (Lea and Spears 1992; Walther 1996). Due to the absence
of visible clues, words on the screen convey more than just a message through typo-
graphical features, use of upper/lower case letters, punctuation, typing errors, and
emoticons—they also leave an impression about the sender, and recipients of online
messages are quick to judge not only the sender’s imagined physical appearance but
also his or her character (Jacobson 1999; Lea and Spears 1992). In addition, the way
in which message content is phrased might be inappropriate given the relationship
between message sender and receiver, and in hierarchical relationships, such as em-
ployees–supervisors and students–professors, status-incongruence is not likely re-
ceived positively and can have negative consequences (Boxer 2002; Bardovi-Harlig
and Hartford 1990; Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig 1996). In fact, numerous educators
have complained about students’ lack of e-mail composing abilities (Inside Higher
Ed 2006).
Greetings and closings, those seemingly little words at the beginning and end of
letters and e-mail messages, have received little attention from the point of view of
how their presence or absence, or their wording, might contribute to impression for-
mation or status congruence. Little words are often particularly troublesome for
NNSs of English because instruction typically focuses on broader aspects and gram-
mar structures rather than authentic interaction patterns (Nunan 1999). As a result,
NNSs may not be familiar with typical greeting and closing patterns, especially not
those in e-mail communication to their professors. However, research on the serial
position effect in memory suggests that words at the beginning and the end of a text
are more likely to be remembered than text in the middle, and words that are more
salient than others are also more easily retained (Healy, Havas, and Parker 2000). One
might argue then that, by extension, greetings and closings are also more likely to
leave an impression on the recipient, particularly if they are salient due to status-in-
congruent formulations.
Greetings and Closings in E-mail
Greetings and closings have been a frequently examined feature in educational as well
as corporate e-mail messages but only recently with intention to explore status (in)con-
gruence. Because both greetings and closings are typically set off from the message
body, they are easily identiﬁable and also easily countable. In an early study on sig-
nature ﬁles in e-mails of employees of a large organization, Sherblom (1988) found
that signature use was inﬂuenced by e-mail senders’position in the organizational hi-
erarchy: Messages sent downward did not contain signatures, but one-third of e-mail
messages sent upward did. Even more strikingly, Waldvogel (1999) discovered that
more than 90 percent of the hierarchically upward sent e-mails she examined con-
tained closings/sign-off phrases and signatures. Gains (1999) compared e-mail mes-
sages sent among employees of an insurance company with those sent among
185
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS

members of educational institutions (sender–recipient constellations are, however, un-
clear). Gains found that all e-mail writers generally adhered to conventions of stan-
dard English, with conversational features occurring only in the educational e-mails.
In addition, Gains observed that 92 percent of the insurance company e-mails and 63
percent of the academic e-mails lacked an opening greeting, but it is unclear how hi-
erarchical relationships might have inﬂuenced those choices.
Waldvogel (2007, 6) examined e-mail greetings and closings in an educational
organization, more speciﬁcally, messages “to and from members of the teaching
staff” with a mix in directionality (hierarchically upward and downward). None of
the messages examined were sent from students to teaching staff, however. Waldvo-
gel observed that more than half the e-mail messages did not contain any greetings,
and those that did typically began with the recipient’s name. Interestingly, greeting
words plus name (e.g., Hi/Dear  name) tended to be used if the e-mail “introduced
a matter of a fairly delicate matter, made a major request of a higher status person,
or expressed appreciation for a major request” (8). With respect to closings, Wald-
vogel found that two-thirds of the e-mails in the educational institution she examined
contained some form of closing, but one-third did not. Another third ended with the
sender’s first name, and few messages contained any farewell formula, such as
Thanks—used as a “ritual closing formula” (10–11)—and Regards. Waldvogel con-
cludes that greetings and closings were more likely to be included in senders’e-mails
if they were addressing a higher-status person, and thus both greetings and closings
are “a way of doing deference or signaling respect and thus constructing the addressee
as having status” (12).
Duthler (2006) conducted a study speciﬁcally investigating students’ use of po-
liteness features, including greetings and closings, in e-mail and voice mail messages
to a faculty member. While he found that address phrases were not more formal in e-
mail than in voice mail, he did observe that address phrases in low imposition e-mails
were surprisingly more formal (using Dear  title  name) than address phrases in
e-mails in which the writer was making a high imposition on the addressee (where Hi
without formal name tended to be used). Duthler explains the less formal Hi in high
imposition e-mails as students’ strategic tactic to redeﬁne the student–professor rela-
tionship in order to bolster feelings of solidarity; however, the messages in Duthler’s
study were elicited messages sent to an imaginary faculty member and not authentic
messages. As a result, his participants’selection of greeting and closing formulae was
not subject to real-life consequences and real-life impression formation.
Studies on e-mail greetings and closings suggest that there is variability in their
use in different organizations and institutions, which is in fact reﬂected in widely dif-
fering advice on e-mail etiquette. Vincent (1999, 12) recommends “us[ing] an appro-
priate salutation . . . by using the receiver’s name” as well as a detailed signature ﬁle.
Danet (2001) feels that e-mails should follow a traditional business letter format in-
cluding both openings and closings. In contrast, Y. Li (2000) assures writers that, in
e-mail, “the greetings . . . of telephone calls or daily conversations can all be neg-
lected” (33).
If use of social protocol is problematic and variable for NSs of English, it is no
surprise that little words can present an even greater challenge for NNSs, but few stud-
186
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas

ies have compared NSs’ and NNSs’ use of greetings and closings. In one study,
L. Li (2000) found that NNSs used more conventional salutations but fewer closings
than NSs in their e-mail messages; however, the institutional context for this research
is unclear. In another study, Kankaaranta (2006) examined greetings and closings in
the English written e-mail messages among the employees of a Scandinavian orga-
nization, but comparisons to messages sent by NSs of English are unavailable.
Kankaanranta found that most of the e-mail messages sent within the organization
contained greetings, typically consisting of Hello  ﬁrst name in positive politeness
efforts (cf. Brown and Levinson 1987) to maintain good social relations among em-
ployees. Closings and signatures also occurred in nearly all messages, partially ac-
counted for by the e-mail writers’use of preprogrammed signature ﬁles. Kankaaranta
concludes that the co-occurrence of greetings and closings in e-mail messages
“seemed to provide a frame of positive tone for the message” and was “one of the
ways to create a feeling of closeness and solidarity in the shared corporate environ-
ment” (224).
Focus of the Present Study and Research Questions
The present study examines e-mail messages from NS and NNS students sent to one
professor at a major American university. It ﬁlls a gap in the research on e-mail greet-
ings and closings by going beyond a simple count of presence or absence through
examination of different greetings and closings realizations; it also examines clos-
ings for existence of closing moves, similar to those found for oral interaction (Bar-
dovi-Harlig et al. 1991). In the student–professor interaction domain, the power
dimension is stable, as the professor is in a position of higher status by virtue of the
student–professor relationship at American institutions of higher education. As a re-
sult, the students’e-mail messages represent messages sent hierarchically upward and
thus make the use of status-congruent linguistic choices necessary (cf. Bardovi-
Harlig and Hartford’s [1990] research on academic advising sessions). The social dis-
tance dimension is relatively stable: Among students and the professor in the present
study, face-to-face contact in classes occurred only once a week, but class contact
was regular over sixteen weeks of a semester and included occasional face-to-face
office hour meetings; thus positive politeness features might not be surprising. The
present study also ﬁlls the gap on comparative research on NSs and NNSs of Eng-
lish and their attempts at navigating the treacherous waters of e-mail correspondence
with faculty, where it is crucial that students leave positive impressions of themselves.
The following research questions guided the study:
Do university students e-mailing their professor use standard letter writing
conventions in e-mail greetings and closings, such as Dear (title  last name)
and Sincerely/Regards?
How are greetings and closings realized linguistically by native and non-native
English speakers? Do particular forms emerge as favorites, and are these sta-
tus congruent?
Might e-mail communication in academia develop its own conventions for
greetings/closings?
187
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS

Methods: Subjects and Data
The subject pool in the present study consisted of NSs and NNSs of English, all of
whom were enrolled in graduate level TESOL courses at a major American univer-
sity. The NNSs came from Asian backgrounds (Korea, Japan, Taiwan) and had had
prior instruction in English in their native countries. They had been accepted into the
graduate teacher training program based on their TOEFL scores.
The data consisted of naturalistic e-mail messages sent to one middle-aged fe-
male professor, who taught the TESOL courses in which the students were enrolled.
Due to ethical and privacy reasons, messages sent to other professors could not be
obtained. Students’e-mail messages were collected over six semesters; students gave
consent to the collection of their messages under the provision that no identifying in-
formation other than NS and NNS status would be revealed. A total of 375 e-mail
messages from NSs and 150 messages from NNSs were analyzed.
The ﬁrst step in the analysis involved identiﬁcation of greetings and closings.
Greetings, always occurring at the beginning of the e-mail messages, were deﬁned
as simple greetings, such as Hello, and salutations, consisting of greetings and/or the
addressee’s title and/or name, such as Hello Professor Smith. Closings were deﬁned
as those elements that signal the end of the e-mail message, such as a signature (the
sender’s name) and any other linguistic/semantic formulae that are not part of the mes-
sage body and occur near the end of a message. Because analyses of spoken interac-
tion have found preclosing sequences by which speakers signal the end of a
conversational exchange (Bardovi-Harlig et al. 1991; Schegloff and Sachs 1973), it
was assumed that written e-mail communication might exhibit similar characteris-
tics. The next step in the analysis involved tallying the occurrences of greeting
and closing expressions, calculating percentages, and comparing results for NSs
and NNSs.
Results and Discussion
Results are discussed with respect to quantitative similarities and qualitative differ-
ences that emerged in NS and NNS students’ e-mail messages.
Greetings
A comparison of NSs and NNSs with respect to the proportion of messages with greet-
ings versus messages without greetings reveals that both groups clearly preferred to
send messages to their professor that included a greeting (NSs  87% and NNSs 
93%). Among these, the vast majority were greetings  name salutations (83% and
91%, respectively), allowing both an acknowledgment of greeting and the perceived
relationship with the professor recipient.
These ﬁndings are in contrast to greetingless e-mails found to be quite frequent
in other organizational environments where NSs of English e-mailed each other
(Gains 1999; Waldvogel 2007), but the ﬁndings are similar to the preponderance of
greetings in messages to higher-ups (Waldvogel 1999) and NNSs’ e-mail messages
(Kankaaranta 2006). The predominance of greetings in the present study suggests that
e-mail composition to a person higher up in the academic institutional hierarchy is
inﬂuenced by the traditional business letter template (Danet 2001). In a study elicit-
ing e-mail messages from students to an imagined female professor, Duthler (2006)
188
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas

189
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS
also found that his student respondents supplied greetings, indicating awareness of
and the need for social protocol in student–faculty electronic interaction.
More revealing of differences between NSs and NNSs than a simple count of
presence/absence of greetings and salutations is an examination of the actual greet-
ing realizations. Overall, thirty-one different greetings realizations were found, with
NSs producing sixteen different variants and NNSs producing nineteen—evidence
not only of the enormous variability within the opening move but also of both native
and non-native e-mail writers’uncertainty as to which greeting might be the most ac-
ceptable. The great variation in linguistic realization of greetings stems from the
multiple possibilities that are created when the different greeting elements are com-
bined: The faculty recipient’s name was prefaced by either Dear, Hello, Hi, a time-
of-day acknowledgment (Good evening), or no element; her title was realized as
either Dr., Professor, Prof., or Mrs. (which includes abbreviations visible only in
writing); her hyphenated last name appeared either in its full form, as one of the two
name parts, or was omitted or replaced by her ﬁrst name (the professor typically in-
troduced herself to students with ﬁrst name plus second part of her hyphenated last
name and did not encourage ﬁrst name basis with students).
Figures 16.1 and 16.2 depict the three most frequently used greeting/salutation
patterns observed for NSs and NNSs, respectively. Despite the range of greeting re-
alizations, most of these did not occur with great frequency; instead, for each group
of students (NSs and NNSs), a clear favorite greeting form emerged, which was used
in nearly one-third of all messages. In addition, the preferred forms indicate apparent
differences between NSs and NNSs, which point to a greater inﬂuence of conventional
business letter discourse in the mail messages sent by NNS, and an intriguing move
toward more bare-bones greetings in the messages sent by NSs.
Figure 16.1 Most Frequently Used Greeting/Salutation Patterns for NSs

190
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas
Nearly one in three NSs chose to address the faculty recipient with Dr. Lucas
(i.e., title  last name), a form that omits business letter formalities such as Dear but
nevertheless acknowledges the recipient’s institutional status by mentioning the proper
academic title. The second most frequently used greeting pattern was Hi Dr. Lucas,
which has a slightly more informal tone than Dr. Lucas by combining an informal
greeting with a deferential naming practice; it might thus acknowledge the sender’s
attempt at building rapport with the professor, whom he or she sees regularly for
classes and whom he or she might greet more informally if meeting face-to-face. The
title  name combination serves to properly acknowledge the professor’s status in a
unique salutation combination, which students might not use if they were writing a
conventional letter to their professor. Interestingly, the third most preferred pattern
for NSs was not to use any greeting at all; this would most likely not be acceptable
for conventional business letters but might signal that certain letter conventions are
dispensable, or modiﬁable, in the e-mail medium (cf. Gains 1999; and Waldvogel
2007, for a high percentage of greetingless e-mails among NSs of English).
In contrast, nearly half the messages sent by NNSs begin with a conventional
business letter salutation, Dear, followed by variants of the recipient’s title plus last
name, Dr. Lucas or Prof. Lucas (abbreviated form), indicating a heavy reliance on
the letter template. In a recent survey on acceptable e-mail greetings and closings
(TechScribe 2006), respondents felt that “using ‘Dear’risked making the sender look
older or inexperienced with email” (para. 4), suggesting that e-mail is indeed devel-
oping its own unique guidelines and conventions for norms of message creation and
that NNSs are not in tune with current e-mail writing practices.
However, the third most frequently used greeting pattern used by NNSs was Prof.
Lucas, a deferential title  name pattern that, even without other adornments and for-
Figure 16.2 Most Frequently Used Greeting/Salutation Patterns for NNSs

191
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS
malities, properly acknowledges the recipient’s institutional status. Interestingly, NSs
students used the title Dr. typically used in U.S. academic culture while NNSs pre-
ferred the abbreviated title Prof. The full title Professor was rarely used; apparently,
not many students read the advice of e-mail etiquette experts who recommend that
Dr. should never be spelled out but that Professor should always be spelled out (Gaert-
ner-Johnston 2006).
Closings
Similar to greetings, closings were also found in most of the e-mail messages from
both groups of students (NSs  91% and NNSs  89%), comparable to previous
studies (Sherblom 1988; Waldvogel 1999, 2007). Apparently, presence of both greet-
ing and closing is, at least at present, considered an important element in e-mail mes-
sages sent upward in the academic institutional hierarchy. However, what elements
signal to the e-mail recipient that the body of the message is coming to an end? In
spoken face-to-face interaction, preclosings are initiated by verbal discourse mark-
ers such as well and okay and nonverbally by breaking eye contact and glancing at
one’s watch (Bardovi-Harlig et al. 1991). Examination of the students’ e-mail mes-
sages reveals closing sequences consisting of several elements, which differentiate
clearly between NSs and NNSs.
Five moves occurred in a typical sequence in the e-mail messages of both groups
of speakers but tended to be used predominantly by the NNSs: (a) a request for the pro-
fessor’s response (e.g., Please let me know [what/when/if]), which could be a move sim-
ilar to a preclosing signal; this was followed by (b) an expression of gratitude (e.g.,
Thank you); then (c) a phatic oral leave-taking expression (e.g., See you in class); (d) a
sign-off phrase (e.g., Sincerely); and (e) the student’s name. Differences between NSs
and NNSs surfaced in the presence or absence of these moves, as well as in the fre-
quency with which individual moves occurred and the resulting typical message end-
ing. Figure 16.3 indicates that, for both groups of students, the most frequently used
Figure 16.3 Closing Sequence Moves: Comparison between NSs and NNSs

closing move was an expression of gratitude; in fact, this verbal politeness marker
(Bunz and Campbell 2002) occurred in all of the NNSs’messages (mostly the more for-
mal variant Thank you) and in more than half of the NSs messages. A similar prefer-
ence for Thanks has been noted by Waldvogel (2007, 10–11), who considers this move
a “ritual closing formula” and not an expression “used genuinely to express thanks.” At
least one-third of NNSs’ messages in the present study also contain requests for re-
sponse, phatic oral leave-taking expressions (cf. Biesenbach-Lucas 2005 for observa-
tions on NNSs’ use of phatic language in e-mail messages), and sign-off expressions,
all of which occurred with much less frequency in the NSs’ messages.
Similar to greetings and salutations, each of the closing sequence moves was real-
ized through a variety of different surface structures, which reveal evidence of NNSs’
close borrowing from conventional business letter templates but appear to be evidence
of NSs’ development of new e-mail conventions, reﬂecting that much of their daily
communication is conﬁned to writing on a keyboard and screen. In general, NNSs’
message closings were characterized by slightly greater formality, deference, and con-
cerns for phatic expressions, such as Thank you very much, Sincerely, and See you next
week; in contrast, NSs tended to opt for a slightly more informal expression of grati-
tude, Thanks, as the only closing move (except for name), conﬁrming Waldvogel’s
(2007) observation that Thanks might indeed be developing into a ritual closing move.
What emerges are two distinct e-mail formats that set NSs apart from NNSs in
the former group’s ability to produce brief openings and closings that do not detract
from message content but are nevertheless appropriately status congruent given the
faculty addressee. The NSs’truncated use of particularly the closing sequence reﬂects
concerns for message clarity and brevity in e-mail (Biesenbach-Lucas 2006). This
combination of status-acknowledging greeting and ritual gratitude expressing clos-
ing appears quite appropriate in a hierarchically upward e-mail and could reﬂect an
emerging convention.
The NNSs in the present study use letter template greetings and at the end of
their e-mail want to have assurance that their message is responded to; similarly, re-
sponse requests are often included in business letters to ensure continuation of cor-
respondence. In contrast, phatic leave-taking expressions, such as see you tomorrow,
are more typical of oral interaction and informal, personal letters. Their inclusion by
NNSs in the e-mails to faculty suggests that NNSs are unaware of blending formal
business letter features with oral and informal personal letter attributes. In addition,
it appears that NNSs are concerned with establishing and maintaining a positive re-
lationship with the professor by adding phatics as positive politeness features. Fur-
ther evidence for NNSs’ mismatch of business and personal letter features surfaces
in the very conventional sign-off phrase Sincerely yours. The blending of forms re-
ﬂects NNSs’ uncertainty about e-mailing higher-ups and, as a result, the borrowing
from both formal and informal letter templates as well as oral interaction is an at-
tempt at negotiating an appropriate level of solidarity and distance, or positive and
negative politeness (Brown and Levinson 1987).
Conclusion and Suggestions for Future Research
The lack of Dear or Hello in NSs’ e-mail greetings may suggest less formality but
not necessarily greater informality or less deference; instead, the title  name greet-
192
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas

ing is neutral, status appropriate, and professional. The minimal closing sequence—
Thanks  name—is short, very matter-of-fact, and reveals no extra attempt at delib-
erate positive image creation, but it also does not risk leaving a bad impression. In
contrast, image creation is more at work in NNSs’ messages through deliberate at-
tempts at including negative and positive politeness features, that is, business letter
template greetings and sign-offs, expressions of gratitude, and phatic leave-taking ex-
pressions, respectively.
While one can argue that greetings and closings are not what an e-mail message
is about—the communicative purpose is expressed in the body of the message—the
position of greetings and closings is nevertheless prominent in an e-mail message:
They are the ﬁrst and last words to be read by the recipient. Studies in psychology
attest to the fact that items at the beginning and the end of text tend to be better re-
called, particularly if they are salient or stand out. An e-mail that contains a status
noncongruent (either too informal or overly polite) greeting or closing puts its sender
at risk of leaving an unfavorable impression.
In conclusion, the developing convention in institutional e-mails calls for mes-
sage brevity and neutrality, with minimal but proper status acknowledgment. For ed-
ucators in the ﬁeld of English as a second language, it is increasingly necessary to
include the composition of appropriate e-mails with appropriate greetings and clos-
ings in their teaching syllabi, especially when the NNS students are planning to study
at an American university where e-mail communication with faculty is becoming com-
monplace.
The present study had limitations in that only e-mail from graduate students in
a particular ﬁeld at a particular university, and sent to one faculty recipient, was ex-
amined. Future research should compare and examine greetings/closings in the fol-
lowing types of e-mail messages in academic institutional settings:
Male versus female students, students in different age brackets, graduate ver-
sus undergraduate students, students in different ﬁelds and at different univer-
sities
NNSs at advanced versus low proﬁciency levels in English
Messages addressed to male versus female faculty, younger versus older fac-
ulty
Messages with different communicative purposes (e.g., asking for clariﬁcation
versus asking for an extension)
Changes over extended message sequences, as well as over course of stu-
dent–professor relationships
Conventions change with new communication media, and it takes time for con-
ventions to become established. At present, e-mail writers do not receive clear guid-
ance on message composition, as the varied advice on e-mail etiquette demonstrates
(Gaertner-Johnston 2006; Vincent 1999). However, the need to communicate via e-
mail exists, and writers need to make lexical, grammatical, and semantic choices. As
they are navigating new communicative waters, they are also creating new norms and
conventions. The present study suggests that e-mail from students to professors in an
academic context is developing toward brevity and ritual formulae that differ from
193
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS

conventional business letters but nevertheless adhere to status-appropriate social pro-
tocol. Waldvogel’s (2007) conclusion about e-mail greetings and closings in the work-
place applies in the present study’s academic context as well: “Greetings and closings
[are] a means of reinforcing status relationships and underlining positional expecta-
tions” (3). NNS students need a little more help with these little words so that they
convey a positive and professional image of themselves in academic e-mails.
REFERENCES
Bardovi-Harlig, Kathleen, and Beverly Hartford. 1990. Congruence in native and nonnative conversations:
Status balance in the academic advising session. Language Learning 40:467–501.
Bardovi-Harlig, Beverly Hartford, Rebecca Mahan-Taylor, M. J. Morgan, and Dudley W. Reynolds. 1991.
Developing pragmatic awareness: Closing the conversation. ELT Journal 44:92–94.
Biesenbach-Lucas, Sigrun. 2005. Communication topics and strategies in email consultation: Compari-
son between American and international university students. Language Learning & Technology 9 (2):
24–46.
———. 2006. Making requests in email: Do cyber-consultations entail directness? Toward conventions
in a new medium. In Pragmatics and language learning, ed. Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig, Cesar Félix-
Brasdefer, and Alwiya S. Omar, 81–108. Ma¯noa: Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Cen-
ter, University of Hawai’i.
———. 2007. Students writing emails to faculty: An examination of e-politeness among native and non-
native speakers of English. Language Learning & Technology 11 (2): 51–81.
Bodman, Jean, and Miriam Eisenstein. 1988. May God increase our bounty: The expression of gratitude
in English by native and non-native speakers. Cross Currents 15:1–21.
Boxer, Diana. 2002. Applying sociolinguistics: Domains and face-to-face interaction. Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Bradac, James J., ed. 1989. Message effects in communication science. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Brown, Penelope, and Stephen Levinson. 1987. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bunz, Ulla, and Scott W. Campbell. 2002. Accommodating politeness indicators in personal electronic mail
messages. Paper presented at the Association of Internet Researchers’ 3rd annual conference, Maas-
tricht, Netherlands. http://bunz.comm.fsu.edu/AoIR2002politeness.pdf (accessed April 11, 2007).
Danet, Brenda. 2001. Cyberpl@y: Communicating online. Oxford: Berg.
Duthler, Kirk W. 2006. The politeness of requests made via email and voicemail: Support for the hyper-
personal model. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 11. http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/is-
sue2/duthler.html (accessed November 9, 2006).
E-variations in email salutations. 2006. www.webmetricsguru.com/2006/11/evariations_in_email_saluta-
tio.html (accessed April 11, 2007).
Gaertner-Johnston, Lynn. 2006. Salutations in letters and email. Business writing. www.businesswriting-
blog.com/business_writing/2006/01/greetings_and_s.html (accessed April 11, 2007).
Gains, Johnathan. 1999. Electronic mail: A new style of communication or just a new medium? An inves-
tigation into the text features of e-mail. English for Speciﬁc Purposes 18 (1): 81–101.
Hartford, Beverly, and Kathleen Bardovi-Harlig. 1996. “At your earliest convenience”: A study of written
student requests to faculty. In Pragmatics and language learning, ed. Lawrence F. Bouton, 55–69.
Monograph Series, vol. 7. Urbana, IL: DEIL.
Healy, Alice F., David A. Havas, and James T. Parker. 2000. Comparing serial position effects in seman-
tic and episodic memory using reconstruction of order tasks. Journal of Memory and Language
42:147–67.
Inside Higher Ed. 2006. Be polite, e-polite. http://insidehighered.com/news/2006/04/19/oregon (accessed
May 4, 2006).
Jacobson, David. 1999. Impression formation in cyberspace: Online expectations and offline experiences
in text-based virtual communities. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 5. http://jcmc.in-
diana.edu/vol5/issue1/jacobson.html (accessed February 25, 2007).
194
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas

Kankaaranta, Anne. 2006. “Hej, Seppo, could you pls comment on this!” Internal email communication
in lingua franca English in a multinational company. Business Communication Quarterly 69:216–25.
Lea, Martin, and Russell Spears. 1992. Paralanguage and social perception in computer-mediated com-
munication. Journal of Organizational Computing 2:321–41.
Li, Lan. 2000. Email: A challenge to standard English? English Today 16 (4): 23–29, 55.
Li, Yongyan. 2000. Surﬁng e-mails. English Today 16 (4): 30–34, 55.
Martin, Matthew M., Scott A. Myers, and Timothy P. Mottet. 1999. Students’ motives for communicating
with their instructors. Communication Education 48:157–64.
Nunan, David. 1999. Second language teaching and learning. Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
Schegloff, Emanuel A., and Harvey Sachs. 1973. Opening up closings. Semiotica 8:289–327.
Sherblom, John. 1988. Direction, function, and signature in electronic mail. Journal of Business Commu-
nication 25 (4): 39–54.
TechScribe. 2006. What to call your email recipient. www.techscribe.co.uk/ta/email-salutations.htm (ac-
cessed April 11, 2007).
Vincent, Annette. 1999. Business communication: Are the rules different for e-mail? Supervision 60 (9):
10–14.
Waldvogel, Joan. 1999. Email: User perceptions and aspects of its role and impact in one workplace. Mas-
ter’s thesis, School of Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, Victoria University of Wellington,
New Zealand.
———. 2007. Greetings and closings in workplace email. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica-
tion 12. http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue2/waldvogel.html (accessed May 3, 2007).
Walther, Joseph B. 1996. Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperper-
sonal interaction. Communication Research 23:3–43.
195
LITTLE WORDS THAT COULD IMPACT ONE’S IMPRESSION ON OTHERS


VI
Acquisition


17
Instructed L2 Acquisition of Differential Object
Marking in Spanish
MELISSA BOWLES AND SILVINA MONTRUL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
IT IS WIDELY HELD that second language (L2) learners restructure their interlanguage
grammars on the basis of input. But what form must input take to promote restruc-
turing? Many studies ﬁnd that input in the form of positive evidence is not sufficient
for successful second language acquisition (SLA) and that some focus on language
form is necessary to lead the learner to notice certain features of the input. That is,
instructed L2 learners may beneﬁt from some type of form-focused instruction, de-
ﬁned by Spada (1997, 73) as consisting of “events which occur within meaning-based
approaches to L2 instruction in which a focus on language is provided in either spon-
taneous or predetermined ways.” Form-focused instruction has been proven effective
in many face-to-face classroom settings (Rod Ellis 2001, 2002; Lyster 2004a, 2004b),
but many language programs have now begun to offer hybrid, or technology-en-
hanced, language courses, in which grammar instruction is offered via self-instruc-
tional units online. In such courses, face-to-face class meetings are reserved for
learners to engage in communicative activities in the L2. But in these hybrid deliv-
ery contexts, how effective is grammar instruction that involves explicit rule presen-
tation and practice with corrective feedback? This study seeks to answer this question,
focusing on the instruction of one particularly problematic structure for native Eng-
lish-speaking L2 learners of Spanish, differential object marking, or a-personal.
Explicit Rule Presentation and Negative Evidence in 
L2 Acquisition
Researchers propose that ﬁrst language (L1) acquisition is driven solely by positive
evidence, or exemplars of possible utterances in the language, which are present in all
grammatical speech. However, research on L2 acquisition (especially in immersion
contexts) has suggested that positive evidence alone may not be sufficient for the ac-
quisition of certain L1–L2 contrasts or structures that are not present in the L1 (Tra-
hey and White 1993; White 1989, 1991; for discussion, see Lightbown 1998 and Long
1996). That is, learners may beneﬁt from some type of form-focused instruction.
One way of delivering form-focused instruction is by providing learners with
explicit information before or during exposure to L2 input, by means of either
199

grammatical explanation or negative evidence in the form of corrective feedback
(Sanz and Morgan-Short 2004). A substantial body of research investigating the role
of explicit grammatical explanation or rule presentation in SLA has generally found
it beneﬁcial (Alanen 1995; Carroll and Swain 1993; de Graaf 1997; DeKeyser 1995;
Nick Ellis 1993; Nagata 1993; Nagata and Swisher 1995; Robinson 1996, 1997;
Rosa and Leow 2004a, 2004b). Furthermore, corrective feedback has been directly
linked to the process of hypothesis formation and testing, which has been shown to
facilitate restructuring and system learning (e.g., Rosa and O’Neill 1999; Rosa and
Leow 2004a). Russell and Spada’s (2006) meta-analysis synthesizes the research on
corrective feedback to date, ﬁnding overall support for it for L2 acquisition of mor-
phosyntax, as does Ellis, Loewen, and Erlam’s (2006) review of studies. This ﬁnding
suggests that even if negative evidence is not crucial for acquisition of some syntac-
tic features of L2 grammar, it does facilitate SLA by speeding up the process of ac-
quisition, as does explicit grammatical explanation or rule presentation.
Differential Object Marking
In Spanish, direct objects are marked differentially based on animacy, with inanimate
objects being unmarked and animate objects being marked with the dative preposi-
tion a in a phenomenon referred to as differential object marking (DOM). In general,
objects that are speciﬁc and animate are obligatorily marked with this preposition, as
shown in (1), while other objects are obligatorily unmarked, as shown in (2) and (3):
(1) a. Marcelo vio a Mónica.
[animate, speciﬁc]
Marcelo vio prep Mónica
“Marcelo saw Mónica.”
b. *Marcelo vio Mónica.
(2) a. La crisis destruyó la moral del pueblo.
[-animate, speciﬁc]
“The crisis destroyed people’s morale.”
b. *La crisis destruyó a la moral del pueblo.
(3) a. La bomba destruyó una iglesia.
[-animate, -speciﬁc]
“The bomb destroyed a church.”
b. *La bomba destruyó a una iglesia.
In some contexts, grammatical sentences with indeﬁnite determiners are pos-
sible with either a marked or an unmarked animate object, and the use of the prepo-
sition a determines whether a speciﬁc or nonspeciﬁc reading is possible, as shown
in (4).
(4) a. José necesita un médico.
[animate, -speciﬁc]
“José needs a doctor.” (any doctor)
b. José necesita a un médico.
[animate, speciﬁc]
José needs prep a doctor
“José needs a doctor.” (a particular doctor)
200
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul

Sentence (4a), with an unmarked object, provides the [-speciﬁc] interpretation
that José needs any doctor he can ﬁnd, not one particular doctor. However, the prepo-
sition a must be used if a [speciﬁc] interpretation, that José needs a particular doc-
tor, is intended, as in the case of (4b).
The exact semantic and syntactic conditions regulating when objects should be
marked with the dative preposition a are quite complex (Aissen 2003; Leonetti 2003;
Torrego 1998; Zagona 2002). Current analyses of DOM maintain that semantic no-
tions such as speciﬁcity, agentivity, telicity, and topicality seem to play a role in ex-
plaining the optionality of the preposition a with animate and inanimate objects.
However, because this study focuses on L2 learners’ acquisition of only the clearest,
prototypical cases of DOM [those with human objects, as in (1)], the speciﬁc details
of those analyses are not necessary. Crucially, following Torrego (1998) we assume
that a speciﬁc functional category for DOM does not exist in English, the native lan-
guage of the learners tested in our study.
Acquisition of Differential Object Marking
There is virtually no research on the L1 acquisition of DOM in Spanish, with the ex-
ception of a recent study by Rodríguez-Mondoñedo (2006). Rodríguez-Modoñedo
conducted an analysis of the spontaneous production of four Spanish-speaking chil-
dren (between the ages of 0;9 and 2;11) from the CHILDES database (López Ornat,
Linaza, Montes, and Vila corpora). All sentences containing V-O structures were an-
alyzed. From a total of 991 examples, the children made 17 errors (8 cases of a pres-
ent but not required and 9 cases of a omitted when required with animate, speciﬁc
objects). This amounts to a 98.38 percent accuracy rate with DOM before age three.
Therefore this study suggests that Spanish-speaking children acquire the semantic
constraints on the distribution of this preposition with direct objects easily and quickly,
at least with the prototypical, clear uses of DOM.
The situation for L2 acquisition is different, however, especially when the native
language the learners speak does not mark direct objects the way Spanish does. SLA
research ﬁndings show that even the unambiguous cases of DOM, like those in (1),
are difficult for English-speaking L2 learners of Spanish to acquire, despite their fre-
quency in the L2 input (VanPatten and Cadierno 1993; Johnston 1995). Perhaps this
difficulty is partially due to the polyfunctionality of the dative preposition a, which
also appears with ditransitive verbs that take indirect objects (Juan le dio un libro a
Pedro, “Juan gave a book to Pedro”), and with gustar-type psychological verbs that
are inherently marked with dative case (A Juan le gusta este libro, “Juan likes this
book”).To date, there has been just one empirical SLA study to investigate the ef-
fects of instruction on DOM—Farley and McCollam (2004). At the outset of the study,
participants were classiﬁed as either developmentally “ready” or “unready” to acquire
DOM (Johnston 1995; Pienemann 1998). Twenty-nine adult learners of Spanish en-
rolled in a ﬁfth-semester course were randomly assigned to either a control group or
one of three instruction groups that provided varying degrees of explicitness and prac-
tice with DOM. Learners’ knowledge of DOM was assessed based on their perfor-
mance on a pretest and immediate posttest consisting of a grammaticality judgment
task (GJT) and a picture description task. The study’s results showed that readiness
201
INSTRUCTED L2 ACQUISITION OF DIFFERENTIAL OBJECT MARKING IN SPANISH

did not constrain learners’ acquisition of the structure, as learners in all instruction
groups improved in their ability to recognize and produce grammatical sentences on
the posttest as compared with the control group that received no instruction on the
form. However, the small number of participants who completed the pretest, instruc-
tion, and posttest (fewer than ten per group) limits the generalizability of the study’s
ﬁndings and necessitates further research on the L2 acquisition of DOM.
Research Questions
Given the limited research into the acquisition of DOM in Spanish, this study set out
to answer the following research questions:
Does explicit instruction and practice (with corrective feedback)
signiﬁcantly affect intermediate-level L2 Spanish learners’ ability to distin-
guish between grammatical and ungrammatical sentences involving DOM?
signiﬁcantly affect their ability to produce grammatical sentences with ani-
mate objects?
Theoretical Assumptions and Hypotheses
We assume the full transfer/full access hypothesis (Schwartz and Sprouse 1996), ac-
cording to which the initial state of L2 acquisition is the entirety of the L1. That is, es-
pecially at the earliest stages of development, L2 learners impose the structural
architecture of their L1 onto the L2 and may ﬁlter out relevant L2 input accordingly.
Only when L2 learners realize that the L1 structure can no longer accommodate L2 in-
put do they restructure their interlanguages accordingly and resort to other options (i.e.,
parameter values, features, functional categories) made available by universal grammar.
Based on this theoretical assumption, we hypothesize that, in general, low-inter-
mediate proﬁciency L2 learners of Spanish will be quite inaccurate with DOM and
will assume that Spanish, like English, does not mark animate, speciﬁc direct objects.
If instruction helps them notice the presence of the object marker a in the input, they
will restructure their interlanguages accordingly.
The Study
Participants
In this study, there was a native speaker baseline group consisting of twelve native
Spanish speakers from a variety of countries. This group was included to verify that
native speakers have clear, determinate judgments with respect to the grammatical-
ity and distribution of DOM in sentences like (1). The original sample of experimen-
tal participants included 329 low-intermediate L2 learners of Spanish enrolled in a
hybrid delivery fourth-semester language course. In the course, students review gram-
mar concepts and complete practice exercises online prior to face-to-face class meet-
ings, where they engage in communicative activities. Only native English speakers
who completed all sessions (pretest, instruction, and both immediate and delayed
posttests) were included in the ﬁnal sample. These restrictions yielded a ﬁnal exper-
imental sample of 145 L2 learners.
During the period of the study, the a-personal was not formally presented in class,
and related coursework did not focus on that structure. In fact, the a-personal is no-
202
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul

ticeably absent from the intermediate-level textbook used in the course. It is men-
tioned only brieﬂy in the section on direct object pronouns, where just a two-line ex-
planation is given.
Tests
Two different tests were used to elicit data from the participants in this study, as the
research questions investigated both recognition and production of DOM in Spanish.
A written grammaticality judgment test was used to determine whether learners could
distinguish between grammatical and ungrammatical sentences involving DOM, and
a controlled written production test was used to evaluate their ability to use DOM
productively.
Grammaticality Judgment Test.
The GJT contained seventy-ﬁve sentences, twenty of which
targeted the a-personal. Of those sentences, ten were grammatical and ten were un-
grammatical, and there were an equal number of sentences with animate and inani-
mate objects. The remaining ﬁfty-ﬁve sentences in the GJT targeted the preposition
a with ditransitive verbs and psych verbs, thereby functioning as distractors and si-
multaneously providing more information about participants’ knowledge of the uses
of a with other verbs requiring structural and inherent dative case. Due to scope lim-
itations, only the results of sentences targeting DOM will be presented here. Partic-
ipants were instructed to rate each sentence on a scale of 1 (incorrect) to 5 (correct).
Controlled written production test.
In the controlled written production test, learners were in-
structed to use the words provided to form a complete, grammatical sentence in
Spanish. Ten items included psych verbs (ﬁve with animate themes and ﬁve with inan-
imate themes), ﬁve included ditransitive verbs, and ten included transitive verbs (ﬁve
with animate objects and ﬁve with inanimate objects). Because of space constraints,
only the results of the transitive verb stimuli will be presented in this chapter.
Participants were instructed to use all of the words in the prompt to create gram-
matical sentences. They could combine the words in any way they wished; however,
only those sentences for which transitive verbs were used were counted in the results.
For instance, a student response of El estudiante y la profesora se visitan, “The stu-
dent and the professor visit each other,” although grammatical, would not be counted
in the tallies because the student did not attempt to use the target structure.
The production data were scored for correct (non)use of the preposition a. Other
errors, such as those having to do with verb inﬂection, were not taken into account.
Therefore a student response of *Patricio visitaré el museo del Prado would be
scored correct for the purposes of this study because the target structure was used
appropriately, even though the verb is incorrectly inﬂected.
One rater scored all of the production data, and a second rater independently
scored 20 percent of the data. Interrater reliability, calculated using Cohen’s kappa,
was j  .91.
Instructional intervention.
The instructional intervention consisted of an explicit grammat-
ical explanation of the a-personal, followed by a practice exercise in which corrective
203
INSTRUCTED L2 ACQUISITION OF DIFFERENTIAL OBJECT MARKING IN SPANISH

feedback was provided. The intervention contained both positive and negative evidence.
Speciﬁcally, the grammatical explanation provided learners with positive evidence
about a-personal in the form of grammatical sentences, which contained both animate
and inanimate objects. In addition, it provided negative evidence, as it alerted learn-
ers to the contrast between Spanish, which requires the animacy marker a, and Eng-
lish, which does not differentially mark objects on the basis of animacy. An excerpt
of the instructional intervention follows:
From the perspective of an English speaker, the “a” appears to be an “extra”
word. From the perspective of a Spanish speaker, the “a” is required, and to not
use it is an error. So you could never say “Conozco María” in Spanish.
After reading the grammatical explanation, learners completed a twenty-item
practice exercise online. Each item consisted of a sentence with a drop-down menu
immediately preceding the object, from which the learners chose either a or —. Of
the twenty items, ten had animate objects and ten had inanimate objects. Following
each response, participants received feedback that indicated whether their response
was correct and provided a grammatical explanation. Participants were allowed to re-
view the explanation and complete the practice task as many times as necessary to
achieve 90 percent accuracy. The participants were all familiar with the presentation
of the explanation and practice activities (and with the 90% cutoff score), as this was
standard practice for all of the online materials in the course.
Design.
The study followed a classic pre-/post-test design. In week 1, both native
speakers and L2 learners completed a language background questionnaire, followed
by the written production and GJT pretests. Then, in week 2, the L2 learners com-
pleted the instructional module online, followed by the immediate posttests. Three
weeks later, the L2 learners completed the delayed posttests.
Results
Research Question 1: GJT Results
To answer the ﬁrst research question, mean grammaticality judgment scores from the
native speaker baseline group were examined ﬁrst. Native speakers performed as pre-
dicted, accepting grammatical DOM sentences (with the a-personal) (M  4.95, SD 
.09) and rejecting ungrammatical ones (without the a-personal) (M  1.1, SD  .35).
Given this pattern of behavior by native speakers, the L2 learners’GJT data were
then examined. On the pretest, the L2 learners’ mean grammaticality judgment rat-
ing for ungrammatical DOM sentences (without the a-personal) was 3.92 (SD  .89).
For grammatical DOM sentences (with the a-personal) their mean rating was lower,
3.76 (SD  .62), indicating that at the time of the pretest the L2 learners in fact found
ungrammatical DOM sentences slightly more acceptable than grammatical ones.
Nevertheless, the difference in their ratings for grammatical and ungrammatical DOM
sentences did not reach statistical signiﬁcance, t(146)  –1.749, p  .08.
The L2 learners’ ability to distinguish between grammatical and ungrammatical
DOM sentences improved markedly as a result of the instructional intervention, al-
though certainly not to nativelike levels, as the graph in ﬁgure 17.1 shows.
204
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul

The L2 learners’ mean GJT scores were analyzed using a factorial repeated-
measures ANOVA with three within-subjects factors—time, grammaticality, and
animacy. There were signiﬁcant main effects for all three factors—time, F(2,145)
 6.512, p  .002; grammaticality, F(1,145)  43.252, p  .0001; and animacy,
F(1,145)  30.247, p  .0001. Speciﬁcally, the learners’scores differed signiﬁcantly
over time, and a post hoc Scheffé test indicated that pretest and immediate posttest
scores were significantly different from each other, but immediate and delayed
posttest scores were statistically similar. Furthermore, there were signiﬁcant inter-
actions between time and grammaticality, F(2,290)  52.012, p  .0001, and be-
tween time and animacy, F(2,290)  82.810, p  .0001. These interactions indicate
that learners’ sensitivity to grammaticality and animacy was a function of the point
in the study when the test was taken. Speciﬁcally, learners behaved differently on
the pretest than they did on both posttests. Whereas on both posttests learners rated
grammatical sentences higher than ungrammatical sentences, on the pretest they did
the opposite. Similarly, on both posttests learners rated animate sentences higher than
inanimate sentences, but on the pretest they rated inanimate sentences higher. The
interaction between grammaticality and animacy, F(1,145)  43.479, p  .0001, is
a result of the fact that learners rated inanimate grammatical sentences higher than
animate grammatical sentences and that they rated animate ungrammatical sen-
tences higher than inanimate ungrammatical sentences. The signiﬁcant interaction
between time, grammaticality, and animacy, F(2,290)  10.631, p  .0001, indi-
cates that whereas on the posttests, learners rated animate grammatical sentences
higher than animate ungrammatical sentences, on the pretest they rated the animate
ungrammaticals higher.
205
INSTRUCTED L2 ACQUISITION OF DIFFERENTIAL OBJECT MARKING IN SPANISH
Figure 17.1 L2 Learners’ Mean GJT Ratings for DOM Sentences (max  5)

These patterns are to be expected, as they show that prior to instruction learners
were treating animate and inanimate objects the same way, just as they do in their
L1. The change in behavior after instruction and the durability of the effects (as ev-
idenced by the similarity of scores on the two posttests) indicates that instruction was
able to inﬂuence their ability to distinguish between grammatical and ungrammati-
cal DOM sentences.
Further analysis of the individual sentence types shows that instruction had a sig-
niﬁcant effect on learners’ ratings on all but the inanimate ungrammatical sentences
(*Joaquín vio a la última película de Batman). This result indicates that instruction was
effective on the target structure, sentences with animate objects. Speciﬁcally, effect
sizes were small for animate ungrammatical sentences (d  .21–.25) (*Jorge ama Car-
olina apasionadamente) and large (d  .67–.83) for animate grammatical sentences (El
estudiante visita a la profesora). Small effect sizes (d  .29–.36) were also observed
for inanimate grammatical sentences (Mi hermana vio una exposición de arte).
Summary of GJT results.
The ﬁrst research question, whether instruction would enable
learners to distinguish between grammatical and ungrammatical DOM sentences, was
answered affirmatively—speciﬁcally, after instruction learners became more accept-
ing of grammatical sentences and less accepting of ungrammatical ones. The largest
effect sizes were found for animate ungrammatical sentences, indicating that instruc-
tion had the greatest impact on sentences that require DOM in Spanish.
Research Question 2:Written Production Results
To answer the second research question, participants’ raw scores on the written pro-
duction test were examined. Figure 17.2 represents the percentage of sentences for
which the preposition a was used correctly.
206
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul
Figure 17.2 L2 Learners’ Use of the Preposition a in Obligatory Contexts

The L2 learners’ written production scores were then analyzed using a factorial
repeated-measures ANOVA with two within-subjects factors—time and animacy.
There were signiﬁcant main effects for time, F(2,292)  28.757, p  .0001, and for
animacy, F(1,146)  460.705, p  .0001, and a signiﬁcant interaction between time
and animacy, F(2,292)  23.715, p  .0001. These results indicate that production
scores increased over time, with a signiﬁcant difference between the pretest and the
immediate posttest, but no signiﬁcant differences between scores on the two posttests.
In addition, grammatical inanimate sentences were produced more frequently than
grammatical animate sentences. Further analysis revealed that instruction had a sig-
niﬁcant effect on learners’ability to produce sentences with animate objects, F(2,292)
 48.120, p  .0001, d  .71, between the pretest and immediate posttest and .78
between the pretest and delayed posttest. However, instruction did not signiﬁcantly
affect learners’ability to produce sentences with inanimate objects, F(2,292)  1.190,
p  .306, although after the instruction there was evidence of slight overgeneraliza-
tion, indicated by a slightly higher tendency for learners to use the preposition a with
inanimate objects than before instruction.
Summary of results: Written production.
The second research question, whether instruction
would enable learners to produce grammatical sentences involving animate and inan-
imate objects, was also answered affirmatively. As the effect sizes indicated, the gains
were quite substantial, with learners averaging just 16.76 percent use of the a-per-
sonal in obligatory contexts on the pretest to between 39 percent and 42 percent use
on the posttests. Furthermore, there was only a slight tendency to overgeneralize the
rule, with 8.69 percent use of the a-personal with inanimate objects on the delayed
posttest.
Discussion and Conclusion
Overall, the results of this study indicate that intermediate-level L2 learners of Span-
ish were able to improve in their ability to distinguish between grammatical and un-
grammatical sentences involving DOM and to produce those sentences, after receiving
explicit instruction and practice involving corrective feedback. Also, the online in-
struction in this study was modeled after the types of instructional modules used
throughout a hybrid delivery Spanish course that uses online modules as a unit of
grammar instruction, reserving face-to-face class time for communicative activities.
Therefore the study found that students made gains with respect to the target struc-
ture from interacting with the self-instructional grammar unit. Although this study
provides only written measures of learning and tests the efficacy of just one module
of instruction, it seems to provide support for this type of hybrid instruction. Cer-
tainly further research in this area, and in the area of computer-assisted language learn-
ing (CALL) in general, is warranted to determine precisely which aspects of
technology-enhanced instruction are most effective on which grammatical targets.
Despite the effects found for instruction in this study, it is important to note that
the instructed L2 learners’posttest GJT ratings and production rates for DOM sentences
were still signiﬁcantly different from those of the native speakers. That is, although the
instruction substantially improved learners’ability to distinguish between grammatical
207
INSTRUCTED L2 ACQUISITION OF DIFFERENTIAL OBJECT MARKING IN SPANISH

and ungrammatical sentences involving DOM, it did not make them perform like na-
tive speakers. Similarly, although the instruction caused them to supply the a-personal
in obligatory contexts (with animate objects), their posttest percentages of use near 40
percent do not make them comparable to native speakers. These results should not be
unexpected given the short duration of the instructional treatment and the difficulty of
the structure for L1 English speakers, evidenced anecdotally by language instructors
and in previous SLA research (VanPatten and Cadierno 1993; Johnston 1995).
Because the participants in this study received instruction that included explicit
rule presentation, positive evidence, and negative evidence in the form of corrective
feedback, our data do not allow us to make claims about which particular aspect(s)
of the instructional intervention led to the gains. Future research could investigate
the relative effects of each aspect, as Sanz and Morgan-Short (2004) did in their study
on the acquisition of clitics in L2 Spanish.
Overall, results support the claim that L2 learners can restructure their interlan-
guages and overcome the structure imposed by their L1 (Schwartz and Sprouse 1996).
Nevertheless, it is clear that these low-intermediate learners have not yet completely
learned the rules for DOM and do not have nativelike grammars in this respect. Be-
cause of this, the data from the present study are not sufficient to determine whether
full access is entirely possible in this grammatical domain. However, future research
could weigh in on the issue by testing advanced and near-native L2 learners’ ability
to distinguish grammatical and ungrammatical sentences involving DOM. Such tests
with advanced learners would reveal whether the problems attested here with low-
intermediate level learners persist and whether instruction would be beneﬁcial for
learners at these levels as well. Perhaps most important, such tests would reveal
whether learners’ knowledge of DOM fossilizes.
REFERENCES
Aissen, Judith. 2003. Differential object marking: Iconicity vs. economy. Natural Language and Linguis-
tic Theory 213:435–48.
Alanen, Riikka. 1995. Input enhancement and rule presentation in second language acquisition. In Atten-
tion and awareness in foreign language learning, ed. Richard Schmidt, 259–302. Honolulu: Univer-
sity of Hawaii Press.
Carroll, Susanne, and Merrill Swain. 1993. Explicit and implicit negative feedback: An empirical study
of the learning of linguistic generalizations. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 15:357–86.
de Graaf, Rick. 1997. The eXperanto experiment: Effects of explicit instruction on second language ac-
quisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 19:249–97.
DeKeyser, Robert. 1995. Learning second language grammar rules: An experiment with a miniature lin-
guistic system. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 17:379–410.
Ellis, Nick. 1993. Rules and instances in foreign language learning: Interactions of explicit and implicit
knowledge. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology 5 (3): 289–318.
Ellis, Rod. 2001. Introduction: Investigating form-focused instruction. Language Learning 51, suppl. no.
1:1–46.
———. 2002. Does form-focused instruction affect the acquisition of implicit knowledge? Studies in Sec-
ond Language Acquisition 24 (2): 223–36.
Ellis, Rod, Shawn Loewen, and Rosemary Erlam. 2006. Implicit and explicit corrective feedback and the
acquisition of L2 grammar. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 28:339–68.
Farley, Andrew P., and Kristina McCollam. 2004. Learner readiness and L2 production in Spanish: Process-
ability theory on trial. Estudios de Linguistica Aplicada 22 (4): 47–69.
208
Melissa Bowles and Silvina Montrul

Johnston, Malcolm. 1995. Stages of acquisition of Spanish as a second language. University of Western
Sydney, Macarthur: The National Languages and Literacy Institute of Australia, Language Acquisi-
tion Research Centre.
Leonetti, Manuel. 2003. Speciﬁcity and object marking: The case of Spanish a. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop “Semantic and Syntactic Aspects of Speciﬁcity in Romance Languages,” ed. Klaus von Heusinger
and Georg. A. Kaiser, 67–101. Fachbereich Sprachwissenschaft: Universitat Konstanz.
Lightbown, Patsy M. 1998. The importance of timing in focus on form. In Focus on form in classroom
second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 177–96. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Long, Michael. 1996. The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In Handbook
of second language acquisition, ed. William C. Ritchie and Tej K. Bhatia, 413–54. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Lyster, Roy. 2004a. Differential effects of prompts and recasts in form-focused instruction. Studies in Sec-
ond Language Acquisition 26 (3): 399–432.
———. 2004b. Research on form-focused instruction in immersion classrooms: Implications for theory
and practice. Journal of French Language Studies 14 (3): 321–41.
Nagata, Noriko. 1993. Intelligent computer feedback for second language instruction. Modern Language
Journal 77:330–39.
Nagata, Noriko, and M. Virginia Swisher. 1995. A study of consciousness-raising by computer: The ef-
fect of metalinguistic feedback on SLA. Foreign Language Annals 28:336–47.
Pienemann, Manfred. 1998. Language processing and second language development: Processability the-
ory. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Robinson, Peter. 1996. Learning simple and complex second language rules under implicit, incidental, rule-
search, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18 (1): 27–67.
———. 1997. Generalizability and automaticity of second language learning under implicit, incidental,
enhanced, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 19 (2): 223–47.
Rodríguez-Mondoñedo, Miguel. 2006. The acquisition of differential object marking in Spanish. Unpub-
lished ms., Department of Linguistics, University of Connecticut.
Rosa, Elena, and Ronald P. Leow. 2004a. Awareness, different learning conditions, and L2 development.
Applied Psycholinguistics 25 (2): 269–92.
———. 2004b. Computerized task-based exposure, explicitness, type of feedback, and Spanish L2 devel-
opment. Modern Language Journal 88 (2): 192–216.
Rosa, Elena, and Michael O’Neill. 1999. Explicitness, intake, and the issue of awareness. Studies in Sec-
ond Language Acquisition 21 (4): 511–56.
Russell, Jane, and Nina Spada. 2006. The effectiveness of corrective feedback for the acquisition of L2
grammar: A meta-analysis of the research. In Synthesizing research on language learning and teach-
ing, ed. John M. Norris and Lourdes Ortega, 133–64. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sanz, Cristina, and Kara Morgan-Short. 2004. Positive evidence vs. explicit rule presentation and explicit
negative feedback: A computer-assisted study. Language Learning 54 (1): 35–78.
Schwartz, Bonnie, and Rex Sprouse. 1996. L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access model. Sec-
ond Language Research 12:40–72.
Spada, Nina. 1997. Form-focused instruction and second language acquisition: A review of classroom and
laboratory research. Language Teaching 30 (2): 73–87.
Torrego, Esther. 1998. The dependency of objects. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Trahey, Martha, and Lydia White. 1993. Positive evidence and preemption in the second language class-
room. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 15:181–204.
VanPatten, Bill, and Teresa Cadierno. 1993. Explicit instruction and input processing. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 15 (2): 225–43.
White, Lydia 1989. The principle of adjacency in second language acquisition: Do learners observe the
subset principle? In Linguistic perspectives on second language acquisition, ed. Susan Gass and
Jacquelyn Schachter, 134–58. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 1991. Adverb placement in second language acquisition: Some positive and negative evidence in
the classroom. Second Language Research 7 (2): 133–61.
Zagona, Karen. 2002. The syntax of Spanish. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
209
INSTRUCTED L2 ACQUISITION OF DIFFERENTIAL OBJECT MARKING IN SPANISH


18
The Role of Pedagogical Tasks and Focus on
Form in Acquisition of Discourse Markers 
by Advanced Language Learners
MARÍA JOSÉ DE LA FUENTE
George Washington University
RECENT LITERATURE has pointed to the inherent difficulty in reaching an advanced level
of proﬁciency in a language in a classroom environment (see Byrnes and Maxim 2003;
Byrnes, Weger-Guntharp, and Sprang 2006). One of the characteristics that deﬁnes
advanced proﬁciency in a second/foreign language (L2) is the ability to produce
speech/text at the discourse level, which involves a mastery of the cohesive devices
inherent to discourse. Constructing L2 discourse involves the use of cohesive re-
sources or discourse markers, both lexical (e.g., deictic markers such as all of this,
that, etc.) and grammatical (e.g., conjunctions). Discourse markers are words or
phrases that signal a relationship between the segment they introduce and the prior
segment, with their contribution to the meaning of the message being procedural
rather than conceptual (Fraser 1999). Some examples of discourse markers in Eng-
lish are moreover, in other words, however, on the contrary, therefore, and as a re-
sult. Observational data from third- and fourth-year foreign language classes—years
when students are expected to reach an advanced level of language ability—show that
learners’ speech and writing is phrasal or clausal rather than sentential and lacks co-
hesive mechanisms in the target language, even with several semesters of exposure
to rich, content-oriented models of classroom L2 instruction. Despite the fact that
these cohesive markers are certainly frequent in naturalistic L2 input, they still seem
to lack salience for learners in an instructed environment, and instructional materi-
als seem to offer little explicit instruction that would call their attention to these
forms.
Review of Literature
Based on the theoretical premises that attention is needed for second language ac-
quisition (SLA) (Schmidt 1990, 1993) and that for acquisition to take place learn-
ers must consciously notice forms in the input (and the meanings these forms
realize) so they can process them in their short-term memory (Skehan 1996), some
researchers advocate a type of classroom pedagogical approach that addresses the
211

learner’s need to attend to form (Doughty and Williams 1998a, 1998b; Ellis 2000;
Harley 1998; Lightbown and Spada 1990; Long and Robinson 1998). According to
Leow (1997 and elsewhere), awareness and noticing contribute to learning and re-
tention; thus some type of form-focused instruction (incidental or planned) that in-
duces noticing must be beneﬁcial/needed for acquisition of certain L2 features. This
attention to form can range from the unobtrusive view of Long and Robinson (1998),
a reactive and unplanned approach where learners’ attention is drawn to form as it
happens incidentally, to the more proactive, planned approach proposed by Spada
(1997) or Doughty and Williams (1998b),1 which calls for planning of the elements
where focus is desired.2 In general, most researchers agree that, in the case of class-
room L2 teaching, a teacher-generated, proactive focus on form may be more desir-
able (see Ellis 2003).
Two questions debated in the literature: Which forms are amenable to focus on
form, and does the effectiveness of this type of instruction depend on the speciﬁc in-
structional treatment (i.e., what type[s] of focus on form technique[s] is/are used)?
Regarding the ﬁrst question, Doughty and Williams (1998b) point out that the term
form can be applied not only to phonological and morphosyntactical features of an
L2 but also to the lexicon, discourse, and pragmatics and that, aside from grammar,
“other levels of linguistic form cannot be ignored as potential candidates for focus
on form” (212). A review of the literature on focus on form reveals a focus of mor-
phosyntactic (Jourdenais et al. 1995; Leeman et al. 1995; Williams and Evans 1998;
Muranoi 1996) or lexical (de la Fuente 2006) features. However, and as Doughty and
Williams (1998a) point out, there is little evidence in the literature of the efficacy of
focus on form beyond the sentence level. Research that targets discourse markers as
forms to focus on during pedagogical interventions is then needed. With respect to
the second question, the type of focus on form (more or less explicit) is directly re-
lated to the implicit/explicit continuum; in other words, is language learning mostly
an implicit, incidental process, or an explicit, intentional one? Examples of highly
implicit focus on form techniques are input ﬂood, based on the principle that the tar-
get structure should appear many times in the input so learners can notice it, and in-
put enhancement (the input is made salient by highlighting it, for example).3 A
combination of input ﬂood and input enhancement task is what Ellis (2003) calls in-
put enrichment tasks. In these tasks, the L2 targeted features are frequent (input
ﬂood) and salient (input enhancement) in the input (Ellis 2003, 158).
Swain (1985, 1995) proposes that output also has a crucial role in noticing and
paying attention to linguistic L2 features. According to Swain (1985), negotiation
tasks can engage learners in pushed output that will attract feedback from the inter-
locutor. Explicitness of attention to form will increase if the task directs learners to
reﬂect upon, discuss, and process linguistic form. Examples of an explicit technique
are consciousness-raising (C-R) tasks (Ellis 2003). According to Ellis (2003, 163),
C-R tasks are intended to create awareness of how an L2 feature works by having
learners “talk meaningfully about a language point using their own linguistic re-
sources.” Fotos (1993, 1994) showed that learners are more likely to acquire explicit
knowledge of targeted forms and notice them in subsequent tasks after completing
C-R tasks than after unfocused, communicative tasks.
212
María José de la Fuente

To be sure, the implicit–explicit continuum in focus on form needs to be further
investigated with respect to classroom L2 instruction. Furthermore, there is a scarcity
of studies directly or indirectly addressing the role of tasks with a focus on form—of
either kind—in acquisition of discourse elements of the language. Pavlenko (2006,
114) observes that one aspect of advanced narrative competence, cohesion, is difficult
to acquire, and may require noticing and C-R tasks. García Mayo (2002, 166) noted
that learners in a group exposed to a dictogloss task seldom discussed any of the tar-
geted features, among which were clausal connectors, and that they “seemed to be more
concerned about the form and meaning of words than about the features targeted by
the task.”4 Given the lack of research in this area, this study is certainly warranted.
Research Questions
This study explores whether and how two different types of interactive pedagogical
tasks with a focus on form can promote learning of discourse markers by advanced
learners of Spanish. The research questions of the study were the following: Are there
differential effects in the immediate comprehension and in the retrieval of discourse
markers between learners exposed to tasks with an explicit focus on form (C-R tasks)
and those exposed to similar tasks with an implicit focus on form? During these tasks,
do learners pay attention to and process target discourse markers? Do they negotiate
target discourse markers?
Methodology
Participants
The sample population of advanced language learners was comprised of two groups
of undergraduate students enrolled at the time of the research at the investigator’s in-
stitution. The participants were twenty-four adult college learners of Spanish (eight
male, sixteen female) enrolled in a class corresponding to a ﬁfth semester of language
study. Their mean length of exposure to the Spanish language in a classroom setting
was 7.2 years. All participants selected met the following criteria: English was their
ﬁrst language, they were not heritage speakers of Spanish, and they did not know any
other foreign language.
Procedure
A quasi-experimental comparison group design was used to address the ﬁrst research
question, utilizing a pretest, a treatment, and a posttest. A written recognition pretest
including twelve isolated Spanish discourse markers was administered one day prior
to the treatment. Participants were asked to provide an English translation for each
connector and then write a paragraph in Spanish that incorporated the connector. Af-
ter scoring the pretests, four Spanish discourse markers, unknown by all participants,
were selected: o sea (that is), entre tanto (meanwhile), en cuanto a (regarding, in ref-
erence to), and puesto que (because). Two planned focus on form tasks were designed,
each of them situated at opposite ends of the implicit–explicit continuum.
Consciousness-raising task. The task was intended to raise students’ awareness
and elicit conscious reﬂection through a focus on the form of the four Spanish
discourse markers selected (see appendix). The input data was a written text
213
THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TASKS AND FOCUS ON FORM IN ACQUISITION OF DISCOURSE MARKERS

containing examples of the four targeted structures, making them salient (en-
hanced in bold) for learners. The task focused learners’ attention on these
forms by making it necessary to process their meanings.
Input enrichment task. This task was designed to induce learners’ noticing of
the target items while performing a meaning (content)-focused activity. The
input data were the same text used for the other condition with the enhanced
targeted forms (see appendix). The task required learners to respond to content
questions and, at the same time, induce noticing of the forms.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two groups: Consciousness-Rais-
ing (C-R), and Input Enrichment (I-E), each comprised of six pairs of students who
had to work collaboratively to solve the assigned task. Every pair was given the same
amount of time to complete the task. All in-task interactions were video recorded.
After each pair completed the task, they participated in an introspective review ses-
sion—stimulated recall5—with the investigator. The researcher replayed and reviewed
with each pair of students the video containing their interaction during the task. The
researcher addressed questions to the students that were pertinent to the study and
had to do with levels of attention, items paid attention to while completing the task,
items that were negotiated or not and why, and so on. These sessions were also
recorded. Following the thirty-minute stimulated recall session, each participant re-
ceived the ﬁrst assessment task: a text in Spanish with eight blank spaces. Learners
needed to read the text and then insert the four target items in the blanks (twice each).
This assessment task measured gains in comprehension of the items. The following
day they were given the second assessment task, a text in English with four discourse
markers, equivalent to the four Spanish ones, underlined. Learners had to translate
each of them into Spanish, avoiding several other options. In this way we would ob-
serve if learners could retrieve the forms as well as the meaning they conveyed.
Results and Discussion
Data were analyzed in two stages. First, the results of the two assessment posttasks,
showing learners’ gains in comprehension and retrieval of targeted discourse mark-
ers, were computed and submitted to statistical analysis; second, the in-task recorded
interactions were transcribed for further analysis, and the videos of the stimulated re-
call sessions were reviewed.
1. Effects in Immediate Comprehension and Retrieval
(Production) of Discourse Markers (Research Question 1)
In order to investigate differential effects in the immediate comprehension of the tar-
get items mean scores and standard deviations (SD) for assessment 1 were statisti-
cally analyzed using a t test. This between-group comparison showed a signiﬁcant
main effect of group (p  .001). Results are shown in table 18.1.
In order to investigate differential effects in retrieval or production of the targeted
items between groups, mean scores, and standard deviations (SD) for assessment 2
were statistically analyzed using a t test. This comparison also showed a signiﬁcant
main effect of group (p  .007). Results are shown in table 18.2.
214
María José de la Fuente

Although gains were observed for both groups, these results show that learners
exposed to a more explicit focus on form task (C-R) were able to show more imme-
diate comprehension of the newly introduced discourse markers than those exposed
to a more implicit focus on form task (I-E). They also show that the ﬁrst group was
more successful at retrieving the discourse markers in order to complete a transla-
tion task. The results suggest that the C-R task was more effective at promoting at-
tention to and noticing of discourse markers, as shown by the higher levels of both
comprehension (meaning, function) and production (form) of the items. The gains
observed in the learners under the IE condition indicate that some level of attention
and awareness was present while these learners performed the tasks; however, fur-
ther processing in short-term memory may have been more effective under the C-R
task condition, which would explain the higher level of immediate comprehension
and short-term retention. These results appear to conﬁrm similar results of other
studies investigating differences between implicit and explicit focus on form instruc-
tion (DeKeyser 1995; Robinson 1996).
2.Analysis of In-Task Interactions and Stimulated Recall
Protocols (Research Question 2)
The analysis of the transcriptions of in-task interactions showed that all interactions in
the C-R group contained substantial amounts of metatalk (talking about the L2); this
metatalk was a result of the task itself, which required students to ﬁgure out collabo-
ratively the meaning of the discourse markers by using contextual clues and other
strategies available to them. Dialogue between participants in all dyads was collabora-
tive, balanced, and conducted in the L2 but with frequent code switching to the ﬁrst
language (L1), caused by the difficulty of producing metatalk in the L2.6 Four dyads
solved the task successfully, that is, they provided the right translation for each target
item. One dyad translated three correctly, and one dyad gave a correct answer for two.
For all six dyads, however, the nature of the task made it successful to focus attention
215
THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TASKS AND FOCUS ON FORM IN ACQUISITION OF DISCOURSE MARKERS
Table 18.1
Assessment Task 1: t test between-Group Comparisons
N
Mean
SD
t
df
Group A
12
3.66
0.74
5.07
21
Group B
12
2.20
0.65
p  .001
Table 18.2
Assessment Task 2: t test between-Group Comparisons
N
Mean
SD
t
df
Group A
12
2.25
0.96
3.01
18
Group B
12
1.25
0.62
p  .007

on the target L2 features, and meaning negotiation of each item took place. Interac-
tions and episodes of meaning negotiation always revolved around the target items. The
most common strategy used to ﬁgure out meaning was hypothesis testing via transla-
tion, as reported in subsequent stimulated recall protocols, and as exempliﬁed in (1):
(1) (dyad in C-R group)
STUDENT A: “En cuanto a . . . [long pause]”
STUDENT B: “[long pause] it’s kind of like ‘regarding’, [translating text]
regarding its importance, it’s used . . . I don’t know if that’s what
it’s trying to say.”
STUDENT A: “It would be like ‘in relation to.’”
STUDENT B: “Yeah, that would work too.”
Several long pauses were observed during which students would reread parts of the
text (and test hypotheses by translating into the L1 in their heads). Then they offered
their solution to the other student who would agree or disagree. Once they agreed on
a translation, they moved to the next item. The analysis of the interactions of the I-E
dyads showed similarities as well as differences with respect to the C-R group. Dia-
logue between participants in all I-E dyads was also balanced and collaborative.
Three I-E dyads solved the task successfully, that is, they answered all content ques-
tions. For these dyads, overt negotiation of the enhanced discourse markers was ob-
served on just a few occasions. In most instances, they used strategies to answer the
questions correctly that did not involve overt negotiation of the markers. All cases of
incorrect answers to the content questions corresponded with a lack of noticing and
processing of the discourse markers, as revealed by the in-task interaction transcripts.
In other words, students exhibited poor comprehension when understanding of the
discourse markers was crucial to answer the question. A substantially lower amount
of code switching was observed: While interactions in the C-R group contained sub-
stantial amounts of metatalk, only six cases of metatalk in all six interactions of the
I-E group were found. That is, talking about content in the L2 was easier than talk-
ing about the L2 itself. The interactions and negotiations that took place in the IE
group revolved around the content of the text and, despite the fact that learners read
through the enhanced target forms, in some cases several times, in order to look for
answers to the questions, only four cases of negotiation of meaning of discourse
markers were found. It is clear that the nature of the task had an effect on how learn-
ers used their attentional resources. This evident lack of awareness and noticing of
target items seems to have been the cause of the differential effects found in posttests.
Further evidence is provided by the answers that learners gave to the question fol-
lowing the ﬁrst posttest: “Was the previous task helpful to you in order solve this one?
How? Please explain.” While learners in the C-R group clearly noted that they fo-
cused their attention on the target items, learners in the I-E group reported not pay-
ing attention to the boldfaced, enhanced items in the text.
(2) (student in an I-E dyad)
“I didn’t even know that [the marker o sea] was there.”
216
María José de la Fuente

Others reported paying attention in a very brief manner but felt no need to negotiate
and ﬁnd out what their meaning/function was. In other words, they were perceptu-
ally salient but considered not needed for successful resolution of the task at hand.
(3) “I saw a couple of them [markers] in that text but still I did not understand
what they meant so they were difficult to place.”
(4) “I remember these were used in the other text, but I have a tendency to skip
over things like these, and then I never fully understand what they mean.”
Unlike in the case of the C-R group, several cases of negotiation of forms not tar-
geted by the task were found in the transcripts of the I-E group. This means that lex-
ical items, and not the enhanced forms, were the focus of meaning negotiation and
that learners noticed those more than they noticed the target markers. These results
are similar to those found in Kowal and Swain (1994), Foster (1998), and Williams
(1999), among others. With more implicit focus on form tasks, such as I-E tasks, it
is hard to predict which L2 areas will attract learners’ attention.
In order to further explore the differences observed in amount and quality of
learners’ declared attention to, and noticing of, target items, we analyzed the stimu-
lated recall protocols for both groups. We grouped opinions of C-R and I-E group
participants with respect to different topics, generalizing when eight or more partic-
ipants expressed similar points of view.
(a) Learners consider discourse markers necessary for L2 text comprehension.
(b) Learners consider discourse markers particularly difficult aspects of the L2
to learn.
(c) C-R learners positively value C-R tasks because they involve “active learn-
ing” and help subsequent retrieval of the L2 features. However, they think they are
most likely to retain these forms only with subsequent exposures and uses.
(d) C-R learners prefer to solve C-R tasks (metatalk) in English, while I-E learn-
ers, with the exception of a few occasions, did not need to codeswitch (use of L1) to
interact.
Conclusions, Implications for Classroom Pedagogy, and
Further Research
This study assumes that use of focused or planned pedagogical tasks is needed to fos-
ter learning of discourse markers, an important aspect of being an advanced L2
learner/user. Its results suggest, however, that not all focused tasks may be of equal
effectiveness. Although input enrichment tasks (a type of planned, implicit focus on
form) seem to promote some level of effective attention to, and noticing of discourse
markers in the L2 input, C-R tasks seem more effective by focusing learners’ atten-
tion on their forms, meanings, and uses, and consequently raising learners’ aware-
ness of such forms, and promoting explicit learning. All of this results in higher levels
of immediate comprehension and retrieval of target forms. During C-R tasks, learn-
ers negotiate meaning of L2 forms: They notice and formulate and test hypotheses.
217
THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TASKS AND FOCUS ON FORM IN ACQUISITION OF DISCOURSE MARKERS

Given their lack of salience, explicit learning (via C-R tasks) and metalinguistic
awareness may be necessary cognitive steps to learn L2 discourse markers.
C-R tasks are valuable classroom activities, and a needed element in task- and
content-based instruction, to foster explicit learning of discourse markers. In combi-
nation with more implicit focus on form tasks, such as I-E tasks, they may facilitate
acquisition of discourse markers by helping that initial stage of noticing and aware-
ness. Teachers then may move to more implicit tasks to facilitate further internaliza-
tion of L2 forms.
Indeed, further research should investigate the relationship between implicit and
explicit focus on form tasks (i.e., if it is a combination of tasks rather than the exclu-
sive use of one form or another, which aids acquisition of L2 features). Also further
studies should address the long-term effects of C-R tasks (retention) and compare the
effectiveness of C-R tasks with other types of explicit focus of form techniques. The
lack of delayed posttests to measure delayed effects and the small number of partic-
ipants are limitations of this small-scale study that need to be mentioned. However,
the scarcity of research in the area of task-based methodology and focus on form in
relation to discourse markers in particular, and to other aspects of the discourse level
of an L2 in general, opens a new path worth pursuing.
NOTES
1. Doughty and Williams (1998b) use the term “proactive” focus on form to refer to planned (not in-
cidental) interventions to provide focus on form during tasks.
2. See also Lightbown (1998); Loschky and Bley-Vroman (1993); and Swain (1998).
3. Jourdenais et al. (1995) observed that learners are more likely to notice visually enhanced input than
unenhanced input. White (1998) concluded that these techniques seem to be ineffective and that more
explicit mechanisms to attract learners’ attention may have to be used. Similarly, Leow (2001) found
no differences between enhanced and unenhanced input in amount of noticing or subsequent acqui-
sition of targeted forms.
4. This concern for lexical meaning rather than other aspects of the L2 has been found in many stud-
ies on interactive tasks and focus on form (see, e.g., Foster 1998; Williams 1999).
5. Stimulated recall is a needed introspective methodology, along with think-aloud protocols, to oper-
ationalize attention and noticing as cognitive processes. See Gass and Mackey (2000) for an excel-
lent introduction to stimulated recall methodology for SLA research.
6. This was reported by participants during the stimulated recall session. See Scott and de la Fuente
(2008) for a study on the uses of the L1 by L2 learners during C-R pedagogical tasks.
REFERENCES
Byrnes, Heidi, and Hiram Maxim, eds. 2003. Advanced foreign language learning: A challenge to college
programs. Boston: Thomson Heinle.
Byrnes, Heidi, Heather Weger-Guntharp, and Katherine Sprang, eds. 2006. Educating for advanced for-
eign language capabilities. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
DeKeyser, Robert M. 1995. Learning second language grammar rules: An experiment with a miniature
linguistic system. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 17:379–410.
de la Fuente, María J. 2006. Classroom L2 vocabulary acquisition: Investigating the role of pedagogical
tasks and form-focused instruction. Language Teaching Research 10:263–95.
Doughty, Catherine, and Jessica Williams, eds. 1998a. Focus on form in classroom second language ac-
quisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
218
María José de la Fuente

———. 1998b. Pedagogical choices in focus on form. In Focus on form in classroom second language
acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 197–261. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Ellis, Rod. 2000. Focus on form in task-based language teaching. In Language policy and pedagogy, ed.
Richard D. Lambert and Elana Shohamy. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
———. 2003. Task-based language learning and teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Foster, Pauline. 1998. A classroom perspective on the negotiation of meaning. Applied Linguistics 19:1–23.
Fotos, Sandra. 1993. Consciousness-raising and noticing through focus on form: Grammar task perfor-
mance vs. formal instruction. Applied Linguistics 14:385–407.
———. 1994. Integrating grammar instruction and communicative language use through grammar con-
sciousness-raising tasks. TESOL Quarterly 28:323–51.
Fraser, Bruce. 1999. What are discourse markers? Journal of Pragmatics 31:931–52.
García Mayo, María del Pilar. 2002. The effectiveness of two form-focused tasks in advanced EFL peda-
gogy. International Journal of Applied Linguistics 12:156–75.
Gass, Susan, and Allison Mackey. 2000. Stimulated recall methodology in second language research. Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Harley, Birgit. 1998. The role of focus on form tasks in promoting child L2 acquisition. In Focus on form
in classroom second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 156–74.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jourdenais, René, Mitch Ota, Stephanie Stauffer, Barbara Boyson, and Catherine Doughty. 1995. Does tex-
tual enhancement promote noticing? A think-aloud protocol analysis. In Attention and awareness in
foreign language learning, ed. Richard W. Schmidt, 183–216. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Kowal, Maria, and Merrill Swain. 1994. Using collaborative language production tasks to promote stu-
dents’ language awareness. Language Awareness 3:72–93.
Leeman, Jennifer, Igone Arteagoitia, Boris Fridman, and Catherine Doughty. 1995. Integrating attention
to form with meaning: Focus on form in content-based Spanish instruction. In Attention and aware-
ness in foreign language learning, ed. Richard W. Schmidt, 217–58. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i
Press.
Leow, Ronald P. 1997. Attention, awareness, and foreign language behavior. Language Learning
47:467–506.
———. 2001. Attention, awareness and foreign language behavior. Language Learning 51:113–55.
Lightbown, Patsy M. 1998. The importance of timing in focus on form. In Focus on form in classroom
second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 177–96. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lightbown, Patsy M., and Nina Spada. 1990. Focus on form and corrective feedback in communicative
language teaching: Effects on second language learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition
12:429–48.
Long, Michael, and Peter Robinson. 1998. Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In Focus on form
in classroom second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 15–41.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Loschky, Lester, and Robert Bley-Vroman. 1993. Grammar and task-based methodology. In Task and
language learning, vol. 1, ed. G. Crookes and Susan Gass, 123–67. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual
Matters.
Muranoi, Hitoshi. 1996. Effects of interaction enhancement on restructuring of interlanguage grammar: A
cognitive approach to foreign language instruction. Unpublished PhD diss., Georgetown University.
Pavlenko, Aneta. 2006. Narrative competence in a second language. In Educating for advanced foreign
language capacities: Constructs, curriculum, instruction, assessment, ed. Heidi Byrnes, Heather
Weger-Guntharp, and Katherine Sprang, 105–17. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Robinson, Peter. 1996. Learning simple and complex second language rules under implicit, incidental, rule-
search, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18:27–68.
Schmidt, Richard. 1990. The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics
11:129–58.
———. 1993. Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics
13:206–26.
219
THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TASKS AND FOCUS ON FORM IN ACQUISITION OF DISCOURSE MARKERS

Scott, Virginia, and María J. de la Fuente. 2008. What’s the problem? L2 learners use of the L1 during
consciousness-raising, form-focused tasks. Modern Language Journal 92:19–38.
Skehan, Peter. 1996. A framework for the implementation of task based instruction. Applied Linguistics
17:38–62.
Spada, Nina. 1997. Form-focused instruction and second language acquisition: a review of classroom and
laboratory research. Language Teaching 30:73–87.
Swain, Merrill. 1985. Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehen-
sible output in its development. In Input in second language acquisition, ed. Susan Gass and Car-
olyn Madden. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
———. 1995. Three functions of output in second language learning. In For H. G. Widdowson: Princi-
ples and practice in the study of language, ed. Guy Cook and Barbara Seidlhofer, 125–44. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
———. 1998. Focus on form through conscious reﬂection. In Focus on form in classroom second lan-
guage acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 64–82. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
White, Joanna. 1998. Getting the learners’ attention. A typographical input enhancement study. In Focus
on form in classroom second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams,
85–113. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, Jessica. 1999. Learner-generated attention to form. Language Learning 49:583–625.
Williams, Jessica, and Jacqueline Evans. 1998. What kind of focus and on which forms? In Focus on form
in classroom second language acquisition, ed. Catherine Doughty and Jessica Williams, 139–55.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
220
María José de la Fuente

Appendix
C-R tasks vs. I-E tasks
[Excerpt from the input data]
La ampliación del Canal de Panamá
En este ensayo discutiré un tema de gran importancia para los panameños: si el pueblo
panameño debe aprobar o rechazar mediante un referéndum la ampliación del Canal de Panamá.
La regla general es que, cuando se quiere un camino, lo paga quien lo quiere usar. Por
ejemplo, los panameños pagamos impuestos por las calles que el gobierno construye por
donde podemos transitar, lo que nos convierte en usuarios, o sea, personas que usan el camino
[. . .]
C-R task
Working with your classmate, provide a translation in English that reﬂects the meaning of these
expressions as they appear in the text.
1. o sea ________________________________
2. puesto que ___________________________
[. . .]
I-E task
Work with your classmate to provide an answer to the following questions.
1. What is being debated regarding the Panama Canal?
2. Why will the Panamanians have to pay for the canal’s expansion?
3. What does the word usuarios (paragraph 2) mean? How do you know?
[. . .]
221
THE ROLE OF PEDAGOGICAL TASKS AND FOCUS ON FORM IN ACQUISITION OF DISCOURSE MARKERS


19
Article Acquisition in English, German,
Norwegian, and Swedish
TANJA KUPISCH, MERETE ANDERSSEN,
UTE BOHNACKER, AND NEIL SNAPE
University of Calgary, University of Tromsø, Uppsala University, and Hokkaido University
ARTICLE OMISSION is a well-documented phenomenon in early child speech. Interest-
ingly, children differ in terms of how extensively they omit articles depending on their
age and what language(s) they are exposed to. Different accounts have been proposed
to account for this cross-linguistic variation. One of the most widely discussed mod-
els is the nominal mapping parameter (NMP), originally proposed in Chierchia
(1998), which relates variation in child language to the syntactic and semantic prop-
erties of noun phrases across languages (e.g., Chierchia, Guasti, and Gualmini 1999;
Guasti and Gavarró 2003; Guasti et al. 2004). Other inﬂuential accounts of determiner
omission have been formulated in prosody-oriented research (e.g., Gerken 1991,
1994; Lleó 1998, 2001; Lleó and Demuth 1999; Roark and Demuth 2000; Demuth,
McCullough, and Adamo 2007). So far, no common agreement has been reached.
This chapter presents a study on article acquisition in English, German, Norwe-
gian, and Swedish, where article use is subject to similar syntactic and semantic con-
ditions. Hence the NMP predicts similar acquisition patterns. In terms of their metrical
structure, noun phrases in these languages differ considerably. Accordingly, different
acquisition patterns are expected.
The chapter is structured as follows: In the ﬁrst section, we present an overview
of articles and article use in the four languages under discussion. In the second sec-
tion, we introduce the NMP and two prosodic accounts. The third section presents
our results, discussing them in light of the aforementioned models. Our data suggest
that the NMP should be discarded as empirically false, while supporting prosodic ap-
proaches to article acquisition. Nevertheless, as we conclude in the fourth section,
even prosodic accounts do not provide an all-encompassing explanation for chil-
dren’s omission of articles.
Article acquisition in these four languages has been studied in previous work (for
monolingual ﬁrst language [L1] acquisition, see, e.g., Brown 1973; Radford 1990;
Abu-Akel and Bailey 2000; Demuth, McCullough, and Adamo 2007, for English;
Clahsen, Eisenbeiss, and Penke 1996; Penner and Weissenborn 1996; Lleó 1998, 2001;
Eisenbeiss 2002; Kupisch 2006, 2007, for German; Anderssen 2005, for Norwegian;
223

Bohnacker 1997, 2004, 2007; Plunkett and Strömqvist 1992; Santelmann 1998;
Svartholm 1978, for Swedish). However, no study has provided a systematic compar-
ison of these languages.
Articles in English, German, Norwegian, and Swedish
The four languages all have deﬁnite and indeﬁnite articles. Indeﬁnite articles occur
prenominally. Deﬁnite articles are prenominal in English and German but postnom-
inal in Norwegian and Swedish. [The articles in (1) are marked by italics.]
(1) En. a house vs. the house
Ge. ein Haus vs. das Haus
No. et hus
vs. hus-e
Sw. ett hus
vs. hus-et
Prosodically, articles in these languages differ in terms of whether they constitute 
clitics or feet. English articles represent free clitics (2a) (Selkirk 1996). In the two
Scandinavian languages, the prenominal indeﬁnite article is proclitic to the noun,
while the postnominal deﬁnite article is enclitic. Traditionally, the suffixal article in
Norwegian (and Swedish) is implicitly taken to be of the kind represented in (2b).
However, recent research suggests that the suffixal article is an affixal clitic (2c) based
on the fact that the addition of the suffixal article does not alter the pitch accent of
monosyllabic nouns (Morén 2007). German articles may be reduced or unreduced.
Nonreduced articles have been analyzed as phonological words on their own, that is,
they form separate feet (2d) (Wiese 1996, p.c.). Reduced articles may be enclitic, be-
ing subsumed under the host, which can be a preceding verb (2b) or a preposition
(2d). In sentence-initial position, reduced articles may be proclitic (2a).1
(2)
The four languages are largely similar in terms of the syntactic, semantic, and prag-
matic conditions of article use. Generally articles are obligatory with singular count
nouns, regardless of whether the reading is speciﬁc (as with the verb see) or generic
(as with the verb like). The absence of an article (or any other determiner) results in
ungrammaticality [cf. (3)].2
(3) En. *I see/like _ cat.
Ge. *Ich sehe/mag _ Katze.
No. *Jeg ser/liker _ katt.
Sw. *Jag ser/gillar _ katt.
If the noun is plural or mass, it may appear bare. In this case, the noun phrase (NP)
has a nonspeciﬁc or a generic reading, depending on the verb [cf. (4)]. Deﬁnite arti-
cles are allowed in these contexts, but they render the NP speciﬁc.
224
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape

(4) En. I like/see _ cats.
Ge. Ich mag/sehe _ Katzen.
No. Jeg liker/ser _ katter.
Sw. Jag gillar/ser _ katter.
Besides these parallels, there are also some interesting differences. In fact, both Scan-
dinavian languages sometimes allow bare singular count nouns whose meaning is
slightly different from the corresponding indeﬁnite marked nouns. The translation
equivalents in English and German are ungrammatical. This point is usually not ad-
dressed in the linguistics literature and, despite its relevance, not mentioned in any
papers dealing with the NMP (cf. Bohnacker 2004, 2007, 53–54, for details).
(5) En. *She has _ dog.
Ge. *Sie hat _ Hund.
No. Hun har _ hund.
Sw. Hon har _ hund.
Based on these observations, one may wonder whether it is still valid to test the NMP
comparing these languages. We think it is, because according to Chierchia (1998,
356–57, 400–401) the Germanic languages pertain to one and the same parameter
setting.
Prosodic Models versus Nominal Mapping Parameter 
and Predictions
In the following sections we summarize the basic ideas pertaining to the NMP and
two prosodic approaches to article omission, and, based on those, we outline the pre-
dictions for article use in children acquiring the four Germanic languages under in-
vestigation.
The Nominal Mapping Parameter (NMP)
The NMP (Chierchia 1998) is concerned with the question of how semantic types of
NPs are mapped onto syntax. Chierchia proposes that languages can be subdivided
into three types according to what their nouns denote. Each of these types is repre-
sentative of a parametric setting: In the Chinese-type language, all nouns are typi-
cally masslike. They come out of the lexicon as arguments and can be directly mapped
onto syntax without projecting a determiner phrase (DP). In this type of language,
nouns are always bare and there is no plural morphology. The Romance-type language
represents the opposite case. Here, nouns are predicates, and D must be projected to
convert them into arguments, which can then appear in argument positions. These lan-
guages have plural morphology and nouns must not be bare. In the third type of lan-
guage, the Germanic type, languages can be either predicates or arguments, depending
on whether they are count or mass. Only in the former case must D be projected. Nom-
inals in all languages can be type-shifted (from predicates to arguments, and vice
versa; see Chierchia 1998). This is necessary because nouns that are inherently count
can sometimes be used as if they were mass, and vice versa.
Chierchia, Guasti, and Gualmini (1999) outline the predictions of the NMP for
acquisition as follows: When acquiring articles, children pass through predetermined
stages corresponding to parameter settings in the following way. The Chinese setting
represents the default setting (stage 1). During this stage, children consistently omit
determiners as if their target language were an articleless language. If this setting does
225
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH

not correspond to the target language, the discovery of plural morphology triggers
resetting of the parameter to the Germanic setting where bare nouns and determiner-
noun sequences appear to be in “free variation.”3 During this stage, children have to
ﬁgure out which nouns are count and which are mass, and article omissions in oblig-
atory contexts result from the misclassiﬁcation of (particular) count nouns as mass.
Children exposed to a Romance-type language have to reset the parameter again.4
They can do so very quickly on the basis of positive evidence, that is, when discov-
ering that nouns are consistently used with articles (rather than varying with bare
nouns). The learning task is assumed to be more time-consuming in the Germanic-
type languages, that is, it results in a more extended period of bare-noun use, because
Germanic-learning children have to ﬁgure out for each noun separately whether it is
mass or count. In Chierchia’s typology, the Germanic languages are associated with
one and the same parameter setting. Hence the NMP predicts that children acquiring
English, German, Norwegian, and Swedish show similar patterns of article use and
omission.
Prosodic Accounts
Prosody-oriented research has resulted in several different accounts on the acquisi-
tion of articles. We discuss two of them, which we refer to as trochaic templates and
bootstrapping via lexical models.
Trochaic templates.
It is generally assumed that trochaic patterns, that is, words or phrases
consisting of a strong syllable followed by a weak one (SW),5 are unmarked as com-
pared with iambic patterns, that is, words or phrases consisting of a weak followed
by a strong syllable (WS). Experimental research has shown that nine-month-old
American infants listen longer to lists of items that conform to the predominant
strong-weak stress pattern of English than to lists that do not display this pattern
(Jusczyk, Cutler, and Redanz 1993). Furthermore it has long been observed that chil-
dren are less likely to preserve the initial syllable in the pronunciation of words like
baNAna or giRAFfe than the ﬁnal syllable of CANdy or DONkey, which also suggests
that English children pay attention to SW structures. Gerken (1991) argues that the
omission of various function words, including articles, should be explained in terms
of a dispreference for iambic structures, as these elements are often prosodiﬁed as
the pretonic syllables of an iamb. She provides empirical support from an imitation
task: Children had to imitate utterances with weakly stressed syllables, including
pronouns and articles. The children omitted extrametrical syllables from iambic struc-
tures, which led Gerken to suggest that child utterances have to ﬁt what she referred
to as a Trochaic Template.
English and most German NPs consisting of a determiner and a noun do not ﬁt
the trochaic template because the unstressed article precedes the noun, as in En. a/the
house (WS), Ge. (ei)n/das Haus (WS) (and the majority of nouns are mono- or bi-
syllabic). The same is true for Norwegian and Swedish indeﬁnite marked NPs, for
example, No. et hus (WS) and Sw. ett hus (WS). By contrast, most Norwegian and
Swedish NPs with a suffixed deﬁnite article ﬁt the trochaic pattern, for example, No.
hus-e, katt-a (SW) and Sw. hus-et, katt-en (SW).
226
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape

If it is true that children show a preference for trochaic templates in acquisition,
we would expect to see different acquisition patterns in the children acquiring Eng-
lish and German on the one hand, and children acquiring the Scandinavian languages
on the other hand. More speciﬁcally, two predictions may be formulated: First, if chil-
dren produce unstressed syllables more often in trochaic patterns than in iambic pat-
terns, Swedish- and Norwegian-learning children should produce more articles than
English- and German-learning children. Second, there should be an asymmetry in the
Scandinavian languages between deﬁnite articles, which ﬁt the trochaic patterns, and
indeﬁnite articles, which do not.6
Prosodic bootstrapping via lexical models.
According to Lleó and Demuth (1999), children’s use
of articles is bootstrapped through the presence of lexemes exhibiting an SWS struc-
ture in the input.7 The authors compare Spanish-learning to German-learning chil-
dren. As Spanish contains many trisyllabic WSW nouns, Spanish-speaking children
are frequently exposed to WSW structures at the lexical level, that is, structures that
are also required in the production of articles. German lexemes, by contrast, are
mostly mono- or disyllabic, with the initial syllable being strong. The model is
couched in terms of optimality theory, where WSW structures are assumed to require
the violation of the Exhaustivity Constraint because they involve the production of
an extrametrical syllable, that is, a syllable not immediately governed by a foot. Lleó
and Demuth assume that because Spanish children have more evidence for the vio-
lation of Exhaustivity on the lexical level, they discover sooner than German chil-
dren that violating Exhaustivity is a requirement in the production of utterances in
their target language. Hence they produce articles earlier. This approach goes one step
farther than the Trochaic Templates approach by motivating the early acquisition of
articles in Spanish as opposed to German.
In the four languages we examine, the great majority of words have stressed ini-
tial syllables. An analysis of root nouns in Norwegian (facilitated by the Text Labo-
ratory at Oslo University) indicated that only 648 (4.7%) of 13,848 nonderived nouns
have initial weak syllables, the vast majority being loan words unlikely to occur in
the input of small children. Because the four languages are typologically closely re-
lated, we do not expect their syllable structure to be noticeably different. Hence this
model predicts that prenominal articles emerge late in all four languages, while def-
inite articles should occur early in Norwegian and Swedish because they correspond
to the predominant metric pattern in the target language.
The Study
Our analysis is based on longitudinal and cross-sectional data. For English and Ger-
man, both cross-sectional and longitudinal data have been used. The English data
represent different children at the ages of 1;10, 2;0, 2;1, and 2;5. For German, two
children were examined longitudinally (1;6–2;5 and 1;8–3;0), and ten more children
were studied at 1;10, 2;1, and 2;5. The English and German data were taken from
the Manchester corpus and from the Szagun corpus, respectively, both available
through CHILDES (Theakston et al. 2001; Szagun 2001; McWhinney and Snow
1990). For Norwegian and Swedish, where fewer data were available, we used only
227
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH

longitudinal corpora. The Norwegian data were collected by Merete Anderssen (An-
derssen 2005). The Swedish corpus Markus was collected by Sven Strömqvist (Plun-
kett and Strömqvist 1992) and is available through CHILDES. The corpus Embla is
from the Stockholm-based Swedish Child Language Syntax Project (Lange and
Larsson 1973).
We compared the children in terms of mean length of utterances (MLU) rather
than age to make our analysis comparable to others, particularly Chierchia et al.
(1999). Our MLU is based on words rather than morphemes because the languages
differ noticeably in the amount of bound morphology. An overview of the ﬁles ana-
lyzed is presented in table 19.1. We calculated the percentage of article use by deter-
mining the number of contexts in which an article was used from the total of contexts
in which native speakers would use an article. We focus on the production of articles
(rather than the whole class of determiners) to render our analysis comparable to pre-
vious ones testing the previously mentioned models. We ignored contexts in which
bare nouns were used correctly, such as (4) through (5).
Figure 19.1 provides an overview of article omission in all four languages. To
be able to run statistics, we also subdivided the data into MLU stages (MLU 1–1.49,
MLU 1.5–1.99, etc.; ﬁgure 19.2). Between MLU 1 and MLU 2.5, there are statisti-
228
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape
Table 19.1
Number of Recordings Analyzed and Total of Noun Phrases Requiring Articles (in brackets)
MLU
English
German
Norwegian
Swedish
1–1.49
7 (265)
26 (1,902)
0
14 (367)
1.5–1.99
13 (666)
10 (913)
7 (529)
5 (184)
2.0–2.49
8 (547)
10 (1,106)
3 (262)
3 (164)
2.5–2.99
7 (408)
6 (708)
4 (318)
3 (210)
3.0–4.0
3 (280)
3 (424)
13 (1,121)
1 (107)
Total
35 (2,166)
48 (4,629)
27 (2,230)
26 (1,032)
Figure 19.1 Article Suppliance in English, German, Norwegian, and Swedish (stages)

cally signiﬁcant contrasts in the use of articles in obligatory contexts, between Eng-
lish and German on the one hand and Norwegian and Swedish on the other hand.8
Between MLU 2.5 and MLU 3, the German children catch up with the children ac-
quiring Norwegian and Swedish. Unexpectedly, the English children lag behind the
German children here,9 and so does the Norwegian child with respect to the Swedish
children.10 With an MLU above 3, children in all four languages use articles in more
than 80 percent of all obligatory contexts.
Discussion
Our results falsify the NMP, which predicts similar acquisition patterns within Ger-
manic languages. Furthermore, there is evidence against the assumption that article
omissions in obligatory contexts in the free variation stage result from a misclassiﬁ-
cation of particular count nouns as mass, because article omission and realization
sometimes occur within the same recording and even in parallel contexts of use. For
example, at the age of 2;5.4, the English-speaking child Anne produced both I want
have a drink now and Want to have drink again. At 2;1.21, the German child Martin
produced both Neemann, “snowman,” and ein Neemann, “a snowman,” in two sepa-
rate utterances, one right after the other. At 1;10.4, the Swedish child Markus pro-
duced the bygga ett tåg, “build a train,” right after producing bygga tåg, “build train.”
At 1;10.4, Ina produced en mann, “a man,” right after producing mann, “man.” (See
Cheng and Sybesma 1999; Munn and Schmitt 2001; Kupisch 2006, 103–4, for more
counterevidence to the NMP, both theoretical and empirical.)
At the same time, the results lend support to the metrical template approach,
which predicts lower rates of article omission in the Scandinavian languages. More-
over, in the Scandinavian languages, prenominal indeﬁnite articles are omitted more
than suffixal articles (ﬁgure 19.3). Again, this is exactly what the metrical templates
approach predicts (see also Santelmann 1998). These results can also be captured by
assuming that articles are bootstrapped via lexical models because Norwegian- and
Swedish-learning children have lexical models for the metrical structure of nouns
with deﬁnite articles, while German and English children do not. Figure 19.3 shows
that the contrast between English/German and Swedish/Norwegian can largely be
229
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH
Figure 19.2 Article Suppliance in English, German, Norwegian, and Swedish

attributed to deﬁnite article use, while indeﬁnite articles are used to similar extents
and from the same age in all languages.
With regard to indeﬁnite article use, it should be noted that although the idea of
bootstrapping via lexical models is supported by our results with regard to the deﬁ-
nite suffix in Norwegian and Swedish, it raises new issues. In fact, Lleó and Demuth’s
(1999) hypothesis that children start to produce articles earlier because their target
languages contain many words with unfooted syllables cannot be applied to the lan-
guages under discussion here. First, all the children’s utterances we analyzed show
no production of any lexemes exhibiting WSW structures—this is not surprising
given that the target languages exhibit few such lexemes. For example, none of the
lexemes in the ﬁrst Norwegian ﬁle involve an unfooted syllable (see Anderssen 2005,
277), but Ina already produces WSW structures in multiword utterances. The Swedish
child Embla produces WSW utterances in the ﬁrst ﬁle at 1;8.2, but she still omits ar-
ticles in 26 percent of all obligatory contexts. Markus produces some WSW utter-
ances between 1;7 and 1;9, for example, de LAMpa, “it-is lamp,” at 1;9.3, while
omitting 100 percent of all indeﬁnite articles. This suggests that WSW lexemes in
the input cannot be the factor that catalyzes prenominal article use, as extrametrical
syllables occur in multiword utterances before they appear at the word level. In short,
the idea of bootstrapping via lexical models predicts the early emergence of deﬁnite
articles in the Scandinavian languages (many nouns having the metrical structure SW).
However, it fails to explain how prenominal articles are acquired in these languages
and why extrametrical syllables occur in multiword utterances while indeﬁnite arti-
cles are omitted.
Does Input Frequency Provide an Alternative Solution?
We mentioned in the ﬁrst section that indeﬁnite articles appear to be more “optional”
in the Scandinavian languages than in English and German. This raises the question
whether the higher amount of deﬁnite as opposed to indeﬁnite marked NPs in Nor-
wegian and Swedish could result from different distributions in the adult input to the
child. Similarly, the higher amount of bare nouns in English and German than in the
230
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape
Figure 19.3 Article Type and Bare Nouns in Comparison

Scandinavian languages may result from respective distributions in the input. We con-
ducted two analyses to test these possibilities, examining for each language the
amount of deﬁnite as compared with indeﬁnite articles and the amount of bare nouns
from the total of NPs. Table 19.2 shows that NPs with deﬁnite articles are more fre-
quent than NPs with indeﬁnite articles in all four languages. However, only Norwe-
gian and Swedish children show a higher use of deﬁnite articles in the onset of article
use. Hence input frequency cannot provide an explanation for the early use of deﬁ-
nite articles in Norwegian and Swedish.
Table 19.3 shows the amount of bare nouns from the total of NPs. A total of 894
noun phrases were analyzed in English, 643 in German, 552 in Norwegian, and 1,487
in Swedish. Proper names were excluded: Norwegian exhibits the highest amount of
bare nouns, although articles in this language are acquired early. English exhibits the
lowest amount, although articles in this language are acquired comparatively late. Ger-
man and Swedish exhibit similar numbers, although children learning these lan-
guages show different patterns of article use. Hence input frequencies do not provide
an alternative account for our ﬁndings.
Conclusions
Our analysis has shown that the NMP cannot account for the distribution of articles
in child Germanic. It would only be tenable by adding to the original proposal aux-
iliary hypotheses to explain the variation attested across Germanic languages. How-
ever, auxiliary hypotheses would make the NMP lose much of its predictive force.
Hence prosodic models, which can capture this variation without any additional as-
sumptions, are preferable. The metrical template approach and the lexical bootstrap-
ping approach correctly predict the early appearance of articles in the Scandinavian
languages and the higher amount of deﬁnite as opposed to indeﬁnite articles.
We have further shown that input frequencies do not provide an alternative solu-
tion to our ﬁndings because the distributions in the input do not match the acquisition
patterns, either with regard to the amount of bare nouns found in the child data or with
regard to the distribution of deﬁnite as opposed to indeﬁnite articles. Overall we agree
with Lleó and Demuth (1999), Lleó (2001), and Demuth, McCullough, and 
231
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH
Table 19.2
Noun Phrases with a Deﬁnite Article versus Noun Phrases with an Indeﬁnite Article in the Input (%)
English
German
Norwegian
Swedish
Deﬁnite NPs
62
59
57
55
Indeﬁnite NPs
38
41
43
45
Table 19.3
Bare Nouns from the Total of Noun Phrases in the Input (%)
English
German
Norwegian
Swedish
Deﬁnite NPs
11
21
29
22

Adamo (2007) that phonological patterns could be responsible for the variation we ob-
serve in the emergence of articles across languages. The fact that deﬁnite articles are
part of trochees in Norwegian and Swedish seems to render them more salient, which
can explain the children’s early awareness of them.
Nevertheless, we admit that phonological approaches cannot provide an all-en-
compassing explanation of article acquisition. First, neither of the two prosodic mod-
els provides an account of why and how children acquire indeﬁnite articles, which
do not form trochees with the nouns they accompany and for which the languages
provide no prosodic models in the domain of words (in the sense of Lleó and De-
muth 1999). Second, neither prosodic model accounts for the (seemingly) optional
use of articles at later stages of acquisition (especially MLU 2 to 3). Third, a closer
look at the data from a qualitative perspective indicates that the distinction between
Scandinavian deﬁnite articles (which ﬁt the trochaic template and are acquired early)
and indeﬁnite articles (which do not ﬁt the template and are acquired late) is too
coarse. It makes a number of predictions that are not borne out: First, it leaves unex-
plained any omission of the deﬁnite article with monosyllabic nouns, for example,
No. hus-e, Sw. hus-et, “house-the,” bil-n, Sw. bil-en, “car-the.” Such omissions are
rare, but they do occur (see Bohnacker 2004; Anderssen 2005). Second, the trochaic
template approach predicts the omission of the third syllable with nouns such as Sw.
ALbum-et, “album-the,” where the deﬁnite article adds a syllable to a trochee, as well
as the omission of the third syllable in plural nouns, for example, Sw. HÄStar-na,
“horses-the.” Such (predicted) omissions are very rare (see Bohnacker 2004, 232–36
for a more detailed discussion). Third, while German children omit articles, they of-
ten produce combinations of deictic pronouns and nouns, for example, da Messer,
“there knife,” which have the same metrical structure as noun phrases with (unre-
duced) articles, for example, das Messer, “the knife.” Hence there are some empiri-
cal data that metric approaches cannot capture. These need to be discussed in future
research.
NOTES
1. According to Lleó (2001, 33), cliticized articles can never be initial in German. We think that there
are exceptions. In High German, sentence-initial indeﬁnite articles are often reduced, typically with
topicalized noun phrases (NPs), e.g., N’Haus kann ich jetzt nicht kaufen, “A house I can’t buy now.”
2. We consider a NP to be speciﬁc if it refers to one or more particular entities and nonspeciﬁc if it
does not refer to any particular entity.
3. As an anonymous reviewer pointed out to us, Aoun and Li (2003) show that, contrary to Chierchia’s
(1998) claims about Chinese, Mandarin does have a restricted (yet frequent) plural marker –men,
which is obligatory on plural personal pronouns and optional on nouns denoting humans. The ob-
servation is problematic for the NMP, both because the NMP claims that articleless languages have
no plural marking and because plural markings are supposed to trigger parameter resetting, from the
Chinese to the Germanic setting.
4. The original order proposed was Chinese →Romance →Germanic. This ordering is problematic
because “Romance” is a subset of “Germanic,” if the Romance languages are deﬁned as languages
without any bare nouns. All nominals that Germanic-learning children in the Romance setting hear
would be consistent with their grammar, and there would be no motivation to reset the parameter.
This original proposal was revised in Chierchia, Guasti, and Gualmini (1999). Yet the fact that all
Romance languages display some bare nouns raises the issue whether “Romance” and “Germanic”
instantiate different parameters.
232
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape

5. SW refers to the metric pattern, while Sw. refers to the language Swedish.
6. This is a simpliﬁcation because it assumes that NPs always occur in isolation (which is not true for
all cases). Articles may be prosodiﬁed with preceding material in the context of larger utterances,
for example, if they follow a monosyllabic verb or preposition.
7. However, note that the “input” is determined through the children’s utterances: The proportion of
WSW structures is estimated based on the proportion of the children’s vocabulary that involves a
WSW structure (in the target language). A slightly different approach has been outlined in Roark
and Demuth (2000).
8. We performed chi-square tests for comparing each language contrast in each MLU stage.
9. One reason may be our treatment of bare nouns after prepositions in German. German articles may
fuse with preceding prepositions, for example, in den Topf, “into the pot“ →in’Topf. The bare noun
structure in Topf only differs by a lack of lengthening on the ﬁnal nasal of in. Because such acoustic
differences are hard to perceive in child speech, we exclude such contexts from our counts, but they
may be an area where variation is most persistent.
10. At the last MLU stage (ﬁgure 19.3), the Norwegian child Ina uses a surprisingly high number of il-
legitimate bare nouns as compared with the other children, particularly the two Swedish ones. Most
likely this is the result of an individual characteristic of Ina. Studies of other grammatical domains
suggest that Ina allows optionality for a prolonged period (Westergaard 2007).
REFERENCES
Abu-Akel, Ahmed, and Bailey, Alison L. 2000. Acquisition and use of “a” and “the” in English by young
children. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual BUCLD, ed. Catherine Howell, Sarah A. Fish,
and Thea Keith-Lucas, 45–57, Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Anderssen, Merete. 2005. The acquisition of compositional deﬁniteness in Norwegian. PhD diss., Univer-
sity of Tromsø.
Aoun, Joseph, and Yen-Hui Audrey Li. 2003. Essays on the representational and derivational nature of
grammar: The diversity of wh-constructions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bohnacker, Ute. 1997. Determiner phrases and the debate on functional categories in early child language.
Language Acquisition 6:49–90.
———. 2004. Nominal phrases. In The acquisition of Swedish grammar, ed. Gunlög Josefsson, Christer
Platzack, and Gisela Håkansson, 195–260. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
———. 2007. The role of input frequency in article acquisition in early child Swedish. In Frequency ef-
fects in language acquisition, ed. Insa Gülzow and Natalia Gagarina, 51–82. Berlin: Mouton De
Gruyter.
Brown, Roger. 1973. First language acquisition: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Cheng, Lisa Lai-Shen, and Rint Sybesma. 1999. Bare and not-so-bare nouns and the structure of NP. Lin-
guistic Inquiry 30:509–42.
Chierchia, Gennaro. 1998. Reference to kinds across languages. Natural Language Semantics 6:339–405.
Chierchia, Gennaro, Maria Teresa Guasti, and Andrea Gualmini. 1999. Nouns and articles in child gram-
mar and the syntax/semantics map. Presentation at GALA 1999, Potsdam.
Clahsen, Harald, Sonja Eisenbeiss, and Martina Penke. 1996. Lexical learning in early syntactic develop-
ment. In Generative perspectives on language acquisition, ed. Harald Clahsen, 129–59. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Demuth, Katherine, Elizabeth McCullough, and Matthew Adamo. 2007. The prosodic (re)organization of
determiners. In Proceedings of the thirty-ﬁrst annual BUCLD, ed. David Bamman, Tatiana Magnit-
skaia, and Colleen Zaller, 196–205. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Eisenbeiss, Sonja. 2002. Merkmalsgesteuerter Grammatikerwerb: Eine Untersuchung zum Erwerb der
Struktur und Flexion der Nominalphrase. PhD diss., Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf.
Gerken, Lou Ann. 1991. The metrical basis for children’s subjectless sentences. Journal of Memory and
Language 30:431–51.
———. 1994. A metrical template account of children’s weak syllable omissions from multisyllabic
words. Journal of Child Language 21:567–84.
233
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH

Guasti, Maria Teresa, and Anna Gavarró. 2003. Catalan as a test for hypotheses concerning article omis-
sion. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual BUCLD, ed. Barbara Beachley, Amanda Brown,
and Frances Conlin, 288–98. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Guasti, Maria Teresa, Joke De Lange, Anna Gavarró, and Claudia Caprin. 2004. Article omission: Across
child languages and across special registers. In Proceedings of GALA 2003, ed. Jaqueline Van Kam-
pen and Sergio Baauw, 199–210. Utrecht: LOT Occasional Series.
Jusczyk, Peter, Anne Cutler, and Nancy Redanz. 1993. Preference for the predominant stress patterns of
English words. Child Development 64:675–87.
Kupisch, Tanja. 2006. The acquisition of determiners in German-Italian and German-French children. Mu-
nich: Lincom Europa.
———. 2007. Testing the effects of frequency on the rate of learning: Determiner use in early French,
German and Italian. In Frequency effects in language acquisition, ed. Insa Gülzow and Natalia Gaga-
rina, 83–113. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.
Lange, Sven, and Kenneth Larsson. 1973. Syntaxen i en 20-22 månader gammal ﬂickas spontana tal. In
Svenskans beskrivning 7, ed. C. Hummelstedt, 117–42. Åbo: Åbo akademi.
Lleó, Conxita. 1998. Proto-articles in the acquisition of Spanish: Interface between phonology and mor-
phology. In Models of inﬂection, ed. Ray Fabri, Albert Ortmann, and Teresa Parodi, 175–95. Tübin-
gen: Niemeyer.
———. 2001. The interface of phonology and syntax. The emergence of the article in the early acquisi-
tion of Spanish and German. In Approaches to bootstrapping: Phonological, syntactic and neuro-
physiological aspects of early language acquisition, vol. 2, ed. Jürgen Weissenborn and Barbara
Höhle, 23–44. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Lleó, Conxita, and Katherine Demuth. 1999. Prosodic constraints on the emergence of grammatical mor-
phemes: Cross-linguistic evidence from Germanic and Romance languages. In Proceedings of the
twenty-third annual BUCLD, ed. Annabel Greenhill, Heather Littleﬁeld, and Cheryl Tano, 407–18.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
McWhinney, Bryan, and Catherine Snow. 1990. The Child Language Data Exchange System: An update.
Journal of Child Language 17:457–72.
Morén, Bruce. 2007. Central Swedish pitch accent: A retro approach. Old World Conference in Phonol-
ogy 4, Rhodes, Greece.
Munn, Alan, and Cristina Schmitt. 2001. Bare nominals and the morpho-syntax of number. In Current is-
sues in Romance linguistics: Selected papers from the twenty-ninth Linguistic Symposium on Ro-
mance Languages, ed. Diana Cresti, Teresa Satterﬁeld, and Cristina Tortora, 217–31. Ann Arbor,
Michigan, April. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Penner, Zvi, and Jürgen Weissenborn. 1996. Strong continuity, parameter setting and the trigger hierar-
chy: On the acquisition of the DP in Bernese Swiss German and High German. In Generative per-
spectives on language acquisition, ed. Harald Clahsen, 161–200. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Plunkett, Kim, and Sven Strömqvist. 1992. The acquisition of Scandinavian languages. In The crosslin-
guistic study of language acquisition, vol. 3, ed. Dan I. Slobin, 457–556. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Radford, Andrew. 1990. The syntax of nominal arguments in early child English. Language Acquisition
1:195–223.
Roark, Brian, and Katherine Demuth. 2000. Prosodic constraints and the learner’s environment: A corpus
study. In Proceedings of the twenty-fourth annual BUCLD, ed. S. Catherine Howell, Sarah A. Fish,
and Thea Keith-Lucas, 597–608. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Santelmann, Lynn. 1998. The acquisition of deﬁnite determiners in child Swedish: Metrical and discourse
influences on functional morphology. In Proceedings of the twenty-second annual BUCLD, ed.
Annabel Greenhill, Mary Hughes, and Heather Littleﬁeld, 651–62. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Selkirk, Elisabeth. 1996. The prosodic structure of function words. In Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from
speech to grammar in early acquisition, ed. James L. Morgan and Katherine Demuth, 187–213. Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Svartholm, Kristina. 1978. Svenskans artikelsystem: En genomgång av artikelbruket i vuxenspråket och
en modell för analys i barnspråket. PhD diss., Stockholm University.
234
Tanja Kupisch, Merete Anderssen, Ute Bohnacker, and Neil Snape

Szagun, Gisela. 2001. Learning different regularities: The acquisition of noun plurals by German-speak-
ing children. First Language 21:109–41.
Theakston, Anna, Elena Lieven, Julian Pine, and Caroline Rowland. 2001. The role of performance lim-
itations in the acquisition of verb-argument structure: An alternative account. Journal of Child Lan-
guage 28:127–52.
Westergaard, Marit. 2007. Word order in subject- and object-shift constructions in early child language:
Pragmatics or economy? Paper presented at Lund University.
Wiese, Richard. 1996. The phonology of German. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
235
ARTICLE ACQUISITION IN ENGLISH, GERMAN, NORWEGIAN, AND SWEDISH


20
A Continuum in French Children’s Surface
Realization of Auxiliaries
CRISTINA D. DYE
Georgetown University
A CENTRAL FOCUS of research in child language has been the acquisition of functional el-
ements such as determiners and auxiliaries (see, e.g., Lust 2006, chap. 9, for a recent
review). Early studies proposed that child speech is “telegraphic,” that is, it consists
mostly of content words such as verbs and nouns, which are essential to communi-
cation, while usually lacking function words (e.g., Brown 1973). The following two
examples from child English illustrate what is usually referred to as telegraphic
speech; in parentheses are possible functional elements that would render these ut-
terances targetlike.
(1) (does) papa have it?
(Eve I, Brown 1973, 207)
(2) Adam (will) put it (in) (the) box.
(Adam I, Brown 1973, 205)
Telegraphic speech, or the ostensible absence of functional elements, has been widely
discussed in the ﬁrst language acquisition literature and has been claimed to be uni-
versal across languages (e.g., Brown 1973 and references therein). Speciﬁcally, the
functional elements that are the focus of this chapter, that is, auxiliaries and modals
(henceforth referred to as “auxiliaries”), have been claimed to be absent across child
languages, for example, in early child English (e.g., Radford 1990), Dutch (e.g., Wij-
nen 1996/1997), or French (e.g., Schlyter 2003).
Numerous proposals have been offered to account for the ostensible absence of
functional elements from early productions. Two major attempts to explain child “te-
legraphy” have consisted of proposing perceptual threshold limitations or deﬁcient
grammatical representations. The perceptual limitations view is based on the fact that,
in contrast with content words, function words usually have shorter vowel duration
and lower amplitude, fewer syllables, and simpler syllabic structure (e.g., Shi, Mor-
gan, and Allopena 1998), and thus are less salient. Given this reduced acoustic pho-
netic salience, it has been proposed that children might simply fail to perceive or
represent functional items in the speech they are exposed to (e.g., Gleitman and Wan-
ner 1982; Echols 1993). Another attempted explanation is that the apparent absence
of function words from early productions reﬂects a deﬁcit in syntactic representations.
237

Here accounts range from proposals arguing for the complete absence of grammati-
cal representations to proposals arguing for some speciﬁc grammatical deﬁcit. For
example, learner-based accounts such as Tomasello (1992) argue that young children
lack grammar altogether. Some scholars suggest that children start out with a seman-
tically based system and only later switch to a syntactically based one (e.g., Bower-
man 1973; Gleitman 1981). Still others believe that the impoverished production of
functional elements reﬂects a grammatical system that is radically different from adult
grammar (e.g., Braine 1963). Within the generative paradigm, it has been proposed
that early language is characterized by the general absence of functional categories
and their projections (e.g., Radford 1990) or by the absence of speciﬁc functional cat-
egories (e.g., Hoekstra and Hyams 1999; Schlyter 2003; Schutze and Wexler 1996).
However, in spite of these long-standing views concerning functional items, a
growing body of research argues that children’s seemingly impoverished productions
represent only an incomplete picture of their underlying grammatical competence.
For example, examination of infants’and toddlers’comprehension indicates that they
are sensitive to function words even before they produce these items (e.g., Gerken,
Landau, and Remez 1990). Young children may in fact use functional elements to
determine the syntactic category of the accompanying content words (e.g., Höhle et
al. 2004; Kedar, Casasola, and Lust 2006). In a similar vein, a number of produc-
tion studies reveal evidence for toddlers’ knowledge of grammatical operations that
depend on functional categories and their projections (e.g., Demuth 1992; Dye et
al. 2004; Lust 1999, 2006; Whitman, Lee, and Lust 1991). Another growing line of
studies argues that, at early ages, functional categories may be realized as “ﬁller”
vowels. Despite initial uncertainty regarding the status of ﬁller vowels, more recent
studies indicate that these behave as proto-functors1 (e.g., Bottari, Cipriani, and
Chilosi 1993/1994; Demuth and Tremblay 2007; Pepinsky, Demuth, and Roark
2001).2 Fillers (or rather, proto-functors) occur in sentential slots where functional
items are expected but have nontarget phonetic features, often taking the form of a
reduced vowel (e.g., a schwa). Work on ﬁllers suggests that functional categories may
be present in syntactic representations early on, even though their initial overt real-
izations may diverge considerably from target forms. The status of functional ele-
ments in child language thus continues to pose a challenge to the ﬁeld, and further
investigation is needed to illuminate the way in which children acquire this funda-
mental part of the grammar.
The Present Study
This study, which is part of a larger investigation reported in Dye (2005), examines
the status of one category of functional elements, namely auxiliaries, on the basis of
a new corpus of child French. In contrast to much previous work, I argue that early
productions are not as impoverished as typically assumed and that children might have
greater grammatical knowledge than previously thought.
Data and Methods
The data for this study are from the Dye 2005 child French corpus. This consists of
more than 5,000 child utterances based on cross-sectional natural speech samples con-
238
Cristina D. Dye

taining 3,438 verb clauses; the high verb density provided for robust analyses. The
participants were eighteen normally developing French monolingual children, with
ages ranging from 1;11 to 2;11 (mean age  2;5).3 The children were recruited
through day-care centers in Paris and Nancy, France, and were interviewed individ-
ually in a quiet room. Average interview length was thirty minutes.
My primary goals in compiling this new corpus were (a) to ensure the availabil-
ity of discourse contexts for the linguistic structures under investigation, namely,
verbs and auxiliaries, (b) to facilitate comparability among speech samples from dif-
ferent children, and (c) to ensure the audio quality necessary to capture functional
items. To ensure that children had ample opportunity to produce the targeted items,
I selected a set of activities, toys, and conversation topics that trigger utterances with
verbs and auxiliaries. To render the speech samples obtained from different children
more comparable, I attempted to standardize as much as possible several aspects of
the interview process, namely, conversation topics, games, toys, interviewers, inter-
viewer training, and interview location.
The sessions were videotaped. Also a separate audio-recording setup was used
to ensure the audio quality necessary to capture functional items. A Sharp IM-
MT880 digital minidisk recorder and Soundman OKM binaural stereo condenser mi-
crophones were used. The recorder attached to the interviewer’s belt, and a pair of
microphones was worn in the interviewer’s ears, like headphones. This new audio-
recording setup offered several advantages. First, it was mobile, allowing proxim-
ity to the child at all times. Second, it was unobtrusive, thus not distracting or
intimidating the child. Third, the recorder quality made it possible to clearly capture
children’s voices even when they turned away or whispered. Fourth, the microphones
were designed to capture sonic information in a manner similar to the human ear,
thus producing very realistic recordings. Fifth, the microphones worked on phan-
tom power from the recorder, thus eliminating the noise associated with a powered
microphone.4
The recordings were digitally edited using Cool Edit to enhance the children’s
voices in relation to the background noise. The interviews were then transcribed with
WAVpedal 5.0, transcription software that allows transcription directly from the com-
puter, without going through analog and thus avoiding loss of quality. Audio samples
were transcribed by trained native speakers and checked by the author, all of whom
were present at the interviews. Transcription was carried out using French orthogra-
phy. Where necessary, transcription and coding referred to spectrographic analyses
carried out in Praat. Coding followed systematic procedures based on the Cornell Uni-
versity Virtual Linguistics Lab Research Methods Manual (Lust, Blume, and Ogden,
forthcoming). In particular, utterances like Spot va/veut partir “Spot is gonna/wanna
leave” were coded as consisting of a single verb clause. Although traditionally con-
sidered biclausal (e.g., Jones 1996), I treat strings like va/faut/veut/peut  inﬁnitive
“gonna/gotta/wanna/can  inﬁnitive” as monoclausal because they are very common
collocations in Colloquial French. Schlyter (2003, 21) makes a similar point based
on the fact that “all these elements, in their most unmarked form (a, e, va, veu, peu,
etc.) are used in very early stages both by children and adult learners, as markings
of TMA (tense, modality, aspect).”5
239
A CONTINUUM IN FRENCH CHILDREN’S SURFACE REALIZATION OF AUXILIARIES

Findings
The eighteen children studied produced a variety of auxiliary types and forms, as ex-
empliﬁed later. The speciﬁc types of auxiliaries observed in children’s speech sam-
ples, in decreasing order of frequency, were the past tense auxiliaries avoir/être
“have/be,” the immediate future auxiliary aller “gonna,” the modal auxiliaries pou-
voir “can,” vouloir “wanna,” and falloir “gotta.”
There was also a range in the surface realizations of auxiliaries. I begin by pre-
senting examples with target auxiliary forms (i.e., child forms that match the target
form in the adult language). Next I illustrate nontarget auxiliary forms and then ﬁller
auxiliaries. Before concluding, I also present utterances where the auxiliary is miss-
ing but that nevertheless evidence phonetic traces of the missing auxiliary.6
Target Auxiliaries
Examples of utterances with target auxiliaries are provided in (3) through (7).
(3) l’élépfant i peut pus, i peut pus tomber
(age 1;11)
“the elephant he can no-longer, he can no-longer fall-INF”
(4) vais l’enver ça
(age 2;2)
“am-gonna it remove-INF this”
(5) je vais mett’ ça
(age 1;11)
“I am-gonna put-INF this”
(6) oh, a perdu son pied
(age 1;11)
“oh, has lose-PRT his foot”
(7) veux enver ss . . . euh . . . la saise
(age 2;1)
“wanna remove-INF ss . . . ah . . . the chair”
Nontarget Auxiliaries
In addition to target auxiliaries, children also produced nontarget auxiliary forms.
These may be forms including one or more inaccurate segments. For example, in (8)
the child produced [po] for the target [pə] peux “can,” combining the target conso-
nant with a nontarget vowel.
(8) euh, [po] pas boire
(age 2;6)
“oh, cannot drink-INF”
Example (9) shows an auxiliary form with nontarget consonant and target vowel. Both
the pragmatic and linguistic contexts support the interpretation of [ka] as the imme-
diate future auxiliary [va] va “gonna.” The child is in the process of deciding where
to place a ﬁgurine (i.e., is holding the ﬁgurine in hand and is looking for a free spot),
announces she is not going to place it in one spot, starts repeating this, and then sud-
denly notices the perfect spot:
(9) on [ka] pas mette là
(age 2;5)
“we are-gonna not put-INF there”
. . .
240
Cristina D. Dye

on [va] pas . . . , là!
“we are-gonna not . . . , there!”
In (10) the child is asking the adult to open the door for her. The linguistic and prag-
matic context of (10) clearly suggests that the form [le] stands for the modal auxil-
iary [və] veux, “gonna” (here both the consonant and the vowel are nontarget).
(10) I
qu’est-ce que tu veux faire?7
(age 1;11)
“what is it that you wanna do-INF?”
C [le] ouwrir la porte!
(asking the adult to open the door for her)
“wanna open-INF the door.”
I
tu veux ouvrir la porte?
“you wanna open-INF the door?”
C oui
“yes”
Other nontarget forms involve reduced auxiliaries. The form v’rait in (11) rep-
resents a reduction of the auxiliary voudrais “would-like-to” and the form vait in (12)
represents a reduction of the auxiliary avait “had”:
(11) vrait s’asseoir là la soris
(age 2;6)
“would-like-to REFLEXIVE sit-INF there the mouse”
(12) vait fait la palle
(age 2;2)
“had do-PRT the ball”
Some auxiliary forms are barely discernable. For example, in (13), the element im-
mediately preceding the main verb was initially barely audible, having much lower
intensity than the main verb.
(13) __rémonter (child is whining)
(age 2;1)
“__go-up-INF”
Spectrographic analyses of (13) identiﬁed the ﬁrst element in the utterance as the aux-
iliary veux “wanna” (ﬁgure 20.1). (13) is in fact (13):
(13) veux rémonter (child is whining)
(age 2;1)
‘wanna go-up-INF’
Inspection of the linguistic and pragmatic context of (13) showed that it occurs in
the context of the child’s requesting to go upstairs to join the other children. Here the
high quality of the digital audio recordings together with spectrographic inspection
allowed for the identiﬁcation of the auxiliary. It is possible that such auxiliary pro-
ductions have been overlooked in studies based on older corpora collected with less
sensitive equipment or not analyzed spectrographically.
241
A CONTINUUM IN FRENCH CHILDREN’S SURFACE REALIZATION OF AUXILIARIES

Filler Auxiliaries
Besides target and nontarget forms, children produced ﬁller auxiliaries as, for exam-
ple, in (14). Here the element [e] may correspond to any of several possible auxil-
iaries (e.g., [pə] “can,” [va] “gonna”).
(14) I
bah oui, tu vois, on peut pas les enlever
“well yes, you see, we cannot them remove-INF”
C Suilà, [e] l’ enver? (asking if she can remove ﬁgurine)
(age 1;11)
“that-one, FILLER AUX it remove-INF?”8
Quantitative results for auxiliaries are summarized in ﬁgure 20.2. Out of the to-
tal 3,438 verb clauses in the corpus, 785 contain auxiliaries.9 Clauses with auxiliaries
range from 3.1 percent (for a child age 2;1) to 35.6 percent (for a child age 2;6) of a
participant’s total verb clauses.
242
Cristina D. Dye
Figure 20.1 Spectogram of veux rémonter, “wanna go up”
Figure 20.2 Clauses with Auxiliaries as a Proportion of Verb Clauses, by Individual Child and Age

As seen in ﬁgure 20.2, all children examined here produce auxiliaries, including
the youngest child (age 1;11), whose percentage of clauses with auxiliaries (24.4%) re-
sembles those of older children ages 2;7 and 2;11 (22.7% and 24.6%, respectively).
Phonetic Traces of Missing Auxiliaries
I now turn to utterances that, although not coded as containing an auxiliary, never-
theless appear to show evidence for an underlying auxiliary. This evidence consists
of phonetic traces of the missing auxiliary. I illustrate two types of phonetic traces
of missing auxiliaries.
One child tends to mark the syntactic slot of the auxiliary with a pause/breath,
as, for example, in (15). This is consistent with Carter and Gerken’s (2004) ﬁndings
that English-speaking children tend to leave a prosodic/phonetic trace when omitting
a weak syllable, that is, they have a longer pause between the item preceding and the
item following the omitted syllable (compared with the pause between the preceding
item and the weak syllable itself, when this is produced).
(15) qu’à haut, (breath) remonter
(age 2;1)
“up there, (breath) go-back-up-INF”
[ə] remonter
“wanna go-back-up-INF”
[və] rémonter
“wanna go-back-up-INF”
The ﬁrst utterance in the sequence in (15), where the position of the auxiliary is
marked by a pause/breath, is immediately followed by two increasingly fuller pro-
ductions of the target auxiliary [və] veux “wanna,” a fact that supports the presence
of an underlying auxiliary in the ﬁrst utterance in this sequence.
Example (16) illustrates a second type of utterance in which the auxiliary is ap-
parently missing. Here the child’s production involves reduplication of the ﬁrst syl-
lable of the main verb.
(16) boum! dar darmir
(age 2;2)
“boom! REDUPLICATION sleep-INF”
Although this type of production has not been discussed in relation to child French,
it has been discussed for child Greek, where Christoﬁdou and Kappa (1998) ob-
served that prior to the productive use of the future and modal/subjunctive auxiliary
particles (tha, na), children indicate these by reduplicating the ﬁrst syllable of the main
verb. The authors note that reduplications such as pe petsume for target na peksume
MODAL PARTICLE play-PFV-NONPAST-1PL. “let’s play,” or ka kani for target na kani
MODAL PARTICLE make-NONPAST-3SG. “she/he should do,” are rather extensive in their
data and systematically mark the function of modality or future, rendering the pre-
verbal modal or future particles. The reduplicated syllable in the French example in
(16) is therefore likely to represent an early realization of the missing auxiliary, which
in this case is probably va “gonna” (the child throws the doll in the toy bed as she
announces that the doll is going to sleep).
243
A CONTINUUM IN FRENCH CHILDREN’S SURFACE REALIZATION OF AUXILIARIES

To summarize, we have seen that auxiliaries (including modals) are evidenced
in all children from the earliest ages examined, contrary to what has been reported
in many previous studies. The present results disconﬁrm previous claims that auxil-
iaries might be absent in young children’s speech and, in particular, claims regarding
the absence of auxiliaries in child French (e.g., Schlyter 2003).10 These ﬁndings also
contrast with previous reports that French-speaking children use the future auxiliary
aller “gonna” from around the age of 3;0 on (Clark 1985, 723). As exempliﬁed in
the utterance in (4) (from a child age 2;2) and the utterance in (5) (from a child age
1;11), the children studied here produce the aller “gonna” auxiliary from much ear-
lier ages. The eighteen French-speaking children evidence a range of auxiliary forms.
Target auxiliaries, nontarget auxiliaries, and ﬁller auxiliaries occur side by side, as
illustrated in the sequence in (15) where the target [və] veux “gonna” has different
realizations each time it is produced (by the same child during the same session). In
addition, some of the utterances where the auxiliary seems to be missing show evi-
dence for phonetic traces of the missing auxiliary. What these data show is a contin-
uum in the surface realization of auxiliary forms.
Discussion
The current results provide evidence that auxiliaries are present in children’s syntac-
tic representations. The new French data reveal a continuum in the surface represen-
tation of auxiliaries: Target auxiliaries, nontarget auxiliaries, ﬁller auxiliaries, and
phonetic traces of auxiliaries occur side by side in children’s productions.
The present ﬁndings call into question the traditional notion of telegraphic speech.
As seen in the French examples, early child productions are not as impoverished as
previously thought. The eighteen children studied here are not “telegraphic.” More-
over, these data indicate that omissions in early speech do not simply reﬂect absence
of function words. Rather early speech reﬂects a range in the degree of surface real-
ization of auxiliaries and appears to be characterized by more gradation than usually
assumed.
Furthermore, these ﬁndings challenge long-standing notions that children do not
produce certain functional items (in this case, auxiliaries) because of deﬁcient syn-
tactic representations thereof or because of perceptual threshold limitations. Instead,
the present results corroborate recent evidence of young children’s sensitivity to func-
tion words (e.g., Gerken, Landau, and Remez 1990; Kedar, Casasola, and Lust 2006),
as well as evidence of early competence for functional structure based on knowledge
of operations dependent on functional structure (e.g., Demuth 1992; Dye et al. 2004;
Lust 1999, 2006; Whitman, Lee, and Lust 1991).
Conclusion
The French child data do not support a simple present or absent analysis but rather
reﬂect a continuum in surface realization, suggesting a need to revise the notion of
what it means for the auxiliary to be “present.” The study has uncovered new evi-
dence supporting the continuous projection of auxiliaries in young children’s gram-
matical representations, indicating that early productions are not as impoverished as
previously thought. The present ﬁndings lend support to proposals for the primacy
244
Cristina D. Dye

of syntax in child language acquisition; they cohere with the observation that “the
building of syntax may actually precede the phonetic (or morpholexical) realization
of functional heads themselves” (Demuth 1992, 84).
NOTES
My gratitude goes to Barbara Lust, Carol Rosen, Yashiro Shirai, John Whitman, Claire Foley, Yumiko Nishi,
Réjane Frick, Marc Brunelle, Andrew Spencer, Yarden Kedar, and two anonymous reviewers. I also thank
the parents and children who participated. This research was supported by a Sicca research grant and a
Cognitive Studies Fellowship from Cornell University.
1. In fact, some studies refer to them as “proto-syntactic devices” (Bottari, Cipriani, and Chilosi
1993/1994).
2. But see Veneziano and Sinclair (2000), where ﬁllers are argued to be prosodic placeholders.
3. I originally collected audio recordings from ﬁfty subjects. For this study, I have transcribed only those
for which I also have video recordings. Subjects who had problems participating in the task were
excluded.
4. See Dye (2005) for more details about the recording setup.
5. See Dye (2005) for additional discussion of this point.
6. Further examples of the utterance types presented here are found in Dye (2005).
7. “I” stands for “interviewer,” and “C” stands for “child.”
8. One may wonder whether in (14) the ﬁller syllable stands for the auxiliary or the subject clitic. Filler
syllables do not occur with synthetic ﬁnite verbs. This suggest that ﬁllers preceding nonﬁnite verbs
as in (14) are unlikely to stand for a subject clitic (see Dye 2005).
9. The remaining 2,653 verb clauses included either synthetic ﬁnite verbs (2,496 clauses) or ostensi-
bly nonﬁnite verbs occurring in matrix contexts (157 clauses).
10. Schlyter (2003, 27) reports that in the ﬁrst recordings of three French (bilingual) children, when these
children were ages 2;3, 2;0, and 2;2, respectively, auxiliaries and modals were absent.
REFERENCES
Bottari, Piero, Paolo Cipriani, and Ana Maria Chilosi. 1993/1994. Proto-syntactic devices in the acquisi-
tion of Italian free morphology. Language Acquisition 3:327–69.
Bowerman, Melissa. 1973. Early syntactic development: A cross-linguistic study with special reference to
Finnish. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Braine, Martin.1963.The ontogeny of English phrase structure: The ﬁrst phase. Language 39:1–13.
Brown, Roger. 1973. A ﬁrst language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Carter, Allyson, and LouAnn Gerken. 2004. Do children’s omissions leave traces? Journal of Child Lan-
guage 31:561–86.
Christoﬁdou, Anastasia, and Ionna Kappa 1998. Pre- and proto-morphological ﬁllers in Greek language
acquisition. Studies in the acquisition of number and diminutive marking: Antwerp papers in linguis-
tics 95:193–214.
Clark, Eve. 1985. The acquisition of Romance with special reference to French. In The Cross-linguistic
study of language acquisition, vol. 1, The data, ed. Dan I. Slobin, 687–782. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Demuth, Katherine. 1992. Accessing functional categories in Sesotho. In The acquisition of verb place-
ment: Functional categories and V2 phenomena in language acquisition, ed. Jurgen Meisel, 83–107.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Demuth, Katherine, and Annie Tremblay. 2007. Prosodically-conditioned variability in children’s produc-
tion of French determiners. Journal of Child Language 34:1–29.
Dye, Cristina D. 2005. Identifying auxiliaries in ﬁrst language acquisition: Evidence from a new child
French corpus. PhD diss., Cornell University.
Dye, Cristina D., Claire Foley, Maria Blume, and Barbara Lust. 2004. Mismatches between morphology
and syntax in ﬁrst language acquisition suggest a “syntax ﬁrst” model. Online Proceedings of BU-
CLD 28. www.bu.edu/linguistics/APPLIED/BUCLD/supp.html (accessed October 13, 2008).
245
A CONTINUUM IN FRENCH CHILDREN’S SURFACE REALIZATION OF AUXILIARIES

Echols, Catharine H. 1993. A perceptually based model of children’s earliest productions. Cognition
46:245–96.
Gerken, LouAnn, Barbara Landau, and Robert Remez. 1990. Function morphemes in young children’s
speech perception and production. Developmental Psychology 26 (2): 204–16.
Gleitman, Lila. 1981. Maturational determinants of language growth. Cognition 10:103–14.
Gleitman, Lila, and Eric Wanner. 1982. The state of the art. In Language acquisition: The state of the art,
ed. Eric Wanner and Lila Gleitman, 3–48. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hoekstra, Teun, and Nina Hyams. 1999. The eventivity constraint and modal reference effects in root in-
ﬁnitives. Proceedings of BUCLD 23, 240–52. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Höhle, Barbara, Jurgen Weisseborn, Dorothea Keifer, Antje Schultz, and Michaela Schmitz. 2004. Func-
tional elements in infants’ speech processing: The role of determiners in syntactic categorization of
lexical elements. Infancy 5 (3): 341–53.
Jones, Michael A. 1996. Foundations of French syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kedar, Yarden, Marianella Casasola, and Barbara Lust. 2006. Getting there faster: 18- and 24- month-old
infants’ use of function words to determine reference. Child Development 77 (2): 25–338.
Lust, Barbara. 1999. Universal grammar: The strong continuity hypothesis in ﬁrst language acquisition.
In Handbook of child language acquisition, ed. W. C. Ritchie and T. K. Bhatia, 111–56. New York:
Academic Press.
———. 2006. Child language: Acquisition and growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lust, Barbara, Maria Blume, and Tina Ogden. Forthcoming. Cornell University virtual linguistics lab re-
search methods manual: Scientiﬁc methods for the study of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pepinsky, Thomas, Katherine Demuth, and Brian Roark. 2001. The status of “ﬁller syllables” in children’s
early speech. In Proceedings of BUCLD 25, 575–86. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Radford, Andrew. 1990. Syntactic theory and the acquisition of English syntax: The nature of early child
grammars of English. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Schlyter, Suzanne. 2003. Development of verb morphology and ﬁniteness in children and adults acquir-
ing French. In Information structure and the dynamics of language acquisition, ed. Christine Dim-
roth and Marianne Starren, 15–44. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Schutze, Carson, and Ken Wexler. 1996. Subject case licensing and English root inﬁnitives. In Proceed-
ings of BUCLD 20, 670–81. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Shi, Rushen, James Morgan, and Paul Allopena. 1998. Phonological and acoustic bases for earliest gram-
matical category assignment: A cross-linguistic perspective. Journal of Child Language 25:169–201.
Tomasello, Michael. 1992. First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Veneziano, Eddy, and Hermine Sinclair. 2000. The changing status of “ﬁller syllables” on the way to gram-
matical morphemes. Journal of Child Language 27:461–500.
Whitman, John, Kwee-Ock Lee, and Barbara Lust. 1991. Continuity of the principles of universal gram-
mar in ﬁrst language acquisition: The issue of functional categories. In Proceedings of NELS 21,
383–97. Amherst: GLSA, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Wijnen, Frank. 1996/1997. Temporal reference and eventivity in root inﬁnitives. MIT Occasional Papers
in Linguistics 12:1–2.
246
Cristina D. Dye

