HAL Id: hal-02544318
https://hal.science/hal-02544318
Submitted on 16 Apr 2020
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on
Biomimetic approach in Architectural and Urban design
Natasha Chayaamor-Heil
To cite this version:
Natasha Chayaamor-Heil.
The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic approach in
Architectural and Urban design. Conference on Biomimetic and Biohybrid Systems, Living Machines
2018, Jul 2018, Paris, France. pp.97-109, ￿10.1007/978-3-319-95972-6_11￿. ￿hal-02544318￿

The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic 
approach in Architectural and Urban design 
 Natasha Chayaamor-Heil [0000-0002-5582-5988]  
MAP-Maacc, CNRS-MCC UMR 3495, ENSA PARIS-La-Villette, France 
natasha.heil@paris-lavillette.archi.fr 
Abstract. At the time when the value of architecture no longer results from cre-
ating shapes in space, but rather fostering relationships within it. A concept of 
architectural design becomes a strategic process rather than an object. Biologi-
cal inspiration is dominating the era, and has its impact in diverse domains, in-
cluding architecture and urbanism. The study of biomimetics bridges the bio-
logical functions, processes and organizational principles found in nature with 
our designs and technologies. Recently there are numerous mathematical algo-
rithms have been developed along with the knowledge transferring process 
from the life forms to solve the design problems. Output of biomimetics study 
includes not only physical applications, but also various computation methods 
that can be applied in different areas. We can learn from biological processes 
and principles to design and develop a number of different kinds of optimisa-
tion algorithms that have been widely used in both theoretical study and practi-
cal applications. In this paper, we discuss and present the impact of nature in-
spired algorithms and digital advanced on biomimetic approach in architectural 
and urban design. We demonstrate how architects reuse bio-inspired computing 
to solve complex problem or optimise their designs, and nonetheless, how ar-
chitects use algorithmic architecture software to directly transpose the complex-
ity of nature’s principles into their design process.  
Keywords: Biomimetics, Biological process, Nature inspired algorithms, Ar-
chitectural and Urban design. 
1 
Introduction 
Nature has always been an inspirational source for architects and designers. This in-
spiration has given highly efficient designs in various fields. One of the best concept 
in which, we see nature as the influential source of inspiration. Biomimetics means 
imitating of biological processes. Biomimetics is a new science and design discipline 
that studies nature’s models and then emulates these forms, processes, systems and 
strategies to solve the problems of our time [1]. In September 2015, the Economic, 
Social and Environmental Council of Paris issued a noticed entitled ‘Biomimicry: 
taking inspiration from nature to innovate sustainably’ [2]. Architecture is presented 
as one of the promising areas of application and there is evidence of an emerging of 
biomimetics in architectural design activity capable of responding to current envi-
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
1

2 
ronmental issues. Undoubtedly, architects have been inspired by nature to stimulate a 
novelty in their designs, but beyond the appearance of a tree, a branch or a simple 
leaf, there are mathematical patterns at play in nature. Understanding nature's basic 
algorithms allows architects and designers to explore natural systems that can be 
translated into efficient designs and awe-inspiring architecture. In fact, nature as in-
spiration is often combined with mathematics in order to move beyond the superficial 
inspiration and realize a design [3]. The fluid order in nature is characterized by repe-
tition, growth and change with the fundamental rules that generate order in nature not 
being absolute but relative, flexible and soft [4]. In contemporary architecture design, 
digital media is increasingly being used not as a representational tool for visualization 
but as a generative tool for the derivation of form and its transformation [5]. The use 
of computational techniques increasingly saturates development biology, from the 
acquisition, processing and analysis of experimental data to the construction of mod-
els of organisms. Similar to the biological processes, it is a process of shape/pattern 
development enabled by computation but in digital environment. However when it 
comes to algorithms it is not just about software’s and computers, they describe a 
process of logical thinking [6]. Yet beyond this, a computational approach to architec-
ture enables the generation of the previously unseen forms that can longer be con-
ceived of through traditional methods become possible, thus opening up new realms.   
2 
The overview of Biomimetics 
2.1 
The emergence of Biomimetics 
In the 1950s biophysicist and engineer Otto H. Schmitt established the field of bio-
medical engineering and proposed the term ‘biomimetics’ for this new science of the 
emerging engineer. The term ‘bionics’ in the United States, invented by the neurolo-
gist Jack E. Steel, and ‘bionik’ in Germany, originating from the work of the biologist 
Werner Nachtigall, appeared in the late 1950s. These terms referred to the study of 
the structures and functions of biological systems as models for the design and engi-
neering of materials and machines. This field of investigation developed during the 
1960s and remained mainly for robotics. During the 1970s, the concept of bionics 
became widespread among engineers and designers within companies. Nachtigall 
describes the concept as: ‘Bionics is the process of taking nature as a source of inspi-
ration for independent technical design’ [7]. The term ‘biomimicry’ appeared in 1980 
and was popularized by the biologist and environmentalist Janine Benyus, author of 
the book Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature [8].  Biomimicry is defined in 
her book as a new science that studies nature in order to imitate it or to draw inspira-
tion from it to solve human problems. The concept of biomimicry, as supported by J. 
Benyus, proposes to draw inspiration from the brilliant ideas developed in nature to 
design our innovations from a perspective of sustainability. Benyus suggests looking 
at nature as a model, measure or mentor.  
 
2
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

3 
2.2 
The process sequences in biomimetic research  
If we consider the biomimetic design process as a whole, from the initial idea to the 
final product, two approaches have been identified [9]. The first approach starts from 
a human need or a design problem then examines the ways in which organisms or 
ecosystems found in nature solve this problem. This is a problem-oriented approach 
(Top-down or design looking to biology). This approach is actually carried out by 
designers who, after identifying initial objectives and design parameters, seek solu-
tions in the nature world. 
The second approach is to identify a particular characteristic, behavior, or function in 
an organism or ecosystem, and then look for the design problem that could be ad-
dressed. It is a solution-oriented approach (Bottom-up or biology influencing design). 
This approach is where knowledge in biology influences human design. It is conduct-
ed by biologists or scientists who are looking for possible applications relevant to the 
design. 
 
2.3 
The levels of biomimetics  
Biomimetics inspires architecture in different levels as biology does in the nature and 
these levels can be summarized under three categories: form, process and ecosystem. 
Form and processes can mimic in an ecosystem. This approach is methodized by Zari 
[10] to specifically apply to a design or an architectural problem. The three levels 
mentioned above are rearranged and separated into five sub-levels (See figure 2) and 
explained how biomimetics is considered for a design problem. 
 
                       
 
Fig. 1. Theoretical framework for the levels and additional sub-levels of biomimetics in archi-
tecture, adapted from [10] 
 
The organism level refers to a specific organism like a plant or an animal and may 
involve mimicking part of or the whole organism, solutions related to efficient energy 
usage and materials, which are established already. In brief, it is mimicking an organ-
ism’s physical attributes. 
ORGANISM
BEHAVIOUR
ECOSYSTEM
Form
Additional sub-levels
The Levels of Biomimicry
Material
Construction
Process
Function
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
3

4 
The behavior level refers to mimicking organism’s behavior, to explore and under-
stand how an organism relates and behaves to a larger context. It is possible to under-
stand this level with observing how an organism tends to operate in its environmental 
capacity and within limits of energy and material availability. 
The ecosystem level of biomimetics intends to create a whole ecosystem, which incor-
porates the other two levels to achieve a sustainable environment. This means a deep 
comprehension of ecology and the regenerative process of the nature, which may 
begin from a small scale and tends to lead to a bigger scale of thinking like green 
cities or eco-cities. 
Within each of the three levels, a further five possible dimensions to the mimicry 
exist. The design may be biomimetic for example in terms of what it looks like 
(form), what it is made out of (material), how it is made (construction), how it works 
(process) or what it is able to do (function) [10]. 
3 
Algorithms in nature 
The real beauty of nature inspired algorithms lies in the fact that it receives its sole 
inspiration from nature. They have the ability to describe and resolve complex rela-
tionships from intrinsically very simple initial conditions and rules with little or no 
knowledge of the search space. Nature is the perfect example for optimization, be-
cause if we closely examine each and every features or phenomenon in nature it al-
ways find the optimal strategy, still addressing complex interaction among organisms 
ranging from microorganism to fully fledged human beings, balancing the ecosystem, 
maintaining diversity, adaptation, physical phenomenon like river formation, forest 
fire, cloud, rain etc. [12]. Nature inspired algorithms is meta-heuristics that mimics 
the nature for solving optimization problems opening a new era in computation [11]. 
For the past decades, numerous research efforts have been concentrated in this partic-
ular area. Still being young and the results being very amazing, broadens the scope 
and viability of Bio Inspired Algorithms (BIAs) exploring new areas of application 
and more opportunities in computing. 
Optimization is a commonly encountered mathematical problem in architectural and 
engineering disciplines. It literally means finding the best possible/desirable solution. 
Optimization problems are wide ranging and numerous, hence methods for solving 
these problems ought to be, an active research topic. Optimization algorithms can be 
either deterministic or stochastic in nature. Former methods to solve optimization 
problems require enormous computational efforts, which tend to fail as the problem 
size increases. This is the motivation for employing bio-inspired stochastic optimiza-
tion algorithms as computationally efficient alternatives to deterministic approach. 
Meta-heuristics are based on the iterative improvement of either a population of solu-
tions (as in Evolutionary algorithms, Swarm based algorithms) or a single solution 
(eg. Tabu Search) and mostly employ randomization and local search to solve a given 
optimization problem. 
 
4
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

5 
3.1 
A multidisciplinary approach  
Interdisciplinary collaboration is necessarily essential in biomimetic design process 
where the knowledge from different fields converges, which leads to innovation and 
increase the novelty of design ideas. Nature is providing a tremendous amount of 
information implemented into these scientific fields, assisting contemporary investi-
gations that vary from the analysis of the human body’s structural element: bone’s 
micro-mechanical configuration [13], to the effect of the micro-fibril orientation into 
plant growth. However it must also be understood that as these design processes re-
quires the collaboration between the architect and the biologist, a similar collabora-
tion might be required between an architect and a computer programmer or mathema-
tician to create the complex algorithms that are used in nature. As the architect though 
can create the concept and workflow may not be skilled enough in making the algo-
rithm. In nature, the development of the life form and structure is complex; it is a kind 
of free-from, free-edge and non-linear structure, which can sometimes be modeled 
mathematically. There is a mathematics lies behind numerical pattern in nature, thus it 
is not a simple task for an architect to understand and demonstrate more advanced 
programming techniques with processing that focus on algorithms and simulation of 
natural formations. There are some distinct collaboration between computer pro-
grammers and architects for an advanced research in architectural project that produce 
a free-from and complex structure as in nature. One known is the work of Prof. 
Helmut Pottmann, who has collaborated with a number of architects (an example of a 
project, figure 2) [15]. He is also the author of a notable book ‘Architectural Geome-
try’ [14]. The book demonstrates some cutting-edge of complex geometrical modeling 
that needs a mathematically well trained to be able to produces such a models. These 
include central concepts on freeform curves and surfaces, differential geometry, kin-
ematic geometry, mesh processing, digital reconstruction, and optimization of shapes 
[14]. Likewise, these concepts appear in nature.  
 
     
 
Fig. 2.  Project Designing Grid Structures Using Asymptotic Curve Networks, Humanizing 
Digital Reality: Design Modeling Symposium Paris 2017 [15] 
 
Today, there are few known examples of architectural construction that are complete-
ly generated from scratch by algorithms based on biomimetic approach, for example, 
The algorithm developed by Chris Bosse for the design of the National Aquatics Cen-
tre in Beijing, the ‘Water cube’ [16], the building’s form is inspired by natural for-
mation of soap bubbles, crystals, cells and molecular structures, these are the most 
efficient subdivision of 3dimensional space with equally sized cells. In this design, it 
moves the algorithmic process one step further where a single material system pro-
duces structure and at the same time defines space. Structural stability is a priori as-
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
5

6 
sured by the design choice itself, the formation of a stable configuration of the geome-
try of bubble packing that also occurs spontaneously in many natural systems.  
 
        
     
 
Fig. 3. (Left) The efficiency of soap-bubble structures is exploited with Weaire–Phelan geomet-
rical principle, (Right) National Aquatics Centre in Beijing, the Watercube by Chris Bosse, 
2008, [17] 
 
The next chapter, we will present some case studies on the utilization of nature in-
spired algorithms within a framework of biomimetic design process in architecture 
along with the use of computational design and the relevant applications in architec-
tural and urban domain. 
4 
The biomimetic framework in architecture 
Biomimetic architecture is a contemporary approach of architecture that seeks innova-
tive and sustainable solutions in nature [18], without attempting to replicate its forms, 
but by seeking to understand the rules that govern them. The objective of biomimetic 
architecture no longer consists solely in giving form and measurement to space but 
also in developing synergistic relationships between the construct and its environ-
ment. The heuristic approach to biomimetics consists in bringing architecture to ‘vi-
talism’ beyond the mechanistic view of life [19]. The biomimetic architecture could 
be at the origin of a transformation of the role of architects evolving from the control 
of the nature to a lasting participation with the nature. 
Original method of biomimetic architecture is a cross-disciplinary approach between 
biology and architecture. This method is initially called ‘Bau-Bionik’, coined by an 
architect, Göran Pohl and a biologist, Werner Nachtigall [20]. As a result of a com-
bined effort by the two disciplines describes the principles which can be used to com-
pare nature, design and technology, how biology can be used as a source of inspira-
tion and ‘translated’ in building and architectural solutions along with current ad-
vanced technology. However, it is not a trivial task to understand the principles that 
govern the living, especially for architects who need to search for an elegant biologi-
cal analogy and transfer it to solve problem in architectural designs. One must only 
then be cautious of too direct interpretation [20]. Inspirations from nature for architec-
ture will not function if they do not well abstract within the context of an interdisci-
plinary analogue. 
In the book ‘Bionik als Wissenschaft’ [21], which applies the theory of cognition to 
biomimetics, signified this process in three-step: Research → Abstraction → Imple-
mentation. By observing a cognitive biomimetic design process within the context of 
6
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

7 
an interdisciplinary, ‘identification’ and ‘abstraction’ often proves to be one of the 
most important as well as most difficult steps in a biomimetic project [9]. Thus, we 
have found two common difficulties for an architect to apply biomimetic methodolo-
gy into their design process, we define the difficulties in two transitions; 1. What to 
look for in nature? 2. How to interpret natures’ principles and transfer into design 
phase? 
      
 
Fig. 4. The two transitions of a cognitive biomimetic design process within the context of an 
interdisciplinary, adapt from [21] 
 
In view of these two transitions, it is possible to distinguish two postures of the use of 
biomimetic approach in architecture: an indirect posture where the architects explore 
biologically inspired computing as a tool derived from biomimetic interdisciplinary 
collaboration between biologists and computer scientists, and a direct posture where 
the architect integrates directly an interdisciplinary biomimetic activity and use com-
putational algorithms to transpose biological knowledge in its architectural design 
process.  
 
4.1 
An indirect biomimetic methodology in architectural design activity 
In many bio-inspired architectural design activity, architects construct design methods 
but the form and technical processes of their projects can be completely different from 
what is found in nature. These design methods generally rely on computer techniques 
such as particle systems, genetic algorithms or multi-agent systems whose functioning 
is bio-inspired. Bio-inspired computing, short for biologically inspired computing, is a 
field of research that breaks down into subfields including connectionism, social be-
havior and emergence. It is close to artificial intelligence or artificial life. It is related 
to the fields of biology, computer science and mathematics. Briefly, it is a matter of 
creating innovative algorithms to solve known problems, such as optimization prob-
lems, for example, based on phenomena observed in nature. The following case study 
presents the use of a biomimetic algorithm capable of designing an optimized 
transport network between different cities while taking into account a certain number 
of characteristics (population, points of interest, possible breakdowns on the network, 
etc.). 
 
Case study: Biomimetic Algorithms: Slime mold inspired network design  
 
It all began in the early 2000s when a team of Japanese and Hungarian researchers 
discovered that a kind of slime mold called Physarum Polycephal is able to find its 
way in a labyrinth [22]. This mold appears to be intelligent and capable of exploring 
Research  
Abstraction
Implementation
                         
Identification of the nature’s principles
 Transfer
                        
Interpretation of the nature’s principles
Analogy between nature and architecture
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
7

8 
its environment to find the shortest paths to food sources [23]. Based on these obser-
vations, an algorithm was constructed; mimicking the behavior of Physarum Poly-
cephal called the Physarum Solver [24]. This algorithm is able to find an optimal path 
in a network and proves to be more efficient than the classical algorithms when the 
number of nodes of the network is very important. This stunning algorithm can for 
example solve problems of optimization of a transport network. How to connect cities 
in a minimum of lines with maximum efficiency, that is to say taking into account 
population density, geography, possible breakdowns or accidents that may occur on 
the network and etc. It has been tested in several cities and countries: the New York 
City street network, the railway network in Japan and other transportation networks in 
Mexico and China [25]. It is clear that this type of algorithm can be used by urban 
planners or architects to design, for example, optimized and resilient distribution net-
works (for example, energy, water and etc.). 
 
       
           
 
Fig. 5. (Left) The behavior of the Physarum Polycephal observed in a petri dish and the bio-
inspired mathematical model of the exploratory behavior of Physarum Polycephal [26], (Right) 
the transportation network in Mexico City developed by the Physarum Solver [25] 
 
The following figure describes a possible architectural design process resulting from 
collaboration between biologists, computer scientists and architects. 
 
 
Fig. 6. The steps of an indirect biomimetic design process in architectural activity, [27] 
 
This framework of an indirect biomimetic methodology does not directly concern the 
architectural field. It produces innovation (optimization) in the field of computing.  
It is clear that in such a process, it is the algorithm used that is innovative because it is 
designed in a biomimetic approach between computer scientists and biologists. The 
architect, by reusing these algorithms, produces an optimized architectural and urban 
design but not necessarily innovative. That's why we called this process an indirect 
biomimetic methodology. 
 
4.2 
A direct biomimetic methodology in architectural design activity 
In the case study presented below and unlike the previous one, there is direct collabo-
Indentify principles
from nature
Using BIA to address a design 
problem
Collaboration between biologists and computer scientists
Computer scientist
Architects
Bio-inspired computational 
algorithms
Specific 
problem
8
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

9 
ration between the architect and the biologist and the use of computational algorithms 
to support the transfer of nature’s principles into the design process. The collaborative 
design activity consists of the initial phase ‘specific design problem’ that architect 
specify, then the architects themselves observe in nature and collaborate with biolo-
gists to identify the strategy and abstract the design principles from nature to solve the 
problem in architectural and urban design.       
 
Case study: District 11 – Skolkovo Innovation center and Thermal regulation 
system of Emperor penguins, 2017 
 
Inspired by the complex social behaviour of group organization of emperor penguins 
that protects from the cold and save energy. Agence d’Architecture A. Bechu & Asso-
ciés collaborates with biologists to study the thermal regulation system of emperor 
penguins on how a penguin colony works as a system to allow all penguins a chance 
to be warm. The architects use the computational algorithm to transpose this principle 
into a complex town planning, which will be housing researchers and their families in 
single-family homes as well as providing them with a living environment that encour-
ages social interaction. Much like penguins on an ice shelf forming a circle to share 
their heat, a hundred villas are grouped ten by ten in a vast clearing surrounded by a 
waterway able to drain away the melting snow. Each of the villas will be unique, giv-
ing occupants their own identity within the urban ensemble, but will all feature a 
modular concrete frame, green roof, and use of renewable energy and water recycling. 
Public functions and common shared services will be located in a central area, in or-
der to create a social link between residents [28]. 
 
   
       
 
Fig. 7. (Left) Thermal regulation system of Emperor penguins [29], (Right) District 11, Skol-
kovo innovation center, Russian [28] 
 
Case study: AEOMIUM: a fog sensor dome to produce drinking water in arid 
area. Site study: Burkina Faso, Africa, 2017 
 
This architectural project ‘AEONIUM’ [30] proposes a fog sensor built near a typical 
rural village of Burkina Fuso. The operation of the dome is inspired by the metabo-
lism of Xerophile plants (for example, succulents) and their different strategies devel-
oped to capture and store the water contained in the ambient air. By bringing the 
source of drinking water to the villages, the installation is a tribute to the tradition of 
the water carriers since it facilitates the activity while creating a pleasant meeting 
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
9

10 
place. The project is realized by the groups of students within the program of Biomi-
metic project applied algorithmic and digital method for architectural design and fab-
rication at the Laval University in Canada [31]. The project was entirely realized with 
the help of an algorithmic software Grasshopper [32] and algorithmic families (frac-
tals, AC, AG, complexity, etc.) while adopting a biomimetic approach. The architects 
have made an analogy between the principles of the plant and the design concept and 
once the biological principles are understood as a design task, the architect transcript 
them in Grasshopper. This new way of reasoning allows the architects to better under-
stand the functioning of the biological models studied, since they respond to an algo-
rithmic logic like Grasshopper. In this project, the algorithms in grasshopper first and 
foremost helped the architects to develop all the kinematics of opening and closing of 
their protective envelope, the principle of which stemmed from the in-depth study of 
the functioning of stomata in Xerophile plants. 
 
    
    
 
 
Fig. 8. (From top left to right) The succulent plant Aeonium percarneum  [33], the functionality 
of the fog sensor dome, the rendering of the dome prototype [30], (Below) The Grasshopper 
canvas of the AEONIUM design process [30] 
 
From the two case studies above, the architect seeks to understand application of al-
gorithm based on biomimetic principles to the architectural context. The architects 
involve directly in biomimetic activity, from the initial to the final phase. Additional-
ly, at present, the algorithm scripting in Grasshopper tool [32] are being used to trans-
pose nature’s principles towards biomimetic approach within the architectural do-
main. Grasshopper is an extremely powerful tool but unfortunately it’s still little 
known specially in bio-inspired architectural field. In somehow, any natural principle 
can be retransmitted as lines of code to determine a sequence of actions composing 
the biological system, but this way requires strong knowledge in computer science 
and code, which is not necessarily the case in an architect. With Grasshopper it is now 
possible to simplify all this procedure through clusters. Indeed thanks to these small 
‘boxes’ closing actions predefined by the software, it is possible to design sequences 
10
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

11 
of operations so as to reproduce the biological system explicitly and visualize the 
result in real time. 
 
The following figure describes a possible architectural design process resulting from 
direct collaboration between architects and biologists and the use of computational 
algorithms to transpose nature’s principles into design phase. 
 
Fig. 9. The steps of a direct biomimetic design process in architectural activity, [27] 
 
The unique framework of biomimetic design is directly related to the architectural 
field. It produces innovation directly in the field of architecture. This is a direct bio-
mimetic design process because there is an effective interdisciplinary collaboration 
between architects, biologists and computer programmer, the latter welcoming with 
great interest the idea of developing this type of collaboration.  
5 
Conclusion 
This paper is an investigation into the development of design method based on biolog-
ical principles that are applied and correlated with nature inspired algorithm and com-
putational design in the field of architecture. It is important to materialize the archi-
tectural output based on application of biomimetics. It can be concluded that the stat-
ed methodological frameworks enable the designer to produce an efficient architec-
ture in terms of innovation and sustainability. But at the same time this approach re-
lies on very specific knowledge, skills and tools. Architects have been searching for 
answers from nature to their complex questions about different kinds of structures, 
and they have mimicked a lot of forms from nature to create better and more efficient 
structures for different architectural purposes. Without computers these complex ways 
and forms of structures couldn’t been mimicked and thus using computers had risen 
the way of mimicking and taking inspiration from nature because it is considered a 
very sophisticated and accurate tool for simulation and computing, as a result design-
ers can imitate different nature’s models in spite of its complexity. Bio-inspired algo-
rithms are going to be a new revolution in computer science. Nevertheless, nature-
inspired algorithms are among the most powerful algorithms for optimization, which 
is going to have a wide impact on future generation computing. Though these algo-
rithms are becoming widespread in many design and fabrication industries, perhaps 
their best use is in architectural design, where they can enable architects to work in 
intuitive and nondeterministic ways. Thus new and innovative designs can be pro-
duced that achieve structural and environmental performances that were once consid-
ered to be post-design optimization processes. 
Abstract of the principles of 
nature into design phrase
Identify principles 
from nature
Specific
problem
Computational
algorithms
Implementation
Architects
Collaboration between architects and biologists
 Transfer phrase
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
11

12 
Acknowledgements 
This article is part of an extended research of Biomimicry in Architecture: State, methods and 
tools, which is published in les Cahiers la recherche architecturale, urbaine et paysagère, issue 
Innover 2018 (https://journals.openedition.org/craup/309). I would like to thank François Gué-
na, the director of Map-maacc UMR 3495, Paris, France and Pierre Côté, Professor at Laval 
University, Canada who provided expertise that greatly assisted on this subject.  
References 
1. Biomimicry Guild, Innovation Inspired by Nature Work Book, Biomimicry Guild, (2007). 
2. Ricard, P., Le biomimétisme : s’inspirer de la nature pour innover durablement, Les projet 
d’avis du Conseil économique, social et environnemental (CESE), Paris, septembre 
(2015). 
3. Toyo, I., Algorithms are Nothing More than an Opportunity to Create Architecture that 
Respires, pp. 36–45, The Japan Architect, Japan (2010). 
4. RianIasefMd, Tree - Inspired Dendriforms and Fractal like Branching Structures in Archi-
tecture: A Brief Historical Overview, Frontiers of Architectural  Research, vol. 03, Issue 
no.3, pp. 298–323, ELSEVIER, (2014). 
5. Kolarevic B., Architecture in the Digital Age – Design & Manufacturing, Spon Press Tay-
lor &Fransic Group, New York, London, (2003).   
6. Bagul, P., Uke, N., Algorithms in Architectural Design, International Journal of Electron-
ics Communication and Computer Engineering, Volume 6, Issue (4) July, India (2014) 
7. Wahl, D. C.,Bionics vs. biomimicry: from control of nature, WIT Transactions on Ecology 
and the Environment, 87, 289-298, W. press, Éd., (2006). 
8. Benyus, J. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature, New York, Harper Collins Pub-
lishers, (1997). 
9. Speck, T., Process sequences in biomimetic research, Design and Nature IV, Brebbia (éd.), 
pp. 3-11, WIT Press (2008). 
10. Zari, M.P., Biomimetic Approaches to Architectural Design for Increased Sustainability, 
Sustainable Building Conference, Auckland, (2007). 
11. Siva Sathya, B., A Survey of Bio-inspired optimization Algorithms, International Journal 
of Soft Computing and Engineering, Volume2, Issue(2), (2012). 
12. Sidhu, T., Samarabandu, J., Premaratne, U., A New Biologically Inspired Optimization 
Algorithm, Fourth International Conference on Industrial and Information Systems, ICIIS, 
pp. 28-31, Sri Lanka (2009). 
13. Huiskes, R., If bone is the answer, then what is the question, Journal of Anatomy 197, pp. 
145-156, Netherlands, (2000). 
14. Pottmann, H., Asperl, A., Hofer, M. and Kilian, A., Architectural Geometry, Bentley Insti-
tute Press (2007). 
15. Shiling, E., Hitrec, D., Barthel, R., Designing Grid Structures Using Asymptotic Curve 
Networks, Humanizing Digital Reality: Design Modeling Symposium Paris 2017, Spring-
er, (2018). 
16. Water cube Homepage, http://www.chrisbosse.de/watercube/, last accessed 2018/05/29. 
17. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beijing_National_Aquatics_Center, last accessed 2018/05/29 
18. Pawlyn, M., Biomimicry in Architecture, London, RIBA publishing, (2011). 
19. Gruber, P., The signs of life in architecture, Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, (2008). 
12
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .

13 
20. Nachtigall, W., Bau-Bionik: Natur ← Analogien → Technik, Berlin, Springer/Auflage, 
(2003). 
21. Nachtigall, W., Bionik als Wissenschaft: Erkennen-Abstrahieren-Umsetzen, Berlin, 
Springer/Auflage, (2010). 
22. Nakagaki, T. et al., Intelligence: Maze-solving by amoeboid organism, Nature, 407, p. 470, 
(2000). 
23. Nakagaki, T. et al., Otaining multiple separate food sources: behavioural intelligence in the 
Physarum plamodium, The Royal Society, 271, pp. 2305-2310, (2004). 
24. Tero, A. et al., Physarum solver: a biologically inspired method of road-network naviga-
tion, Elsevier Science, (2005).  
25. Mahadevan, S., A Biologically Inspired Network Design Model, Nature research journal, 
Scientific Reports 5, (2015). 
26. Adamatzky, A., Slime mould processors, logic gates and sensors, The Royal Society Pub-
lising, Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society a mathematical, physical and en-
gineer science, vol. 373, n°2046, (2005). 
27. Chayaamor-Heil, N., Guéna, F., Hannachi-Belkadi, N., Biomimicry in Architecture: State, 
methods and tools, Les Cahiers de la recherché Architecturale Urbaine et Paysagère, 
http://journals.openedition.org/craup/, (2017). 
28. Agence d’architecture A.Bechu Homepage, http://www.anthonybechu.com/fr, last ac-
cessed 2018/02/1. 
29. Asknature Homepage, https://asknature.org, last accessed 2018/03/15. 
30. AEONIUM Homepage, https://aeonium.wixsite.com/project, last accessed 2018/05/29. 
31. AENIUM project is part of the program Méthodes en Architecture en Fabrication numé-
riques ARC-6046, Automne 2017, University Laval, by Prof. Pierre Côté, Marie-Jeanne 
Allaire-Côté, Théo Jarrand, Marc-Antoine Juneau and Josianne Ouellet-Daudelin. 
32. Grasshopper: Algorithmic modeling for Rhino Homepage, 
http://www.grasshopper3d.com, last accessed 2018/01/15. 
33. Wikipedia Aeonium, https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aeonium, last accessed 2018/05/29. 
 
 
LM2018, 031, v3 (ﬁnal): ’The Impact of Nature inspired algorithms on Biomimetic appro‌ . . .
13

