
LORD ŚIVA’S SONG


Translated with an Introduction and Notes by 
Andrew J. Nicholson
LORD ŚIVA’S SONG
The Īśvara Gītā
STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK PRESS

Cover art: Prince Subuddhi in the Forest of Illusion (folio 35 from the 
Suraj Prakash), accession number RJS1660, used with permission of 
Mehrangarh Museum Trust, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India, and His Highness 
Maharaja Gaj Singh of Jodhpur.
Published by
STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK PRESS
Albany
©  2014 State University of New York
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever 
without written permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means including electronic, 
electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or 
otherwise without the prior permission in writing of the publisher.
For information, contact 
State University of New York Press
www.sunypress.edu
Production, Laurie Searl
Marketing, Michael Campochiaro
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Puranas. Kurmapurana. Isvar-gita. English.
  Lord Siva’s Song : the Isvara Gita / Translated with an introduction and 
notes by Andrew J. Nicholson.
      pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references.
  Translated from Sanskrit.
  ISBN 978-1-4384-5101-5 (hardcover : alk. paper)
  I. Nicholson, Andrew J.  II. Title. 
  BL1140.4.K8742I8813 2014
  294.5’925—dc23	
2013020385
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

To the memory of Shri Narayan Mishra
yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau
tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ
“These matters described by the great one
reveal themselves to the person
who shows the highest love toward god,
and as toward god, toward his own teacher.” 
—Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23


vii
Contents
Acknowledgments	
 ix
Introduction	
1
TRANSLATION
  1	 The Arrival of the Gods	
35
  2	 The Changeless Self	
47
  3	 The Unmanifest Lord	
59
  4	 The God of Gods	
65
  5	 The Lord’s Dance	
73 
  6	 The Glory of Lord Śiva	
87
  7	 The Master of Beasts	
99
  8	 The Hidden Lord 	
107
  9	 Brahman’s Powers	
113
10	 Brahman and the Lord	
119
11	
The Highest Yoga 	
125
Commentarial Notes	
155
Sanskrit Text	
185
List of Concordances	
219
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms	
223
Bibliography	
233


ix
Acknowledgments
The quest for liberation through yoga in medieval India, although 
sometimes depicted as a solitary endeavor, was more often a project 
involving an entire community of teachers and disciples. The same is 
true of the quest to complete a book such as this one. I have benefited 
enormously from the guidance and friendship of many scholars, only 
a few of whom I have the space to acknowledge here. First, I wish to 
offer thanks to my teachers in the United States and in India, espe-
cially to Shri Narayan Mishra, who helped me with this translation 
but passed away before publication.
I am very grateful to Stony Brook University, which granted me a 
semester research leave in 2009 to begin this project, and which also 
awarded me an FAHSS research grant to travel to Varanasi in 2011. 
Mario Piantelli was very kind to make his excellent Italian transla-
tion of the Īśvara Gītā available to me in digital form. The online text 
of the Kūrma Purāṇa and other Purāṇas provided by the Göttingen 
Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages (GRETIL) was also 
an important digital resource. My expert colleagues David Buchta, 
Whitney Cox, James Fitzgerald, Deven Patel, and Travis Smith read 
parts of my manuscript and offered invaluable advice. I presented 
parts of the introductory section of this book to audiences at the 
American Academy of Religion Annual Meeting in 2010, the Freie 
Universität Berlin Zukunftsphilologie Seminar in 2011, and the McGill 
University Faculty of Religious Studies Lecture Series in 2012. Their 
spirited, insightful questions have led me to refine my interpreta-
tions of the Īśvara Gītā and of Pāśupata philosophy. The students 
who read drafts of this work in undergraduate seminars with me at 
Stony Brook University offered suggestions to improve some of my 
unclear and ungainly translations. Finally, I thank my family, Claudia 
Misi, Silvia Nicholson, Marlene Nicholson, Norman Nicholson, and 
Elizabeth Nicholson, who have always sustained me with their love 
and encouragement. 


1
Introduction
The Īśvara Gītā (“Lord Śiva’s Song”) is a philosophical poem that 
conveys the teachings of the Pāśupatas, a group of Śiva worshippers 
who would have a profound and lasting influence on the develop-
ment of Hinduism. Since its composition in the eighth century CE, 
it has been an inspiration to generations of philosophers, devotees, 
and yogis in India. Like its famous predecessor, the Bhagavad Gītā 
(“Song of Lord Kṛṣṇa”), it goes beyond mere philosophical theory to 
describe a regimen of spiritual exercises to achieve self-transcendence 
and absolute freedom. These spiritual exercises, the “Pāśupata Yoga,” 
are a regimen of ethical discipline, breath control, physical postures, 
and mental concentration through which the yogi attains divine 
knowledge, power, and liberation. Pāśupatas are not content just to 
know god. The ultimate goal of Pāśupata Yoga is to become god—to 
attain Lord Śiva’s majestic power and wisdom in this very lifetime 
through mental absorption and union with him, the Lord of Yoga.
The proliferation of many different practices in the globalized 
yoga of the 20th and 21st centuries has led modern yogis to great 
uncertainty about what the final goal of yoga practice is: Is it stress 
relief? Peace of mind? Self-actualization? Nirvāṇa? Many teachers 
today describe Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras, an influential text compiled 
between the second and fifth centuries CE, as the authoritive set of 
guidelines for yoga practice. But examination of Patañjali’s work 
reveals that many of the central ideas and practices of yoga as under-
stood in later times are absent. One notable difference is Patañjali’s 
relative lack of interest in physical postures (āsanas), the main focus 
of practice for many modern yogis. Another surprise for some Hindus 
might be the place of god (īśvara) in Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras. Although 
often described as the “classical Hindu” yoga, worship of and medita-
tion on god is according to Patañjali a mere preliminary practice to 
the highest form of yoga.1 This contrasts with the understanding of 

2
Lord Śiva’s Song
most Hindus, for whom god-absorption is the highest yogic practice.
The Īśvara Gītā, “Lord Śiva’s Song,” shows some influence from 
Patañjali’s eight-limbed (aṣṭāṅga) yoga. According to this later text, 
however, Patañjali’s highest form of mental absorption (samādhi) is a 
lower yoga, below absorption in god. The Īśvara Gītā also shares many 
concepts and themes with the famous Bhagavad Gītā, composed some 
six centuries earlier.2 The most obvious difference between these two 
texts is the god who presents their teachings. In the Bhagavad Gītā, 
it is Kṛṣṇa, in disguise as a charioteer, who instructs the great warrior 
Arjuna on the subtleties of philosophy and sacred duty (dharma). In 
the Īśvara Gītā it is Śiva as Paśupati, Master of Beasts, who instructs 
a group of sages about the highest truth and the means to realize it 
through the practice of yoga. Śiva says that he himself is supreme, the 
source of creation for all other gods, and the ultimate focus of yogic 
concentration. In the popular imagination and especially among non-
Hindus, Śiva is regarded as the god of destruction. However, accord-
ing to the Pāśupatas who composed the Īśvara Gītā, he is something 
much more: the creator of the universe and the ultimate source of 
worldly bondage and liberation.
The Historical Background of the Īśvara Gītā
The earliest Hindu holy texts are the Vedas, composed in Sanskrit 
beginning in approximately 1500 BCE. For many Hindus, the Vedas 
are the absolute scriptural authority. According to traditional interpre-
tation, the Vedas are eternal and beyond human authorship, received 
by ancient seers who spoke and memorized the words of the Vedas. 
Indeed, the word “scripture” is misleading insofar as the Vedas were 
oral texts not written down until hundreds of years after their compo-
sition. Scholars of the Vedas made a fundamental distinction between 
the eternal Vedas and other texts that were composed by human 
authors. In this second category are included the Bhagavad Gītā and 
Īśvara Gītā, both attributed to the sage Vyāsa. Although considered 
an omniscient seer, Vyāsa’s texts and those composed by other great 
sages were not considered to have the same level of authority as the 
eternal Vedas. They were labeled “traditional” (smṛti) texts rather than 
the “revealed” (śruti) texts that make up the Vedas. The gods Śiva 
and Viṣṇu, prominently featured in Iśvara Gītā, are different than 
those emphasized in most of the Vedas. Yet an early form of Śiva is 
present in some form in the Vedas, known by another name, Rudra, 
“the roarer.” Later parts of the Vedas, known as the Upaṇiṣads, show 
evidence of an increasing reverence for Rudra-Śiva. The Śvetāśvatara 

3
Introduction
Upaniṣad (circa third century BCE) describes Rudra as the supreme 
being and creator of the entire world. The themes of this monotheistic 
text went on to have a great influence on later religious literature, 
including the Bhagavad Gītā and Īśvara Gītā.3 
The Purāṇas, a voluminous group of texts whose composition 
began around the fourth century CE, are the source of much of the 
mythology surrounding the god Śiva that has inspired Hindus in the 
medieval and modern periods. It is in the Purāṇas that we find the 
majority of texts known as Gītās, “songs.” Like the Hindu epics the 
Mahābhārata and the Rāmāyana, the Purāṇas are “traditional,” not 
“revealed.” All these Purāṇas were regarded as the works of Vyāsa, 
an author of superhuman productivity, if we take these stories of 
authorship as historical fact. The Purāṇas are sometimes stereotyped 
as “mythological” texts. They certainly are a rich source of Hindu 
mythology, but they are also much more. Like the Mahābhārata, the 
Purāṇas are a vast repository of wisdom, containing sections on phi-
losophy, theology, law, astrology, ritual theory, cosmology, and politi-
cal science, usually combined in ways that defy tidy classification.4 
The Īśvara Gītā is itself a small section of one of these Purāṇas, the 
Kūrma Purāṇa (“Purāṇa of the Tortoise Incarnation”).
The Purāṇas frequently present a trio of divine forms (the trimūrti), 
each form with a specific task: The god Brahmā is responsible for 
the world’s creation, Viṣṇu for the world’s preservation, and Śiva 
for the world’s destruction. However, this formulation obscures the 
monotheistic orientation of many sections of the Purāṇas. The Īśvara 
Gītā teaches that although it may appear that Brahmā and Viṣṇu do 
their work independently from Śiva, the wise know that all the other 
gods are controlled by, and parts of, a single supreme deity. This 
single supreme deity is Lord Śiva.5 Śiva is the one absolute god, and 
other gods mere aspects of the One. Like the Bhagavad Gītā and 
the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad, the Īśvara Gītā is not a polytheistic text, 
strictly speaking. Yet neither is it a monotheistic text in the same sense 
as the Bible or the Qur’an. In the monotheism of the Īśvara Gītā, the 
many gods are real and have real power in the world. But all their 
power is derived from the One, the supreme Śiva. 
The Īśvara Gītā, although influential for medieval Hindus, was 
just one of the many sections labeled “Gītās” from the Purāṇas. Dis-
regarded by most modern scholars of Hindu mythology for their 
philosophical focus, these Gītās also have been ignored by modern 
historians of Indian philosophy who do not usually think of the 
Purāṇas as quite properly philosophical. But premodern philosophers 
in India did not share this attitude toward the Purāṇas. The authors of 

4
Lord Śiva’s Song
the five Sanskrit commentaries on the Īśvara Gītā that have survived 
to the present day take this text every bit as seriously as the Bhagavad 
Gītā. One even suggests the Bhagavad Gītā and Īśvara Gītā are in 
essence the same teaching.6 It makes sense that these Hindu philoso-
phers would have treated the Īśvara Gītā, and the Purāṇas in general, 
with such reverence. If the sage Vyāsa composed the Mahābhārata 
and all of the many Purāṇas, then the Īśvara Gītā and the Bhagavad 
Gītā must present the same philosophy. How could an omniscient 
sage change his mind or contradict himself?
In the modern era, influential Hindu reformers such as Gandhi, 
Aurobindo, and Radhakrishnan have departed from premodern atti-
tudes about the Vedas’ authorship and the omniscience of the author(s) 
of the Purāṇas.7 It is now widely accepted by Hindus and non-Hindus 
alike that the Purāṇas, the Mahābhārata, and the Rāmāyaṇa were 
each composed by more than one person over the course of several 
centuries, and that some of the thematic shifts we see within these 
texts are due to shifts in authorship.8 Yet if the Mahābhārata and 
the Purāṇas were not all composed by a single author, and were 
instead composed over the course of many centuries, who were the 
true authors and compilers of these texts? How should we approach 
the Purāṇas’ frequent repetitions of themes and stories found in the 
Mahābhārata, in particular? Are the Purāṇas muddled, superstitious 
texts, products of a later degenerate phase of Hinduism?
Intertextuality and Hinduism: The Īśvara Gītā,  
the Bhagavad Gītā, and the Yoga Sūtras
The Īśvara Gītā has been dismissed by some in the modern period 
because of its apparent borrowings from the Bhagavad Gītā. In the 
words of the 20th-century Sanskritist Franklin Edgerton, the Īśvara 
Gītā is an “imitative performance,” “pale and lifeless” in comparison 
to its original.9 Many Western Indologists and modern Hindu reform-
ers shared this assessment of the Īśvara Gītā, and of the Purāṇas 
in general. One powerful example of modern anti-Purāṇic attitudes 
comes from Swami Dayananda Saraswati (1824–1883), founder of 
the influential Arya Samaj (“Society of Nobles”) reform movement. 
Dayananda opposed idolatry in all its forms and saw the Vedas as 
preaching a rational worship of a formless and nameless ultimate 
God. Although some Hindus who believe in a God beyond forms 
might maintain that idol-worship is a “ladder” whereby the unedu-
cated are able to approach the absolute reality, Dayananda emphati-
cally disagreed. According to him:

5
Introduction
The method of worshipping through idols was introduced by 
the tantras and purāṇas. . . . Idol-worship is not a ladder. It is 
a big ditch, by falling into which man is smashed to pieces. 
He can never come out of it and is sure to remain there till 
he dies. . . . Nobody has ever become learned by the worship 
of idols. All idolators remain ignorant till death overcomes 
them and terminates their unsuccessful career.10
Dayananda maintained that the Purāṇas were the not true works of 
Vyāsa, but rather works of later authors “in the name of Vyāsa . . . full 
of ridiculous and credulous stories.”11 Although contemporary scholars 
would agree with Dayananda’s assessment that the Purāṇas were not 
all composed by a single author, many would argue that Dayananda 
sells the Purāṇas short. Besides providing immense amounts of data 
for historians who wish to understand the development of medieval 
Hinduism, the Purāṇas are also a vast repository of wisdom, a con-
tinuation of the insights of the Vedas and epics.12
The Bhagavad Gītā, a section of the epic Mahābhārata, has been 
considered by Gandhi and many other modern Hindus as the clos-
est equivalent that Hinduism has to a Bible. Its fame has been so 
overpowering that many Hindus themselves are unaware that it is 
only one among dozens of texts in Sanskrit known as “Gītās” or 
“songs.”13 These Gītās are philosophical dialogues written in verse, 
and often involve a conversation between an omniscient deity and 
one or more human beings. The themes of these other Gītās often 
overlap with the Bhagavad Gītā, especially in their focus on bhakti 
(devotion to god) and on the practice of yoga. But they were written 
after the Bhagavad Gītā, often by many centuries, and their teachings 
mark further elaborations of the themes found in earlier texts. Some 
medieval Gītās present teachings of tantric yoga, including such now-
familiar ideas as cosmic union of male and female principles repre-
sented by the ascent of the kuṇḍalinī serpent through the subtle energy 
centers known as cakras.14 The Īśvara Gītā stands at an important 
transitional stage before the widespread influence of tantra but after 
the “classical” yoga of Patañjali. It shows the unmistakable influence 
of Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras in its elaboration of the eightfold (aṣṭānga) 
yoga, yet it goes beyond him. In chapter 11, the Īśvara Gītā teaches 
that the “aloneness” (kaivalya) presented by Patañjali as the highest 
goal is only a preliminary step on the way to the highest yoga, the 
union of the individual self with Lord Śiva.
Instead of criticizing the Īśvara Gītā and other works in Sanskrit 
that copy pieces of earlier texts as mere imitations, we should try 

6
Lord Śiva’s Song
the imaginative exercise of putting ourselves in the situation of the 
audiences for these “imitative” texts. The readers or listeners of the 
Īśvara Gītā certainly were not fooled into thinking that the copied 
verses were new and original to the Īśvara Gītā. On the contrary, the 
quotations from the Bhagavad Gītā in this text were designed to be 
noticed. Instead of weakening the authority of the Īśvara Gītā, such 
borrowing strengthens it. In the Sanskrit textual traditions of which 
the Īśvara Gītā is a part, novelty is not a virtue; it is a defect. The 
Īśvara Gītā, the Bhagavad Gītā, and other “traditional” (smṛti) texts 
insist that they are not presenting new teachings. They say that in 
fact, all they are doing is re-presenting in a new format the teachings 
of the revealed (śruti) texts that came before them, the Vedas. Like-
wise, medieval commentators on the Īśvara Gītā and the Bhagavad 
Gītā insist that they are simply uncovering meanings that are already 
present in those texts, not innovating or adding any new meanings 
of their own. In this literary universe so different from ours today, 
for innovation to be accepted, it had to wear the cloak of tradition.
Just as its is possible to treat the Purāṇas as appendices to the 
Mahābhārata, picking up and expanding on many of the stories and 
ideas therein, so too the Īśvara Gītā often expands on the Bhagavad 
Gītā, picking up philosophical ideas that were merely hinted at in the 
Bhagavad Gītā and putting them at the forefront of the later text. One 
marked example of this is the concept of māyā (“magical power”), 
which makes a fleeting appearance in the Bhagavad Gītā.15 In the 
Īśvara Gītā the idea of magical power, the power that god employs 
to conceal the true nature of things from worldly creatures, becomes 
a major theme. The word māyā is used thirty-two times. The Īśvara 
Gītā also describes god as the māyin, magician, who creates forms in 
the world by means of his magical power, a feminine force. A related 
theme is the use of the imagery of human sexual procreation as a 
metaphor for god’s creative process in the world. The idea that the 
ultimate god contains both masculine and feminine aspects is a famil-
iar one from later Hindu theology, such as Rāmānuja’s Śrī Vaiṣṇava 
school. Verses 14.3–4 of the Bhagavad Gītā teach,
My womb is the great infinite spirit;
in it I place the embryo,
and from this, Arjuna,
comes the origin of all creatures.
The infinite spirit is the great womb 
of all forms that come to be
In all wombs,
and I am the seed-giving father.16

7
Introduction
The authors of the Īśvara Gītā eagerly expand this metaphor, 
showing even more explicitly how the ultimate god Śiva is an andro-
gyne, containing both masculine and feminine characteristics:
Great brahman is my womb.
That is where I place the seed.
It is the source named magical power,
and from it the entire world is born . . . 
Magical power is the supreme womb
of the forms that are born
in the wombs of all beings. 
Sages know that I am the father.
The wise one who recognizes me
as inseminator, father, and ruler
does not become deluded 
in any of the worlds.17
Action and Renunciation
Despite the obvious thematic similarities between the Bhagavad Gītā 
and Īśvara Gīta, there are important differences in tone and emphasis. 
The Bhagavad Gītā is primarily a text for householders, those mem-
bers of society like the warrior Arjuna who are engaged in worldly 
pursuits: marrying, having children, making a living, and (in Arjuna’s 
case) fighting battles. Its continuing relevance, especially in the minds 
of modern Hindu thinkers like Gandhi and Tilak, was in its teaching 
of karma-yoga, the yoga of action.18 Must one renounce career and 
family to achieve the highest goal of life, liberation from the cycle 
of death and rebirth? According to ancient Indian theories of action 
(karma), any worldly pursuit involves the accumulation of karmic 
fruits, and these karmic fruits ensure continuous rebirth from lifetime 
to lifetime. Even the priest performing the sacrifices enjoined by the 
Vedas ties himself down to the world through his sacrificial action. 
The fruits of his actions may be positive, ensuring future rebirths in 
bodies rewarded with comfort and worldly success. Nonetheless, such 
actions lead the individual no closer to the ultimate goal of freedom 
from rebirth in the cycle of saṃsāra. Following this line of thinking, 
only by abandoning all action, both meritorious and demeritorious, 
and becoming a renouncer (saṃnyāsin) can one hope to achieve libera-
tion at some future time.19
The Bhagavad Gītā’s teaching of action without concern for the 
fruits of action presented a solution to the householder’s conundrum. 

8
Lord Śiva’s Song
Beginning in its second chapter, the god Kṛṣṇa teaches that it is pos-
sible for someone like Arjuna to pursue his caste responsibilities and 
still be liberated. Instead of throwing down his bow and renouncing 
all action, Arjuna must become a renouncer internally. By following 
his duties without any concern for the positive karmic results that 
will accrue, it is possible for Arjuna, and for all people regardless 
of class (varṇa) and stage of life (āśrama), to achieve liberation while 
engaged in a life of action. Reinterpreted not primarily as a call to 
perform traditional duties but rather as a call to progressive social 
activism, this message inspired Gandhi and his followers to fight for 
the rights of widows and untouchables, breaking away from earlier 
attitudes about ritual purity and pollution.20
From its very first chapter, it is clear that the Īśvara Gītā’s social 
milieu is quite different. Instead of focusing on the responsibilities 
of the householder to act, the Īśvara Gītā teaches that renunciation 
accompanied by yoga is the highest way to know god. Borrowing 
from the Yoga Sūtra of Patañjali, another renouncer text, the Īśvara 
Gītā demands celibacy (brahmacārya) and nonacquisition (aparigraha) 
as preparatory steps to higher levels of yogic perfection.21 Śiva’s 
teaching in this text is not primarily directed toward a warrior 
(kṣatriya) like Arjuna who struggles with this-worldly moral dilem-
mas. Rather, it is for the Brahmin renouncers who have gathered at 
a remote, sacred site in the Himālayas to try to clarify their confu-
sion. This confusion is not about their worldly duties in society, but 
rather about metaphysics: “Who is the lord who causes others to 
be reborn? Who sees everything? What is the highest brahman?”22 
Although the Bhagavad Gītā eventually gets around to answering 
these questions, it begins with a this-worldly inquiry on the nature 
of duty and sacrifice. The first chapter of the Īśvara Gītā dives imme-
diately into the deep end of Hindu metaphysics and cosmology, and 
at first glance may seem less approachable for the modern reader 
than the Bhagavad Gītā.
On the other hand, the Īśvara Gītā’s advantage over the Bhaga-
vad Gītā is that it goes into much greater detail about the practice of 
yoga. In a few famous verses the Bhagavad Gītā sketches how and 
where a yogi should practice, but its primary concern is the house-
holder’s success in fulfilling his worldly duties with the right mental 
attitude.23 As a meditation manual, it leaves a great deal out. What 
is breath control (prāṇayāma), and what are its effects? What types of 
mantras should one recite? Most importantly, how can the yogi cul-
tivate the meditative concentration (dhyāna) that leads to liberation? 
Chapter 11 of the Īśvara Gītā systematically details the eight limbs 
of yoga, including discussions of specific postures, moral observa-

9
Introduction
tions, breath control exercises, and vividly described visualization 
techniques. The ground covered by the chapter will be familiar to 
readers of Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtra, as the eight limbs (aṅgas) of yoga 
are the same in both texts. But Patañjali leaves out what the Īśvara 
Gītā considers most important of all. For the yogi to be truly liber-
ated, he must first become god.
Philosophy and Practice: 
The Pāśupata Path of Godhood
Śaivas, those Hindus who take Śiva as the single highest god, were a 
powerful force in medieval South and Southeast Asia, but the history 
of their origins is still cloaked in mystery. The Pāśupatas, the earli-
est recorded group of Śaivas, are mentioned in the Mahābhārata, the 
famous Hindu epic poem.24 These ascetics took the name “Pāśupata” 
from the form of Śiva they worshipped, Paśupati, “The Master of 
Beasts.” The Pāśupatas occupied an ambiguous place among Hindu 
traditions. Although today they are understood as a seminal influence 
on later Hinduism, in their time they often were criticized and consid-
ered beyond the pale of the Vedic mainstream, especially in the eyes 
of the orthoprax Brahmins who concerned themselves with the pres-
ervation of the Vedas and the correct performance of Vedic rituals.25 
This liminal position is reflected in the Purāṇas, where the Pāśupatas 
are at turns celebrated and reviled, sometimes in the very same text.
The defenders of the Vedas often may have seen the Pāśupatas as 
a threat, but the Pāśupatas were conscious of their connection to Vedic 
tradition, presenting themselves as its true heirs. Central to the liturgy 
of the Pāśupatas was the Śatarudrīya, “Hymn to the Thousand forms 
of Rudra,” which appears in the Yajur Veda.26 Unlike later tantric 
worshippers of Śiva, they also adhered to many of the social attitudes 
of Vedic religion by drawing distinctions between the four classes 
(varṇas). According to the tradition of the Pāśupata Sūtras, initiation 
is only available to Brahmin males, and the Pāśupata yogi should 
never even speak with low castes or women.27 One name associated 
with the Pāśupata sect, “the way beyond” (atimarga), expresses the 
idea that the adept has passed beyond the four stages of life outlined 
in the Hindu legal texts, and is on a path more rarified and demand-
ing than the path of the orthoprax renouncer (saṃnyāsin) described 
in mainstream texts.28 Like later Śaivas, the Pāśupata imitates Śiva 
by taking on his outward appearance (matted hair, skin smeared 
with ash) and antisocial behavior (gesticulating wildly, making loud 
noises and lewd gestures). At a higher and more meaningful level, 
this means becoming Śiva by taking on his lordly powers. Through 

10
Lord Śiva’s Song
meditative contact with Śiva, the Pāśupata yogi receives his powers, 
like a flame passed from candle to candle.
The Pāśupatas, like some of the later groups they influenced, 
introduce three ontological categories to explain the state of ­suffering 
experienced by most beings. The first category is pati, “master,” Lord 
Śiva himself. Śiva is the cause and creator of all beings. He is their 
protector, and it is he who is ultimately responsible for bondage and 
liberation. The paśu, or “beast,” refers to an individual self (jīvātman) 
who is bound to the cycle of death and rebirth, not yet liberated. 
Finally, the third category is the pāśa, “fetter.” It is through the fetters 
created by god that selves are bound to the cycle of suffering and 
rebirth. Yet it is also through the master that such beasts have their 
fetters removed. The wise know it is ultimately Lord Śiva’s grace 
(prasāda), and not the individual efforts of the yogi, that allows the 
individual to join the ranks of the siddhas, liberated beings who have 
permanently become free from suffering by means of Pāśupata yoga.29 
The playful image invoked through this trio of alliterative words—
pati, paśu, pāśa—is, of course, the nomadic life of the pastoral cattle-
herder. Śiva protects his herd of beasts (paśus) even as he keeps them 
in fetters (pāśas). But why does Śiva do any of this at all? What is 
the point of Śiva’s elaborate game in which some selves are bound 
in chains even as others are freed? Chapter seven of the Īśvara Gītā 
suggests that this is all part of god’s play (līlā):
All selves that undergo the cycle
of rebirth are called “beasts.”
I am god, their master. The wise
know me as the “master of beasts.”
In my play, I ensnare those beasts 
using the fetters of magical power.
Those who speak of the Veda call me
the one who frees the beasts.
There is no liberator of those 
ensnared in the fetters of magical power
other than me, the highest self,
the immortal ruler of beings.30
The Pāśupata Sūtras and their commentaries teach that the yogic 
adept (sādhaka) undertakes a vow that consists of three stages. In the 
first, the Pāśupata should live at or near a Śaiva temple, should bear 

11
Introduction
the mark of the Pāśupata ascetic by bathing in ash, and worship Śiva 
with song, dance, laughter, and mantra repetition.31 The initiate also 
adopts a set of moral precepts similar to those outlined in Patañjali’s 
Yoga Sūtras, including non-harming (ahiṃsā), celibacy (brahmacārya), 
and truthfulness (satya).32 The idea of yogis singing and dancing defies 
the common stereotype of yogis as solitary, stationary, and solely 
concerned with inward contemplation. Furthermore, these were not 
mere spontaneous gestures of devotion or simple oral folk traditions. 
Kauṇḍinya says that the singing of the Pāśupata yogi should be “in 
accord with the Gandharva Śāstra” and his dancing “in accord with 
the Nāṭya Śāstra,” presumably meaning the classic work composed 
by Bharata.33 Although these passages may force us to adjust our 
ideas of what is proper behavior for a yogi, on second thought it 
should be hardly surprising that medieval yogis would include train-
ing in dance as part of the path to union with Śiva. Śiva is famous 
as Nāṭarāja, “Lord of the Dance.” It is this form that is portrayed in 
the climactic fifth chapter of the Īśvara Gītā, when Śiva displays his 
wondrous dance in the sky above the Badarikā hermitage where the 
yogis are assembled.
The second of the three stages of the Pāśupata vow has attracted 
more attention than almost all other aspects of the Pāśupata path, 
as it involves transgressions of the normal conventions of society, 
reminiscent in some ways of the practice of shamelessness among 
the Cynics of ancient Greece.34 During this stage he discards the mark 
(liṅga) of the Pāśupata ascetic, and enters the public square snoring, 
trembling, limping, making obscene gestures to young women, and 
babbling as if drunk or insane.35 His goal in this practice is to purify 
himself by receiving the abuse of others. All these behaviors are an 
act, as he has not given up his previous vows of celibacy (brahmacarya) 
and mindfulness (apramāda). Instead, he engages in a different kind 
of spiritual exercise, one practiced only rarely by Śaiva ascetics today. 
Because one of the most powerful human motivations is to receive 
praise and avoid blame, by learning to “despise praise like a poison” 
and take pleasure in insult, the Pāśupata adept cuts off yet another 
tie that binds Hindus who remain in the first four stages of life.36 
These practices earned the Pāśupatas notoriety among other sects and 
philosophical traditions. In modern works on Indian philosophy and 
religion they are still mentioned more often for this than for their 
strict ethical precepts or theology of union with Śiva. In the third and 
final stage of the Pāśupata vow, the adept withdraws from society and 
moves into a vacant house or cave.37 Then, after six months of uninter-
rupted meditation on the syllable Oṃ and union with Śiva, he moves 
to a cremation ground.38 There he achieves complete union with Śiva, 

12
Lord Śiva’s Song
cutting off karma at its root. By the grace of Śiva, he achieves the end 
of suffering and eternal freedom.39
Mainstreaming Pāśupata Practice
Although in verse 11.67 the Īśvara Gītā describes its teachings as 
“Pāśupata Yoga,” many statements of the Īśvara Gītā appear to con-
tradict the teachings of the Pāśupata Sūtras (circa second century CE) 
and its commentary by Kauṇḍinya (circa fourth to sixth centuries CE). 
So, for instance, the Īśvara Gītā follows the Bhagavad Gītā in portray-
ing Sāṃkhya and Yoga teachings in a positive light. In chapter 11, the 
Īśvara Gītā presents the eight limbs of yoga in a way nearly identical 
to Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras, not mentioning important differences in the 
lists of restraints (yamas) and observances (niyamas) between Patañ-
jali’s Yoga and Pāśupata Yoga. By contrast, Kauṇḍinya’s commen-
tary on the Pāśupata Sūtras repeatedly rejects and criticizes Patañjali’s 
Yoga, describing it as “devoid of right knowledge” and describing the 
followers of Patañjali as “beasts” (paśus) who have not yet escaped 
from their bondage in the cycle of death and rebirth.40
Another feature of the Īśvara Gītā that may be confusing is its fre-
quent use of concepts familiar from Vedānta. In particular, the impor-
tant Vedāntic terms ātman (“self”) and brahman (“ultimate reality”) 
appear frequently. The Vedānta school of philosophy based itself on 
the systematic interpretation of the Upaniṣads, and the exploration of 
the relation between self and ultimate reality detailed there. But there 
is great variation in the interpretations of the different subschools 
of Vedānta, despite their common focus. The most well-known sub-
school of Vedānta in the modern period, Śaṅkara’s Advaita (nondual-
ist) Vedānta, taught that in ultimate truth brahman is beyond the gods, 
and completely without qualities (nirguṇa). Although devotion to god 
might have some limited benefits, according to Śaṅkara only knowl-
edge of the highest brahman without qualities leads to liberation.41 
However, other Vedāntins such as Rāmānuja and Śrīkaṇṭha were the-
ists who taught that references to brahman in the Upaniṣads were ref-
erences to an all-powerful personal god. According to Rāmānuja, that 
ultimate god is Viṣṇu, whereas Śrīkaṇṭha, a Śaiva, argued that Śiva is 
highest. Both the Īśvara Gītā and Bhagavad Gītā are generally more 
amenable to a theistic interpretation than to Śaṅkara’s non-theistic 
position, although Śaṅkara did in fact write a commentary on the 
Bhagavad Gītā.42 Some other concepts found in the Īśvara Gītā, such 
as the notion of the world as god’s play (līlā), are not found in the 
Pāśupata Sūtras but are similar to later theistic Vedānta.43

13
Introduction
A very important issue taken up by the Pāśupata Sūtras is the 
question of who has the qualification (adhikāra) to practice Pāśupata 
yoga. Although Kauṇḍinya understands only Brahmins to be quali-
fied, there is no stipulation in the Īśvara Gītā that the highest yoga 
is only open to Brahmins, nor is there any echo of the Pāśupata 
Sūtras’ prohibition from interacting with people of the servant class 
(śūdras) and women.44 Kauṇḍinya is aware that in the course of beg-
ging for alms, the Pāśupata mendicant will see and may even have 
to talk to śūdras and women. He therefore prescribes a purificatory 
ritual of bathing in ashes and breath exercises (prāṇayāma) that the 
Pāśupata yogi should practice whenever he sees urine, feces, a śūdra, 
or a woman. We can see from this that in spite of its influence on 
what would eventually become tantric Saivism, the Pāśupatas who 
followed Kauṇḍinya had drastically different attitudes to purity and 
pollution than did later tantric yogis. Kauṇḍinya’s commentary is also 
notoriously misogynistic. In his discussion of celibacy, he describes 
women as “poison,” and “the root of all evils.”45
The Īśvara Gītā, however, shows no such hostility toward śūdras 
and women. Although it tends to focus on the life of Brahmin male, 
as do most texts of its time period, it does not agree with Kauṇḍinya 
that only Brahmin men can achieve liberation through union with 
Lord Śiva. Here the Īśvara Gītā instead follows the Bhagavad Gītā’s 
lead in suggesting that by the grace of god, union with Śiva is also 
a possibility for the low born.46 In chapter 4 of the Īśvara Gītā, Lord 
Śiva says:
Virtuous brahmins, warriors,
and merchants worship me.
I grant them the state of bliss,
the supreme abode.
Even servants and others of low birth
who pursue forbidden occupations
are in time freed and joined to me 
if they are full of devotion.47
How can we account for the differences between the Īśvara Gītā’s 
portrayal of Pāśupata Yoga and the portrayal in the Pāśupata Sūtras? 
One intriguing possibility is that the Īśvara Gītā expressed a kind 
of “exoteric” or “mainstream” form of Pāśupatism.48 Although the 
Īśvara Gītā repeats again and again the idea that its ideas are secret 
and should only be shared with a select few, in practice this was not 

14
Lord Śiva’s Song
the case. In contrast to the Pāśupata Sūtras, the Īśvara Gītā was a 
part of the popular Kūrma Purāṇa, and as a result would have had 
a wide readership of many different types of Hindus, not only Śiva 
worshippers. If the Īśvara Gītā was indeed a later insertion into the 
Kūrma Purāṇa, a text originally affiliated with Vaiṣṇavaism, the Īśvara 
Gītā may have been one of several attempts throughout the Purāṇas 
to “mainstream” Pāśupatism by portraying it in a sympathetic and 
relatively sectarian-neutral light. This also would account for the fre-
quency of Vedāntic, Sāṃkhya, and Pātañjala themes in the Īśvara Gītā 
less common in the Pāśupata Sūtras and their commentaries.
However, it is also clear that not all of the authors of various 
sections of the Kūrma Purāṇa had a positive attitude toward the 
Pāśupatas. Looking at the different parts that make up the Kūrma 
Purāṇa, the Pāśupatas are more often celebrated than criticized. Some 
of the criticisms in the text, however, are severe. For instance, in the 
section that comes directly after the Īśvara Gītā, a treatise on the 
dharma of the householder called the “Song of Vyāsa” (Vyāsa Gītā), 
the sage Vyāsa reviles Pāśupatas and two other sects:
Do not interact, even just in speech,
with the heretics who engage in wrong action:
Tantrics of the left-hand,
Pañcarātras, and Pāśupatas.49 
Elsewhere in the Vyāsa Gītā, Pāśupatas are classified as heretics 
(pāṣaṇḍas) alongside Buddhists, Jains, Pañcarātras, and Kāpālikas. In 
that section, Vyāsa warns that anyone who consorts with such people 
will not be able to successfully perform the ancestral (śrāddha) rites.50 
It is clear that the Pāśupata sect suffered from an image problem in 
early medieval India. This problem was especially actute among smar-
ta Brahmin householders concerned with upholding the ritual order of 
their forefathers, which had come under attack by the Buddhist, Jain, 
and Hindu renouncers. It is therefore especially notable that the Īśvara 
Gītā moderates the Pāśupatas’ hard-line stance against the ritual sac-
rifice of animals. Like Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras, the Pāśupata Sūtras 
maintained a strict adherence to non-harming (ahiṃsā) in all situa-
tions, even when the Vedas explicitly demand performance of animal 
sacrifice. For Vedic traditions, this was among the most threatening 
of the yogis’ teachings.51 However, the Īśvara Gītā contains a subtle 
and important re-definition of the concept of non-harming (ahiṃsā):
The great sages define non-harming
as not causing pain to any living

15
Introduction
being anywhere, whether through
physical action, thoughts, or speech.
There is no dharma higher than non-harming.
It is the greatest happiness. But harming
when following scripture’s injunction 
should be considered non-harming.52
This conciliatory attitude, mostly absent in the Pāśupata Sūtras 
and Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras, shows willingness to compromise on ques-
tions that many yogis would have considered non-negotiable.53 This 
proviso in the Īśvara Gītā may well have been inspired by a famous 
verse from the Laws of Manu, where Manu teaches that “when hiṃsā 
is sanctioned by the Veda and well established in this mobile and 
immobile creation, it should be regarded definitely as ahiṃsā; for it is 
from the Veda that the Law has shined forth.”54 Although everyday 
acts of violence, such as hunting animals for a meal, would still have 
violated this revised understanding of the teaching of non-harming, it 
allowed Vedic ritualists to continue to pursue their animal sacrifices 
without the taint of demerit. This concern for rapprochement between 
Pāśupata Yoga and Vedic sacrificial traditions, largely absent from 
Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the Pāśupata Sūtras, is a remarkable 
feature of the exoteric Pāśupata teachings of the Īśvara Gītā.
The Yoga of the Pāśupatas
At the beginning of chapter 11 of the Īśvara Gītā, Lord Śiva pres-
ents two different kinds of yoga, one called “the yoga of non-being” 
(abhāva-yoga), the other “the great yoga” (mahā-yoga):
Those who are yoked to this yoga on me,
whether once daily, twice daily,
three times daily, or all the time,
should be known as the “great lords.”
But yoga is known to be of two kinds.
The first is considered the yoga
of non-being. The other is the 
great yoga, the very best of all yogas.
The yoga in which one’s own essence 
is known to be empty, free from all

16
Lord Śiva’s Song
false appearances, is named the yoga
of non-being. Through it, one sees the self.
The yoga in which one discerns the self 
as eternally blissful, free from blemish,
and united with me is called
the great yoga of the supreme lord.55
Despite the use of the word “empty” (śūnya), the “yoga of non-
being” described here is not Buddhist yoga.56 Rather, it refers to ces-
sative yogas such as Patañjali’s that do not understand the ultimate 
state of liberation as union with a supreme deity or ultimate reality. 
By means of the cessation (nirodha) of mental activity, such yogas 
enable the practitioner to discern the existence of a pure, eternal self 
free from the world of matter (prakṛti). This yoga of non-being does 
not, however, reveal the self’s unity with Lord Śiva. It is useful as a 
means to discriminate between the true, eternal self and the egoistic 
self that is subject to change, a preparatory practice for liberation. 
But it is powerless to move the yogi from this dualistic discernment 
of the self’s ontological difference from material nature to the higher 
knowledge of the self’s oneness with God.57
This distinction between the two yogas is reminiscent of anoth-
er Pāśupata text, Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the Pāśupata Sūtras. 
There too, the Sāṃkhya-influenced Yoga philosophy of Patañjali is 
mentioned and given lower status than the yoga of the Pāśupatas. 
But the way the Īśvara Gītā and Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the 
Pāśupata Sūtras present issues of ritual and doctrinal diversity is dif-
ferent. The Īśvara Gītā emphasizes the preliminary value of the yoga 
of non-being, the cessative approach to yoga. By contrast, Kauṇḍinya 
repeatedly belittles followers of Patañjali. He writes, “those who have 
won [supposed] release through Sāṃkhya-Yoga, indeed all creatures 
from Brahmā down to the animals, are considered ‘beasts.’ ”58 Here 
Kauṇḍinya uses the word paśu, “beast,” in its technical sense, referring 
to any self in bondage who has yet to be liberated. Although follow-
ers of Patañjali argue otherwise, they cannot truly be liberated unless 
they recognize their fundamental unity with God. Hence, Kauṇḍinya 
calls them “beasts.” The Īśvara Gītā, however, does not dwell on this 
deficiency, simply presenting the yoga of non-being as a preparatory 
practice to the great yoga, the yoga of the Pāśupatas. 
After chapter 11 introduces the distinction between the two yogas, 
it subsequently presents a fusion of Pāśupata and Pātañjala Yoga tra-
ditions. The most obvious borrowing from Patañjali is the text’s adop-
tion of his “eight limbs” (aṣṭāṅga) of Yoga. The Pāśupata Sūtras in fact 

17
Introduction
have a different way of enumerating the path of yoga, which includes 
five categories (arthas), ten abstentions (yamas), and ten observances 
(niyamas).59 This contrasts with the five abstentions and five obser-
vances presented in the Yoga Sūtras. Īśvara Gītā verses 11.11 to 11.45 
present a fairly straightforward summary of Patañjali’s eight limbs. 
Yet at this section’s beginning, in its definition of the word yoga, it 
both alludes to and rejects Patañjali’s understanding of yoga as “ces-
sation of mental activity” (citta-vṛtti-nirodha). Here is how Lord Śiva 
begins his account of the eight limbs in the Īśvara Gītā:
Breath control, meditation, 
sense withdrawal, concentration, 
absorption, abstentions, observances, 
and posture—Best of sages,
yoga is the one-pointed focus
of the mind on me through suppression
of other mental activity.
I have just told you its eight means.60
After enumerating the eight limbs of yoga, Lord Śiva here gives 
a definition of yoga that is both an allusion to and a departure from 
Patañjali’s famous sūtra 1.2: “Yoga is the suppression of mental activ-
ity” (yogaś citta-vṛtti-nirodhaḥ). According to the Īśvara Gītā, the cessa-
tion of mental activity described by Patañjali is incomplete by itself, 
a mere means to the highest absorption in the Lord. This is accom-
plished by one-pointed mental focus (eka-cittatā) on Lord Śiva. Of 
course, meditation on the Lord does have some role to play in Patañ­
jali’s yoga as well: Called īśvara-praṇidhāna, it is classified as one of 
the five observances, or niyamas, in his scheme. As such is it is one 
of the preliminary practices that eventually lead to the higher forms 
of meditation and eventually to the transcendent state of aloneness 
(kaivalya). But for the Īśvara Gītā, mental focus on Lord Śiva is the 
highest yoga, whereas the Pātañjala Yoga’s highest samādhi occupies 
a lower rung in the hierarchy of yogas.
Another piece of evidence suggesting that the Īśvara Gītā sought 
to present the Pāśupata Yoga in a positive light, minus any doctrines 
or practice that may have alienated the Purāṇas’ wider audience, is 
the lack of mention of the practices of the second stage of the Pāśupata 
vow. Feigning madness in public and making lewd gestures were 
not standard practices for most renouncers in premodern India, and 
would have been difficult to explain to an audience without any par-
ticular knowledge of or allegiance to Pāśupatism. This second stage, 

18
Lord Śiva’s Song
and the rationale behind it, goes entirely unmentioned in the Īśvara 
Gītā. Instead the yoga path described hews closely to the eightfold 
path of Patañjali, but with a new Śiva-centric attitude. Although 
Patañ­jali lists “meditation on the lord” (īśvara-praṇidhāna) among the 
five observances (niyamas), the precise identity of the lord, and the 
precise meaning of the word praṇidhāna, have been open to multiple 
interpretations. It may even be argued that Patañjali was purposefully 
vague, refusing to identify “the lord” explicitly with Viṣṇu or Śiva, in 
order to avoid alienating any of his potential audience.61 By contrast, 
the Īśvara Gītā is quite clear in its identification of Śiva as the lord. 
Instead of using Patañjali’s ambiguous word praṇidhāna to describe 
this observance, it uses the term īśvara-pūjana, worship of Lord Śiva.
Above all, the special mark of Pāśupata practice was the smearing 
of ashes on the body. Although it is not discussed at length in the 
Īśvara Gītā, this remarkable practice is at least mentioned. It comes 
at the end of the description of a series of visualization exercises 
performed by the Pāśupata Yogi. These are what the Īśvara Gītā 
describes as the “great yoga” (mahā-yoga). It is the type of yoga that 
goes beyond the preparatory practice of “the yoga of non-being” 
(abhāva-yoga) exemplified by Patañjali and other yogis who present 
cessation (nirodha) of mental activity as the ultimate form of yoga. 
The exercises of the “great yoga” facilitate the yogi’s identification 
with Lord Śiva until union (saṃyoga) is achieved:
Binding himself in the svastika,
lotus, or half posture, his gaze
resting evenly on the tip of his nose,
with eyes slightly open,
calm and free from fear, he renounces
this world consisting of magical power. 
He concentrates on the supreme lord, 
the god who resides in his own self. 
He then visualizes a lotus twelve
fingers long on the tip of his topknot. 
It is beautiful, blooming from the bulb
that is dharma. Its stalk is knowledge,
the lordly powers its eight petals.
It is completely white. Renunciation
is its seed-cup. In that seed-cup he should 
visualize a sublime golden treasure.

19
Introduction
Consisting of all of the powers, 
directly they call it Oṃ, the divine,
eternal syllable, the unmanifest,
surrounded by a network of rays.
There he should think of 
a pure, supreme, eternal light.
In that light he places his own self,
which is identical to it.
He meditates on the lord, highest cause, 
standing in the middle of space.
At last, becoming the all-pervading 
lord himself, he visualizes nothing.62
This practice is not just a mental exercise by which the yogi visu-
alizes himself “as if” he were Lord Śiva. Rather, it is a transformative 
practice through which the yogi becomes the Lord. Throughout the 
Īśvara Gītā, accomplished yogis are called “Lords” (īśvaras), “Great 
Lords,” (maheśvaras) or “Lords of Yoga” (yogeśvaras). It is sometimes 
unclear when the word “lord” (īśvara) is used if it is Lord Śiva or 
one of his Pāśupata followers who is meant. This ambiguity serves 
a purpose. It reinforces the central metaphysical assertion of the 
Pāśupata philosophy: At the highest level of yogic absorption, the 
difference between the meditating subject and the object of his medita-
tion dissolves. The Īśvara Gītā’s “one-pointed mental focus” on Śiva 
is ultimately the same as the “union of the individual self with the 
Lord” (ātmeśvara-saṃyoga) described in Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on 
the Pāśupata Sūtras.
After detailing three visualization exercises, the Īśvara Gītā pro-
claims, “This Pāśupata yoga is for the liberation of creatures from 
their fetters. The Vedas declare it the essence of all the Upaniṣads, 
transcending the stages of life.”63 At this point, it is as if the authors 
of the Īśvara Gītā realize that they have gone too far, revealed too 
much, departed too drastically from the paradigm of the Bhagavad 
Gītā. For following this is a series of verses that borrow themes from 
the Bhagavad Gītā, in some cases in word-for-word imitation. These 
fifteen verses focus primarily on two themes: devotion to god (bhakti) 
and abandonment of the fruits of actions (phala-tyāga). Although the 
theme of devotion recurs throughout the Īśvara Gītā (and, of course, 
is a major theme of virtually all the Purāṇas), the theme of abandon-
ment of fruits is relatively uncommon in the Īśvara Gītā. This is one 
of the major differences between the Īśvara Gītā and Bhagavad Gītā. 

20
Lord Śiva’s Song
The authors of the Bhagavad Gītā redefined the meaning of renuncia-
tion to make sense in Arjuna’s warrior milieu: Renunciation means 
renunciation of fruits, not renunciation of actions themselves. How-
ever, the Īśvara Gītā is ambiguous about which type of renunciation 
is preferable. Often, it preaches renunciation of all worldly activities, 
echoing Patañjali’s teaching of celibacy (brahmacarya), austerity (tapas), 
and non-acquisition (aparigraha) in the first two limbs (aṅgas) of the 
Yoga Sūtra’s eight-limbed yoga.
Unity and Diversity Among the Gods
As in the Bhagavad Gītā, another central concern of the Īśvara Gītā is 
to establish the ultimate unity of the gods. The Īśvara Gītā is primar-
ily concerned with two: Śiva and Nārāyaṇa (also known as Viṣṇu). 
Nārāyaṇa, present from the very first chapter of the Īśvara Gītā, gives 
a kind of warm-up act before Śiva appears and begins his discourse 
to the sages. After Śiva’s arrival, Nārāyaṇa sits beside Śiva admiringly 
and listens to his teaching. Near the end of the Īśvara Gītā’s final 
chapter, Śiva finally explains that he and Nārāyaṇa are one. There 
is no possibility of liberation for those who shun his divine friend:
Those people go to terrible hells 
who see me otherwise, 
thinking that he and I are different gods.
I do not abide in them.
I liberate those who take refuge in me:
the fool and the scholar, 
the Brahmin and the dog-cooker, 
but not one who reviles Nārāyaṇa.
Therefore, to give me pleasure,
my devotees should 
praise him and bow to him, 
the highest spirit, the great yogi.64
These are the last words that Lord Śiva utters in the Īśvara Gītā. 
After Śiva departs, Nārāyaṇa says a few words of praise for Śiva, 
and then he too leaves the audience of sages. Here we see a concern 
to justify another apparent departure from the Bhagavad Gītā, the 
shift from understanding Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu as the highest god to the 
portrayal of Lord Śiva as supreme.65 Through Śiva’s insistence that 
he and Nārāyaṇa are one, the text attempts to preempt objections 

21
Introduction
from worshippers of Nārāyaṇa. This is not unlike the strategies in 
the Bhagavad Gītā itself, which subordinates all other gods to Kṛṣṇa, 
the god of gods (devadeva). Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate recipient of all other 
gods’ sacrifices:
When devoted men sacrifice
to other deities with faith,
they sacrifice to me, Arjuna,
however aberrant the rites.
I am the enjoyer
and the lord of all sacrifices;
they do not know me in reality,
and so they fail.66
Of course, Śaivas can employ the same strategy with regard to 
Viṣṇu and his incarnations. Chapter 11 the Īśvara Gītā does this, 
drawing upon the language of the above verses from the Bhagavad  
Gītā:
Those who sacrifice to other deities
for the enjoyment of pleasure
receive fruits according to those deities.
This much should be known.
But if people who are devoted 
to other deities sacrifice to them 
knowing them to be the same as me,
they too are actually freed.
So when someone completely abandons
other gods who are not the lord
and takes refuge in me, the lord,
one goes to the highest abode.67
There can be little doubt that the Īśvara Gītā borrows from the 
Bhagavad Gītā. But why does it do so? We should first dismiss the 
idea that its authors were lazy, unoriginal, or suffering from writer’s 
block. It is more likely that the opposite is the case—certain parts of 
the Īśvara Gītā seem too original, seem to introduce ideas concerning 
yogic visualization exercises and worship of the Śiva liṅga that are 
too different from the Bhagavad Gītā. The authors of the Īśvara Gītā 

22
Lord Śiva’s Song
follow such novel sections with themes that every intelligent person 
will know immediately to be the same as the Bhagavad Gītā. These 
sections enhance the text’s authority by showing that, in spite of the 
apparent novelty of some of the Īśvara Gītā’s teachings, the two texts 
are in basic agreement in their major themes. 
In the past ten years, historians of Indian religions have paid new 
attention to the early Śaiva sects, among them the Pāśupatas. One 
fact has become increasingly clear: The teachings of the Pāśupatas, 
the first recorded and most widespread of the Śaiva sects in ancient 
India, cannot simply be reduced to the teachings of the Pāśupata 
Sūtras, as some earlier scholars were wont to do. Recent work on an 
even earlier Pāśupata Purāṇa, the Skanda Purāṇa, has suggested that 
the differences between the rigid casteism and sexism of Kauṇḍinya’s 
commentary on the Pāśupata Sūtras and the relative openness of the 
Pāśupata ideas expressed in the Purāṇas can be better understood 
by looking at the social and political history of the first millennium 
in India.68 For example, it was the Pāśupatas who, between the third 
and sixth centuries CE, brought the worship of Śiva to Vārāṇasī, 
a city now famous as the holiest city for Śiva worshippers across 
India. In this second phase of Pāśupatism after the composition of the 
Pāśupata Sūtras, members of this group received considerable royal 
patronage and actively recruited lay supporters. Mendicant ascetics, 
such as Buddhist, Jain, and Pāśupata monks, required an outside 
source of food and material support, as their own codes of conduct 
prevented them from farming and most types of business.69 Similar 
to the symbiotic relationship between early Buddhist monks and lay 
Buddhists, the Pāśupatas established a foothold as priests in temples 
across India, supported by lay devotees who sought Lord Śiva’s grace 
and his aid in dealing with their everyday concerns. In the Pāśupatas’ 
movement from the periphery to the mainstream of religious life 
in first millennium India, they let go of some of the extreme and 
forbidding aspects of the path described by Kauṇḍinya, such as the 
prohibition against talking to women and śūdras. A kinder, gentler 
Pāśupata teaching was born, and the Īśvara Gītā is perhaps its most 
famous exemplar.
However, not everyone accepted the movement from the periph-
ery to the mainstream of these dreadlocked, ash-smeared yogis. This 
conflict is reflected in those other parts of the Purāṇas where Pāśupatas 
are shunned as dangerous heretics of the same sort as Buddhists and 
Jains. Members of established sects that understood Viṣṇu, not Śiva, to 
be the supreme god were not swayed by the inclusivism of the Īśvara 
Gītā. Although the new Pāśupata attitude in the Purāṇas of emphasiz-
ing the value rather than the deficiencies of Vaiṣṇava and Pātañjala 

23
Introduction
Yoga teachings is a departure from the harsh rhetoric of the Pāśupata 
Sūtras, the Īśvara Gītā too teaches that ultimately all liberation occurs 
by the grace of Śiva. But eventually, by the mid-second millennium of 
the Common Era, such disputes were “ancient history,” so to speak. 
Late medieval Vaiṣṇava interpreters of the Purāṇas were willing to 
accept the teachings of the Īśvara Gītā, declaring them the same in 
essence as the Bhagavad Gītā. The attempt of the Īśvara Gītā’s authors 
to downplay the more extreme and challenging aspects of their sect’s 
history had basically succeeded. As a result the Īśvara Gītā became a 
text widely accepted and commented on by non-Śaiva authors. The 
Pāśupatas went from being one of the most reviled sects to being iden-
tified as one of the established āstika, or “affirmer,” schools.70 Today, 
when the Pāśupatas are remembered at all, they are remembered as 
just one colorful tile in the brilliant mosaic of Hinduism. 
Notes on Translation
The Sanskrit language presents special challenges for a translator. Like 
Greek and Latin, it is an inflected language, so the order of words in 
Sanskrit is much less important to the meaning of a sentence than in 
English. There also are no rules in Sanskrit about “run-on sentences.” 
As a result, a single sentence might go on for many pages, and a 
translator from Sanskrit into English often will have little choice but 
to break up a single sentence into several in English. Another issue 
is that for many Sanskrit words there is no single equivalent in Eng-
lish. Just as there is no single English word available to translate the 
German word Schadenfreude (“happiness at the misfortune of anoth-
er”), Sanskrit is full of compound words that elude every attempt 
at a single-word English translation. I have done my best to seek a 
middle path between the type of extremely literal translation favored 
by specialists, which is often incomprehensible to an English reader 
without knowledge of Sanskrit, and a translation that so emphasizes 
readability in American English that the original meaning of the text 
is distorted beyond recognition.
The format of the Īśvara Gītā and similar works such as the 
Bhagavad Gītā and the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad may initially appear 
so foreign that it does not seem to qualify as what we think of as 
a “philosophical text.” Although it may seem strange to Westerners, 
the idea of a fundamental division between philosophers and poets 
is seldom found in premodern India. Instead, major philosophers 
like Śaṅkara and Rāmānuja also were celebrated for their poetry. 
The Īśvara Gītā is a philosophical poem composed in two different 
meters. The most common is a meter containing four quarters of eight 

24
Lord Śiva’s Song
­syllables each, for a total of thirty-two syllables per stanza. This meter, 
known as the anuṣṭubh, is the most common in classical Sanskrit. The 
other meter used by the Īśvara Gītā is the longer triṣṭubh, four quar-
ters of eleven syllables for a total of forty-four syllables. The triṣṭubh 
is sometimes used to give a sense of heightened intensity. It is used 
in the Bhagavad Gītā in the climactic eleventh chapter where Kṛṣṇa 
gives Arjuna a vision of his absolute form, and similarly in chapter 
5 of the Īśvara Gītā to depict Śiva’s dance of cosmic creation and 
destruction.71 I have chosen to adhere to a few metrical contraints in 
my translation of the Īśvara Gītā. I translate the anuṣṭubh sections into 
four-line stanzas containing four to twelve syllables per line. For the 
triṣṭubh verses of the Īśvara Gītā, I use eight-line stanzas of no more 
than nine syllables per line.72 I hope that this alternation between 
four- and eight-line stanzas will give the reader a feel for the original 
Sanskrit meter without being unnecessarily distracting.
I have tried to be consistent in the way I translate Sanskrit philo-
sophical and religious terms into English without being too mechani-
cal. However, certain Sanskrit words, such as dharma and yoga, are just 
too complex and multifaceted to be successfully translated. I have left 
such words in the original Sanskrit, usually with a note in my com-
mentary explaining how the term should be understood in its specific 
context. For the Pāśupata sect, the most important meaning of yoga 
is “union” of the self with Lord Śiva. Yet the Īśvara Gīta uses yoga in 
many other ways as well. For instance, it enumerates four different 
yogas (“spiritual paths”): bhakti-yoga (the yoga of devotion), karma-yoga 
(the yoga of action), jñāna-yoga (the yoga of wisdom), and dhyāna-yoga 
(the yoga of mental concentration).73 I have made the choice not to 
use consistently gender-neutral language in this translation. With few 
exceptions, Sanskrit texts in premodern India were composed by men 
and intended primarily for their eyes and ears. The quintessential 
practitioner of yoga in the eighth century CE was male. However, 
unlike the Pāśupata Sūtras, the Īśvara Gītā nowhere expressly forbids 
women from the practice of yoga.74
Coming after the translation of the Īśvara Gītā in this book are 
commentarial notes explaining the ideas and language in many of 
the verses; the transliterated Sanskrit text of the Īśvara Gītā; a list 
of concordances noting parallel verses from the Bhagavad Gītā and 
Upaniṣads; and a glossary of Sanskrit terms and proper nouns. The 
edition of the Sanskrit text presented here is based on the critical 
edition published by the All-India Kashiraj Trust, with minor emen-
dations.75 Whatever readers’ motivations for picking up this book, 
whether it be spiritual illumination, intellectual curiosity, or some-

25
Introduction
thing else entirely, I hope they find what they seek in the Īśvara Gītā, 
Lord Śiva’s Song.
Guide to Sanskrit Pronounciation
This guide to the sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet gives approxi-
mate American English equivalents. For more on Sanskrit phonol-
ogy, readers may consult Robert Goldman and Sally Sutherland’s 
Devavāṇīpraveśikā: An Introduction to the Sanskrit Language. (Berkeley: 
Center for South Asia Studies, 1999.)
Sanskrit Letter as in English 
a 	 but
ā 	 father
i 	 sit
ī 	 machine
u 	 put
ū 	 tuba
ṛ 	 bitter
ḷ 	 little
e 	 gate
ai 	aisle
o 	 slow
au 	cow
k 	 kite
g 	 goat
ṅ 	 sing
c 	 chill (not as in care or receive)
j 	 jury
ñ 	 canyon
ṭ 	 hit (tongue touching roof of mouth)
ḍ 	 hid (tongue touching roof of mouth)
ṇ 	 fin (tongue touching roof of mouth)
t 	 ten (tongue touching teeth)
d 	 dog (tongue touching teeth)
n	 new (tongue touching teeth)
p 	 pit
b 	 ball
m 	mattress
y 	 yellow
r 	 record (lightly trilled)

26
Lord Śiva’s Song
l 	 leopard
v 	 very (almost sounds like w as in wall)
ś 	 sharp
ṣ 	 fish (tongue touching roof of mouth)
h 	 have
kh, gh, ch, jh, ṭh, ḍh, th, dh, ph, bh aspirated consonants, as in thick-
head, jughead, hothouse, uphill, etc. (not as in with, phone)
Suggestions for Further Reading
Brown, C. Mackenzie (ed. and tr.) (1998). The Devi Gita: The Song of the God-
dess. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Bryant, Edwin F. (ed. and tr.) (2009). The Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali. New York: 
North Point Press.
Davis, Richard H. (1991). Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshiping Śiva in 
Medieval India. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Dimmitt, Cornelia and J.A.B. van Buitenen (ed. and tr.) (1978). Classical Hindu 
Mythology: A Reader in the Sanskrit Purāṇas. Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press.
Flood, Gavin (ed.) (2003). The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Maldon, MA: 
Blackwell Publishing.
King, Richard (1999). Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu and Buddhist 
Thought. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Olivelle, Patrick (ed. and tr.) (1996). Upaniṣads. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Patton, Laurie L. (ed. and tr.) (2008). The Bhagavad Gita. New York: Penguin.
White, David Gordon (ed.) (2012). Yoga in Practice. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Notes
  1. For Patañjali, the highest stage of yoga is “absorption without sup-
port” (asaṃprajñāta samādhi), a type of meditation that does not take god as 
its focus (see Bryant 2009:70–2). By contrast, the Īśvara Gītā teaches that the 
highest yoga, beyond asaṃprajñāta samādhi, is absorption in Śiva.
  2. The Bhagavad Gītā was composed between approximately the second 
century BCE and the second century CE (see Flood 1996:107, 123–7). The 
Kūrma Purāṇa, of which the Īśvara Gītā is a part, was composed around the 
eighth century CE (see Rocher 1986:184–6).
  3. For instance, Bhagavad Gītā 13.13 is identical to Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 
3.16. This same verse also appears at Īśvara Gītā 3.2: “It dwells in the world, 
enveloping everything, hands and feet everywhere, eyes, head, face, and ears 
everywhere.” Part of this Upaniṣad’s importance is that it foreshadows the 
type of inclusive monotheism that would become so prevalent in medieval 
Vaiṣṇava, Śaiva, and Śākta (Goddess-worship) traditions. For more on the 
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad, see Olivelle (1996:253–65).

27
Introduction
  4. For selected translations of some of the most important and influential 
sections of the Purāṇas, see Dimmitt and van Buitenen (1978).
  5. Hindus who see Viṣṇu as supreme are known as Vaiṣṇavas, and 
those who understand Śakti (the Goddess) as supreme are known in Sanskrit 
as Śāktas. The Bhagavad Gītā, for instance, is understood as a Vaiṣṇava text 
insofar as Kṛṣṇa is understood by many as an incarnation (avatara) of Viṣṇu.
  6. The 16th-century philosopher Vijñānabhikṣu suggests that because he 
has already written a commentary on the Īśvara Gītā, it would be redundant 
to write another on the Bhagavad Gītā. See Nicholson (2010:75).
  7. Gandhi suggested that the poet who composed the Bhagavad Gītā 
did not see the “great consequences” of his own philosophical teachings. It 
was because of this that the Bhagavad Gītā appears to accept the violence 
of war (Gandhi 1965:49).
  8. See Malinar (2009:54–225) for one recent theory of the “layers” of 
authorship in the Bhagavad Gītā.
  9. Edgerton (1934:306).
10. Upadhyaya (2008: 521–3).
11. Ibid., 512.
12. For more on the Purāṇas’ place in Indian religious history, see Doni-
ger (1993).
13. Nilakantan (1989) counts at least twenty-six Gītās in the Mahābhārata 
and the Purāṇas.
14. The Devī Gītā (“Song of the Goddess”) is a Gītā text that shows the 
influence of tantric concepts. See Brown (1998:1–29). 
15. The word māyā appears five times in the Bhagavad Gītā (BhG 4.6, 
7.14, 7.15, 7.25, 18.61). It is interesting to note that the word māyā does not 
appear in the Pāśupata Sūtras, though it does occur in other Śaiva philoso-
phies, such as that of Śrīkaṇṭha (see Dasgupta 1975:65–129).
16. Miller (1986:121).
17. Īśvara Gītā 8.3, 8.7, 8.8. On the idea of māyā as a feminine force, 
see Pintchman (1994:198–200). On the androgynous form of Śiva known as 
Ardhanarīśvara (“The lord who is half woman”), see Goldberg (2002).
18. On the Bhagavad Gītā’s influence on modern Hindu thinkers, see 
Minor (1986).
19. For more information on the renouncer perspective see Olivelle 
(1992:19–58).
20. It is important to note that the Bhagavad Gītā and Īśvara Gītā accept 
some of the traditional distinctions between classes (varṇas), for instance by 
describing the different livelihoods appropriate to the different varṇas (at 
Bhagavad Gītā 18.41–7).
21. The Īśvara Gītā follows closely the eight-limbed yoga scheme pre-
sented by Patañjali, in which celibacy (brahmacarya), non-acquisition (apari-
graha), and non-harming (ahiṃsā) are among the “restraints,” the first and 
most fundamental of the eight limbs. But such restraints are contrary to the 
pursuits of the traditional Brahmin priest, who was enjoined by the Vedas to 
father children, accumulate wealth, and engage in sacrifices that sometimes 
involved the killing of animals (see Bryant 2009:242–52).

28
Lord Śiva’s Song
22. Īśvara Gītā verse 1.27.
23. Bhagavad Gītā verses 6.10–14 discuss practical aspects of yoga.
24. The Mahābhārata classifies the Pāśupata doctrine as one of the “knowl-
edges,” along with “the Vedas” (vedāḥ), Sāṃkhya-Yoga, and Pañcarātra (see 
Dyczkowski 1988:19).
25. For instance, the Mīmāṃsā ritual theorist Kumārila Bhaṭṭa lists the 
Pāśupatas alongside Buddhists and Jains as a group whose teachings on 
dharma are unreliable (Hara 2002:18).
26. See Dyczkowski (1988:24).
27. Kauṇḍinya prescribes a purificatory ritual of bathing in ashes and 
breath exercises (prāṇayāma) that the Pāśupata yogi should practice when-
ever he sees urine, feces, a śūdra, or a woman (commentary on Pāśupata 
Sūtra 1.13; Chakraborti 1970:78–9). Kauṇḍinya’s commentary is notoriously 
misogynistic. In the context of his discussion of celibacy, he describes women 
as “poison,” and “the root of all evils” (commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.9; 
Chakraborti 1970:66). Mark Dyczkowski notes that there is evidence of some 
Kṣatriyas being initiated into Pāśupatism; it is not clear how seriously to take 
Kauṇḍinya’s insistence that only Brahmins can be Pāśupatas (Dyczkowski 
1988:24).
28. See Sanderson (2005:158). This is expressed even more directly at 
Īśvara Gītā 11.67, which says that Pāśupata yoga is “beyond the stages of 
life” (atyāśrama).
29. See Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.1 for a concise 
summary of Pāśupata theology (Chakraborti 1970:50–5).
30. Īśvara Gīta 7.18–20. It is remarkable that the idea of god’s play (līlā), 
so common throughout the Purāṇas, does not appear in Pāśupata Sūtras or 
Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on that text.
31. On the three stages of Pāśupata practice, see Flood (2003:207). 
32. In conscious contradiction of Patañjali, Kauṇḍinya introduces ten 
restraints (yamas) for the Pāśupatas: non-harming (ahiṃsā), celibacy (brah-
macarya), truthfulness (satya), non-transaction (asaṃvyavahāra), non-stealing 
(asteya), non-anger (akrodha), obedience to the teacher (guru-śuśrūṣā), purity 
(śauca), moderation in diet (āhāra-lāghava), and mindfulness (apramāda) (see 
Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.9; Chakraborti 1970:61–77). 
This may be compared to the five restraints enumerated in Patañjali’s Yoga 
Sūtra 2.30 (Bryant 2009:242–52). Just as the Pāśupata Sūtra presents itself as 
a fifth stage of life beyond the four stages of mainstream Hindu legal texts, 
it presents its ten restraints (yamas) and ten observances (niyamas) as going 
beyond the Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali.
33. See Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.8 (Chakraborti 
1970:60). On the Pāśupatas and dance, see Smith (2008:125–6) and Davidson 
(2002:223). Davidson also claims, “the Pāśupatas are the probable source for 
the employment of song and dance in the Buddhist forms of worship, which 
is ubiquitous in yoginī-tantra literature” (Ibid.).
34. See Ingalls (1962) and Hulin (1993). The ancient Cynics were said 
to live a simple life like that of a dog (the word “Cynic” may have come 
from the Greek word kunikos, meaning “dog-like”). Similarly, Pāśupatas are 

29
Introduction
instructed to have “the nature of a cow or a deer,” because such animals were 
thought to have a high tolerance for physical and mental distress (Pāśupata 
Sūtra 5.18; Chakraborti 1970:165).
35. See Pāśupata Sūtras 3.12–17 (Chakraborti 1970:128–32).
36. See Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 3.3 (Chakraborti 
1970:123).
37. Pāśupata Sūtra 5.9.
38. Ibid., 5.30.
39. Ibid., 5.39–40.
40. “Those who have won [supposed] release through Sāṃkhya-Yoga, 
indeed all creatures from Brahman down to the animals, are considered 
‘beasts.’ ” (commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.1; Sastri 1940:5). Note that the 
meanings of the terms sāṃkhya and yoga are different in the Bhagavad Gītā 
than in the Pāśupata Sūtras and the Īśvara Gītā (see Malinar 2009:70–79, 
Nicholson 2010:70–72).
41. For more on Advaita Vedānta’s concept of nirguṇa brahman and its 
non-theistic philosophical position, see King (1999:213–6). It is important to 
note that the terms nirguṇa (“without qualities”) and saguṇa (“with quali-
ties”) do not refer to the three guṇas of the Sāṃkhya philosophical tradition.
42. For those verses that appear to indicate that brahman is not beyond 
the gods, as when Kṛṣṇa describes himself as the “foundation” (pratiṣṭhā) of 
brahman at Bhagavad Gītā 14.27, Śaṅkara argues that the text must be read 
figuratively, rather than literally (see Gambhirananda 2006:589–90).
43. In many cases, the theistic Vedāntins were themselves influenced by 
Purāṇic sources such as the Īśvara Gītā, leading to a confluence of Vedanta 
and devotion (bhakti) not found among earlier Vedāntic commentators. For 
more on Rāmānuja’s Vaiṣṇava interpretation of Vedānta see King (1999:221–
8). On Śrīkaṇṭha’s Śaiva commentary on the Brahma Sūtras, see Dasgupta 
(1975:65–95).
44. See Pāśupata Sūtra 1.13 (Chakraborti 1970:78).
45. See commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.9 (Chakraborti 1970:66).
46. Īśvara Gītā 4.10–11, 11.104; Bhagavad Gītā 9.32.
47. Īśvara Gītā 4.10–11.
48. It is due to such discrepancies in Pāśupata texts that Dyczkowski 
suggests, “we must clearly distinguish between two basic types of Pāśupata 
teachings, namely, one that bases itself on Vedic “tradition, and another that 
runs counter to that tradition” (Dyczkowski 1988:24).
49. Kūrma Purāṇa 2.16.15.
50. Ibid., 2.21.34–35.
51. On the issue of ahiṃsā as a dividing line among Hindus, see Halbfass 
(1990:87–130).
52. Īśvara Gītā 11.14–15.
53. For more on the Pāśupata concept of ahiṃsā, see Hara (2002:67–76).
54. Laws of Manu 5.44; translated in Olivelle (2005:140). 
55. Īśvara Gītā verses 11.4–7.
56. The central philosophical concept of the Madhyamaka Buddhist 
school of philosophy is “emptiness” (śūnyatā). The Īśvara Gītā’s use of the 

30
Lord Śiva’s Song
word śūnya should not, however, be taken as a reference to that school. For 
a better understanding of the term abhāva-yoga (yoga of non-being), it is 
useful to compare this description to descriptions of abhāva-yoga in the Śiva 
Purāṇa (7.2.37.7–10) and Liṅga Purāṇa (2.55.14).
57. Angelika Malinar suggests that a similar division between two types 
of yoga, one concerned with cessation (nirodha), the other with “the vision of 
God . . . as this self” is also present in the Bhagavad Gītā (see White 2012:64).
58. PABh 1.1 (Sastri 1940: 5).
59. The Pāśupata Sūtra’s observances (yamas) are non-harming (ahiṃsā), 
celibacy (brahmacarya), truthfulness (satya), non-transaction (asaṃvyavahāra), 
non-stealing (asteya), non-anger (akrodha), obedience to the teacher (guru-
śuśrūṣā), purity (śauca), moderation in diet (āhāra-lāghava), and mindful-
ness (apramāda). For more on the ten observances and ten abstentions, see 
Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on Pāśupata Sūtra 1.9 (Chakraborti 1970:61–77).
60. Īśvara Gītā 11.11–12. 
61. Edwin Bryant suggests this possibility in his recent commentary on 
Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtas (Bryant 2009:87–99).
62. Īśvara Gītā 11.53–59.
63. Īśvara Gītā 11.67.
64. Īśvara Gītā 11.116–8.
65. Although in later times Kṛṣṇa was usually considered one among 
many incarnations of Viṣṇu, it is likely that the Bhagavad Gītā’s authors con-
sidered Kṛṣṇa himself to be the highest god. For instance, the word “Viṣṇu” 
is used only four times in the Bhagavad Gītā (see Malinar 2009:163–86).
66. This translation of BhG 9.23–24 is from Miller (1986:86).
67. Īśvara Gītā 11.89–91.
68. See, for instance, Bisschop (2006:3–88) and Smith (2008:58–140).
69. For instance, Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the Pāśupata Sūtra 1.9 
lists “non-transaction” (asaṃvyavahāra) as one of the ten restraints (yamas) 
(Chakraborti 1970:61–77). 
70. For instance, the influential 16th-century catalogue of philosophies, 
the Sarva Darśana Saṃgraha (“Compendium of All Philosophical Schools”) 
categorizes the Pāśupatas as an āstika philosophy. On the meaning and his-
tory of the terms āstika (“affirmer”) and nāstika (“denier”) see Nicholson 
(2010:166–79).
71. This section of the Īśvara Gītā is in conscious imitation, I believe, of 
the theophany of Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gītā chapter 11, verses 15–50.
72. I borrow this strategy for marking changes between anuṣṭubh to 
triṣṭubh meter from Barbara Stoler Miller’s translation of the Bhagavad Gītā 
(Miller 1986).
73. See Īśvara Gītā 4.24. At 11.72–3, the Īśvara Gītā lists only three (exclud-
ing dhyāna-yoga). Swami Vivekananda may have derived his famous scheme 
of “four yogas” from this verse.
74. Not only are women forbidden from initiation, but Pāśupata Sūtra 
1.13 also states, “One should not talk with a woman or śūdra” (Chakraborti 
1970:79). Because the Īśvara Gītā nowhere repeats this prohibition, however, it 
is unclear whether it applies here. Unlike the Pāśupata Sūtras, the Īśvara Gītā 

31
Introduction
states that it is possible for śūdras to be liberated (Īśvara Gītā 1.104). From 
this it is possible to infer that the Īśvara Gītā also has more liberal attitudes 
toward women than the Pāśupata Sūtras. 
75. For variant readings of the Īśvara Gītā text that I present here, I 
encourage readers to consult the critical edition of the Kūrma Purāṇa (Gupta 
1971:373–432). The Īśvara Gītā consists of sections 2.1–11 of the Kūrma Purāṇa.


TRANSLATION 
KL
LORD ŚIVA’S SONG
The Īśvara Gītā


35
Chapter One
The Arrival of the Gods
The sages said:
1.	
Sūta, you have spoken rightly
of the creation of the first man, 
the expansion of the cosmos, 
and the order of world-epochs.
2.	
You say that celibate students 
engaged in dharma and constantly 
	
devoted to the yoga of knowledge 
	
should worship god, the lord of lords.
3.	
Please explain the supreme knowledge 
whose sole object is brahman, 
	
destroying the suffering of all rebirths
	
and allowing us to see the ultimate.
4.	
Lord, you have obtained 
	
complete knowledge from Vyāsa,

36
Lord Śiva’s Song
who is Nārāyaṇa personified. 
Therefore, we ask you again.
5.	
Sūta, bard of the Purāṇas, 
listened to the sages’ words. 
Calling Lord Vyāsa to mind 
he was about to speak.
6.	
At that very moment Vyāsa, 
Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana himself, 
arrived where the great sages 
were holding their sacrifice.
7.	
Those brahmins bowed down 
upon seeing Vyāsa, knower 
of the Veda. His splendor was like 
a dark cloud, his eyes like lotus leaves.
8.	
Seeing Vyāsa, Sūta threw himself 
to the ground, straight as a stick.
Sūta walked around the teacher 
and stood by his side, palms together.
9.	
Vyāsa inquired after the health 
of Śaunaka and the other wise men. 

37
Chapter One: The Arrival of the Gods
They reassured the great sage 
and arranged for him a proper seat.
10.	
Then mighty Lord Vyāsa, 
son of Parāśara, asked them, 
	
“Are there any difficulties with your 
	
austerities, Vedic studies, or learning?”
11.	
Sūta bowed to his teacher,
	
that great sage, and said, 
“Please explain to these wise men
the knowledge of brahman.
12.	
These calm ascetics are 
sages engaged with dharma, 
full of desire to listen.
Please explain as it truly is
13.	
the divine knowledge leading to freedom.
	
You told it to me in person.
	
Viṣṇu explained it to the wise men
long ago, in his tortoise form.”
14.	
Hearing Sūta’s request,
	
the sage Vyāsa, son of Satyavatī,

38
Lord Śiva’s Song
bowed his head to Śiva 
and spoke these pleasing words.
Vyāsa said:
15.	
I will tell you what the god Śiva
	
himself said when questioned
	
long ago by the lords among yogis,
headed by Sanatkumāra.
16.	
Sanatkumāra, Sanaka, 
Sanandana, and Aṅgiras, 
along with Rudra and Bhṛgu, 
the great scholar of dharma,
17.	
Kaṇāda, Kapila the yogi, 
the great sage Vāmadeva, 
	
Śukra, and glorious Vasiṣṭha,
all masters of mental discipline,
18.	
consulted one another,
	
their minds penetrated by doubt. 
They practiced fearsome austerities
at holy Badarikā hermitage.
19.	
There they saw Nārāyaṇa,
the seer whose yoga was great,

39
Chapter One: The Arrival of the Gods
the son of Dharma, immortal
and pure. Nara was with him.
20.	
They all praised him 
with various hymns from the Vedas. 
Full of devotion, the yogis bowed 
	
to the one who knows yoga best.
21.	
The omniscient lord 
who knew their wishes 
asked them in a deep voice, 
“What is the purpose of these austerities?”
22.	
Thrilled, they spoke to Nārāyaṇa, 
eternal self of the universe, 
the god whose arrival before them
signaled their achievement.
23.	
“We who speak of brahman
are sunken in doubt. 
We approach you alone
for refuge, the highest spirit.
24.	
You know that highest truth.
	
You are the sage and omniscient lord,
	
the ancient unmanifest spirit, 
	
Nārāyaṇa himself before our eyes.

40
Lord Śiva’s Song
25.	
There is no one who knows
	
other than you, supreme lord.
	
We are eager to listen, 
So please cut off all of our doubts.
26.	
What is the cause of this whole universe? 
	
Who is reborn time and time again?
	
What is the self and what is liberation? 
	
What causes the cycle of rebirth?
27.	
Who is the lord who causes others
to be reborn? Who sees everything? 
	
What is the highest brahman? 
	
Please explain all of this to us.”
28.	
After saying this, the sages saw 
	
the highest spirit had cast off 
	
his form as an ascetic,
and stood now in his own brilliance.
29.	
Shining, immaculate, embellished 
	
with a halo of light, the god had 
	
the brilliance of molten gold. 
	
The mark of Śrī’s beloved was on his breast.
30.	
Covered with light, in his hands 
	
were a conch, discus, club, and bow.

41
Chapter One: The Arrival of the Gods
	
For an instant Nārāyaṇa’s 
	
radiance made Nara invisible.
31.	
Just then the great Lord Śiva appeared, 
	
crescent moon upon his forehead,
	
the terrifying one, 
with kind intentions for the sages.
32.	
Seeing him, their minds were thrilled.
	
With devotion they praised the lord 
	
of the universe, the three-eyed one 
	
whose ornament is the moon:
33.	
“Hail, lord! Hail, great god! 
	
Hail, Śiva, lord of beings!
	
Hail, lord of all sages, 
	
recipient of our austerities! 
34.	
Hail, thousand-formed one, self of all beings,
	
Impeller of the world-machine,
	
endless cause of the world’s creation,
	
preservation, and destruction!
35.	
Hail, thousand-footed lord, delightful one 
	
extolled by the greatest yogis! 
	
Husband of the mother goddess,
	
supreme lord, we bow to you!”

42
Lord Śiva’s Song
36.	
After this praise, the three-eyed lord
	
felt affection for his devotees.
	
He embraced bristling-haired 
	
Nārāyaṇa and spoke in a deep voice:
37.	
“Lotus-eyed one, why have 
	
the great sages who speak of brahman 
	
come to this place? Unwavering one,
what should I do for them?”
38.	
The god among gods,
	
Nārāyaṇa, gave ear to the lord’s words. 
	
He replied to the great god Śiva 
	
who stood there with kind intentions.
39.	
“Lord, these sages are ascetics 
	
who have wiped away all impurity. 
	
With the desire for right knowledge	
they have come to me for refuge.
40.	
If you are pleased with
	
these self-cultivated sages,
	
please explain that divine knowledge
	
here in my presence.
41.	
You know your own self.
Śiva, there is no one else who knows. 

43
Chapter One: The Arrival of the Gods
	
So you yourself should show 
	
the self to the great sages.”
42.	
Saying this, he gazed at Śiva,
	
whose emblem is the bull. 
Disclosing Śiva’s yogic power, 
Nārāyaṇa spoke to the bulls among sages.
43.	
“Because you have now seen Śiva, 
the great lord, trident in hand, 
know yourselves truly
	
to have achieved your goal.
44.	
You may ask the lord of the universe, 
who stands before your eyes. 
And you, lord, please speak the truth
	
here in my presence.”
45.	
After hearing Viṣṇu’s words
	
the sages bowed to Śiva.
	
Headed by Sanatkumāra
	
they queried the great lord.
46.	
At just that moment a throne appeared
	
from the sky, divine, auspicious, 
immaculate—something inconceivable,
	
as befits Lord Śiva himself. 

44
Lord Śiva’s Song
47.	
The maker of all, self of yoga, 
	
sat down there with Viṣṇu. 
	
Great Lord Śiva shone, filling 
	
the universe with his radiance.
48.	
The sages who spoke of brahman 
	
saw Śiva, radiating brilliance,
	
first of the gods and lord 
	
of them all, on that flawless throne.
49.	
They saw calm Śiva, his radiance 
	
without equal. Those who are 
	
steady in yoga see that lord
	
as the self inside themselves.
50.	
They saw the lord of beings 
	
seated upon that throne. 
From him comes the creation of beings.
	
Into him that creation dissolves.
51.	
They saw that lord seated 
alongside Nārāyaṇa. 
Everything is inside of him. 
This world is not separate from him.
52.	
After their request, the blessed one 
	
glanced at lotus-eyed Nārāyaṇa.

45
Chapter One: The Arrival of the Gods
	
The supreme lord taught the sages
	
the unsurpassed yoga of his own self.
53.	
“All you blameless sages, 
you whose minds are at peace, 
listen to my true teaching—
the wisdom imparted by the lord.”


47
Chapter Two
The Changeless Self
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Twice-borns, this eternal knowledge 
	
is my secret, and should not be uttered. 
	
Even the gods do not know it,
	
though they strive for it.
2.	
Taking refuge in this knowledge, 
	
the best of twice-borns become brahman. 
	
Like the ancients who spoke of brahman, 
	
they do not undergo rebirth.
3.	
The most secret of secrets, it
	
should be guarded with great effort. 
	
I will now tell it directly to you 
who speak of brahman, so full of devotion.
4.	
The self that is alone, self-contained, 
	
calm, subtle, and eternal is

48
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
pure consciousness itself, 
inside all beings, beyond darkness.
5.	
It is inner controller, spirit, 
	
breath, and the great lord. 
It is time, fire, and the unmanifest.
	
The revealed texts say it is all this.
6.	
The universe arises from it, 
	
and into it the universe dissolves. 
	
It is the magician who creates 
manifold forms bound by magical power.
7.	
This mighty one is not reborn,
	
nor does it cause rebirth for others. 
	
It is not this earth, not water, 
not energy, wind, or sky.
8.	
It is not the breath, not the mind, 
	
not the unmanifest, not sound or touch,
	
not form, taste, or smell, not the “I,” 
not the doer, and not speech.
9.	
Best of twice-borns, it is not 
	
the hands, feet, anus or genitals, 
	
not the doer or enjoyer, 

49
Chapter Two: The Changeless Self
not matter or spirit, 
not magical power or even breath. 
	
In highest truth, it is consciousness.
10.	
The relation between light and 
	
darkness is impossible. Likewise,
	
there is no relation of oneness 
	
between the highest self and creation.
11.	
Here on earth, shadow and sunlight 
	
have different characteristics. 
	
So too, in highest truth, spirit
	
and created world are apart.
12.	
If the self were impure, infirm, 
	
and changeable in its own nature,
	
it could not become liberated 
	
even after hundreds of rebirths.
13.	
Sages deep in yoga see their own selves 
according to the highest truth
as unchanging, free from suffering, 
blissful in essence, and undying.
14.	
“I am the doer. I am happy. 
I am suffering. I am weak. I am fat.”

50
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
From the activity of the ego, 
people project such thoughts onto the self.
15.	
Those who know the Veda say the self 
	
is the witness, beyond matter. 
It is the observer, imperishable, 
	
pure, and standing everywhere.
16.	
Therefore ignorance is the cause of
	
rebirth for all embodied beings.
	
From ignorance, which is false knowledge,
spirit is conjoined with matter.
17.	
The self is eternally arisen, 
	
self-luminous, all-pervading supreme spirit.
The ego’s lack of discrimination
makes people think “I am the doer.”
18.	
Sages who speak of brahman perceive
	
primeval matter, unmanifest
	
and eternal, seeing that as the cause.
	
Its nature is the good and the bad.
19.	
Even joined with matter, that self is still 
	
unchanging and free from blemish.

51
Chapter Two: The Changeless Self
	
People do not know that their nature
	
is actually imperishable brahman.
20.	
Suffering and other states come from 
	
perceiving the self in that which is 
	
not the self. All flaws, such as passion 
	
and hatred, are caused by this confusion.
21.	
For the person who acts,
	
there are flaws of merit and demerit.
This is how it is. By force of this,
	
all are born into various bodies.
22.	
The self is eternal, all-pervading, 
	
unchanging, and flawless. It is one,
	
divided through magical power,
	
not divided in its own nature.
23.	
So wise men say that in highest truth 
	
there is only nonduality. Difference
	
comes from the nature of manifest things.
	
Magical power is located in the self.
24.	
The sky does not become dirty 
	
through contact with smoke. 

52
Lord Śiva’s Song
Sentiments from the organ of thought,
	
likewise, do not adhere to the self.
25.	
A pure, immaculate crystal shines 
	
with its own brilliance. The self,
	
without stain, free from limiting 
	
conditions, shines in the same way.
26.	
Clear-sighted people say that the essence
of this world is knowledge. 
	
Ignorant people with wrong views
	
see the physical as its essence.
27.	
In its own nature the self is consciousness:
	
changeless, beyond qualities, 
and all-pervading. People whose vision 
	
is confused see it as physical form.
28.	
People perceive a pure crystal as red
	
when it is next to something
that is red. They perceive
	
the highest spirit in the same way.
29.	
Seekers of freedom should hear about it,
contemplate it, and meditate on it.

53
 Chapter Two: The Changeless Self
	
It is the imperishable, pure, 
eternal, all-pervading, undying self. 
30.	
When all-pervading consciousness 
	
shines in the mind constantly,
without interruption, 
then the yogi attains himself.
31.	
When he sees all beings 
	
in his own self and he sees 
	
the self in all beings, 
	
then he attains brahman.
32.	
When, steady in meditation, 
	
he sees no beings, he has 
	
become one with the highest. 
	
Then he is alone.
33.	
When all desires abiding 
	
in his heart are banished, 
	
then he has become immortal.
	
That learned one achieves peace.
34.	
When he sees the many states of beings 
	
as abiding in the one,

54
Lord Śiva’s Song
their expansion coming only from that, 
	
then he attains brahman.
35.	
When he sees that in highest truth
	
the self is alone and the entire world
	
is nothing but magical power, 
then he is satisfied.
36.	
When he obtains the sole knowledge 
	
of brahman—the only remedy 
	
for the diseases of birth, old age, 
and suffering—then he is Śiva.
37.	
Here on earth, rivers and streams 
become one with the ocean. 
Likewise the self becomes one 
with imperishable, undivided brahman.
38.	
Therefore only knowledge exists, 
	
not the created world, not rebirth.
	
Knowledge is concealed by ignorance.
	
From it, people become confused.
39.	
Such knowledge is stainless, subtle, 
	
nonconceptual, and undying.

55
Chapter Two: The Changeless Self
	
Everything else is ignorance. 
That is how I understand knowledge.
40.	
I tell you that this highest sāṃkhya 
	
is the supreme knowledge, the essence 
of all the Upaniṣads. Yoga is
	
one-pointed mental focus on that knowledge.
41.	
Knowledge is produced by yoga, 
	
and yoga proceeds from knowledge. 
	
The person who has mastered yoga 
	
and knowledge has nothing else to obtain.
42.	
Yogis attain the same state 
attained by followers of sāṃkhya. 
He who sees sāṃkhya and yoga
	
as one knows the truth.
43.	
Other yogis focus their minds 
on lordly powers. The Vedas say
	
they sink into just those powers 
and do not attain the self.
44.	
However, when his body perishes,
	
the master of knowledge and yoga 

56
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
achieves the divine, unwavering,
	
all-pervading, great state of lordliness.
45.	
I am the self, the unmanifest,
	
the magician, the supreme lord
	
celebrated in all the Vedas, the
	
self of everyone, facing everywhere.
46.	
I possess all desires, all tastes, all smells.
	
I am free from old age and death. 
	
With hands and feet everywhere, 
I am the eternal inner controller.
47.	
Though without hands or feet, I am swift. 
I am the grasper who resides in the heart. 
Though without eyes, I see. 
Though without ears, I hear.
48.	
I know this entire world 
	
yet no one knows me. 
	
Those who see the reality say that 
	
I am the one, the great spirit.
49.	
Sages who see subtle things
	
know that the cause, supreme lordliness,

57
Chapter Two: The Changeless Self
	
belongs to the self, which is
free from qualities and without stain.
50.	
Listen attentively, you sages 
	
who speak of brahman! I will tell you
	
something that the gods, confused 
	
by my magical power, do not discern.
51.	
I am not director of all things, 
for in my own nature I am 
beyond magical power. Yet wise men 
know that I set that cause in motion.
52.	
Yogis who see reality 
enter into union with me,
	
obtaining my most secret,
	
all-pervading, undying body.
53.	
My polymorphous magical 
	
power falls into their control. 
	
They obtain the highest purity,
nirvāṇa, union with me.
54.	
Greatest yogis, it is by my grace 
that they do not return again, 

58
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
not even after a billion cosmic cycles.
This is the teaching of the Vedas.
55.	
Those who speak of brahman 
should give this knowledge 
	
of sāṃkhya and yoga that I teach
only to sons, pupils, and yogis.

59
Chapter Three
The Unmanifest Lord
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
From the unmanifest came time,
	
primeval matter, and the supreme spirit.
	
The whole world was born from these three,
	
so the world consists of brahman.
2.	
It dwells in the world,
	
enveloping everything,
	
hands and feet everywhere,
	
eyes, head, face, and ears everywhere.
3.	
It appears to possess all qualities
	
and all senses, yet is free of them all.
	
Supporting all things, it is eternal bliss, 
	
the unmanifest, free from duality.
4.	
Without any object of comparison,
	
its range is beyond the means of knowledge.

60
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
The abode of all things, supreme immortality,
beyond mental construction or semblance,
5.	
undivided, yet appearing as divided, 
	
it is eternal, fixed, and unchanging.
	
It is without qualities, the highest space.
	
This is the knowledge the wise understand.
6.	
It is the self of all beings.
	
It is the external, the internal, the supreme.
	
It is I, all-pervading and calm,
	
the highest lord whose essence is knowledge.
7.	
I, whose form is unmanifest,
	
pervade this entire world.
	
All beings dwell in me.
	
He who knows this knows the Vedas.
8.	
The two principles are called
	
primeval matter and spirit.
	
Their uniter is time, the supreme,
	
stated to be beginningless.
9.	
These three stand fixed in the unmanifest,
	
without beginning or end. The wise

61
Chapter Three: The Unmanifest Lord
	
know that that my form is identical to 
	
the three, yet different from them.
10.	
The one who gives birth to the entire world,
	
from the principle of intellect to the
	
individual elements, is called matter.
	
She is the deceiver of all embodied beings.
11.	
The spirit, standing with matter,
	
experiencing the guṇas of matter,
	
is called the twenty-fifth principle
	
because it is free from ego.
12.	
The first evolute of matter
	
is named the “great one.”
	
It is the knower, possessing the power
	
of cognition. Out of it comes the ego.
13.	
The “great one” is one only.
	
Those who reflect on the principles
	
say it is also the ego. They say it is 
	
the individual, the inner self.
14.	
It causes knowledge of all happiness
and suffering in human lifetimes.

62
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
Its nature is cognition and
	
and the mind is its assistant.
15.	
Because of its lack of discrimination,
	
the spirit undergoes rebirth. 
This lack of discrimination 
	
is from the connection of matter with time.
16.	
Time creates beings
	
and time destroys them.
	
All are subject to time,
yet time is subject to no one.
17.	
It is eternal and interior,
	
regulating all things.
	
It is proclaimed Lord Breath,
	
the omniscient one, the highest spirit.
18.	
The learned say that the mind
	
is superior to all the senses,
	
the ego higher than the mind,
	
the intellect higher than the ego.
19.	
The unmanifest is higher than the intellect,
	
the spirit higher than the unmanifest.

63
Chapter Three: The Unmanifest Lord
	
Lord Breath is higher than the spirit.
	
The entire world belongs to him.
20.	
Space is higher than breath,
	
and Lord Agni is beyond space.
	
He is I, all-pervading and calm,
	
the highest lord whose essence is knowledge.
	
There is no being higher than me.
	
Those who know me are freed.
21.	
No being in the world is eternal, 
	
whether mobile or immobile,
	
except for me, the one, the unmanifest,
	
the great lord whose nature is space.
22.	
That is I, the divine magician.
	
Joined with time, I eternally
	
emit and absorb the entire world,
	
which is made up of magical power. 
23.	
Time, whose nature is endless,
	
creates and impels the entire world
	
only due to my presence.
	
This is the teaching of the Vedas.


65
Chapter Four
The God of Gods
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Listen, you collected sages 
	
who speak of brahman! I will tell you
	
the glory of the god of gods
	
who sets this world in motion.
2. 	
I cannot be known to men
	
through manifold austerities,
	
through charity, or through sacrifice,
	
without incomparable devotion.
3. 	
Lordly sages, I am all-pervading 
and dwell in the interior of all beings.
	
People do not know me, 
	
the witness of all.
4. 	
This entire world is inside me,
	
and I am the supreme, inside all beings,

66
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
facing all directions. I am the founder,
provider, and the fire at the end of time.
5. 	
Sages, dwellers in the highest heaven, 
	
Brahmā, the Manus, Śakra, 
	
and the superpowerful beings—
	
none of them see me.
6.	
The Vedas constantly praise me
	
as the one, the supreme lord. 
	
Brahmins sacrifice to me as Agni
	
by various Vedic rites. 
7.	
All the worlds revere me, as does
	
Brahmā, patriarch of worlds.
	
Yogis meditate on me, the lord,
	
the god who rules all beings.
8.	
I am the recipient of all sacrifices
	
and the one who bestows their fruits.
	
Taking the form of all the gods,
	
I am everywhere, the self of everyone.
9.	
Wise, virtuous scholars of the Veda
	
see me in this world.

67
Chapter Four: The God of Gods
	
I am always near to those
	
who worship me with devotion.
10.	
Virtuous brahmins, warriors,
	
and merchants worship me.
	
I grant them the state of bliss,
	
the supreme abode.
11.	
Even servants and others of low birth
	
who pursue forbidden occupations
	
are in time freed and joined to me 
	
if they are full of devotion.
12.	
Those devoted to me are not annihilated.
	
All of their stains are wiped clean.
	
In the beginning I made this promise:
	
my devotee does not perish.
13.	
The fool who scorns my devotee
	
scorns the god of gods.
	
One who honors him with devotion
	
is always honoring me.
14.	
A disciplined person who gives
	
a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water 

68
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
to please me is my devotee.
	
He is considered dear to me.
15.	
I created Brahmā, the supreme one,
	
at the beginning of the world.
	
I gave him all of the Vedas,
	
which emanate from my self.
16.	
I am the immortal teacher
	
of all the yogis. I am protector 
of the virtuous and destroyer 
of the enemies of the Vedas.
17.	
I free yogis from the entire cycle
	
of death and rebirth here in the world.
	
Free of this entire cycle,
I am its only cause.
18.	
I alone am the destroyer.
	
I am the creator and maintainer.
	
As the magician, the magical power
	
of world-deception belongs to me.
19.	
Mine too is that highest power 
	
that is praised as “knowledge.”

69
Chapter Four: The God of Gods
	
Using it to destroy illusory power,
	
I rest in the hearts of yogis.
20.	
I am the impeller of all powers
	
and the one who restrains them,
	
the foundation of them all
	
and the reservoir of immortality.
21.	
One power inside of all beings,
	
consisting of and controlled by me,
	
takes the form of Brahmā
	
and creates the manifold world.
22.	
Another vast power of mine
	
becomes Nārāyaṇa, the endless,
	
all-encompassing lord of the world.
	
That power sustains the world.
23.	
My third great power 
	
destroys the entire world.
	
Named “time,” it is made up
of darkness. Its form is Rudra.
24.	
Some discern me through meditation,
	
others through knowledge,

70
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
some through the yoga of devotion,
	
still others through the yoga of action.
25.	
Of all the devotees,
	
the one I prefer, the dearest to me,
	
is one who constantly gratifies me 
	
through knowledge, not otherwise.
26.	
The other three types of devotees
	
who long to gratify me
	
certainly also attain me,
	
and they too are not reborn.
27.	
I unfold this whole world 
	
made of primeval matter and spirit.
	
The entire world dwells in me
	
and is set in motion by me. 
28.	
Sages, I am not the director.
	
I direct the entire world
	
only as I rest in the highest yoga.
	
One who knows this becomes immortal.
29.	
I regard this entire world as
	
existing by its own nature.

71
Chapter Four: The God of Gods
	
It was created by time, the blessed one
	
who is the lord of the great yoga himself.
30.	
The wise say in learned texts
	
that “yoga” means magical power.
	
The “yogi” is that lord of yoga,
	
the blessed great god, the mighty one. 
31.	
The supreme one is called “great”
	
because he is beyond all of the principles.
	
He is the blessed Brahmā, the great
	
immaculate one who is made up of brahman.
32.	
There is no doubt: one who knows me, 
	
lord among lords of the great yoga,
	
is joined to me in the yoga that is
	
without conceptual constructions.
33.	
I am he, the god, the director,
	
resting in the highest bliss, 
	
the yogi who dances perpetually.
	
The knower of the Veda knows this.
34.	
This most secret knowledge is in
	
all the Vedas. It should be given

72
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
only to one who tends the sacred fire,
who is mentally pure and righteous.

73
Chapter Five
The Lord’s Dance
Vyāsa said:
1.	
After the lord, the highest god,
	
said this to the yogis,
	
he danced, showing them 
	
his supreme lordly form.
2.	
They saw the master, the great god,
	
a supreme storehouse of light,
	
dancing with Viṣṇu
	
in the immaculate sky.
3.	
In the sky they truly saw 
	
the lord of all beings, known
	
by yogis with disciplined minds 
	
who know the reality of yoga.
4.	
The sages saw the dancing one himself.
	
This whole world belongs to him.

74
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
It is made up of magical power.
	
He sets it in motion.
5.	
They saw him, the dancing one.
	
By recalling him and his lotus feet,
	
people are freed from fear,
	
which arises out of ignorance.
6.	
They saw that yogi. Those who are
	
free from fatigue, breath subdued, 
	
calm, and full of devotion—
	
such people see him as pure light.
7.	
They saw Rudra the liberator 
	
in the sky. Gracious and
	
loving to his devotees, quickly
	
he frees them from ignorance.
8.	
The god with a body of a thousand heads, 
a thousand feet, and a thousand arms, 
with matted hair and a half-moon 
fixed at the crown of his head,
9.	
wearing the skin of a tiger,
	
one enormous hand gripping a trident,
	
the other hand with a club, 
his three eyes Sūrya, Soma, and Agni,

75
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
10.	
enveloping the entire universe with
	
his own radiance and abiding in it,
invincible, with horrible fangs 
	
and the brilliance of ten million suns,
11.	
standing inside and outside the universe,
	
outside, interior, and beyond,
	
emitting blazing fire and
consuming the entire world—
	
they saw that god dancing,
	
the lord who is creator of all.
12.	
The great god whose yoga is great,
	
the divine god of the gods,
	
the master of beasts, the lord,
	
the undying light of lights,
13.	
large-eyed bearer of the Pināka bow,
	
cure for those sick from worldly existence,
	
the essence of time, the destroyer of time,
	
the god among gods, the great lord,
14.	
husband of Umā, many-eyed one,
	
supreme and full of the bliss of yoga,
	
abode of knowledge and renunciation
	
whose yoga of knowledge is eternal,

76
Lord Śiva’s Song
15.	
rich with the eternal lordly powers,
	
the foundation of dharma, unobtainable,
	
honored by Indra and Viṣṇu and 
	
celebrated by the groups of great sages,
16.	
foundation of all powers,
	
lord among lords of the great yoga,
	
the highest brahman of the yogis
	
celebrated by them through yoga,
	
dwelling in the heart of yogis yet
	
concealed through yoga’s magical power,
17.	
creator of the entire world,
	
free from disease, Nārāyaṇa
	
joined in union with the lord—
	
the ones who spoke of brahman saw him.
18.	
Seeing that this form of the lord
	
had the nature of Rudra and Nārāyaṇa,
	
the ones who spoke of brahman
	
realized that they had attained their goal.
19. 	
Now Sanatkumāra, 
	
Sanaka, and Bhṛgu,
	
Sanātana 

77
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
	
and Sanandana,
Rudra, Aṅgiras, 
Vāmadeva, and Śukra,
the great sage Atri, 
Kapila, and Marīci,
20.	
seeing Rudra, ruler of the world,
	
whose left side is Viṣṇu 
	
of the lotus navel,
	
meditated with him 
	
in their hearts;
	
they bowed down 
	
and folded their hands 
	
on their foreheads.
21.	
Uttering the syllable Oṃ
	
they glanced at the god
	
sequestered in a cavern
	
in their inner bodies.
	
Their minds full of bliss, 
	
they praised him
	
with the words
	
of the Veda.
The sages said:

78
Lord Śiva’s Song
22.	
“We bow to you—
the one lord,
	
the ancient person,
	
Rudra, the lord of breath
	
whose yoga is infinite,
	
the wise one inside our hearts,
	
the purifier
made up of brahman.
23.	
Meditating on you
dwelling immovable
inside their bodies,
calm, disciplined sages see you—
the womb of the Vedas,
	
immaculate and golden,
	
the supreme seer, 
higher than the high ones.
24.	
The producer of the world
	
was produced from you.
	
You, the self of all beings,
	
are the infinitesimal atom,
	
the smallest of the small,
	
the greatest of the great.
	
All of the holy ones
	
speak only of you.

79
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
25.	
Hiraṇyagarbha,
	
the inner self of the world,
	
the ancient person,
	
was born from you.
	
Coming into existence
	
emitted by you,
	
he emits the entire world
	
by your rule.
26.	
You generated 
all the Vedas;
they will issue
back into you.
We see you,
cause of the world,
dancing 
in our hearts.
27.	
You are the one
	
who turns this wheel of brahman.
	
You are the magician,
	
the one lord of the world.
	
We bow and take refuge in you,
	
the essence of yoga.
	
the master of consciousness,
	
the celestial dance.

80
Lord Śiva’s Song
28.	
We see you dancing
in the highest sky
and meditate 
on your supremacy—
the self of all beings,
entering into many forms,
experiencing again and again
the bliss of brahman.
29.	
The syllable Oṃ 
	
refers to you,
	
the seed of liberation.
	
You are the imperishable one
	
secretly ensconced in matter.
	
In this world, the holy ones 
speak of you as the truth
whose light shines by itself.
30.	
All of the Vedas
	
praise you constantly.
	
Sages whose flaws are gone
bow down to you.
Ascetics who are calm,
devoted to truth,
and established in brahman
enter into you, the best one.

81
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
31.	
The Veda is one, endless,
	
with many branches.
	
It communicates knowledge
	
of only you—your form is one.	
Those who take refuge in you,
the Veda’s object,
	
have eternal peace.
	
Others do not.
32.	
You are the husband of Pārvatī
	
and the beginningless mass of light.
	
You are Brahmā and Viṣṇu,
	
the supreme one, the best.
	
After you experience
	
the bliss of your self,
	
you lie down in your light,
	
unmoving and eternally free.
33.	
You, the one Rudra,
	
create everything in this world.
	
In your multiple forms
	
you protect the whole world.
	
At its end, the world
	
disappears into you alone.
	
We bow to you,
	
taking refuge in you.

82
Lord Śiva’s Song
34.	
They call you the one,
	
the seer, the sole Rudra,
	
breath, the great one,
	
Hari, Agni, the lord,
	
Indra, death, 
	
wind, intelligence,
	
the founder, Āditya, 
	
and the multiform one.
35.	
You are the imperishable,
	
the supreme object of knowledge.
	
You are the final resting place
	
of the entire world.
	
You are the undying protector
	
of the perpetual dharma.
	
You are the highest spirit,
	
the eternal one.
36.	
You alone are Viṣṇu.
	
You are four-faced Brahmā.
	
You alone are Rudra,
	
the blessed supreme lord.
	
You are the world-navel,
	
matter, the foundation.
	
You are the lord of everything,
	
the highest lord.

83
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
37.	
They say you are the one,
	
the ancient person
	
the color of the sun
	
who is beyond darkness—
	
pure consciousness,
	
unmanifest and inconceivable,
	
the sky, brahman, emptiness,
	
matter, and the unqualified.
38.	
You are the one in whom
	
the entire world shines;
	
You are undying, stainless,
	
and single in form. 
	
Moreover, your form 
	
is inconceivable;
	
inside of it
	
reality shines forth.
39.	
We all bow to you,
	
seeking refuge in you—
	
Rudra, the lord of yoga 
	
whose powers are endless,
	
the final goal, the purifier
	
whose body is the Veda.
	
Great lord, ruler of beings,
	
be gracious to us!

84
Lord Śiva’s Song
40.	
By recalling
	
your lotus feet,
	
the seed of all rebirths
	
is destroyed.
	
Restraining our minds
	
and prostrating our bodies,
	
we beg the one lord 
	
to be gracious.
41.	
Homage to you who are
	
being and being’s source,
	
to you who are time,
	
the whole, and Hara!
	
Homage to you,
	
matted-haired Rudra!
	
Homage to you, Agni!
	
Homage to you, Śiva!”
42.	
Then the blessed one, the god
	
with matted hair who rides the bull,
	
withdrew his highest form and
	
returned to his mundane state as Bhava.
43.	
Seeing Bhava, lord of past and future,
	
standing there as before

85
Chapter Five: The Lord’s Dance
	
with the god Nārāyaṇa,
	
the amazed sages spoke these words:
44.	
“Blessed lord of past and future
	
whose emblem is the bull,
	
after seeing your highest form 
	
we are satisfied, eternal one.
45.	
From your grace comes
	
our constant faith in you alone,
	
the supreme stainless one, 
	
the highest lord.
46.	
Auspicious one, we now wish
	
to hear of your glory again
as it truly is,	
eternal and supreme.”
47.	
Giving ear to their request,
	
the one who grants success in yoga
	
glanced at Nārāyaṇa
	
and spoke in a deep voice.


87
Chapter Six
The Glory of Lord Śiva
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Listen, all you sages.
	
I, the supreme one, will tell you
	
of the glory of the lord
	
known by knowers of the Veda.
2.	
I am the one creator, 
	
protector, and destroyer
	
of the entire world.
	
I am the eternal self of all beings.
3.	
I am the father,
	
the inner controller of all things.
	
All things dwell inside of me,
	
yet I am situated nowhere.
4.	
The supernatural form of mine
	
that you just saw, wise ones,

88
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
was a simulacrum I displayed 
	
through my magical power.
5.	
I am situated in the middle
	
of all states of existence
	
and I set the whole world in motion.
	
This is my power of action.
6.	
Through this the universe moves
	
in accord with its own nature.
	
I am time, setting in motion 
	
the whole composite world.
7.	
Bulls among sages, I create
	
the whole world with one of my parts.
	
With another form I destroy it.
	
This is my twofold character.
8.	
Without beginning, middle, or end,
	
I impel the principle of magical power
	
and agitate spirit and primeval matter
	
at the beginning of creation.
9.	
The universe is born from the union 
	
of these two principles. As the intellect

89
Chapter Six: The Glory of Lord Śiva
	
and the other principles progress, 
	
my radiance is revealed.
10.	
The sun god Hiraṇyagarbha,
	
witness to the entire world, 
	
impeller of the wheel of time,
	
was also born from my body. 
11.	
At the beginning of the cosmic cycle
	
I gave him my divine lordly power, 
	
the eternal yoga of knowledge,
	
and the four Vedas that I created.
12.	
By my command, the god Brahmā,
	
taking on my state of being,
	
himself always wields 
	
my divine lordly power.
13.	
Four-faced Brahmā, 
	
omniscient maker of all worlds,
	
sends forth creation by my command.
	
Yet he originates from me.
14.	
Eternal Nārāyaṇa,
	
undying sustainer of worlds,

90
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
is my sublime form
	
engaging in protection.
15.	
Rudra, destroyer of all beings,
	
the mighty one whose essence is time,
	
perpetually reabsorbs the worlds
	
by my order. He too is my bodily form.
16.	
Agni, the bearer who brings 
oblations to the gods, offerings 
to the ancestors, and does the cooking,
is also impelled by my power.
17.	
By command of the lord,
Agni, the blessed universal one,
	
burns up all day and night
	
the food that has been eaten.
18.	
By command of the lord,
	
Varuṇa, bull among gods,
	
source of all the waters,
	
brings the entire world to life.
19.	
The one who dwells
inside and outside of beings,

91
Chapter Six: The Glory of Lord Śiva
the god Wind, supports
their bodies by my order.
20.	
Soma, who makes men live
	
and grants immortality
to the gods, proceeds
impelled by my command.
21.	
By the rule of the self-born one,
Sūrya constantly illuminates
	
the entire world with his brilliance
	
and spreads the rains.
22.	
Śakra, lord of all immortals,
ruler of the world, granting fruits
	
to those who sacrifice,
	
proceeds by my order.
23.	
The god Yama, scion of the sun
	
who punishes the wicked,
	
acts regularly in this world 
by command of the god among gods.
24.	
Kubera, overseer of all wealth,
	
bestower of riches,

92
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
also always proceeds 
	
by the command of the lord.
25.	
Nirṛti, king of all demons,
	
the god who dispenses 
	
the fruits of dark activities,
	
always proceeds by my command.
26.	
Īśāna too, lord of the bands
	
of goblins and ghosts,
	
dispensing fruits of enjoyment
	
to devotees, is under my command.
27.	
Vāmadeva, pupil of Aṅgiras,
	
foremost in Rudra’s bands of followers,
	
eternal protector of yogis,
	
proceeds by my command.
28.	
Gaṇeśa, guide to dharma,
	
worshipped by the entire world,
	
creator and remover of obstacles,
	
also proceeds by my instruction.
29.	
Mighty Skanda, best among those
	
who know brahman, general 

93
Chapter Six: The Glory of Lord Śiva
	
of the army of the gods, is impelled
	
by the rule of the self-born one.
30.	
The lords of created beings, 
	
great sages like Marīci, 
	
create manifold worlds 
only by the supreme one’s command.
31.	
Śrī, wife of Nārāyaṇa,
	
giving great prosperity
	
to all beings,
	
proceeds by my grace.
32.	
The goddess Sarasvatī,
	
who bestows great speech,
	
is also impelled to set out
	
by the command of the lord.
33.	
The goddess Sāvitrī follows 
	
the command of god.
	
When remembered, she rescues
	
all people from horrible hells.
34.	
Pārvatī, the highest goddess,
	
also moves by my word.

94
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
When she is discerned in meditation,
	
she presents knowledge of brahman.
35.	
Endless Śeṣa, of infinite greatness,
	
king of all the immortals,
	
bears the world on his head
	
by the command of god.
36.	
Agni, eternal destroyer,
	
takes the form of a horse
	
and drinks up the entire ocean
	
at the command of the lord.
37.	
The fourteen Manus, 
	
famous in this world 
	
for their energy, protect
	
all creatures by my command.
38.	
The Ādityas, Vasus, 
	
Rudras, Maruts, Aśvins, 
	
and all the other gods
	
are governed by my rule.
39.	
The Gandharvas, Garuḍas, Ṛkṣas,
	
Siddhas, Sādhyas, Cāraṇas, 

95
Chapter Six: The Glory of Lord Śiva
	
spirits, demons, and goblins all stand 
	
under the rule of the self-born one.
40.	
The kalā, kāṣṭhā, moment,
	
muhūrta, day, night, season, 
	
fortnight, and month exist
	
under the rule of the lord of progeny.
41.	
The yugas and ages of Manu
	
are under my dominion,
	
as are the paras, the parārdhas,
	
and all the other divisions of time.
42.	
The four classes of beings,
	
both inanimate and animate,
	
proceed from the command
	
of god, the highest self.
43.	
All of the hells, upper regions,
	
and universes proceed
	
from the dominion 
	
of the self-born one.
44.	
The countless universes 
	
of the past, along with 

96
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
all the things everywhere
	
within them, and so too
45. 	
all the universes that will be,
	
and the things inside of them,
	
always fulfill the order
	
of the supreme, highest self.
46.	
Earth, water, fire, wind,
	
space, mind, intellect,
	
and primal matter, the first element,
	
proceed under my command.
47.	
Magical power, womb of all worlds,
	
deceiver of all embodied beings,
	
also eternally comes forth
	
from the command of the lord.
48.	
The self, called the supreme spirit,
	
the god of embodied beings,
	
eternally proceeds
	
from the command of the lord.
49.	
Knowledge, which cuts through
	
the thicket of confusion

97
Chapter Six: The Glory of Lord Śiva
	
and reveals the supreme abode,
	
also follows the great lord’s command.
50.	
My power is the world’s essence.
	
I set in motion the entire world
	
and it dissolves into me.
	
What else is there to say?
51.	
I am the blessed one, the lord,
	
the eternal self-luminous light,
	
the highest self, supreme brahman.
	
Besides me there is nothing.
52.	
I have taught you this,
	
the highest knowledge.
	
The person who knows it
	
is freed from the bonds of rebirth.


99
Chapter Seven
The Master of Beasts
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Listen, all you sages, 
	
to the majesty of the supreme one.
	
Knowing him, a person is liberated
	
and does not undergo rebirth.
2.	
My supreme abode is brahman,
	
higher than the highest,
	
undying, indivisible, and firm—
	
eternal bliss without mental constructions.
3.	
Among those who know brahman
	
I am self-born Brahmā, facing all directions.
	
Among those who possess magical power
	
I am the ancient undying god Hari.
4.	
Among yogis I am Śambhu;
	
among women, the mountain king’s daughter.

100
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
Among the Ādityas I am Viṣṇu;
	
among the Vasus, the god of fire.
5.	
Among Rudras I am Śaṅkara,
	
and among birds, Garuḍa.
	
Among elephant kings I am Airāvata,
	
and among warriors, Rāma.
6.	
Among the sages I am Vasiṣṭha,
	
and among the gods, Indra.
	
Among the craftsmen I am Viśvakarman,
	
and among the immortals’ foes, Prahlāda.
7.	
Among sages I am Vyāsa,
	
among the troops, Gaṇeśa.
	
Among heroes I am Vīrabhadra,
	
among the accomplished ones, wise Kapila.
8.	
Among mountains I am Meru,
	
and among heavenly bodies, the moon.	
Among weapons I am the thunderbolt,
	
and among vows, truthfulness.
9.	
Among serpents I am lord Śeṣa,
	
and among generals, I am Skanda.

101
Chapter Seven: The Master of Beasts
	
Among stages of life I am the householder,
	
and among lords, I am the great lord Śiva.
10.	
Among kalpas I am the great kalpa,
	
and among yugas, the kṛta yuga.
	
Among yakṣas, I am the god of wealth,
	
and among the lords of troops, Vīraka.
11.	
Among the progenitors I am Dakṣa;
	
among all the demons, Nirṛti.
	
Among the mighty ones I am wind;
	
among the continents, Puṣkara.
12.	
Among kings of beasts I am the lion,
	
and among devices, the bow.
	
Among the Vedas I am the Sāma,
	
and among ritual formulas, the Śatarudrīya.
13.	
Among all of the mantras I am the Sāvitrī,
	
and among the secret ones, Oṃ.
	
Among hymns, I am the hymn of the first man,
	
and among chants, the Jyeṣṭhasāma.
14.	
Among all those who know the meaning 
	
of the Veda, I am self-born Manu.

102
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
Among countries, I am the land of brahman;
	
Among holy places, Vārāṇasī.
15.	
Among sciences, I am the science of the self;
	
among knowledges, the lord’s supreme knowledge.
	
Among elements, I am space,
	
and among beings, death.
16.	
Among bonds, I am magical power.
	
Among those who tally, I am time itself.
	
Among goals, I am liberation.
	
Among the supreme, I am the highest lord.
17.	
You should also understand
	
any other being in this world
	
who is full of radiance and power
	
as my radiance made manifest.
18.	
All selves that undergo the cycle
	
of rebirth are called “beasts.”
	
I am god, their master. The wise
	
know me as the “master of beasts.”
19.	
In my play, I ensnare those beasts 
	
using the fetters of magical power.

103
Chapter Seven: The Master of Beasts
	
Those who speak of the Veda call me
the one who frees the beasts.
20.	
There is no liberator of those 
	
ensnared in the fetters of magical power
	
other than me, the highest self,
	
the immortal ruler of beings.
21.	
The twenty-four principles, action,
	
illusory power, and the three guṇas—
	
these, and the afflictions that bind beasts,
	
are the beast-master’s fetters.
22.	
Mind, intellect, ego, space, air,
	
water, fire, and earth—these are
	
the eight productive principles. 
	
The others are the products.
23.	
Hearing, touching, seeing, 
	
tasting, and smelling, the fifth; 
	
anus, genitals, hands, feet,
	
and tongue, known as the tenth;
24.	
sound, contact, form, 
	
taste, and smell too;

104
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
these twenty-three principles
	
derive from matter.
25.	
The twenty-fourth, primeval matter,
	
unmanifest, possessing the guṇas,
	
is without beginning, middle, or end.
	
It is the cause of the entire world.
26.	
Purity, agitation, and inertia
	
are called the three guṇas.
	
Sages know that unmanifest matter
	
is the equilibrium of these three.
27.	
Purity is knowledge, inertia is ignorance,
	
and agitation is said to be a mixture.
	
The seers know that the imbalance of guṇas 
comes from error in the intellect.
28.	
Dharma and adharma—these are
	
the two bonds known as fetters.
	
When surrendered to me,
	
actions that bind lead to freedom.
29.	
Ignorance, egoism, attachment, 
	
aversion, and fear of death—

105
Chapter Seven: The Master of Beasts
	
sages call these the afflictions,
	
unshakable fetters that bind the self.
30.	
It is said that magical power
	
is the cause of these fetters.
	
That is original unmanifest matter,
	
the power that resides in me.
31.	
He is original matter, primeval,
	
and he is spirit too.
	
He, the eternal God among gods,
	
is the intellect and the other evolutes.
32.	
He is the bond
	
and the creator of bonds.
	
He is the fetter
	
and he is the beasts.
	
He knows everything,
	
yet none know him.
	
They call him the first,
	
the ancient spirit.


107
Chapter Eight
The Hidden Lord
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Bulls among brahmins, I will tell you
	
another most secret teaching.
	
With this teaching, one crosses over
	
the terrible ocean of death and rebirth.
2.	
I am made up of brahman—
	
calm, eternal, pure, and undying.
	
I alone am called the blessed one,
	
the sole highest lord.
3.	
Great brahman is my womb.
	
That is where I place the seed.
	
It is the source named magical power,
	
and from it the entire world is born.
4.	
From it were born primeval matter, 
spirit, also called the self,

108
Lord Śiva’s Song
intellect, ego, subtle elements, 
gross elements, and sense organs.
5.	
From it came the golden egg
	
whose brilliance equals million suns.
	
Great Brahmā was born there
	
and invigorated by my power.
6.	
All the many other 
	
living beings are made up of me,
	
but deluded by my magical power
	
they do not see me, their father.
7.	
Magical power is the supreme womb
	
of the forms that are born
	
in the wombs of all beings. 
	
Sages know that I am the father.
8.	
The wise one who recognizes me
	
as inseminator, father, and ruler
	
does not become deluded 
	
in any of the worlds.
9.	
I am the master of all sciences,
	
the highest lord of beings, blessed, 

109
Chapter Eight: The Hidden Lord
	
whose form is the syllable Oṃ.
	
I am Brahmā, lord of progeny.
10.	
He who sees the highest lord 
	
abiding equally in all beings,
	
immortal within mortals—
	
he is the one who truly sees.
11.	
Seeing the lord situated
	
everywhere equally, 
	
he himself does not injure the self,
	
so he goes the highest way.
12.	
Discerning the seven subtle principles
	
and the great lord with his six limbs,
	
knowing the use of primeval matter, 
	
he goes to the highest brahman.
13.	
Sages say that 
	
these are the six limbs
	
of the great lord,
	
who is all-pervading:
	
Omniscience, contentment,
	
beginningless wisdom, independence,
	
power that never wanes,
	
and power that is without end.

110
Lord Śiva’s Song
14.	
The sages say that these
	
are the seven subtle principles:
	
the five subtle elements,
	
the mind, and the self.
	
Matter, the primordial one,
	
is the material cause.
	
When the self is in its employ,
	
that is known as bondage.
15.	
In the Vedas,
	
the power hidden in matter
	
is called the cause
	
and the womb of the Vedas.
	
Beyond that power
	
is the single supreme one,
	
the great lord, the spirit
	
whose form is truth.
16.	
He is Brahmā, the yogi,
	
the highest self, the great one,
	
the ancient one who pervades space
	
and is known through the Vedas.
	
He is the one Rudra,
	
death, the unmanifest,
	
the one seed, the entire world,
	
the one and only god.

111
Chapter Eight: The Hidden Lord
17.	
Some call him one,
	
others call him many.
	
Some say he is the one self,
	
while others say otherwise.
	
He is the smallest of the small,
	
the greatest of the great.
	
Those who know the Vedas
	
proclaim him the great god.
18.	
The wise one who knows god
	
as dwelling in secret,
	
the supreme ruler,
	
the ancient spirit
	
whose form is the world, golden, 
	
the highest way of the wise—
	
That person abides
	
beyond the intellect.


113
Chapter Nine
Brahman’s Powers
The sages said:
1.	
If the highest lord is partless, pure,
	
eternal, and free from activity,
	
how can the world be your form?
	
Please tell us this, great god.
Lord Śiva said:
2.	
Twice-borns, I am not the same as the world,
	
yet without me the world cannot exist.
	
The cause here is magical power, 
which depends on me.
3.	
Magical power, resting on the unmanifest,
	
is a power without beginning or end.
	
This created world came from the unmanifest,
	
and magical power is its cause.

114
Lord Śiva’s Song
4.	
Sages say the unmanifest is the cause.
	
It is bliss and eternal light.
	
I am the highest brahman,
	
and besides me there is nothing.
5.	
Hence those who speak of brahman
	
have determined that the world is my form.
	
They proclaim this teaching
	
in terms of oneness and multiplicity.
6.	
Twice-borns, I am that supreme brahman,
	
the highest eternal self. 
	
It is said that I, brahman, am uncaused.
	
Therefore, the self is flawless.
7.	
Magical power and the other powers 
	
are infinite, fixed within the unmanifest.
	
The unmanifest, which is eternal and 
	
located in heaven, shines alone.
8.	
Joined with the powers it appears as divided,
	
but in its nature it is indivisible.
	
By means of one of those powers,
	
beginningless, endless union with me occurs.

115
Chapter Nine: Brahman’s Powers
9.	
A person has superhuman attainments
	
by one power, yet by another they disappear.
	
That which is without beginning,
	
middle, or end is joined with ignorance.
10.	
That is the supreme unmanifest one,
	
embellished with a brilliant halo.
	
It is the supreme eternal radiance,
	
the highest abode of Viṣṇu.
11.	
Upon that the entire world
	
is woven and interwoven.
	
It is the whole world.
	
Knowing this leads to freedom.
12.	
Not reaching it, words turn back
	
together with the mind.
	
Knowing it as the bliss of brahman,
	
one is afraid of nothing at all.
13.	
I know that great spirit 
	
who is the color 
	
of the sun god, 
	
beyond darkness.
	
Knowing that spirit,

116
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
the wise person is freed
	
and attains eternal bliss,
	
becoming brahman.
14.	
That supreme,
	
of which nothing is higher,
	
the one light among lights,
	
standing in heaven—
	
the wise person who knows
	
that this is the self
	
attains the self’s bliss,
	
becoming brahman.
15.	
It is undying, impenetrable,
	
its body hidden,
	
the immortal bliss of brahman,
	
the entire world’s abode—
	
so say the brahmins
	
who are established in brahman.
	
After going to it
	
one does not return again.
16.	
With knowledge of that, 
	
the radiance that is
	
like a ray of light

117
Chapter Nine: Brahman’s Powers
	
flashing golden
	
in the highest space,
	
wise men perceive
	
the shining sky,
	
the immaculate abode.
17.	
Then the wise men
	
see the highest one,
	
experiencing again and again
	
the self within themselves.
	
The supreme one, great
	
and self-illuminating,
	
is this lord, the blessed one,
	
full of the bliss of brahman.
18.	
The one god is
	
hidden in all beings,
	
all-pervading, the self
	
inside of all beings.
	
The wise men who perceive 
	
only him as the one
	
have eternal peace.
	
Others do not.
19.	
The blessed one, all-pervading,
all faces, all heads, all throats,

	
rests secretly in the hearts of all beings.
There is no object of desire besides him.
20.	
Bulls among sages, I have taught you
	
this majestic wisdom.
	
It must be guarded with special care.
It is difficult even for yogis to grasp.

119
Chapter Ten
Brahman and the Lord
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Brahman is unmarked, unique, and unmanifest.
	
It has been established that it is the liṅga,
	
the self-luminous supreme reality
	
located in highest space.
2.	
The unmanifest cause is
	
the imperishable supreme abode.
	
Wise people regard it as
	
pure knowledge without qualities.
3.	
The Vedas say that those established in brahman,
	
who have taken on its state of being
and who always resolve to tranquility,
see the liṅga as that highest brahman.
4.	
Bulls among sages, otherwise
	
it is impossible to see me,

120
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
because there is no other knowledge
	
by which one knows the supreme.
5.	
Only wise people know this,
	
the highest knowledge.
	
Everything else is ignorance,
	
since the entire world is magical power.
6.	
Learned people say this knowledge,
	
which is pure, subtle, undying,
	
and free from mental constructions,
	
is just that self of mine.
7.	
Those who see the self as multiple
	
also see that supreme one,
	
for they understand the one undying truth
	
and abide in the highest state of being.
8.	
Whether they see me as one or many,
those who see me with devotion, 
the lord and highest reality,
are known to have that as their essence.
9.	
They see before them their own self, 
the highest lord. Eternally blissful 

121
Chapter Ten: Brahman and the Lord
and free from mental constructions, 
he is truth embodied. This is how it is.
10.	
Established in their own selves,
	
calm within the highest unmanifest one,
	
they enjoy the supreme, all-pervading
	
bliss that has brahman as its essence.
11.	
This is the highest freedom, 
the best union with me.
It is nirvāṇa, oneness with brahman, 
and aloneness. The seers know this.
12.	
So, only one supreme, auspicious thing
is without beginning, middle, and end.
That is the lord, the highest god.
By knowing him, one becomes free.
13.	
Sun does not shine in this world,
	
nor the moon,
	
nor the stars,
	
nor fire and lightning.
	
This whole world is always
	
bright with his light.
	
His eternal light shines
	
true and unwavering.

122
Lord Śiva’s Song
14.	
It shines as
eternally risen consciousness
free from mental constructions,
pure, great, and supreme.
Those who speak of brahman
regard it as the intimate, 
eternal, unwavering reality.
It is the lord.
15.	
All the Vedas say
	
that the spirit is eternal bliss,
	
immortal, pure,
	
and the embodiment of truth.
	
Those who ascertain
	
the meaning of the Veda
	
meditate on that lord
	
with the syllable Oṃ.
16.	
He is not earth,
	
not water, not mind,
	
not fire, not breath,
	
not air, not space,
	
not even the intellect,
	
consciousness, or its opposite.
	
In the middle of highest space
	
the god Śiva shines alone.

123
Chapter Ten: Brahman and the Lord
17.	
I have told you the
	
highest secret,
	
the nectar of knowledge
	
hidden in all the Vedas.
	
The pious yogi 
who knows the secret
	
should constantly practice yoga
in a solitary place.


125
Chapter Eleven
The Highest Yoga
Lord Śiva said:
1.	
Now I will explain the highest yoga,
	
most difficult to attain.
	
With that yoga, sages see the self 
	
as the lord, luminous like the sun.
2.	
Immediately the fire of yoga 
burns down the whole cage of evils.
	
Pure knowledge arises, leading directly
to nirvāṇa and supernormal powers.
3.	
Knowledge is produced by yoga
	
and yoga proceeds from knowledge.
	
The great lord is pleased with one
	
who has mastered yoga and knowledge.
4.	
Those who are yoked to this yoga on me,
	
whether once daily, twice daily,

126
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
three times daily, or all the time,
	
should be known as the “great lords.”
5.	
But yoga is known to be of two kinds.
	
The first is considered the yoga
	
of non-being. The other is the 
	
great yoga, the very best of all yogas.
6.	
The yoga in which one’s own essence 
	
is known to be empty, free from all
	
false appearances, is named the yoga
	
of non-being. Through it, one sees the self.
7.	
The yoga in which one discerns the self 
	
as eternally blissful, free from blemish,
	
and united with me is called
	
the great yoga of the supreme lord.
8.	
All the other yogas discussed
	
by the yogis in their many books
are not worth one-sixteenth
	
a part of the yoga of brahman.
9.	
The yoga in which the liberated 
	
see before their eyes that the universe

127
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
is the lord himself—this is considered
	
the supreme yoga among all the yogas.
10.	
Those who reject the lord do not see me, 
the one, though they may practice yoga 
hundreds and thousands of times 
with disciplined minds.
11.	
Breath control, meditation, 
	
sense withdrawal, concentration, 
	
absorption, restraints, observances, 
	
and posture—Best of sages,
12.	
yoga is the one-pointed focus
of the mind on me through suppression
	
of other mental activity.
	
I have just told you its eight means.
13.	
Non-harming, truthfulness, non-stealing,
	
celibacy, and non-acquisition,
	
in brief, are called the restraints. 
They purify the minds of human beings.
14.	
The great sages define non-harming
	
as not causing pain anywhere

128
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
to any living being, whether through
	
physical action, thoughts, or speech.
15.	
There is no dharma higher than non-harming.
	
It is the greatest happiness. But harming
	
when following scripture’s injunction 
	
should be considered non-harming.
16.	
Through truthfulness one obtains everything.
	
Everything has its foundation in truthfulness.
	
Twice-borns define truthfulness as
	
the practice of telling things as they are.
17.	
Taking the possessions of others 
	
by stealth or by force is stealing.
	
Through abstaining from that comes
	
non-stealing, the means to dharma.
18.	
Renouncing sexual intercourse
	
in actions, thoughts, and speech, 
	
in all times, places, and circumstances, 
is called celibacy. 
19.	
Not willfully accepting possessions,
	
even in an emergency,

129
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
is called non-acquisition.
	
Maintain it with great effort.
20.	
Austerity, Vedic study, contentment,
	
purity, and worship of the lord,
	
in brief, are called the observances.
	
They grant success in yoga. 
21.	
Those who practice austerity say
	
the highest austerity is emaciation
	
of the body through the extended fast,
the lunar penance, and so forth.
22.	
Recitation of the Upaniṣads, 
	
the Śatarudrīya, and the syllable Oṃ 
	
is what the wise call Vedic study.
	
It purifies the human disposition.
23.	
There are three kinds of Vedic study:
	
the voiced, the unvoiced, and the mental.
	
Those who know the meaning
	
of the Veda say the last kind is best.
24.	
That which generates verbal understanding
	
clearly in others who are listening

130
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
is called voiced Vedic study.
	
Now the definition of the unvoiced:
25.	
Merely moving the lips without generating
verbal understanding in another person
	
is unvoiced recitation. It is 
a thousand times better than the voiced.
26.	
They know this as mental recitation:
concentration on the whole text 
	
in sequence of its words and syllables
	
without the movement of the lips.
27.	
When a person always thinks
	
that whatever comes along by chance
	
is enough, the sages call it contentment.
	
It is characterized by happiness.
28.	
Best of twice-borns, purity is declared
	
to be twofold: external and internal.
	
The external is done with earth and water. 
	
The internal is purification of the mind.
29.	
Worship of the lord is 
unshakable devotion to Śiva 

131
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
through praise, remembrance, and worship, 
done in speech, mind, and body, respectively.
30.	
Now that restraints and observances 
	
have been explained, learn about breath control.
	
“Breath” is wind that originates in the body.
	
“Control” means its suppression.
31.	
There are three types of breath control:
	
higher, lower, and middle.
	
Each of these three is also 
of two types: seeded and unseeded.
32.	
The suppression of the breath 
	
for twelve beats is the weak,
	
for twenty-four beats is the middle, 
	
and for thirty-six beats is the higher.
33.	
The weak causes perspiration,
	
the middle causes trembling, 
and the higher causes levitation. 
Bliss is greatest with the last one.
34.	
The wise say that the “seeded” is
	
accompanied by mental recitation.

132
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
“Unseeded” is not. In this way
	
yogis define breath control.
35.	
With restrained breath one should recite 
	
the Gāyatrī mantra three times 
preceded by Oṃ bhūr bhūvaḥ svaḥ.
This is declared to be breath control. 
36.	
Those who practice yoga with 
	
disciplined minds say in all learned texts 
	
that breath control consists of 
	
expiration, inspiration, and retention.
37.	
Through continuous breathing out,
	
there is expiration. After its cessation,
	
there is inspiration. The state of 
	
equilibrium is called retention. 
38.	
Virtuous ones, sense withdrawal is
	
the restraint of the sense organs. 
	
By their own nature, they would
	
move toward the objects of sense.
39.	
Concentration is fixing the mind 
	
on a place such as the heart-lotus, 

133
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
the navel, the forehead, 
	
or the peak of a mountain.
40.	
The intellect’s continued activity 
	
resting in a single place, unmixed 
	
with other mental activity, 
	
is what the wise know as meditation.
41.	
Absorption is cognition whose form
	
is one and the same as the thing itself, 
without a support in any place at all. 
It is the best of the means of yoga.
42.	
Concentration is said to be 
	
twelve times as valuable as breath control, 
	
meditation twelve times concentration,
	
and absorption twelve times meditation.
43.	
Posture, consisting of the svastika, 
	
lotus, and half-lotus postures,
is called the best means
	
of all the means of yoga. 
44.	
Best of Brahmins, sitting
	
after putting the tops of both feet 

134
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
on top of one’s thighs is
	
the lotus, the best posture.
45.	
Most virtuous ones, 
sitting after putting one foot
	
on one thigh is the half-lotus,
	
the best means of yoga.
46.	
Sitting after putting the soles
	
of both feet inside one’s own
knees and thighs is called 
the svastika, the supreme posture.
47.	
Even a mere glimpse of yoga
is impossible at the wrong places 
and times: near fire, in water, 
where there are piles of dried leaves,
48.	
in a place full of animals, 
a cremation ground, a decrepit cowshed,
	
a crossroads, a noisy or dangerous place,
	
a place with many anthills,
49.	
in a place that is inauspicious, full of
	
wicked people, or mosquito-infested.

135
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
One should not practice when the body 
is ill or the mind disturbed.
50.	
In a secluded, pleasant place,
	
in a mountain cave, on the bank
	
of a river, in a holy place, 
	
in the sanctuary of a god,
51.	
in a pleasant, attractive house devoid of
	
people and animals—there the yogi 
	
should constantly yoke the self 
	
in yoga, with me as his final goal.
52.	
After bowing to the best of yogis,
	
to their disciples, to Gaṇeśa,
	
to his teacher, and to me, the yogi
	
should practice yoga with a collected mind.
53.	
Binding himself in the svastika,
	
lotus, or half posture, his gaze
	
resting evenly on the tip of his nose,
with eyes slightly open,
54.	
calm and free from fear, he renounces
	
this world consisting of magical power. 

136
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
He concentrates on the supreme lord, 
	
the god who resides in his own self. 
55.	
He then visualizes a lotus twelve
	
fingers long from the root of his topknot. 
	
It is beautiful, blooming from the bulb
	
that is dharma. Its stalk is knowledge,
56.	
the lordly powers its eight petals.
	
It is completely white. Renunciation
	
is its seed-cup. In that seed-cup he should 
	
visualize a sublime golden treasure.
57.	
Consisting of all of the powers, 
	
directly they call it Oṃ, the divine
eternal syllable, the unmanifest,
surrounded by a network of rays.
58.	
There he should think of 
	
a pure, supreme, eternal light.
	
In that light he places his own self,
	
which is identical to it.
59.	
He meditates on the lord, highest cause, 
	
standing in the middle of space.

137
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
At last, becoming the all-pervading 
	
lord himself, he visualizes nothing.
60.	
This is the most secret meditation.
	
Now I will describe another:
	
visualizing in the heart the supreme 
	
lotus that was previously described,
61.	
he visualizes the self, the doer, 
	
brilliant as fire, as the spirit, 
	
the twenty-fifth principle, in the form 
	
of a flame in the middle of the lotus.
62.	
He should visualize the highest self
	
as the pure sky in the middle 
	
of that lotus, as the eternal principle 
	
expressed by Oṃ, the unwavering Śiva,
63.	
as the unmanifest, hidden in nature, 
	
the supreme unsurpassed light. 
Then he should visualize the supreme principle,
	
flawless, the support of the self.
64.	
He should visualize the great lord 
	
who is uniform, eternal, consisting of the self,

138
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
who has purified all the principles 
	
with the syllable Oṃ. Alternatively,
65.	
placing himself in me, 
	
the immaculate highest abode,
	
washing his own body
	
with the water of knowledge,
66.	
having my self, constituted by me, he takes 
	
the ashes of the agnihotra sacrifice 
	
and smears them over his entire body, 
	
reciting the mantra that begins 
	
with the word “fire.” He should visualize 
	
in himself the lord whose essence is pure light.
67.	
This Pāśupata yoga is for the liberation
	
of creatures from their fetters. The Vedas
	
declare it the essence of all the Upaniṣads,
transcending the stages of life.
68.	
It is the highest of secrets, 
	
leading to union with me. 
	
It is taught for those twice-borns
	
who are devoted and celibate.
69.	
The limbs of the vow are specified as
	
celibacy, non-harming, patience,

139
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
purity, austerity, self-control, 
	
contentment, truthfulness, and affirmation.
70.	
Even lacking just one of these, 
	
his vow is broken. Therefore, 
	
full of his own good qualities, 
	
he should take up the vow to me.
71.	
Free from passion, fear, and anger,
	
constituted by me, taking 
	
refuge in me, purified by this yoga, 
	
many people attain my being.
72.	
I serve them depending on
	
the way they approach me. 
	
So one might worship me, the supreme lord, 
	
by means of the yoga of knowledge,
73.	
or by means of the yoga of devotion, 
	
with complete renunciation. One who
	
is always pure might worship me 
	
with a mind that is yoked to wisdom.
74.	
One who surrenders all actions,
	
begging for alms and practicing 
	
non-acquisition, attains union with me. 
	
This is the secret that I impart.

140
Lord Śiva’s Song
75.	
One who has no hatred for any being,
	
who is friendly and compassionate,
	
who has no possessiveness or ego,
	
who is devoted to me, is dear to me.
76.	
The yogi who is always content, 
	
whose self is controlled, whose resolve is firm, 
	
whose mind and intellect are fixed on me,
	
who is devoted to me, is dear to me.
77.	
One whom the world does not scorn
	
and who does not scorn the world,
	
who is free from elation, anger, 
	
fear, and anxiety, is dear to me.
78.	
One who is impartial, pure, skillful, and
	
dispassionate, whose ill temper has gone,
	
who has given up all undertakings,
	
who is full of devotion, is dear to me.
79.	
One who regards blame and praise equally,
	
who is silent, content with whatever comes, 
	
who has no home, whose mind is steady,
	
who is devoted to me, will reach me. 
80.	
One who is committed to me, 
	
even if constantly performing 

141
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
all actions, attains the supreme 
	
eternal abode by my grace.
81.	
One who surrenders all actions to me
	
in his mind and takes me as his highest goal,
	
becoming free from desire and greed,
	
should approach me as his lone refuge.
82.	
Abandoning attachment to action’s fruits,
	
he is always satisfied and independent. 
Even when engaged in action,
he is not bound by action at all.
83.	
One who is free from desire, 
	
whose mind is disciplined, renouncing
	
all acquisitions, performing actions 
	
only with his body, attains that highest abode.
84.	
For one who is content with whatever
	
comes along by chance, who is beyond
	
the dualities, acting just for my favor,
	
action destroys the cycle of rebirth.
85.	
His mind on me, bowing to me,
	
sacrificing to me, taking me as his goal,
	
knowing me as the supreme lord,
	
this lord among yogis will reach me.

142
Lord Śiva’s Song
86.	
Those whose thoughts are on me, 
	
constantly teaching each other 
	
and always talking about me,
	
should attain union with me.
87.	
For those who always strive in this way,
	
I destroy all the darkness
	
that follows their actions
	
with the shining lamp of knowledge.
88.	
I bring security in yoga
	
to those people who are always striving,
	
whose thoughts are on me,
	
constantly worshipping me in this world.
89.	
Those who sacrifice to other deities
	
for the enjoyment of pleasure
	
receive fruits according to those deities.
	
This much should be known.
90.	
But if people who are devoted 
	
to other deities sacrifice to them
knowing them to be the same as me,
they too are actually freed.
91.	
So when someone completely abandons
	
other gods who are not the lord

143
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
and takes refuge in me, the lord,
	
one goes to the highest abode.
92.	
Abandoning affection for sons and family,
	
without sorrow and without possessions,
	
a renouncer should worship the supreme lord
	
in the form of the liṅga until his death.
93.	
I grant supreme lordly power
	
in a single lifetime
to those who always worship the liṅga,
	
completely abandoning enjoyments.
94.	
The liṅga’s essence is the highest bliss.
	
It is the sole existent, free from blemish.
	
Consisting of knowledge, it is all-pervading,
	
standing in the hearts of yogis.
95.	
Disciplined devotees who meditate 
	
according to the method taught
	
may worship the supreme lord 
	
in that liṅga anywhere at all.
96.	
Meditating on the lord’s liṅga
	
in water, in fire, in the sky, 
	
in the sun, in a jewel, and so forth,
	
one should worship the lord.

144
Lord Śiva’s Song
97.	
This whole world is made of the liṅga.
	
This whole world rests upon the liṅga. 
	
Therefore, in the liṅga one may worship 
	
the eternal lord anywhere at all.
98.	
For the ritualists, the liṅga is in fire.
	
For the learned, it is in water, sky, or sun.
	
For fools, it is only in wood or stone.
	
But for yogis, it is in the heart.
99.	
If a renouncer who is full of love but
	
has not yet cultivated wisdom 
	
recites the syllable Oṃ, the essence
	
of brahman, for his entire life,
100.	
or if a solitary twice-born 
	
recites the Śatarudrīya
	
with a disciplined mind until his death, 
	
he will go to the supreme abode.
101.	
Or if a wise, collected person 
	
lives in Vārāṇasī until his death,
	
he too will go to that supreme abode
	
through the grace of the lord.
102.	
At their time of death
	
I give all embodied beings there

145
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
the highest knowledge,
	
freeing them from their fetters.
103.	
Following all duties according to caste 
	
and stage of life, committed to me,
	
he gains knowledge in that very lifetime
	
and goes to the auspicious abode.
104.	
Twice-borns, all people who reside there, 
	
even the lowborn and those who come 
	
from evil wombs, pass beyond the cycle
	
of rebirth by the grace of the lord.
105.	
Twice-borns, there will be obstacles for those
	
whose thoughts are overwhelmed by evil. 
Therefore, for liberation
	
take constant refuge in dharma.
106.	
This secret of the Vedas
	
should not be given to anyone
	
other than the righteous, celibate 
	
student who is full of devotion.
Vyāsa said:
107.	
After explaining his own 
	
incomparable yoga, the lord

146
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
spoke to Nārāyaṇa, who had been
	
sitting there free from discomfort.
108.	
“I have uttered this wisdom for the benefit 
	
of those who speak of brahman.
	
You should share this auspicious wisdom
	
with pupils whose minds are calm.”
109.	
Just after saying this,
the unborn lord spoke 
to the great yogis for the benefit
	
of all twice-born devotees: “Twice-borns,
110.	
following my instruction,
	
you too should impart my wisdom
	
to all devoted pupils
	
according to rule.
111.	
I, Lord Śiva, am this Nārāyaṇa.
	
Of this there is no doubt. Those who see
	
no difference between him and me 
	
should be granted the highest wisdom.
112.	
This highest form of mine, 
	
named Nārāyaṇa, peacefully

147
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
dwells in the selves of all beings.
	
It is called the imperishable.
113.	
But some people think otherwise,
seeing difference in the world.	
They do not apprehend me, 
	
and are born again and again.
114.	
There is no rebirth for people 
	
who see this Viṣṇu
	
as being one with me,	
the unmanifest Lord Śiva.
115.	
Therefore, you should regard Viṣṇu,
the beginningless, endless,
	
imperishable self, as me alone,
	
and worship in that way.
116.	
Those people go to terrible hells 
	
who see me otherwise,
thinking that he and I are different gods.
I do not abide in them.
117.	
I liberate those who take refuge in me:
	
the fool and the scholar, 

148
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
the Brahmin and the dog-cooker, 
	
but not one who reviles Nārāyaṇa.
118.	
Therefore, to give me pleasure
	
my devotees should 
praise him and bow to him,
	
the highest spirit, the great yogi.”
119.	
Śiva, bearer of the Pināka bow, 
	
spoke these words and embraced Viṣṇu.
	
He then disappeared in front of
	
the entire audience of onlookers.
120.	
And blessed Nārāyaṇa assumed 
	
the excellent appearance of an ascetic,
	
casting off his highest form
	
and taking leave of those yogis:
121.	
“By the grace of the great supreme lord  
in person, you have acquired 
	
the immaculate knowledge
	
that destroys the cycle of rebirth.
122.	
Lords among sages, 
	
all of you free from afflictions, 

149
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
go and convey the supreme one’s 
	
wisdom to your virtuous students.
123.	
You should give this lordly wisdom
	
in particular to the devoted,
calm, righteous brahmin 
	
who tends the sacred fire.”
124.	
Saying this, the self of the universe,
	
the most learned about yoga 
	
among yogis, the great yogi
	
Nārāyaṇa himself disappeared.
125.	
Bowing down to the great lord 
	
who is first among gods and to Nārāyaṇa 
	
who is first among beings, the sages too
	
dispersed to their own lands.
126.	
Lord Sanatkumāra, that great sage,
	
gave the lord’s teaching
	
to Saṃvarta. He in turn 
	
gave it to Satyavrata.
127.	
Sanandana, best of yoga practitioners,
	
transmitted it to the great sage Pulaha.

150
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
The lord of progeny Pulaha
	
then transmitted it to Gautama.
128.	
Aṅgiras gave it to Bharadvāja, 
	
who knew the Veda. 
	
Kapila gave it to Jaigīṣavya 
	
and also to Pañcaśikha.
129.	
My father Parāśara, 
	
who knew all of reality, obtained 
	
that highest knowledge from Sanaka,
	
and Vālmīki received it from Parāśara.
130.	
The god created from the bodies
	
of Satī and Bhava told it to me
	
long ago. The great yogi Vāmadeva
	
is the Rudra who carries the Pināka bow.
131.	
Lord Nārāyaṇa, Viṣṇu himself,
	
offspring of Devakī,
	
gave this supreme teaching 
	
to Arjuna in person.
132.	
The incomparable wisdom
	
I received from Rudra Vāmadeva

151
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
	
produced in me a special devotion
	
to the mountain-dwelling lord.
133.	
I took refuge specifically in Rudra,
	
the protector, mountain-dweller,
the unshakable lord of beings,
	
the god of gods who bears the trident.
134.	
You too, with all your wives
	
and all your sons—proceed for refuge
	
in Śiva, the delightful one, 
	
the god who rides the bull.
135.	
Turn toward the benevolent one.
	
Through the yoga of action,
	
by his grace, worship the great lord
	
adorned with ash, protector of cowherds.
136.	
Hearing this, the sages led by Śaunaka
	
bowed down to the great Lord Śiva, 
	
eternal and unshakable, 
	
and to Vyāsa, son of Satyavatī.
137.	
With pleased minds they spoke
	
to mighty Vyāsa, who is

152
Lord Śiva’s Song
	
bristling-haired Viṣṇu personified, 
	
great lord of all the worlds.
138.	
“By your grace, unwavering devotion
	
to Śiva, the bull-emblemed protector,
	
is now born in us. Such devotion is
	
hard even for the gods to attain.
139.	
Best of sages, explain to us
	
the incomparable yoga of action
	
that will allow seekers of freedom
	
to gratify the blessed lord.
140.	
Vyāsa, in your presence
	
let Sūta hear the words the lord used
	
to summarize the dharma
	
for the protection of all the worlds. 
141.	
The god of gods Viṣṇu, in tortoise form,
	
explained it when Śakra and the sages
	
asked him long ago, when he churned
	
the nectar out of the ocean.”
142.	
Hearing this, Vyāsa,
son of Satyavatī, taught the sages 

153
Chapter Eleven: The Highest Yoga
the eternal yoga of action
	
that Kṛṣṇa had taught with focused mind.
143.	
One who constantly reads 
	
this conversation between Śiva
	
and the sages headed by Sanatkumāra
	
will be freed from all evils.
144.	
One who recites this 
	
to pure twice-borns intent on celibacy
	
or who ponders its meaning
	
goes the highest way.
145.	
And one who hears this constantly, 
	
joined to devotion with a firm vow,
	
is liberated from all evils
	
and is exalted in the world of Brahmā.
146.	
Therefore, wise people,
	
especially brahmins,
	
should read, hear, and reflect on it
	
with all effort forever.


155
Commentarial Notes
Chapter 1
1.1 
The Īśvara Gītā begins with the sages addressing the bard 
Sūta, also known as Lomaharṣaṇa. Although the name 
“Sūta” is not included in this verse, I supply it for clarity.
 
“The first man” refers to Svāyaṃbhuva, the first human 
being created during this particular world-epoch (manvan-
tara). His name means “descendent of the self-born one.” 
“Self-born one” (svayaṃbhū) is an epithet given to the creator 
god.
1.2 
“Celibate students” refers to brahmacārins (here called 
varṇins), students who have undertaken study of the Vedas 
and have yet to marry. This is first of the four stages of life 
(āśramas) according to many Hindu legal texts. 
 
“The lord of lords” (īśvareśvara) is the one whom all other 
gods acknowledge as highest. According to the Īśvara Gītā, 
that god is Śiva. 
1.6 
“Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana” (“Island-born Kṛṣṇa”) does not refer to 
the god Kṛṣṇa of the Bhagavad Gītā, but rather to Vyāsa, the 
mythical sage and author of the Mahābhārata and Purāṇas. 
Verse 1.4 asserts, however, that Vyāsa is himself a form of 
Nārāyaṇa/Viṣṇu.
1.8 
Circumambulation is a traditional way of honoring a teacher 
or worshipping a god. It should always be done clockwise.
 
“Palms together” refers to the añjali, a gesture of greeting 
and respect still widely used in India and Tibet today.

156
Commentarial Notes
1.11 
Sūta’s request here is an implicit answer to Vyāsa’s question 
at 1.10. The difficulty these sages face is that they cannot 
ascertain the true nature of brahman.
1.13 
This is a reference to the story of the tortoise (kūrma) incarna-
tion of Viṣṇu, when the gods and demons churned the ocean 
of milk using a mountain as a churning stick, balanced on 
the back of a giant tortoise at the bottom of the sea. The 
Īśvara Gītā is itself a section of the Kūrma Purāṇa, a text 
that takes its name from Viṣṇu’s tortoise avatar.
1.15  
Here begins the narration by the sage Vyāsa. Vyāsa narrates 
the text until 11.137, when his pupil Sūta speaks again.
 
According to R.C. Hazra (1987:62–71), this is the point in 
the text at which the later author or authors of the Īśvara 
Gītā introduce Śiva, transforming what was previously a 
Vaiṣṇava text into a text that understands Śiva as the high-
est god. Hazra’s hypothesis helps to explain some of the 
sudden transitions and puzzling interactions between the 
gods Nārāyaṇa and Śiva in chapter 1.
1.17 
“Rudra” in this verse refers to a sage named Rudra, not to 
the wrathful incarnation of the god Śiva.
1.18 
Badarikā, known today as Badrinath, is a locale in the 
Himālayas. It has historically been an important pilgrimage 
center both for Vaiṣṇavas and Śaivas. 
1.19 
Nara and Nārāyaṇa are twin incarnations of Viṣṇu, some-
times identified with Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa of the Bhagavad 
Gītā. They are also closely associated with Badarikā, as at 
Bhāgavata Purāṇa 3.4.22.
1.21 
“Austerities” translates tapas, which can literally mean 
“heat” (from the verbal root tap, “to heat up”). Through the 
practice of austerities, yogis become powerful by storing up 
heat in their bodies.
1.22 
The arrival of the god Nārāyaṇa indicates that the sages’ 
austerities have been a success. Translated more literally, it 
is Nārāyaṇa himself who is described as “signaling [their] 
achievement” (siddhisūcaka).
1.23 
I have translated the noun brahmavādin, which appears fre-
quently throughout the Īśvara Gītā, as “one who speaks of 
brahman.” It also might be appropriate to translate as “one 
who speaks of the Vedas,” but because discussion of the true 

157
Commentarial Notes
nature of brahman is one of the central themes of the Īśvara 
Gītā, I have chosen the former translation. Also see the note 
at 4.9 for vedavādin.
1.24  
“The ancient unmanifest spirit” refers to the Sāṃkhya 
philosophical school’s concept of puruṣa, often translated 
“person.” According to Sāṃkhya, the puruṣa is pure con-
sciousness. Any passion or conceptual content ascribed to 
it is actually part of the realm of matter (prakṛti). Complete 
freedom comes from the disunion of spirit and matter, and 
is known in Sāṃkhya as “aloneness” (kaivalya). For a sum-
mary of Sāṃkhya philosophy, see King (1999:166–89).
 
“Highest spirit” (puruṣottama) is also a common epithet for 
god, denoting that puruṣa who has never been deluded into 
thinking that he is the same as prakṛti.
1.25 
This could mean that Śiva is the only one who knows the 
highest truth mentioned at 1.24. It also could be interpreted 
more metaphysically: In the entire universe, there is only one 
“knower” (vettṛ), Śiva.
1.28 
The god Nārāyaṇa gives the sages a glimpse of his divine 
form. Previously he was disguised as a human ascetic 
(tāpasa).
1.29  
“Śrī’s beloved” (śrīvatsa) is an epithet of the god Viṣṇu. In 
this case the word refers to a special mark Viṣṇu bears on 
his chest, also called the śrīvatsa.
1.30 
Instead of “covered with light,” this also can be interpreted 
as “accompanied by the goddess Śrī.”
1.31  
Śiva’s abrupt entrance is slightly puzzling. One interpreta-
tion is that the human sage Nara here reveals his true form 
to be Śiva, just as at 1.28 Nārāyaṇa reveals his divine form. 
This abrupt transition could be due to a textual interpolation 
(see note at 1.15).
 
“The Terrifying One” is an approximate translation of 
“Rudra,” another common name for Śiva. Although Śiva 
can be terrifying, he arrives here with the desire to bestow 
his grace (prasāda) upon the sages.
1.33  
“Lord of beings” (bhūtapati) can mean the lord of all beings 
(bhūtas), but it also has a specific mythological significance. 
In his terrifying form as Rudra, Śiva is the lord of the ghosts 
(bhūtas) who haunt places such as cremation grounds.

158
Commentarial Notes
1.34 
Here the world is likened to a machine (yantra). Śiva sets this 
machine in motion. A similar metaphor of the phenomenal 
world as a machine operated by god appears at Bhagavad 
Gītā 18.61. For a survey of some of the machines used in pre-
modern India, see Raghavan (1952). Implicit in the metaphor 
in the Bhagavad Gītā and here is that individual beings are 
cogs in a great machine, with god as its operator—possibly 
denying humans free will.
1.38 
As at 1.31, Śiva’s desire to bestow his grace (prasāda) is 
emphasized here.
1.41 
As at 1.25, this could be interpreted metaphysically: There 
is only one knower in the entire universe.
 
This verse plays on the multiple meanings of the Sanskrit 
word ātman, which can mean the conventional self (the 
mind, the body, and the senses), the ultimate self, or can 
simply be used as a reflexive pronoun (“himself,” “your-
self”). Compare similar wordplay on ātman in the Bhagavad 
Gītā (6.5, 6.20, 10.15, 13.29).
1.42 
Although it is unclear from the language here whose “yogic 
power” (yoga-siddhi) Nārāyaṇa is explaining, in this context 
it would make sense that it is Śiva who is being extolled. The 
word siddhi is also ambiguous—in the context of the yoga of 
the Pāśupata sect it often means superhuman power attained 
though yoga, yet it also can simply mean “accomplishment” 
or “success.”
 
“Bulls among sages” (muni-puṅgavān) is a stock phrase 
meaning “best of sages.” In this verse the poet uses it to 
play on an epithet of Śiva, “one whose emblem is the bull” 
(vṛṣabhadhvajam).
1.44 
Although it may seem strange that Nārāyaṇa asks Śiva to speak 
truthfully, the sixteenth-century commentator Vijñānabhikṣu 
points out that Śiva has a reputation for dishonesty in his 
teachings—some of his discourses are teachings of darkness 
(tāmasa śāstras), designed to delude the wicked. According to 
Vijñānabhikṣu’s commentary, it is only because he is in the 
presence of Viṣṇu, who formally requests that he tell the truth, 
that we can be certain that Śiva’s teaching in the Īśvara Gītā 
is correct. Hence, Nārāyaṇa’s emphasis here and at 1.40 that 
Śiva should speak “just in my presence” (mamaiva sannidhau).
1.46 
All of the epithets used to describe Śiva’s throne—divine, 
free from flaws, auspicious (śiva), inconceivable—are epi-
thets that can be applied to the god Śiva himself.

159
Commentarial Notes
Chapter 2
2.1	
The term twice-born (dvija) can refer to any of the highest 
three classes (varṇas): priests, warriors, or merchants. In this 
text, it primarily refers to the priestly class (the brahmins).
 
“My secret” (ātmaguhya) also could be translated “the secret 
of the self.”
2.4 
“Darkness” (tamas) refers to one of the three guṇas of the 
system of Sāṃkhya philosophy. There are three guṇas, col-
ored white, red, and black, that can be translated as purity 
(sattva), agitation (rajas), and inertia (tamas), respectively. 
These three guṇas constitute the material world (prakṛti), 
and all aspects of the material world can be understood as 
being an admixture of these three guṇas. For more, see King 
(1999:166–89).
2.5 
“Spirit” (puruṣa) is one of the twenty-five principles (tatt-
vas) of Sāṃkhya philosophy. It is separate from the other 
twenty-four, which consist of primal matter (prakṛti) and the 
evolutes of matter.
 
The grammatical subject of verses 2.5 to 2.9 is the self 
(ātman). Because this word is masculine, it would be gram-
matically correct to use the pronoun “he” rather than it. 
Such a translation would emphasize the personal aspect of 
the self (also here called “Great Lord”). Translating with the 
neuter pronoun “it,” as I have done, emphasizes the abstract, 
philosophical aspect of ātman as identified with the ultimate 
reality, Brahman.
 
“Revealed texts” (śruti) refers specifically to the Vedas, the 
highest scriptural authority for most Hindus.
2.6 
“Magician” (māyin) literally means “one who possesses mag-
ical power (māyā).” It is used frequently in the Īśvara Gītā as 
an epithet for Śiva (see 2.6, 2.27, 2.45, 3.22, 4.18, and 5.27).
 
“Magical power” (māyā) is sometimes translated as “illu-
sion.” More often in Sanskrit texts, however, this word is 
refers to the power of god or of brahman to create a phenom-
enal world that is taken by the ignorant to be the highest 
reality.
2.7 
Verses 2.7 to 2.9 attempt to teach the nature of the highest 
self by the via negativa, by saying what it is not. This is most 

160
Commentarial Notes
famously expressed in the Upaniṣads by the phrase “not 
this, not that” (neti neti).
2.8 
This verse lists the five sense-objects, sound, touch, form, 
taste, and smell, and denies that the self is any of these 
things. These five sense-objects encompass all of our every-
day objects of perception; by denying that the ultimate real-
ity is any of these things, the poet denies that the ultimate 
reality is an object of perception.
 
“It is not the breath” appears to directly contradict 2.5, which 
says that “it is . . . the breath.” However, because the word 
in question, prāṇa, has multiple meanings, commentators 
can read this section in a way that avoids contradiction. 
Besides it usual meaning of “breath,” prāṇa also has second-
ary meanings of ultimate reality (brahman) and sense organs 
(indriyas). So, although in this verse the meaning may be 
breath, at 2.5 it may be understood as brahman. By reading 
texts such as the Īśvara Gītā in this way using secondary 
(gauṇa) meanings of words, commentators attempt to avoid 
what seem to be direct contradictions within the text.
2.9  
This verse contains two extra quarters (sixteen extra syl-
lables). This is not unusual for the epics and Purāṇas, whose 
language tends to be looser than some other types of San-
skrit poetic texts.
 
This verse again refers to concepts from Sāṃkhya philoso-
phy: matter (prakṛti) and spirit (puruṣa) are the two separate 
ultimate principles of this dualistic philosophical system. 
However, according to some theistic forms of Sāṃkhya, both 
of these principles must be understood as creations of or 
aspects of god.
 
“Hands, feet, anus or genitals” refers directly to four of 
the five “organs of action” (karmendriyas) enumerated by 
Sāṃkhya philosophy. The fifth, speech, is mentioned in the 
previous verse. These organs of action are also parts of mat-
ter (prakṛti).
 
“In highest truth” translates paramārthataḥ. Some schools 
of Vedānta philosophy make a distinction between “high-
est truth” (paramārtha-satya) and “conventional truth” 
(vyāvahārika-satya).

161
Commentarial Notes
2.11  
In this verse, the Sāṃkhya philosophical concept of spirit 
(puruṣa) is used synonymously with the Vedānta concept of 
highest self (paramātman) at 2.10.
2.13 
This explains how it is known that the self is not impure, 
infirm, or changeable (2.12). By means of yogic perception 
(yogipratyakṣa), sages are able to “see” their selves as they 
truly are. Because the self is not an object of ordinary per-
ception (see 2.8), it is only available to this higher way of 
knowing.
2.15 
Ordinarily, the word bhoktṛ means “enjoyer,” the one who 
experiences states such as suffering and happiness. However, 
2.14 says that the self is not the one who suffers. Here bhoktṛ 
may be understood as a synonym for “witness” (sākṣin), sim-
ply a disinterested observer of mental states.
2.18  
This theme is reminiscent of one of the teachings of the 
Bhagavad Gītā: individual human beings are merely the 
instruments of a larger cosmic system as part of prakṛti; they 
themselves are not the true agents of action. Also see the 
note at 1.34.
2.22 
This chapter insists repeatedly that in its “own nature” 
(svabhāva), the ultimate reality is one. It appears as many 
only due to “limiting conditions” (upādhis) that are not 
essential to the ultimate reality itself. On “limiting condi-
tions,” see note at 2.28.
2.26 
Those who “see the physical as its essence” (artha-svarūpam) 
are materialists who deny the existence of the transcendent 
self, which is pure consciousness. The Cārvāka school in 
ancient India held this materialist view.
2.28  
This is the classic metaphor used to clarify the philosophi-
cal concept of the “limiting condition” (upādhi), mentioned 
in several other verses. Although the crystal is pure and 
without color, it reflects the color of a flower or a seed in its 
proximity. The limiting condition, in this case the red object, 
makes people mistakenly think it has color. The same applies 
to the self (ātman) or spirit (puruṣa). It is pure conscious-
ness, free from passions and impurities. But its proximity to 
the material world (prakṛti), full of such impurities, makes 
it appear to possess the properties of prakṛti. The similar 
metaphor of the clear sky and smoke appears at 2.24.

162
Commentarial Notes
2.29  
The injunction that one should hear about (śrotavya) the self 
refers to the study of “that which is heard” (śruti), a common 
term for the four Vedas and their branches. The other class 
of authoritative text is called “that which is remembered” 
(smṛti), and includes the epics, the Purāṇas, and legal texts. 
This passage alludes to the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad’s three-
fold formula of hearing (śravaṇa), contemplating (manana), 
and meditating on (nididhyāsana) the highest truths of the 
Vedas (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.4.5).
2.32  
This refers to the Sāṃkhya philosophical school’s concept of 
“aloneness” (kaivalya). But instead of understanding the self 
as being separate, as most texts of the Sāṃkhya philosophi-
cal school do, this verse identifies that state of being alone 
with “becoming one with the highest” (ekībhūtaḥ pareṇa).
2.35  
I translate māyā in this verse and elsewhere as “magical 
power.” Often the word māyā refers to god’s power to cre-
ate a world that, although apparently real, is not the ulti-
mate reality. At other times māyā refers not to god’s creative 
power, but to the effect of such power: the conventional 
world created by god. That is the sense in which it is used 
here.
2.38  
This may be the “great yoga” (mahāyoga) mentioned at verse 
11.7.
2.37  
This famous simile of the rivers merging into the ocean 
occurs at Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.10.1.
2.39 
Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras 1.43–44 say there are two types of 
mental concentration (samādhi): concentration with concepts 
(savikalpaka-samādhi) and the higher stage of concentration 
without concepts (nirvikalpaka-samādhi) (see Bryant 2002:144–
9). The Īśvara Gītā says that strictly speaking, knowledge 
accompanied by concepts is also ignorance (ajñāna).
2.40 
For more on Yoga as “one pointed mental focus” (ekacittatā), 
see Īśvara Gītā 11.12.
2.42 
The third foot of this verse is identical to Bhagavad Gītā 5.5. 
Just as in the Bhagavad Gītā, in most instances the Īśvara 
Gītā does not use the words sāṃkhya and yoga to refer to 
two different but related philosophical schools, as scholars 
often use the two words today. Instead, sāṃkhya corresponds 
roughly to “the path of knowledge,” whereas yoga corre-
sponds to “the path of mental concentration.”

163
Commentarial Notes
2.43 
“Lordly powers” (aiśvaryas) here refer to the sorts of super-
natural attainments described in Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras 
3.16–48: for instance, becoming very large or very small, 
levitating, or inhabiting other beings’ bodies. Some yogis 
become so caught up in the acquisition and use of these 
supernatural powers for their own selfish ends that they 
lose sight of the ultimate goal of liberation, conceived by 
the Īśvara Gītā as union with god.
2.44 
In contrast to the ignorant magician-yogis described in the 
previous verse, wise people who have mastered both yoga 
and knowledge attain the true state of lordliness (aiśvarya), 
which is becoming Lord Śiva.
2.49 
Alternatively: “Sages who see subtle things/ know that 
supreme lordliness/ is the cause of a self that is/ free from 
qualities and without stain.” If this reading is accepted, then 
lordliness is strictly speaking the cause of knowledge of the 
self. It is not the cause of the self per se, because the self 
(ātman) is eternal and uncaused.
2.50  
The third and fourth quarters of this verse are identical to 
the first and second quarters of Īśvara Gītā 4.1.
2.51 
This theme, that Śiva delegates authority and is not involved 
directly in the world’s governance, is emphasized through-
out the Īśvara Gītā.
2.53  
Although the word nirvāṇa, “extinguishing,” was made 
famous by the Buddhists, it is also frequently used in the 
Purāṇas and other Hindu texts as a synonym for mokṣa, lib-
eration from the cycle of death and rebirth. Also see note at 
10.11.
2.54 
The first quarter of this verse echoes Bṛhadāraṇyaka 
Upaniṣad 6.2.15.
 
A “cosmic cycle” (kalpa) equals 4,320,000,000 human years. 
For more on Purāṇic conceptions of time, see notes at 6.40 
and 7.10.
 
A major question among Hindu theological traditions is 
whether one can achieve liberation by one’s own effort 
alone, or whether the grace (prasāda) of god is required.
2.55  
The idea that teachings of sāṃkhya (the path of knowledge) 
and yoga (the path of self-cultivation) should be given 
only to a restricted few appears throughout the Upaniṣads 

164
Commentarial Notes
and Gītās. See, for example, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.22, 
Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 6.3.12, Maitrī Upaniṣad 6.29, and 
Bhagavad Gītā 18.67.
 
It is unclear whether the reference to “sons” here should be 
understood in the sense of “sons and daughters” (the word 
putra can be used to mean “offspring” in general).
Chapter 3
3.1  
“The unimanifest” (avyakta) here refers to brahman, as it also 
does at 3.3.
 
This chapter borrows heavily from the cosmology of the 
Sāṃkhya school of philosophy. However, it differs from the 
“classical” Sāṃkhya of the Sāṃkhya Kārikā, because it intro-
duces the concepts of time (kāla) and brahman, which are not 
among the twenty-five principles (tattvas) mentioned in that 
text. For more on Sāṃkhya, see King (1999:166–89).
3.4  
This verse uses technical terms from Indian epistemology. 
The “means of knowledge” (pramāṇas) are the tools that 
philosophers use to establish truth and validity. Examples 
of the pramāṇas include perception (pratyakṣa), rational infer-
ence (anumāna), scriptural authority (śabdapramāṇa), and 
comparison (upamāna). Because brahman is unique, it has no 
object of comparison (upamāna). The means of knowledge 
are not available to understand it as they are for worldly 
things. For more on epistemology in ancient India, see King 
(1999:128–46).
 
Mental construction (vikalpa) and semblance (ābhāsa) are 
also important philosophical concepts, discussed in Yoga, 
Vedānta, and Buddhist philosophies.
3.5 	
Brahman is space (vyoma or ākāśa) in a metaphorical sense. 
Like space, it is all-pervading and free from impurity (also 
see 2.24, 3.21).
3.6  
The third and fourth quarters of this verse are identical to 
Īśvara Gītā 3.20.
3.8  
In Sāṃkhya philosophy, the two fundamental principles 
(tattvas) are primeval matter (prakṛti or pradhāna) and spirit 
(puruṣa). Many Sāṃkhya texts say that the attraction between 
these two principles is automatic, like the attraction between 

165
Commentarial Notes
iron filings and a magnet. However, other texts describe some 
external force beyond these two who bring them together at 
the beginning of each cosmic cycle. One possibility is that 
god unites these two principles. Another possibility, described 
here, is that time (kāla) brings the two together.
3.9  
“These three” are time (kāla), primeval matter (pradhāna), and 
spirit (puruṣa), as described at 3.1 and 3.8. They exist in a 
relation of “difference-in-identity” (bhedābheda) with brah-
man, according to this verse. From one perspective they are 
the distinct entities; when analyzed in terms of brahman they 
are one.
3.10 
This is a reference to Sāṃkhya cosmology, according to 
which there are twenty-three evolutes that issue from mat-
ter (prakṛti). The first of these is the intellect (buddhi), also 
known as “the great one” (mahat). The final evolutes are the 
five gross physical elements: space, air, fire, water, and earth. 
For more discussion and a chart of the evolutes, see King 
(1999:170–89).
 
The “deceiver” (mohinī) is an allusion to the myth from the 
Mahābhārata and the Purāṇas in which the god Viṣṇu incar-
nates as the seductress Mohinī in order to trick the demons 
into giving up the nectar of immortality. The name Mohinī 
comes from the verbal root muh, “to be confused.” Like 
the beguiling female form of Viṣṇu, prakṛti seduces puruṣa. 
She confuses him and makes him forget that in reality he 
is entirely apart from the world of primal matter and its 
evolutes.
3.11 
On the guṇas in Sāṃkhya philosophy, see note at 2.4.
 
Ego (ahaṃkāra) is the second evolute. It comes out of the 
intellect (buddhi) after the intellect has come out of prakṛti. 
It is responsible for creating the false understanding of self-
hood. Besides prakṛti and its twenty-three evolutes, there is 
also spirit (puruṣa), which is in reality independent of prakṛti. 
It is therefore called the twenty-fifth principle (tattva).
3.12 
The first evolute of prakṛti is called “the great one” (mahat) 
or “intellect” (buddhi) in the Sāṃkhya philosophy. Although 
intellect is not the true self (ātman), it is falsely identified as 
the self by those who are deluded by prakṛti. It makes deter-
minate knowledge (vijñāna) possible, and is in that sense the 
knower (vijñātṛ).

166
Commentarial Notes
3.13 
The ego (ahaṃkāra) evolves from “the great one.” Therefore, 
from one perspective, ego is not different from it.
3.14 
Mind (manas) is the name of another evolute in the Sāṃkhya 
system, arising out of the ego (ahaṃkāra). It should not be 
confused with the intellect. It is lower than the intellect 
and ego, and it directly apprehends mental objects (such as 
feelings, thoughts, and memories). It is also responsible for 
assimilating the sense impressions created by the five sense 
organs.
3.15 
Īśvara Gītā 3.8 describes time (kāla) as responsible for unit-
ing the principles of matter (prakṛti) and spirit (puruṣa). Dis-
criminative knowledge (viveka) of the two principles is what 
enables liberation, according to Sāṃkhya. According to this, 
it is time that is responsible for the lack of discriminative 
knowledge, since it joins the two principles.
3.17 
Here and at 3.19, the author appears to apotheosize the 
breath (prāṇa) as “Lord Breath” (bhagavān prāna). Similarly 
Lord Agni, the god of fire, is mentioned at 3.20.
3.18 
This is once again a reference to Sāṃkhya cosmology: intel-
lect (buddhi or mahat) causes ego (ahaṃkāra), which in turn 
creates the mind (manas) and sense organs (indriyas).
3.19 
By “the unmanifest” (avyakta) this verse means unmani-
fest matter (prakṛti), not unmanifest brahman. For atheistic 
Sāṃkhya, puruṣa is the highest principle. However, accord-
ing to theistic Sāṃkhya texts such as the Īśvara Gītā, the lord 
(īśvara or bhagavān) controls prakṛti and puruṣa. Also see 6.8.
3.20 
The third and fourth quarters of this verse are identical to 
Īśvara Gītā 3.6.
3.21 
Space (vyoma) is sometimes translated as “ether.” It is the 
subtlest of the five elements. It often is compared to god or 
brahman, as it is all-pervading and eternally pure. Also see 
note at 3.5.
3.22 
On “magician” (māyin) and “magical power” (māyā), see 
notes at 2.6, 2.35.
Chapter 4
4.1 
The first and second quarters of this verse are identical to 
the third and fourth quarters of Īśvara Gītā 2.50.

167
Commentarial Notes
4.4 
“The founder, provider, and the fire at the end of time” is an 
allusion to Śiva’s three aspects: creator (Brahmā), preserver 
(Nārāyaṇa), and destroyer (Rudra). Also see 4.21–3.
4.9 
“One who speaks of the Veda” translates vedavādin. Compare 
the similar word brahmavādin (note at 1.23).
4.10–11  In these two verses the author alludes to the four classes 
(varṇas). “Brahmins, warriors, and merchants” refers to the 
three twice-born varṇas in the Hindu class system. The fourth 
and lowest varṇa, servants (śūdras), also can be saved if they 
have devotion. “Those of low birth” (nīcajātayaḥ) refers both 
to śūdras and to outcastes, those who are born entirely out-
side the system of the four varṇas. According to Hindu legal 
texts, one’s occupation is determined by the specific class 
(varṇa) and caste (jāti) that one is born into.
4.15  
Here the god Brahmā, not the impersonal creative principle 
brahman, is meant.
4.18–19  On “magical power” and “magician,” see notes at 2.6 and 
2.35.
4.20 
“Reservoir of immortality” (nidhānam amṛtasya) refers to 
the nectar of immortality churned out of the ocean by the 
gods (devas) and demons (asuras), one of part of the story 
of Viṣṇu’s tortoise (kūrma) avatar.
4.21–3 
These verses recapitulate the well known formulation of the 
“trio” (trimūrti) of gods from a Śaiva point of view. The three 
main gods Brahmā (the creator), Nārāyaṇa (the preserver), 
and Rudra (the destroyer) are all described as “powers” 
(śaktis) of Śiva, who is the highest god.
4.23 
“Made up of darkness” (tāmasī) refers to one of the Sāṃkhya 
philosophical system’s three guṇas, namely darkness or leth-
argy (tamas). For more on the three guṇas, see note at 2.4.
4.24 
This verse lists the “four yogas,” the four paths to god 
employed by people based on their different inclinations. 
These are the yoga of meditation (dhyāna-yoga), the yoga of 
knowledge (jñāna-yoga), the yoga of devotion (bhakti-yoga), 
and the yoga of action (karma-yoga). Swami Vivekananda, 
who knew the Īśvara Gītā, may have been inspired by this 
verse to create his own list of four yogas.
4.28 
Strictly speaking, Śiva is pure eternal consciousness, and 
never performs any act—hence he is not the “director” 

168
Commentarial Notes
(prerayitṛ). However, it is due to his mere existence that the 
entire world comes into being.
4.29 
On “the great yoga” (mahāyoga), see verse 11.7.
4.30 
If yoga is the same as “magical power” (māyā), it follows 
that the “lord of yoga” (yogeśvara) is the magician mentioned 
elsewhere (see note at 2.6).
4.31 
“Principles” (tattvas) refers to the twenty-five principles of 
the Sāṃkhya philosophical school. See notes at 3.11, 3.14, 
and 7.22.
4.32 
On “conceptual constructions” (vikalpas), see note at 2.39.
4.33 
Śiva’s cosmic dance, mentioned here, is manifested to the 
sages in chapter 5.
Chapter 5
5.1 
This chapter is reminiscent of chapter 11 of the Bhagavad 
Gītā. There and here, human beings are granted divine vision 
to see the supreme form of god. The difference, of course, is 
that here Śiva is the supreme god, and the chapter portrays 
his famous Tāṇḍava dance of the creation, preservation, and 
destruction of the universe.
5.4 
On “magical power” (māyā), see notes at 2.6 and 2.35.
5.9 
The three radiant gods Sūrya (the sun), Soma (the moon), 
and Agni (fire) are described here as the three eyes of Lord 
Śiva.
5.11 
This verse contains two extra quarters (of eight syllables 
each). See note at 2.10.
5.13 
Although the literal expression here is “the time of time” 
(kāla-kāla), I have taken the second word in this compound 
in its sense of “destroyer”—to translate this word literally 
into English would render it incomprehensible. The Sanskrit 
world kāla is often figuratively used to refer to death (mṛtyu) 
or to Yama, the god of death.
5.17–20  These verses portay Harihara, the form of god that is Viṣṇu 
(Hari) and Śiva (Hara) combined: Viṣṇu on the left, Śiva on 
the right (verse 5.20). The Īśvara Gītā interprets this form by 
saying that Nārāyaṇa/Viṣṇu, is none other than Śiva when 

169
Commentarial Notes
Śiva is seen correctly in his highest lordly form. Elsewhere 
Nārāyaṇa is described as the power (śakti) of Śiva responsi-
ble for the world’s preservation (see 4.22). Śiva also contains 
within himself the gods Sūrya, Soma, and Agni as his three 
eyes (see 5.9).
5.19–41  These verses employ the triṣṭubh, a different meter than used 
previously in this text. Most of the Īśvara Gītā is written in 
anuṣṭubh, four quarters of eight syllables each per verse. The 
triṣṭubh has four quarters of eleven syllables each per verse. 
The switch from anuṣṭubh to triṣṭubh to is sometimes used to 
emphasize or set apart the triṣṭubh verses. One example of 
this is in Bhagavad Gītā 11.15–50, where Kṛṣṇa reveals his 
highest, awe-inspiring form to Arjuna.
5.22  
Here and at 5.25, I translate puruṣa as “person” rather than 
“spirit.” The puruṣa in these passages appears to refer not 
to the Sāṃkhya dyad of prakṛti and puruṣa, but rather to 
the creator god, Brahmā. Brahmā was created by Lord Śiva 
and responsible for creating the world. He is also called 
Hiraṇyagarbha, the “golden egg,” as the Purāṇas say he 
was born out of such an egg. Brahmā is described at 4.21 
as the power (śakti) of Śiva responsible for the world’s 
creation.
5.31  
The word śākha means both a “branch” and, in the context 
of the Vedas, a lineage of oral transmission.
 
Although a frequent theme of the Īśvara Gītā is the all-
inclusive form of Lord Śiva, verses like this seem to offer a 
more exclusivist message. The form of the Lord is one, and 
he is known through the Veda. Those who take refuge in 
him have peace, a peace that is not available to those who 
do not take refuge in him.
5.34 
This and some of the other verses in this section call to mind 
the famous hymn at 1.64.46 of the Ṛg Veda: “They call him 
Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, and Agni. He is the divine winged 
Garuḍa. He is one; sages call him by many names. They say 
he is Agni, Yama, and Mātariśvan.”
5.37 
This verse uses terms from some of the various philosophical 
schools: Vedāntins call the ultimate reality brahman, while 
according to this text, the Buddhists use the concept of the 
“empty” (śūnya) to refer to the same thing. On emptiness 

170
Commentarial Notes
and the school of Madhyamaka Buddhist philosophy, see 
King (1999:119–27).
5.44  
Earlier in chapter 5, Śiva revealed himself in his highest 
form, which encompasses Brahmā (the creator), Nārāyaṇa 
(the preserver), and Rudra (the destroyer). However, in 
his everyday form as Bhava, Lord Śiva appears as distinct 
from the other gods, hence Nārāyaṇa now once again stands 
beside him.
5.45 
On “grace” (prasāda), see notes at 1.31 and 2.54.
5.47 
“One who grants success in yoga” (yoga-siddhidaḥ) could also 
mean “one who grants yogic powers.”
Chapter 6
6.4 
“Simulacrum” (upamā) might also be translated as “com-
parison” or “resemblance.” This word is used by Sanskrit 
literary theorists in a different context to mean “simile.”
 
On “magical power” (māyā), see notes at 2.6 and 2.35.
6.5 
Philosophers in India make a distinction between “power of 
action” (kriyā-śakti) and “power of thought” (dhī-śakti), the 
mental faculty.
6.8  
This verse nicely encapsulates the role of god in Purāṇic 
Sāṃkhya. Rather than spirit (puruṣa) and matter (prakṛti) 
activating automatically as in the “classical” Sāṃkhya of the 
Sāṃkhya Kārikās, it is god who agitates them at the begin-
ning of creation, setting them in motion. Also see Īśvara Gītā 
3.19.
6.9 
The “intellect” is the Sāṃkhya principle of mahat or buddhi, 
which is created out of prakṛti, and from which the other 
twenty-two principles of prakṛti are created. Also see Īśvara 
Gītā 3.18.
6.17 
According to classical Indian medical thought, digestion 
occurs when food is burnt up by the body’s internal fire. 
Agni, the god of fire, is “universal” (vaiśvānara) because he 
is the fire inside of all living beings.
6.19 
According to classical Indian physiology, wind or vital ener-
gy (prāṇa) circulates throughout the body and is responsible 
for various functions. Often five different types of prāṇa are 

171
Commentarial Notes
mentioned, each one with a specific purpose. Breath control 
(prāṇayāma) is important in premodern yoga as it is through 
mastery of breath control that the yogi controls the body’s 
natural circulatory system. Wind is also apotheosized as 
“Lord Breath” (bhagavān prāṇa) at verse 3.17. For more on 
prāṇayāma, see the discussion in Bryant (2009:372–3).
6.25  
Although Nirṛti is often portrayed as a feminine deity, the 
wife of Adharma (the god of anti-dharma), here Nirṛti is a 
masculine deity who bestows negative results of dark or 
wicked (tāmasa) acts (referring to tamas, one of the three 
guṇas of Sāṃkhya philosophy; see note at 2.4). Compare 
this to the portrayal of Śakra (Indra) at 6.22, who bestows 
positive results of Vedic sacrifice.
6.36 
The god of fire is the “eternal destroyer” because it is he who 
burns up the entire world at the end of each world-cycle.
6.39 
All of the beings described here are supernatural beings infe-
rior to the gods (devas). I translate yakṣas as “spirits.” They 
are attendants of the god of wealth Kubera, and usually 
not considered to be malevolent. “Demons” here refer to 
rākṣasas, blood-drinking malevolent beings such as Rāvaṇa, 
the god Rāma’s foe in the Rāmāyaṇa. “Goblins” are piśācas, 
another class of flesh-eating beings.
6.40–4 
These verses list the various divisions of time according to 
the Purāṇas, primarily based on the lunar calendar. Each 
lunar month (māsa) consists of two fortnights (pakṣas) of 
fourteen days each, one during the waxing and the other 
during the waning of the moon. There are six seasons (ṛtus) 
in one year. 
 
The units of time listed at 6.40 deal with relatively short peri-
ods. A kalā is 1.6 minutes according to Laws of Manu 1.64; 
a kāṣṭhā is one-thirtieth of one kalā; a muhūrta is equivalent 
to forty-eight minutes (see Olivelle 2005:90–1).
 
Verse 6.41 deals with cosmological time. There are four 
yugas, of decreasing amounts: 1,728,000 years, 1,296,000 
years, 864,000 years, and 432,000 years. Their sum total is 
one “great yuga” (mahāyuga). Seventy-one mahāyugas consti-
tute an “age of Manu” (manvantara). Each age of Manu is 
equivalent to one-fourteenth of a day and night of the god 
Brahmā. A para is said to be the life span of the god Brahmā; 
a parārdha is half of Brahmā’s life span.

172
Commentarial Notes
6.42 
The four classes of beings are those born from a womb (jara-
yujya); those born from an egg (andaja); those born from heat 
(usmaja); and those born from a seed (udbhijja).
6.43 
Each universe (brahmāṇda, literally “egg of Brahmā”) consists 
of seven hells and seven upper regions. There are innumer-
able universes according to the cosmology of the Purāṇas. 
6.46 
Primal matter (prakṛti) is the first principle in Sāṃkhya phi-
losophy, from which other parts of nature evolve. See notes 
at 1.24, 2.5, and 2.9.
6.47 
On the “deceiver” (mohinī), see note at 3.10.
 
At 3.10 it is matter (prakṛti), not magical power (māyā) that 
is described as the “deceiver of all embodied beings.” Often 
these two words are used as synonyms in the Purāṇas and 
in medieval Vedānta. Both traditions borrow heavily from 
Sāṃkhya philosophy. Both the words prakṛti and māyā are 
feminine in gender.
6.48  
Here the Vedānta term self (ātman) is identified with the 
Sāṃkhya principle of “spirit” (puruṣa).
Chapter 7
7.3–16  
In these verses, Lord Śiva speaks of classes of beings, and 
describes himself as the best or highest of the beings in each 
of these classes. This is a common feature of many texts 
labeled in Sanskrit as “songs” (gītās). Compare, for instance, 
Bhagavad Gītā 10.21–39.
7.4 
Śambhu is a name for Śiva in his benevolent form; the 
mountain king’s daughter is the goddess Pārvatī, Śiva’s 
consort. Ādityas and Vasus are different classes of deities. 
Both Ādityas and Vasus are deities associated with the sun. 
7.6 
By “the immortals’ foes” (amaradviṣ), the text means the 
asuras, a class of ancient beings who fought the devas and 
are sometimes translated in English as “titans” or “demons.” 
Strictly speaking, Prahlāda was not an enemy of the gods. 
According to the accounts of his story in the Purāṇas, he was 
an asura devoted to Viṣṇu who opposed his wicked father 
and sister.
7.9 
As described in most Indian legal texts (dharmaśāstras), there 
are four stages of life: 1. Celibate student, 2. Householder, 3. 

173
Commentarial Notes
Forest-dweller, and 4. Renouncer. It is remarkable that here 
the householder stage is extolled as highest, since elsewhere 
the Īśvara Gītā extolls the life of the renouncer, or even sug-
gests that it is possible to transcend the four āśramas entirely 
(see note at 11.67). 
7.10  
A kalpa can be a generic word for a span of time. It also can 
be a duration of time measuring 4,320,000,000 human years, 
one day in the life of Brahmā. A “great kalpa” (mahākalpa) 
is equivalent to the lifespan of Brahmā, 311,040,000,000,000 
human years.
 
There are four yugas: the kṛta, treta, dvāpara, and kali. Each 
yuga is superior to the one that precedes it. Our current 
yuga, the kaliyuga, is characterized by discord, immorality, 
and short life spans among human beings. For the length 
of each of the four yugas, see note to 6.40–41.
 
The “god of wealth” is Kubera, king of the supernatural 
beings called yakṣas.
 
Vīraka is another name for Nandin, one of the most impor-
tant leaders of Śiva’s troops (gaṇas). Although in later times 
“Nandin” became the standard name for Śiva’s vehicle, the 
bull (ṛṣabha), early Śaiva texts sometimes depicted Nandin 
as a powerful warrior with a monkey’s face and a human 
body.
7.12 
The Śatarudrīya is a hymn in the Yajur Veda praising the 
hundred forms of the god Rudra. It is also mentioned at 
11.22 and 11.100.
7.13 
The “hymn to the first man” is the famous Ṛg Veda sec-
tion called the Puruṣa Sūkta, which describes how the entire 
world was created from the sacrifice of a giant man.
7.14 
The “land of brahman” (brahmāvarta) is described at Laws of 
Manu 2.17 as the region between the Sarasvatī and Dṛṣadvatī 
rivers. This word might also be translated “Land of the 
Vedas.”
7.18 
This verse begins a new theme in chapter 7, the exposition 
of the theology of the Pāśupata sect (see introduction). The 
designation Pāśupatas give to the individual self is “beast” 
(paśu). Lord Śiva is the “master of beasts,” Paśupati.
7.19 
Here the important Hindu theological concept of God’s 
play (līlā) is introduced. God creates the world not from 

174
Commentarial Notes
any need or compulsion, but solely as a spontaneous act of 
joyful creativity. Although this concept is not mentioned in 
the Pāśupata Sūtras, it is prominent in later theistic philoso-
phers such as Rāmānuja (see King 1999:228).
 
“One who speaks of the Veda” translates vedavādin. Compare 
the similar word brahmavādin (note at 1.23.)
7.22 
This is another reference to the principles (tattvas) of the 
Sāṃkhya school of philosophy. The first eight principles 
created from primordial matter are termed “productive 
principles” (prakṛtis) because they, while being created, 
create something else in turn. The other fifteen “created 
principles” (vikāras) are created by the prakṛtis, but create 
nothing themselves. Note that although prakṛti often refers 
to the primordial matter (mūlaprakṛti) from which the twen-
ty-three other created principles come, it can also be used 
in this wider sense. Also note that mind (manas), listed here 
as a productive principle (prakṛti), is generally considered 
to be a created principle (vikāra) in other Sāṃkhya texts. 
That is why other texts normally list sixteen created prin-
ciples instead of fifteen (see Larson and Bhattacharya 1989: 
48–53).
7.23–24  These verses continue with a list of the remaining fifteen 
of the twenty-three principles that evolve out of primordial 
matter (mūlaprakṛti). They include the five organs of sense 
(buddhīndriyas), the five organs of action (karmendriyas), and 
the five subtle elements (tanmātras). For more on the Sāṃkhya 
principles, see Larson and Bhattacharya (1987:48–53).
7.25 
Although in atheistic Sāṃkhya prakṛti is by itself the cause of 
the entire world, in theistic Sāṃkhya texts such as this one 
it is understood as only the material cause that God uses 
to make the world, similar to the clay that a potter uses to 
make a pot.
7.26 
On the three guṇas, see note at 2.4.
7.27 
For Sāṃkhya, the cause of the “imbalance” (vaiṣamya) of the 
three guṇas is the “imbalance” or “error” (vaiṣamya) in the 
intellect that regards the self or spirit (puruṣa) as not some-
thing separate from the body, mind, and material elements.
7.28 
Dharma and adharma here refer to righteous and unrighteous 
actions. Both are fetters insofar as both bind people to the 

175
Commentarial Notes
cycle of death and rebirth. Even virtuous actions lead to 
rebirth, as they generate new, positive karmic results. How-
ever, by dedicating the fruits of one’s actions to god without 
having and desire for those fruits, liberation can be attained 
while leading an active life. This is the teaching most closely 
associated with the Bhagavad Gītā, and is echoed in a few 
parts of the Īśvara Gītā (also see verses 11.80–84).
7.30  
This verse asserts that magical power (māyā) is synonymous 
with original matter (mūlaprakṛti), and that both are a power 
(śakti) of God.
7.32  
Here the meter switches from anuṣṭubh to triṣṭubh for just 
one verse (see note at 5.19).
 
On “spirit,” see note at 1.24.
Chapter 8
8.4 
This is another reference to the twenty five principles (tat-
tvas) of Sāṃkhya philosophy. See notes at 3.11, 3.14, and 7.22.
8.8 
On “magical power” (māyā), see notes at 2.6 and 2.35.
8.9 
“Of all sciences” (sarvavidyānāṃ) refers to “sciences” in the 
wider sense, including disciplines such as poetics, astrology, 
statecraft, etc. It does not refer exclusively to the natural and 
social sciences, as the term is often used in English.
8.12 
“Knowing the use of primal matter” (pradhānaviniyogajñaḥ) 
also can be translated, “knowing the disjunction of primal 
matter,” that is, how to separate spirit (puruṣa) from matter 
(prakṛti). In Sāṃkhya philosophy, matter exists for the sake 
of spirit. By using matter skillfully (training one’s mind and 
body), one achieves freedom from matter.
 
On the Sāṃkhya concepts of spirit and matter, see note at 
1.24.
8.17 
“Some call him one,/ others call him many” might be seen 
as a theological statement of difference-in-identity: god is 
both one and many. A similar statement comes at 10.8. A 
strict Advaita (monistic) reading of this text, however, would 
assert that only oneness is real. Manyness is an illusion 
caused by god’s magical power of deception (māyā). 

176
Commentarial Notes
Chapter 9
9.1 
The issue taken up here is that Śiva has said previously that 
the whole world is his form (rūpa). But the world appears 
to have very different characteristics than god. God is pure, 
eternal, and indivisible; the world is full of suffering, is sub-
ject to change, and has many different parts. Verses such 
as this show that the Īśvara Gītā’s understanding of god’s 
relation to the world is better described as panentheism than 
pantheism. The world is a part of him, yet he transcends it.
9.2 
Although the creation of the world could not occur with-
out god or brahman, he/it is not directly responsible for its 
creation. Instead, māyā is the world’s material cause. This 
accounts for impurity and suffering in the world. Since God 
is free from all impurities and suffering, if there the world 
were identical to God, such things could not exist.
9.6 
The meaning of the second half of this verse is obscure. I am 
taking it to mean that by means of just one magical power 
(māyā), an individual can find liberation and union with 
god. Māyā can itself be divided into parts, corresponding 
to different people, much as the Sāṃkhya system describes 
parts of prakṛti corresponding to each individual puruṣa. It 
is by means of skillful engagement with māyā that the self is 
liberated. Because according to some schools of Vedānta the 
entire world is māyā, even study of the Vedas and purifica-
tion of the mind through yoga are ways of using māyā for 
liberation.
9.9 
“That which is without beginning, middle, or end” is god or 
brahman. By the union of that with ignorance (avidyā), bond-
age and suffering occur. Yet this union is only apparent, not 
real, because brahman is pure and free from any flaw, just as 
the sky is not stained by smoke (see verse 2.24).
9.11 
This verse relies on a metaphor from weaving. The highest 
abode of Viṣṇu is the loom, on which the world is spun up 
and down (prota) and back and forth (ota).
9.18 
This verse emphasizes the importance of knowing the one 
true god. It may seem to contrast with other statements 
extolling both Śiva and Viṣṇu (e.g., 11.115), but is not nec-
essarily contradictory. 

177
Commentarial Notes
Chapter 10
10.1 
Chapter 10 begins with a play on the word “mark” (liṅga). 
Unmanifest brahman is aliṅga, free from any mark or char-
acteristic (elsewhere called nirguṇa). But at the same time, 
brahman is the liṅga, the famous symbol of Śiva worshipped 
in temples throughout India. The meaning of Śiva’s liṅga is 
explored in more detail in chapter 11 (11.92–98).
10.2 
This verse suggests that through yoga one can achieve lib-
eration, along with supernormal powers (siddhis), while still 
embodied in this world. The question of whether or not 
“embodied liberation” (jīvanmukti) is possible was hotly 
debated among philosophers in India.
 
The word nirvāṇa, closely associated with Buddhism, is also 
used in verses 2.53 and 10.11.
10.5 
On magical power (māyā), see notes at 2.6 and 2.35.
10.7 
The question as to whether selves are one or many was 
debated by philosophical schools in India. The Advaita 
Vedānta school sees the individual self (jīvātman) to be one 
and identical to brahman. Other Vedānta schools, however, 
uphold the multiplicity of individual selves, arguing that 
if the self were one, then when one person becomes lib-
erated, all people would become liberated. The “classical” 
Sāṃkhya of the Sāṃkhya Kārikās also argued for the exis-
tence of many distinct “spirits” (puruṣas). The Īśvara Gītā 
seems to suggest here that exponents of either philosophical 
position can achieve liberation. For more on these different 
philosophies, see King (1999:166–89, 212–29).
10.8 
Here allowance is made for the worship the many different 
gods because they are all ultimately the same as brahman, the 
ultimate reality. Through devotion to just one god or aspect 
of brahman, the worshipper eventually knows the totality of 
brahman. On the idea that god is both one and many, also 
see note at 8.17.
10.11 
In this verse, the goals of several different spiritual paths are 
all identified as the same: The union with god that is the 
goal of theistic sects, the nirvāṇa of the Buddhists, the one-
ness with brahman of Vedānta, and the aloneness (kaivalya) 
of Sāṃkhya. Also see note at 2.53. 

178
Commentarial Notes
Chapter 11
11.2 
The “cage of evils” is saṃsāra, the cycle of death and rebirth. 
Yogis who have achieved the state of embodied liberation 
(jīvanmukti) are no longer subject to the bondage and suf-
fering of saṃsāra.
 
I take siddhi here to refer specifically to the extraordinary 
powers one attains as a part of the yogic path. These pow-
ers are described in the third chapter of Patañjali’s Yoga 
Sūtras. The second half of this verse could also be translated 
“Pure knowledge arises, leading directly to the attainment 
of nirvāṇa.” Also see note at 11.56.
11.4 
Those who take Śiva as their meditative object become Śiva 
himself. The epithet “Great Lord” (māheśvara) is commonly 
applied to the god Śiva. But “Lord” (īśvara) or “Great Lord” 
(māheśvara) is also used to refer to advanced yoga practitio-
ners who partake of the lord’s power (aiśvarya). Also see 
2.43, 2.44, 2.49.
11.6 
Although the “yoga of non-being” (abhāvayoga) is useful 
for helping the practitioner distinguish the real self from 
false appearances, it fails to illuminate the relation of the 
self and universe to god (understood here to be Lord Śiva). 
The “yoga of non-being” described here has similarities to 
the one mentioned in the Śiva Purāṇa (7.2.37.7–10) and Liṅga 
Purāṇa (2.55.14).
11.8  
“The yoga of brahman” is the same as “the yoga on me” 
discussed at 11.4 (the “great yoga”).
11.10  
“Those who reject the lord” (īśvarabahiṣkṛtāḥ) is more liter-
ally “those who expel the lord” or “those who drive out the 
lord.” It may refer to atheistic yogis, or it may refer more 
generally to any yogi who does not see Śiva as the highest 
lord.
11.11–12  This list of the eight means (sādhanas) of yoga is identical to 
the list of the eight limbs (aṅgas) given in Patañjali’s Yoga 
Sūtra 2.28, albeit in a different order. In subsequent verses, 
the Īśvara Gītā details each of the eight in the same order 
as the Yoga Sūtras, with one exception. The postures are 
explained last, after absorption (samādhi), the limb of yoga 
considered highest by Patañjali. (On Patañjali’s eight limbs, 
see Bryant 2009:241.)

179
Commentarial Notes
 
An important difference between the two texts is the Īśvara 
Gītā’s theocentric definition of yoga as the focus of the mind 
exclusively on God through suppression of all other mental 
activity. Patañjali’s defines yoga at Yoga Sūtra 1.2 simply as 
“suppression of mental activity” (citta-vṛtti-nirodha) without 
any mention of God. Patañjali does mention concentration 
on the Lord (īśvara-praṇidhāna) as one of the observances 
(niyamas) at Yoga Sūtra 1.23. But Īśvara is not clearly at the 
center of the Yoga Sūtras in the way that he is of the Īśvara 
Gītā, nor is it likely in the Yoga Sūtras that Patañjali uses 
the word īśvara to mean Lord Śiva, the creator, preserver, 
and destroyer of the world.
11.13  
This list of restraints is identical to the one at Yoga Sūtra 
2.30.
11.15 
The author of the Īśvara Gītā offers a proviso regarding non-
harming (ahiṃsā). Because the Vedas require certain animal 
sacrifices, these acts might seem to be prohibited by the prin-
ciple of non-harming. This is not the case, as these violent 
acts too should considered falling under the text’s definition 
of ahiṃsā. This is the position of the Mīmāṃsā school, which 
insists on the necessity in certain types of ritual violence 
that are prescribed by the Vedas. “Scripture’s injunction” 
(vidhi) refers specifically to injunctions of the Vedas, not of 
any other texts. The most frequently cited example of this 
exception in cases of ritual violence is from the Laws of 
Manu (verse 5.44): “When a killing (hiṃsā) is sanctioned by 
the Veda and well-established in this mobile and immobile 
creation, it should be regarded definitely as a non-killing 
(ahiṃsā); for it is from the Veda that the Law has shined 
forth” (translated in Olivelle 2005:140). 
 
Notably, this proviso does not appear in the Yoga Sūtras of 
Patañjali or its commentaries, which explicitly say that non-
harming and the other restraints are universal, not subject 
to any exceptions (YS 2.31). In commenting on this sūtra by 
Patañjali, Vyāsa writes that those who believe that they will 
acquire merit from violent animal sacrifices are confused, 
and that they incur demerit instead. Kauṇḍinya’s commen-
tary on the Pāśupata Sūtras also rejects any exception to 
the universal rule of ahiṃsā. The proviso in this verse can 
be interpreted as the Īśvara Gītā’s concession to mainstream 
views about the necessity of animal sacrifice. For more on 
ahiṃsā in Indian traditions, see Halbfass (1990:87–129).

180
Commentarial Notes
11.19 
This can also be translated as “not accepting possessions 
from desire (yathecchayā).” Most sects in India allow some 
possessions for a mendicant, such as a robe and begging 
bowl. But accepting gifts of food, for instance, should be 
disinterested and solely to nourish the body, not from any 
craving for the taste of the food.
11.20 
This list of observances appears at Yoga Sūtra 2.32, with 
“concentration on the Lord” (īśvara-praṇidhāna) in the Yoga 
Sūtra replaced in the Īśvara Gītā with “worship of the Lord” 
(īśvara-pūjana).
11.21 
The extended (parāka) fast is described at Laws of Manu 
11.216: “When a man, controlled and vigilant, abstains 
from food for twelve days, it is called the Parāka penance, 
which removes all sins.” The lunar (cāndrāyaṇa) penance is 
described in Manu 11.217: “He should decrease his food by 
one rice-ball a day during the dark fortnight and increase 
it likewise during the bright fortnight, bathing three times 
a day—tradition calls this Cāndrāyaṇa (the lunar penance)” 
(see Olivelle 2005: 226–7).
11.22  
On the Śatarudrīya, see note at 7.12.
11.25  
Compare this verse to Laws of Manu verses 2.85–87 (Olivelle 
2005:99).
11.26 
All three of these types of recitation—voiced, unvoiced, and 
mental—both involve repetition of the words of the text and 
comprehension of the words of the text. Mere repetition of 
the sounds of the words without comprehension, as is com-
monly practiced by worshippers who do not understand 
Sanskrit, is not Vedic study (svādhyāya).
11.28 
Purification by earth (mṛd) refers to the smearing the body 
with ashes (bhasma) practiced by the Pāśupatas and other 
Śaiva sects. Also see 11.66.
11.29 
According to this text, verbal worship is praise (stuti) of Śiva, 
mental worship is remembrance (smṛti) of Śiva, and physical 
worship, such as offering fruit or flowers to Śiva, is simply 
known as worship (pūjana).
11.32  
The commentator Vijñānabhikṣu specifies that a “beat” 
(mātrā) is equivalent to the time it takes to say one short 
syllable.

181
Commentarial Notes
11.34  
Although the type of recitation (japa) that accompanies 
breath control exercises is not specified, from context it is 
clear that mental recitation is meant.
11.35  
This is the author’s instruction for breath control “with 
seed” (sagarba). The Gāyatrī mantra is a very well-known 
mantra from the Ṛg Veda. This verse says that it should 
always be preceded by its “head” (śiras), which consists of 
the syllable Oṃ and the words bhūr bhūvaḥ svaḥ (known as 
the vyāhṛti).
11.38  
“Restraint of the sense organs” refers to the generally accept-
ed theory of perception among philosophers in ancient India: 
The sense organs themselves move toward and come into 
contact with the objects of sense. This contact is the cause of 
the arising of the five types of sense perceptions. Although 
the sense organs of the undisciplined person automatically 
move toward and engage with sense objects, a disciplined 
yogi is able to stop the sense organs from extending out from 
the body toward their objects. For more on this projective 
theory of perception, see White (2009: 123–6)
11.43  
The author departs from Patañjali’s ordering of the eight 
limbs (aṅgas) of yoga by describing posture (āsana) after 
absorption (samādhi). This creates ambiguity about which 
of the Īśvara Gītā’s eight means (sādhanas) should be con-
sidered highest. After stating at 11.41 that absorption is the 
highest means, at 11.43 the author states that posture is the 
highest. In light of the Īśvara Gītā’s understanding of the 
highest yoga as union between the individual and Lord 
Śiva, the statement at 11.43 should probably be taken as 
hyperbole.
11.50–51 On the proper place for the performance of yoga, compare 
this verse with Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 2.10 and Bhagavad 
Gītā 6.11–12.
11.54  
On “magical power” (māyā), see notes at 2.6 and 2.35.
11.56  
The “lordly powers” (aiśvaryas) are supernatural abilities 
acquired in the course of the practice of yoga. Although they 
may be used toward positive ends, the Īśvara Gītā warns 
against focusing on these powers exclusively and losing 
sight of the end goal of yoga (see Īśvara Gītā 2.43).

182
Commentarial Notes
 
The eight petals of the lotus may correspond to the eight 
aiśvaryas enumerated by yoga commentators. One common 
version of this list is: 1. becoming very small; 2. becoming 
very light; 3. Becoming very large; 4. The ability to attain 
anything; 5. Fulfillment of all desires; 6. Having complete 
control of other beings; 7. Being lord of the world; 8. Being 
able to manipulate the elements (see Bryant 2009:384–5).
11.61  
“Spirit” is a translation of puruṣa, the twenty-fifth principle 
(tattva) of Sāṃkhya philosophy. It is pure and different sepa-
rate from other twenty-four principles. According to Yoga 
Sūtra 1.24, the lord is himself a spirit who differs from all 
others on account of his never having been subject to impu-
rity of any sort.
11.66  
The mantra beginning with ‘fire’ ” is in the Atharvaśiras 
Upaniṣad. It describes the Pāśupatas as smearing their bod-
ies with ashes and reciting the mantra “Fire is ashes, wind is 
ashes, water is ashes, dry land is ashes, the sky is ashes. All 
this is ashes, the mind, these eyes are ashes” (Atharvaśiras 
Upaniṣad 39; see Tarkaratna 1990).
 
There are an extra two quarters, of eight syllables each, in 
this verse (see note at 2.10).
11.67  
The Pāśupatas were one of the earliest recorded groups to 
be devoted to Śiva. It was they who composed most of the 
Īśvara Gītā. They taught that individual selves (paśus, “crea-
tures”) can be liberated from their fetters (pāśas) by means 
of identification with Lord Śiva (the pati, “master”) using 
visualization exercises of the sort described from 11.53–66. 
Refer to the introduction for more information.
 
“Stages of life” refers to the four stages (āśramas) taught as 
obligatory in Hindu legal texts: student, householder, forest-
dweller, and renouncer. The Pāśupatas maintained that their 
vow was a fifth stage beyond the four outlined in most legal 
texts. This is why the Pāśupata path is often described as the 
atimarga, “the path beyond [the four stages]” (see Sanderson 
2005:158). Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the Pāśupata Sūtras 
suggests that only brahmin males who have already under-
gone the sacred thread (upanayana) ceremony are qualified to 
take Pāśupata vow, although in practice, other twice-borns 
may have been initiated as well (see introduction).

183
Commentarial Notes
11.68  
Here the nine limbs of another vow (vratāṅgāni) are described. 
Note that of these nine, non-harming, truthfulness, and celi-
bacy were included among the restraints (yamas) at 11.13, 
and austerity, contentment, and purity were included among 
the observances (niyamas) at 11.20.
 
Affirmation (āstikya) literally means, “being one who says, 
‘there is.’ ” The precise nature of the affirmation varies accord-
ing to different sources. Early uses of this term seem to have 
referred to “one who affirms the existence of an afterlife.” In 
later times it came to be defined primarily as “one who affirms 
the authority of the Vedas” (see Nicholson 2010:168–84).
11.71  
This verse begins a series of verses in chapter 11 that are 
borrowed in part or in whole from the Bhagavad Gītā. For 
some reflections on the relationship between the Īśvara Gītā 
and the Bhagavad Gītā, refer to the introduction. For a list 
of verses identical to those in Bhagavad Gītā and other texts, 
refer to the list of concordances.
11.74  
Compare this verse to 11.81: This verse simply says “one 
who surrenders all actions,” suggesting complete renuncia-
tion of all worldly acts. Verse 11.81 expands this as “one 
who surrenders all actions to me in his mind,” repeating the 
Bhagavad Gītā’s exhortation to act in accordance with legal 
texts while devoting the fruits of action to God (Bhagavad 
Gītā 18.57).
11.80  
This verse begins a discourse on karma-yoga, the yoga of 
action. This theme of acting while renouncing the fruits of 
one’s actions is much more common in the Bhagavad Gītā 
than the Īśvara Gītā. Like Patañjali’s Yoga Sūtras, the Īśvara 
Gītā’s main concern is the life of the renouncer (saṃnyāsin), 
not the householder (gṛhastha).
11.81  
See note at 11.74.
11.92 
Here again is the exhortation to abandon all worldly ties, 
including “sons and family,” something not taught in the 
Bhagavad Gītā’s exhortation to act without concern for the 
fruits of action. Additionally, worship of the liṅga is men-
tioned here, one of the central practices of Śaiva ascetics.
11.93 
On achieving liberation and supernatural powers while still 
embodied, see note at 11.2.

184
Commentarial Notes
11.98  
This memorable verse is a reminder that the liṅga is not 
merely an object or a phallic symbol: It is an omnipresent 
reality and metaphysical principle.
11.100  
On the Śatarudrīya, see note at 7.12.
11.111– 
Although these verses condemn those who would criticize
115  
Vaiṣṇavas, it also takes a typically Śaiva attitude toward 
Viṣṇu and other gods: Viṣṇu should be revered because he 
is a form of the highest god, Śiva.
11.117  
“Dog-cooker” (śvapāka) is a pejorative term for a cāṇḍala, 
one of the lowest of all outcaste groups. In the eyes of Śiva, 
someone who reviles Nārāyaṇa is even worse than the low-
est of the low, someone who cooks and eats dogs.
11.129  
It is the sage Vyāsa who is speaking here, hence “my father 
Parāśara.”
11.131  
This is a reference to Kṛṣṇa’s teaching to Arjuna in the 
Bhagavad Gītā.
11.134  
According to this verse, the worship of Śiva is encouraged 
for the sages’ wives.
11.135  
“Benevolent” (Śaṅkara) is another name of Śiva.
11.137  
Here resumes the narration by Sūta, pupil of Vyāsa. Vyāsa 
narrates from 1.15 to 11.136.
11.141  
On the “tortoise” (kūrma) avatar of Viṣṇu, see note at 1.13.
11.142  
This may refer to the Vyāsa Gītā (Song of Vyāsa), the excur-
sus on dharma that follows the Īśvara Gītā in the Kūrma 
Purāṇa.

185
Sanskrit Text
Chapter 1
ṛṣaya ūcuḥ
1. 	
bhavatā kathitaḥ samyak sargaḥ svāyaṃbhuvas tataḥ
	
brahmāṇḍasyāsya vistāro manvantaraviniścayaḥ
2.	
tatreśvareśvaro devo varṇibhir dharmatatparaiḥ
	
jñānayogaratair nityam ārādhyaḥ kathitas tvayā1
3.	
tadvadāśeṣasaṃsāraduḥkhanāśanam uttamam 
jñānaṃ brahmaikaviṣayaṃ yena paśyema tat param2
4.	
tvaṃ hi nārāyaṇāt sākṣāt kṛṣṇadvaipāyanāt prabho 
avāptākhilavijñānas tat tvāṃ pṛcchāmahe punaḥ
5.	
śrutvā munīnāṃ tad vākyaṃ kṛṣṇadvaipāyanaṃ prabhum 
sūtaḥ paurāṇikaḥ smṛtvā bhāṣituṃ hy upacakrame
6. 	
athāsminn antare vyāsaḥ kṛṣṇadvaipāyanaḥ svayam
	
ājagāma muniśreṣṭhā yatra satraṃ samāsate 
7.	
taṃ dṛṣṭvā vedavidvāṃsaṃ kālameghasamadyutim 
vyāsaṃ kamalapatrākṣaṃ praṇemur dvijapuṃgavāḥ 
8.	
papāta daṇḍavad bhūmau dṛṣṭvāsau romaharṣaṇaḥ 
pradakṣiṇīkṛtya guruṃ prāñjaliḥ pārśvago ‘bhavat3
9.	
pṛṣṭāste ‘nāmayaṃ viprāḥ śaunakādyā mahāmunim 
samāśvāsyāsanaṃ tasmai tadyogyaṃ samakalpayan
10.	
athaitān abravīd vākyaṃ parāśarasutaḥ prabhuḥ 
kaccin na tapaso hāniḥ svādhyāyasya śrutasya ca
11.	
tataḥ sa sūtaḥ svaguruṃ praṇamyāha mahāmunim 
jñānaṃ tad brahmaviṣayaṃ munīnāṃ vaktum arhasi
12.	
ime hi munayaḥ śāntās tāpasā dharmatatparāḥ 
śuśrūṣā jāyate caiṣāṃ vaktum arhasi tattvataḥ

186
Sanskrit Text
13.	
jñānaṃ vimuktidaṃ divyaṃ yan me sākṣāt tvayoditam 
munīnāṃ vyāhṛtaṃ pūrvaṃ viṣṇunā kūrmarūpiṇā
14.	
śrutvā sūtasya vacanaṃ muniḥ satyavatīsutaḥ 
praṇamya śirasā rudraṃ vacaḥ prāha sukhāvaham
vyāsa uvāca
15.	
vakṣye devo mahādevaḥ pṛṣṭo yogīśvaraiḥ purā 
sanatkumārapramukhaiḥ svayaṃ yat samabhāṣata
16.	
sanatkumāraḥ sanakas tathaiva ca sanandanaḥ 
aṅgirā rudrasahito bhṛguḥ paramadharmavit 
17.	
kaṇādaḥ kapilo yogī vāmadevo mahāmuniḥ
	
śukro vasiṣṭho bhagavān sarve saṃyatamānasāḥ
18.	
parasparaṃ vicāryaite saṃśayāviṣṭacetasaḥ 
taptavantas tapo ghoraṃ puṇye badarikāśrame4
19.	
apaśyaṃs te mahāyogam ṛṣiṃ dharmasutaṃ śucim 
nārāyaṇam anādyantaṃ nareṇa sahitaṃ tadā
20.	
saṃstūya vividhaiḥ stotraiḥ sarve vedasamudbhavaiḥ 
praṇemur bhaktisaṃyuktā yogino yogavittamam
21.	
vijñāya vāñchitaṃ teṣāṃ bhagavān api sarvavit 
prāha gambhīrayā vācā kim arthaṃ tapyate tapaḥ
22.	
abruvan hṛṣṭamanaso viśvātmānaṃ sanātanam 
sākṣān nārāyaṇaṃ devam āgataṃ siddhisūcakam 
23.	
vayaṃ saṃśayam āpannāḥ sarve vai brahmavādinaḥ 
bhavantam ekaṃ śaraṇaṃ prapannāḥ puruṣottamam 
24.	
tvaṃ hi tad vettha paramaṃ sarvajño bhagavān ṛṣiḥ 
nārāyaṇaḥ svayaṃ sākṣāt purāṇo ‘vyaktapūruṣaḥ
25.	
na hy anyo vidyate vettā tvām ṛte parameśvara 
śuśrūṣāsmākam akhilaṃ saṃśayaṃ chettum arhasi
26.	
kiṃkāraṇam idaṃ kṛtsnaṃ ko ‘nusaṃsarate sadā 
kaścid ātmā ca kā muktiḥ saṃsāraḥ kiṃnimittakaḥ5
27.	
kaḥ saṃsārayatīśānaḥ ko vā sarvaṃ prapaśyati 
kiṃ tat parataraṃ brahma sarvaṃ no vaktum arhasi
28.	
evam ukte tu munayaḥ prāpaśyan puruṣottamam 
vihāya tāpasaṃ rūpaṃ saṃsthitaṃ svena tejasā 
29.	
vibhrājamānaṃ vimalaṃ prabhāmaṇḍalamaṇḍitam 
śrīvatsavakṣasaṃ devaṃ taptajāmbūnadaprabham

187
Chapter One
30.	
śaṅkhacakragadāpāṇiṃ śārṅgahastaṃ śriyāvṛtam 
na dṛṣṭas tatkṣaṇād eva naras tasyaiva tejasā
31.	
tadantare mahādevaḥ śaśāṅkāṅkitaśekharaḥ 
prasādābhimukho rudraḥ prādur āsīn maheśvaraḥ
32.	
nirīkṣya te jagannāthaṃ trinetraṃ candrabhūṣaṇam 
tuṣṭuvur hṛṣṭamanaso bhaktyā taṃ parameśvaram
33.	
jayeśvara mahādeva jaya bhūtapate śiva 
jayāśeṣamunīśāna tapasābhiprapūjita
34.	
sahasramūrte viśvātman jagadyantrapravartaka 
jayānanta jagajjanmatrāṇasaṃhārakāraṇa
35.	
sahasracaraṇeśāna śaṃbho yogīndravandita 
jayāmbikāpate deva namaste parameśvara
36.	
saṃstuto bhagavān īśas tryambako bhaktavatsalaḥ 
samāliṅgya hṛṣīkeśaṃ prāha gambhīrayā girā
37.	
kimarthaṃ puṇḍarīkākṣa munīndrā brahmavādinaḥ 
imaṃ samāgatā deśaṃ kiṃ vā kāryaṃ mayācyuta 
38.	
ākarṇya bhagavadvākyaṃ devadevo janārdanaḥ 
prāha devo mahādevaṃ prasādābhimukhaṃ sthitam6
39.	
ime hi munayo deva tāpasāḥ kṣīṇakalmaṣāḥ 
abhyāgatā māṃ śaraṇaṃ samyagdarśanakāṅkṣiṇaḥ
40.	
yadi prasanno bhagavān munīnāṃ bhāvitātmanām 
sannidhau mama taj jñānaṃ divyaṃ vaktum ihārhasi
41.	
tvaṃ hi vettha svam ātmānaṃ na hy anyo vidyate śiva 
tatas tvam ātmanātmānaṃ munīndrebhyaḥ pradarśaya
42.	
evam uktvā hṛṣīkeśaḥ provāca munipuṅgavān 
pradarśayan yogasiddhiṃ nirīkṣya vṛṣabhadhvajam
43.	
saṃdarśanān maheśasya śaṅkarasyātha śūlinaḥ 
kṛtārthaṃ svayam ātmānaṃ jñātum arhatha tattvataḥ
44.	
praṣṭum arhatha viśveśaṃ pratyakṣaṃ purataḥ sthitam 
mamaiva sannidhāv eṣa yathāvad vaktum īśvaraḥ
45. 	 niśamya viṣṇuvacanaṃ praṇamya vṛṣabhadhvajam 
sanatkumārapramukhāḥ pṛcchanti sma maheśvaram
46.	
athāsminn antare divyam āsanaṃ vimalaṃ śivam 
kim apy acintyaṃ gaganād īśvarārhaṃ samudbabhau

188
Sanskrit Text
47.	
tatrāsasāda yogātmā viṣṇunā saha viśvakṛt 
tejasā pūrayan viśvaṃ bhāti devo maheśvaraḥ
48.	
taṃ te devādideveśaṃ śaṅkaraṃ brahmavādinaḥ 
vibhrājamānaṃ vimale tasmin dadṛśur āsane
49.	
yaṃ prapaśyanti yogasthāḥ svātmany ātmānam īśvaram 
ananyatejasaṃ śāntaṃ śivaṃ dadṛśire kila7
50.	
yataḥ prasūtir bhūtānāṃ yatraitat pravilīyate 
tam āsanasthaṃ bhūtānām īśaṃ dadṛśire kila
51.	
yadantarā sarvam etad yato ‘bhinnam idaṃ jagat 
savāsudevam āsīnaṃ tam īśaṃ dadṛśuḥ kila8
52.	
provāca pṛṣṭo bhagavān munīnāṃ parameśvaraḥ 
nirīkṣya puṇḍarīkākṣaṃ svātmayogam anuttamam
53.	
tac chṛṇudhvaṃ yathānyāyam ucyamānaṃ mayānaghāḥ 
praśāntamānasāḥ sarve jñānam īśvarabhāṣitam
Chapter 2
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
avācyam etad vijñānam ātmaguhyaṃ sanātanam 
	
yan na devā vijānanti yatanto ‘pi dvijātayaḥ
2.	
idaṃ jñānaṃ samāśritya brahmabhūtā dvijottamāḥ
	
na saṃsāraṃ prapadyante pūrve ‘pi brahmavādinaḥ
3.	
guhyād guhyatamaṃ sākṣād gopanīyaṃ prayatnataḥ
	
vakṣye bhaktimatām adya yuṣmākaṃ brahmavādinām
4.	
ātmāyaḥ kevalaḥ svasthaḥ śāntaḥ sūkṣmaḥ sanātanaḥ
	
asti sarvāntaraḥ sākṣāc cinmātras tamasaḥ paraḥ 
5.	
so ‘ntaryāmī sa puruṣaḥ sa prāṇaḥ sa maheśvaraḥ
	
sa kālo ‘gnis tad avyaktaṃ sa evedam iti śrutiḥ
6.	
asmād vijāyate viśvam atraiva pravilīyate
	
sa māyī māyayā baddhāḥ karoti vividhās tanūḥ9
7.	
na cāpy ayaṃ saṃsarati na ca saṃsārayet prabhuḥ
	
nāyaṃ pṛthvī na salilaṃ na tejaḥ pavano nabhaḥ
8.	
na prāṇo na mano ‘vyaktaṃ na śabdaḥ sparśa eva ca
	
na rūparasagandhāś ca nāhaṃ kartā na vāg api
9.	
na pāṇipādau no pāyur na copasthaṃ dvijottamāḥ
	
na kartā na ca bhoktā vā na ca prakṛtipūruṣau
	
na māyā naiva ca prāṇaś caitanyaṃ paramārthataḥ

189
Chapter Two
10.	
yathā prakāśatamasoḥ sambandho nopapadyate
	
tadvad aikyaṃ na saṃbandhaḥ prapañcaparamātmanoḥ
11.	
chāyātapau yathā loke parasparavilakṣaṇau
	
tadvat prapañcapuruṣau vibhinnau paramārthataḥ 
12.	
yady ātmā malino ‘svastho vikārī syāt svabhāvataḥ
	
na hi tasya bhaven muktir janmāntaraśatair api
13.	
paśyanti munayo yuktāḥ svātmānaṃ paramārthataḥ
	
vikārahīnaṃ nirduḥkham ānandātmānam avyayam
14.	
ahaṃ kartā sukhī duḥkhī kṛśaḥ sthūleti yā matiḥ
	
sā cāhaṃkārakartṛtvād ātmany āropyate janaiḥ
15.	
vadanti vedavidvāṃsaḥ sākṣiṇaṃ prakṛteḥ param
	
bhoktāram akṣaraṃ śuddhaṃ sarvatra samavasthitam 
16.	
tasmād ajñānamūlo hi saṃsāraḥ sarvadehinām
	
ajñānād anyathājñānāt tattvaṃ prakṛtisaṃgatam10
17.	
nityoditaḥ svayaṃ jyotiḥ sarvagaḥ puruṣaḥ paraḥ
	
ahaṃkārāvivekena kartāham iti manyate
18.	
paśyanti ṛṣayo ‘vyaktaṃ nityaṃ sadasadātmakam
	
pradhānaṃ prakṛtiṃ buddhvā kāraṇaṃ brahmavādinaḥ
19.	
tenāyaṃ saṃgato hy ātmā kūṭastho ‘pi nirañjanaḥ
	
svātmānam akṣaraṃ brahma nāvabuddhyeta tattvataḥ 
20.	
anātmany ātmavijñānaṃ tasmād duḥkhaṃ tathetaram
	
rāgadveṣādayo doṣāḥ sarve bhrāntinibandhanāḥ
21.	
karmaṇy asya bhaved doṣaḥ puṇyāpuṇyam iti sthitiḥ 
	
tadvaśād eva sarveṣāṃ sarvadehasamudbhavaḥ
22.	
nityaḥ sarvatrago hy ātmā kūṭastho doṣavarjitaḥ
	
ekaḥ sa bhidyate śaktyā māyayā na svabhāvataḥ
23.	
tasmād advaitam evāhur munayaḥ paramārthataḥ
	
bhedo vyaktasvabhāvena sā ca māyātmasaṃśrayā
24.	
yathā hi dhūmasaṃparkān nākāśo malino bhavet
	
antaḥkaraṇajair bhāvair ātmā tadvan na lipyate
25.	
yathā svaprabhayā bhāti kevalaḥ sphaṭiko ‘malaḥ
	
upādhihīno vimalas tathaivātmā prakāśate
26.	
jñānasvarūpam evāhur jagad etad vicakṣaṇāḥ
	
arthasvarūpam evājñāḥ paśyanty anye kudṛṣṭayaḥ
27.	
kūṭastho nirguṇo vyāpī caitanyātmā svabhāvataḥ
	
dṛśyate hy artharūpeṇa puruṣair bhrāntidṛṣṭibhiḥ 

190
Sanskrit Text
28.	
yathā saṃlakṣyate raktaḥ kevalaḥ sphaṭiko janaiḥ
	
raktikādyupadhānena tadvat paramapūruṣaḥ
29.	
tasmād ātmākṣaraḥ śuddho nityaḥ sarvagato ‘vyayaḥ
	
upāsitavyo mantavyaḥ śrotavyaś ca mumukṣubhiḥ
30.	
yadā manasi caitanyaṃ bhāti sarvatragaṃ sadā
	
yogino ‘vyavadhānena tadā saṃpadyate svayam
31.	
yadā sarvāṇi bhūtāni svātmany evābhipaśyati
	
sarvabhūteṣu cātmānaṃ brahma saṃpadyate tadā 
32.	
yadā sarvāṇi bhūtāni samādhistho na paśyati
	
ekībhūtaḥ pareṇāsau tadā bhavati kevalaḥ
33.	
yadā sarve pramucyante kāmā ye ‘sya hṛdi sthitāḥ
	
tadāsāv amṛtībhūtaḥ kṣemaṃ gacchati paṇḍitaḥ 
34.	
yadā bhūtapṛthagbhāvam ekastham anupaśyati
	
tata eva ca vistāraṃ brahma saṃpadyate tadā
35.	
yadā paśyati cātmānaṃ kevalaṃ paramārthataḥ
	
māyāmātraṃ jagat kṛtsnaṃ tadā bhavati nirvṛtaḥ
36.	
yadā janmajarāduḥkhavyādhīnām ekabheṣajam
	
kevalaṃ brahmavijñānaṃ jāyate ‘sau tadā śivaḥ
37.	
yathā nadīnadā loke sāgareṇaikatāṃ yayuḥ
	
tadvad ātmākṣareṇāsau niṣkalenaikatāṃ vrajet
38.	
tasmād vijñānam evāsti na prapañco na saṃsṛtiḥ
	
ajñānenāvṛtaṃ loko vijñānaṃ tena muhyati 
39.	
taj jñānaṃ nirmalaṃ sūkṣmaṃ nirvikalpaṃ yad avyayam
	
ajñānam itarat sarvaṃ vijñānam iti me matam
40.	
etad vaḥ paramaṃ sāṃkhyaṃ bhāṣitaṃ jñānam uttamam
	
sarvavedāntasāraṃ hi yogas tatraikacittatā
41.	
yogāt saṃjāyate jñānaṃ jñānād yogaḥ pravartate
	
yogajñānābhiyuktasya nāvāpyaṃ vidyate kvacit
42.	
yad eva yogino yānti sāṃkhyais tad adhigamyate
	
ekaṃ sāṃkhyaṃ ca yogaṃ ca yaḥ paśyati sa tattvavit
43.	
anye ca yogino viprā aiśvaryāsaktacetasaḥ
	
majjanti tatra tatraiva na tv ātmaiṣām iti śrutiḥ11
44.	
yat tat sarvagataṃ divyam aiśvaryam acalaṃ mahat
	
jñānayogābhiyuktas tu dehānte tad avāpnuyāt

191
Chapter Three
45.	
eṣa ātmāham avyakto māyāvī parameśvaraḥ
	
kīrtitaḥ sarvavedeṣu sarvātmā sarvatomukhaḥ
46.	
sarvakāmaḥ sarvarasaḥ sarvagandho ‘jaro ‘maraḥ
	
sarvataḥ pāṇipādo ‘ham antaryāmī sanātanaḥ
47.	
apāṇipādo javano grahītā hṛdi saṃsthitaḥ
	
acakṣur api paśyāmi tathākarṇaḥ śṛṇomy aham
48.	
vedāhaṃ sarvam evedaṃ na māṃ jānāti kaścana
	
prāhur mahāntaṃ puruṣaṃ mām ekaṃ tattvadarśinaḥ 
49.	
paśyanti ṛṣayo hetum ātmanaḥ sūkṣmadarśinaḥ
	
nirguṇāmalarūpasya yat tad aiśvaryam uttamam 
50.	
yan na devā vijānanti mohitā mama māyayā
	
vakṣye samāhitā yūyaṃ śṛṇudhvaṃ brahmavādinaḥ
51.	
nāhaṃ praśāstā sarvasya māyātītaḥ svabhāvataḥ
	
prerayāmi tathāpīdaṃ kāraṇaṃ sūrayo viduḥ
52.	
yan me guhyatamaṃ dehaṃ sarvagaṃ tattvadarśinaḥ
	
praviṣṭā mama sāyujyaṃ labhante yogino ‘vyayam
53.	
teṣāṃ hi vaśam āpannā māyā me viśvarūpiṇī
	
labhante paramāṃ śuddhiṃ nirvāṇaṃ te mayā saha
54.	
na teṣāṃ punarāvṛttiḥ kalpakoṭiśatair api
	
prasādān mama yogīndrā etad vedānuśāsanam
55.	
nāputraśiṣyayogibhyo dātavyaṃ brahmavādibhiḥ
	
maduktam etad vijñānaṃ sāṃkhyayogasamāśrayam
Chapter 3
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
avyaktād abhavat kālaḥ pradhānaṃ puruṣaḥ paraḥ
	
tebhyaḥ sarvam idaṃ jātaṃ tasmād brahmamayaṃ jagat
2.	
sarvataḥ pāṇipādaṃ tat sarvato ‘kṣiśiromukham
	
sarvataḥ śrutimal loke sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati
3.	
sarvendriyaguṇābhāsaṃ sarvendriyavivarjitam
	
sarvādhāraṃ sadānandam avyaktaṃ dvaitavarjitam
4.	
sarvopamānarahitaṃ pramāṇātītagocaram
	
nirvikalpaṃ nirābhāsaṃ sarvāvāsaṃ parāmṛtam

192
Sanskrit Text
5.	
abhinnaṃ bhinnasaṃsthānaṃ śāśvataṃ dhruvam avyayam
	
nirguṇaṃ paramaṃ vyoma taj jñānaṃ sūrayo viduḥ
6.	
sa ātmā sarvabhūtānāṃ sa bāhyābhyantaraḥ paraḥ
	
so ‘haṃ sarvatragaḥ śānto jñānātmā parameśvaraḥ
7.	
mayā tatam idaṃ viśvaṃ jagad avyaktamūrtinā
	
matsthāni sarvabhūtāni yas taṃ veda sa vedavit
8.	
pradhānaṃ puruṣaṃ caiva tattvadvayam udāhṛtam
	
tayor anādir uddiṣṭaḥ kālaḥ saṃyojakaḥ paraḥ
9.	
trayam etad anādyantam avyakte samavasthitam
	
tadātmakaṃ tadanyat syāt tad rūpaṃ māmakaṃ viduḥ
10.	
mahadādyaṃ viśeṣāntaṃ saṃprasūte ‘khilaṃ jagat
	
yā sā prakṛtir uddiṣṭā mohinī sarvadehinām
11.	
puruṣaḥ prakṛtistho hi bhuṅkte yaḥ prākṛtān guṇān
	
ahaṃkāravimuktatvāt procyate pañcaviṃśakaḥ
12.	
ādyo vikāraḥ prakṛter mahān ātmeti kathyate
	
vijñānaśaktir vijñātā hy ahaṃkāras tadutthitaḥ
13.	
eka eva mahān ātmā so ‘haṃkāro ‘bhidhīyate
	
sa jīvaḥ so ‘ntarātmeti gīyate tattvacintakaiḥ
14.	
tena vedayate sarvaṃ sukhaṃ duḥkhaṃ ca janmasu
	
sa vijñānātmakas tasya manaḥ syād upakārakam
15.	
tenāvivekatas tasmāt saṃsāraḥ puruṣasya tu
	
sa cāvivekaḥ prakṛtau saṅgāt kālena so ‘bhavat
16.	
kālaḥ sṛjati bhūtāni kālaḥ saṃharati prajāḥ
	
sarve kālasya vaśagā na kālaḥ kasyacid vaśe
17.	
so ‘ntarā sarvam evedaṃ niyacchati sanātanaḥ
	
procyate bhagavān prāṇaḥ sarvajñaḥ puruṣottamaḥ
18.	
sarvendriyebhyaḥ paramaṃ mana āhur manīṣiṇaḥ
	
manasaś cāpy ahaṃkāram ahaṃkārān mahān paraḥ
19.	
mahataḥ param avyaktam avyaktāt puruṣaḥ paraḥ
	
puruṣād bhagavān prāṇas tasya sarvam idaṃ jagat
20.	
prāṇāt parataraṃ vyoma vyomātīto ‘gnir īśvaraḥ
	
so ‘haṃ sarvatragaḥ śānto jñānātmā parameśvaraḥ
	
nāsti mattaḥ paraṃ bhūtaṃ māṃ vijñāya vimucyate
21.	
nityaṃ hi nāsti jagati bhūtaṃ sthāvarajaṅgamam
	
ṛte mām ekam avyaktaṃ vyomarūpaṃ maheśvaram

193
Chapter Four
22.	
so ‘haṃ sṛjāmi sakalaṃ saṃharāmi sadā jagat
	
māyī māyāmayaṃ devaḥ kālena saha saṅgataḥ12
23.	
matsannidhāv eṣa kālaḥ karoti sakalaṃ jagat
	
niyojayaty anantātmā hy etad vedānuśāsanam
Chapter 4
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
vakṣye samāhitā yūyaṃ śṛṇudhvaṃ brahmavādinaḥ
	
māhātmyaṃ devadevasya yenedaṃ saṃpravartate13
2.	
nāhaṃ tapobhir vividhair na dānena na cejyayā
	
śakyo hi puruṣair jñātum ṛte bhaktim anuttamām
3. 	
ahaṃ hi sarvabhāvānām antas tiṣṭhāmi sarvagaḥ
	
māṃ sarvasākṣiṇaṃ loko na jānāti munīśvarāḥ
4.	
yasyāntarā sarvam idaṃ yo hi sarvāntaraḥ paraḥ
	
so ‘haṃ dhātā vidhātā ca kālāgnir viśvatomukhaḥ14
5. 	
na māṃ paśyanti munayaḥ sarve ‘pi tridivaukasaḥ
	
brahmā ca manavaḥ śakro ye cānye prathitaujasaḥ
6.	
gṛṇanti satataṃ vedā mām ekaṃ parameśvaram
	
yajanti vividhair agniṃ brāhmaṇā vaidikair makhaiḥ
7. 	
sarve lokā namasyanti brahmā lokapitāmahaḥ
	
dhyāyanti yogino devaṃ bhūtādhipatim īśvaram
8.	
ahaṃ hi sarvahaviṣāṃ bhoktā caiva phalapradaḥ
	
sarvadevatanur bhūtvā sarvātmā sarvasaṃsthitaḥ
9.	
māṃ paśyantīha vidvāṃso dhārmikā vedavādinaḥ
	
teṣāṃ sannihito nityaṃ ye bhaktyā mām upāsate 
10.	
brāhmaṇāḥ kṣatriyā vaiśyā dhārmikā mām upāsate 
	
teṣāṃ dadāmi tat sthānam ānandaṃ paramaṃ padam
11.	
anye ‘pi ye vikarmasthāḥ śūdrādyā nīcajātayaḥ
	
bhaktimantaḥ pramucyante kālena mayi saṃgatāḥ
12.	
na madbhaktā vinaśyanti madbhaktā vītakalmaṣāḥ
	
ādāv etat pratijñātaṃ na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati
13.	
yo vai nindati taṃ mūḍho devadevaṃ sa nindati
	
yo hi taṃ pūjayed bhaktyā sa pūjayati māṃ sadā
14.	
patraṃ puṣpaṃ phalaṃ toyaṃ madārādhanakāraṇāt
	
yo me dadāti niyataṃ sa me bhaktaḥ priyo mataḥ15

194
Sanskrit Text
15.	
ahaṃ hi jagatām ādau brahmāṇaṃ parameṣṭhinam
	
vidhāya dattavān vedān aśeṣān ātmaniḥsṛtān
16.	
aham eva hi sarveṣāṃ yogināṃ gurur avyayaḥ 
	
dhārmikāṇāṃ ca goptā ‘haṃ nihantā vedavidviṣām
17.	
ahaṃ vai sarvasaṃsārān mocako yoginām iha 
	
saṃsārahetur evāhaṃ sarvasaṃsāravarjitaḥ
18.	
aham eva hi saṃhartā sraṣṭāhaṃ paripālakaḥ 
	
māyāvī māmikā śaktir māyā lokavimohinī
19.	
mamaiva ca parā śaktir yā sā vidyeti gīyate
	
nāśayāmi tayā māyāṃ yogināṃ hṛdi saṃsthitaḥ16
20.	
ahaṃ hi sarvaśaktīnāṃ pravartakanivartakaḥ
	
ādhārabhūtaḥ sarvāsāṃ nidhānam amṛtasya ca
21.	
ekā sarvāntarā śaktiḥ karoti vividhaṃ jagat
	
āsthāya brahmāṇo rūpaṃ manmayī madadhiṣṭhitā
22.	
anyā ca śaktir vipulā saṃsthāpayati me jagat
	
bhūtvā nārāyaṇo ‘nanto jagannātho jaganmayaḥ
23.	
tṛtīyā mahatī śaktir nihanti sakalaṃ jagat
	
tāmasī me samākhyātā kālākhyā rudrarūpiṇī
24.	
dhyānena māṃ prapaśyanti kecij jñānena cāpare
	
apare bhaktiyogena karmayogena cāpare
25.	
sarveṣām eva bhaktānām iṣṭaḥ priyataro mama
	
yo hi jñānena māṃ nityam ārādhayati nānyathā
26.	
anye ca ye trayo bhaktā madārādhanakāṅkṣiṇaḥ
	
te ‘pi māṃ prāpnuvanty eva nāvartante ca vai punaḥ
27.	
mayā tatam idaṃ kṛtsanaṃ pradhānapuruṣātmakam
	
mayy eva saṃsthitaṃ viśvaṃ mayā saṃpreryate jagat
28.	
nāhaṃ prerayitā viprāḥ paramaṃ yogam āśritaḥ
	
prerayāmi jagat kṛtsnam etad yo veda so ‘mṛtaḥ
29.	
paśyāmy aśeṣam evedaṃ vartamānaṃ svabhāvataḥ
	
karoti kālo bhagavān mahāyogeśvaraḥ svayam
30.	
yogaḥ saṃprocyate yogī māyā śāstreṣu sūribhiḥ
	
yogeśvaro ‘sau bhagavān mahādevo mahān prabhuḥ
31.	
mahattvaṃ sarvatattvānāṃ paratvāt parameṣṭhinaḥ
	
procyate bhagavān brahmā mahān brahmamayo ‘malaḥ

195
Chapter Five
32.	
yo mām evaṃ vijānāti mahāyogeśvareśvaram
	
so ‘vikalpena yogena yujyate nātra saṃśayaḥ
33.	
so ‘haṃ prerayitā devaḥ paramānandam āśritaḥ
	
nṛtyāmi yogī satataṃ yas tad veda sa vedavit
34.	
iti guhyatamaṃ jñānaṃ sarvavedeṣu niṣṭhitam
	
prasannacetase deyaṃ dhārmikāyāhitāgnaye
Chapter 5
vyāsa uvāca
1. 	
etāvad uktvā bhagavān yogināṃ parameśvaraḥ
	
nanarta paramaṃ bhāvam aiśvaraṃ saṃpradarśayan
2.	
taṃ te dadṛśur īśānaṃ tejasāṃ paramaṃ nidhim
	
nṛtyamānaṃ mahādevaṃ viṣṇunā gagane ‘male
3. 	
yaṃ vidur yogatattvajñā yogino yatamānasāḥ
	
tam īśaṃ sarvabhūtānām ākaśe dadṛśuḥ kila
4.	
yasya māyāmayaṃ sarvaṃ yenedaṃ preryate jagat
	
nṛtyamānaḥ svayaṃ viprair viśveśaḥ khalu dṛśyate
5.	
yatpādapaṅkajaṃ smṛtvā puruṣo ‘jñānajaṃ bhayam
	
jahati nṛtyamānaṃ taṃ bhūteśaṃ dadṛśuḥ kila17
6.	
yaṃ vinidrā jitaśvāsāḥ śāntā bhaktisamanvitāḥ
	
jyotirmayaṃ prapaśyanti sa yogī dṛśyate kila
7.	
yo ‘jñānān mocayet kṣipraṃ prasanno bhaktavatsalaḥ
	
tam eva mocakaṃ rudram ākāśe dadṛśuḥ param 
8.	
sahasraśirasaṃ devaṃ sahasracaraṇākṛtim
	
sahasrabāhuṃ jaṭilaṃ candrārdhakṛtaśekharam
9.	
vasānaṃ carma vaiyāghraṃ śūlāsaktamahākaram
	
daṇḍapāṇiṃ trayīnetraṃ sūryasomāgnilocanam
10.	
brahmāṇḍaṃ tejasā svena sarvam āvṛtya ca sthitam
	
daṃṣṭrākarālaṃ durdharṣaṃ sūryakoṭisamaprabham
11.	
aṇḍasthaṃ cāṇḍabāhyasthaṃ bāhyam abhyantaraṃ param
	
sṛjantam analajvālaṃ dahantam akhilaṃ jagat
	
nṛtyantaṃ dadṛśur devaṃ viśvakarmāṇam īśvaram
12.	
mahādevaṃ mahāyogaṃ devānām api daivatam
	
paśūnāṃ patim īśānaṃ jyotiṣāṃ jyotir avyayam

196
Sanskrit Text
13.	
pinākinaṃ viśālākṣaṃ bheṣajaṃ bhavarogiṇām
	
kālātmānaṃ kālakālaṃ devadevaṃ maheśvaram
14.	
umāpatiṃ virūpākṣaṃ yogānandamayaṃ param
	
jñānavairāgyanilayaṃ jñānayogaṃ sanātanam 
15.	
śāśvataiśvaryavibhavaṃ dharmādhāraṃ durāsadam
	
mahendropendranamitaṃ maharṣigaṇavanditam 
16.	
ādhāraṃ sarvaśaktīnāṃ mahāyogeśvareśvaram
	
yogināṃ paramaṃ brahma yogināṃ yogavanditam
	
yogināṃ hṛdi tiṣṭhantaṃ yogamāyāsamāvṛtam
17.	
kṣaṇena jagato yoniṃ nārāyaṇam anāmayam
	
īśvareṇaikatāpannam apaśyan brahmavādinaḥ
18.	
dṛṣṭvā tad aiśvaraṃ rūpaṃ rudranārāyaṇātmakam
	
kṛtārthaṃ menire santaḥ svātmānaṃ brahmavādinaḥ
19.	
sanatkumāraḥ sanako bhṛguś ca 
	
sanātanaś caiva sanandanaś ca
	
rudro ‘ṅgirā vāmadevā tha śukro 
	
maharṣir atriḥ kapilo marīciḥ
20.	
dṛṣṭvātha rudraṃ jagadīśitāraṃ
	
taṃ padmanābhāśritavāmabhāgam
	
dhyātvā hṛdisthaṃ praṇipatya mūrdhnā
	
baddhvāñjaliṃ sveṣu śiraḥsu bhūyaḥ
21.	
oṅkāram uccārya vilokya devam
	
antaḥśarīre nihitaṃ guhāyām
	
samastuvan brahmamayair vacobhir
	
ānandapūrṇāyatamānasās te munaya ūcuḥ
22.	
tvām ekam īśaṃ puruṣaṃ purāṇaṃ
	
prāṇeśvaraṃ rudram anantayogam
	
namāma sarve hṛdi sanniviṣṭaṃ
	
pracetasaṃ brahmamayaṃ pavitram 
23.	
tvāṃ paśyanti munayo brahmayoniṃ
	
dāntāḥ śāntā vimalaṃ rukmavarṇam
	
dhyātvātmastham acalaṃ sve śarīre
	
kaviṃ parebhyaḥ paramaṃ paraṃ ca18
24.	
tvattaḥ prasūtā jagataḥ prasūtiḥ
	
sarvātmabhūs tvaṃ paramāṇubhūtaḥ
	
aṇor aṇīyān mahato mahīyāṃs
	
tvām eva sarvaṃ pravadanti santaḥ 

197
Chapter Five
25.	
hiraṇyagarbho jagadantarātmā
	
tvatto ‘dhijātaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ
	
saṃjāyamāno bhavatā visṛṣṭo
	
yathāvidhānaṃ sakalaṃ sasarja 
26.	
tvatto vedāḥ sakalāḥ saṃprasūtās
	
tvayy evānte saṃsthitiṃ te labhante
	
paśyāmas tvāṃ jagato hetubhūtaṃ
	
nṛtyantaṃ sve hṛdaye sanniviṣṭam 
27.	
tvayaivedaṃ bhrāmyate brahmacakraṃ
	
māyāvī tvaṃ jagatām ekanāthaḥ
	
namāmas tvāṃ śaraṇaṃ saṃprapannā
	
yogātmānaṃ citpatiṃ divyanṛtyam 
28.	
paśyāmas tvāṃ paramākāśamadhye
	
nṛtyantaṃ te mahimānaṃ smarāmaḥ
	
sarvātmānaṃ bahudhā sanniviṣṭaṃ
	
brahmānandam anubhūyānubhūya 
29.	
oṃkāras te vācako muktibījaṃ
	
tvam akṣaraṃ prakṛtau gūḍharūpam
	
tat tvāṃ satyaṃ pravadantīha santaḥ
	
svayaṃprabhaṃ bhavato yatprakāśam
30.	
stuvanti tvāṃ satataṃ sarvavedā
	
namanti tvām ṛṣayaḥ kṣīṇadoṣāḥ
	
śāntātmānaḥ satyasaṃdhā variṣṭhaṃ
	
viśanti tvāṃ yatayo brahmaniṣṭhāḥ 
31.	
eko vedo bahuśākho hy anantas
	
tvām evaikaṃ bodhayaty ekarūpam 
	
vedyaṃ tvāṃ śaraṇaṃ ye prapannās
	
teṣāṃ śāntiḥ śāśvatī netareṣām 
32.	
bhavānīśo ‘nādimāṃs tejorāśir
	
brahmā viṣṇuḥ parameṣṭhī variṣṭhaḥ
	
svātmānandam anubhūyādhiśete
	
svayaṃ jyotir acalo nityamuktaḥ19
33.	
eko rudras tvaṃ karoṣīha viśvaṃ
	
tvaṃ pālayasy akhilaṃ viśvarūpaḥ
	
tvām evānte nilayaṃ vindatīdaṃ
	
namāmas tvāṃ śaraṇaṃ saṃprapannāḥ 
34.	
tvām ekam āhuḥ kavim ekarudraṃ
	
prāṇaṃ bṛhantaṃ harim agnim īśam

198
Sanskrit Text
	
indraṃ mṛtyum anilaṃ cekitānaṃ
	
dhātāram ādityam anekarūpam 
35.	
tvam akṣaraṃ paramaṃ veditavyaṃ
	
tvam asya viśvasya paraṃ nidhānam
	
tvam avyayaḥ śāśvatadharmagoptā
	
sanātanas tvaṃ puruṣottamo ‘si 
36.	
tvam eva viṣṇuś caturānanas tvaṃ
	
tvam eva rudro bhagavān adhīśaḥ
	
tvaṃ viśvanābhiḥ prakṛtiḥ pratiṣṭhā
	
sarveśvaras tvaṃ parameśvaro ‘si
37.	
tvām ekam āhuḥ puruṣaṃ purāṇam
	
ādityavarṇaṃ tamasaḥ parastāt
	
cinmātram avyaktam acintyarūpaṃ
	
khaṃ brahma śūnyaṃ prakṛtiṃ nirguṇaṃ ca
38.	
yadantarā sarvam idaṃ vibhāti
	
yad avyayaṃ nirmalam ekarūpam
	
kim apy acintyaṃ tava rūpam etat
	
tadantarā yat pratibhāti tattvam
39.	
yogeśvaraṃ rudram anantaśaktiṃ
	
parāyaṇaṃ brahmatanuṃ pavitram
	
namāma sarve śaraṇārthinas tvāṃ
	
prasīda bhūtādhipate maheśa
40.	
tvatpādapadmasmaraṇād aśeṣa-
	
saṃsārabījaṃ vilayaṃ prayāti
	
mano niyamya praṇidhāya kāyaṃ
	
prasādayāmo vayam ekam īśam
41.	
namo bhavāyāstu bhavodbhavāya
	
kālāya sarvāya harāya tubhyaṃ
	
namo ‘stu rudrāya kapardine te
	
namo ‘gnaye deva namaḥ śivāya
42.	
tataḥ sa bhagavān devaḥ kapardī vṛṣavāhanaḥ
	
saṃhṛtya paramaṃ rūpaṃ prakṛtistho ‘bhavad bhavaḥ
43.	
te bhavaṃ bhūtabhavyeśaṃ pūrvavat samavasthitam
	
dṛṣṭvā nārāyaṇaṃ devaṃ vismitā vākyam abruvan
44.	
bhagavan bhūtabhavyeśa govṛṣāṅkitaśāsana
	
dṛṣṭvā te paramaṃ rūpaṃ nirvṛtāḥ smaḥ sanātana20
45.	
bhavatprasādād amale parasmin parameśvare
	
asmākaṃ jāyate bhaktis tvayy evāvyabhicāriṇī

199
Chapter Six
46.	
idānīṃ śrotum icchāmo māhātmyaṃ tava śaṅkara
	
bhūyo ‘pi tava yan nityaṃ yāthātmyaṃ parameṣṭhinaḥ
47.	
sa teṣāṃ vākyam ākarṇya yogināṃ yogasiddhidaḥ
	
prāha gambhīrayā vācā samālokya ca mādhavam21
Chapter 6
īśvara uvāca
1.	
śṛṇudhvam ṛṣayaḥ sarve yathāvat parameṣṭhinaḥ
	
vakṣyāmīśasya māhātmyaṃ yat tad vedavido viduḥ
2.	
sarvalokaikanirmātā sarvalokaikarakṣitā
	
sarvalokaikasaṃhartā sarvātmāhaṃ sanātanaḥ
3.	
sarveṣām eva vastūnām antaryāmī pitā hy aham
	
madhye cāntaḥsthitaṃ sarvaṃ nāhaṃ sarvatra saṃsthitaḥ
4.	
bhavadbhir adbhutaṃ dṛṣṭaṃ yat svarūpaṃ tu māmakam
	
mamaiṣā hy upamā viprā māyayā darśitā mayā
5.	
sarveṣām eva bhāvānām antarā samavasthitaḥ
	
prerayāmi jagat kṛtsnaṃ kriyāśāktir iyaṃ mama
6.	
yayedaṃ ceṣṭate viśvaṃ tatsvabhāvānuvarti ca
	
so ‘haṃ kālo jagat kṛtsnaṃ prerayāmi kalātmakam
7.	
ekāṃśena jagat kṛtsnaṃ karomi munipuṅgavāḥ
	
saṃharāmy ekarūpeṇa dvidhāvasthā mamaiva tu
8.	
ādimadhyāntanirmukto māyātattvapravartakaḥ
	
kṣobhayāmi ca sargādau pradhānapuruṣāv ubhau
9.	
tābhyāṃ saṃjāyate viśvaṃ saṃyuktābhyāṃ parasparam
	
mahadādikrameṇaiva mama tejo vijṛmbhate
10.	
yo hi sarvajagatsākṣī kālacakrapravartakaḥ
	
hiraṇyagarbho mārtaṇḍaḥ so ‘pi maddehasaṃbhavaḥ
11.	
tasmai divyaṃ svam aiśvaryaṃ jñānayogaṃ sanātanam
	
dattavān ātmajān vedān kalpādau caturo dvijāḥ
12.	
sa manniyogato devo brahmā madbhāvabhāvitaḥ
	
divyaṃ tan māmakaiśvaryaṃ sarvadā vahati svayam
13.	
sa sarvalokanirmātā manniyogena sarvavit
	
bhūtvā caturmukhaḥ sargaṃ sṛjaty evātmasaṃbhavaḥ
14.	
yo ‘pi nārāyaṇo ‘nanto lokānāṃ prabhavo ‘vyayaḥ
	
mamaiva paramā mūrtiḥ karoti paripālanam22

200
Sanskrit Text
15.	
yo ‘ntakaḥ sarvabhūtānāṃ rudraḥ kālātmakaḥ prabhuḥ
	
madājñayāsau satataṃ saṃhariṣyati me tanuḥ
16.	
havyaṃ vahati devānāṃ kavyaṃ kavyāśinām api
	
pākaṃ ca kurute vahniḥ so ‘pi macchakticoditaḥ 
17.	
bhuktam āhārajātaṃ ca pacate tad aharniśam
	
vaiśvānaro ‘gnir bhagavān īśvarasya niyogataḥ 
18.	
yo ‘pi sarvāmbhasāṃ yonir varuṇo devapuṅgavaḥ
	
so ‘pi saṃjīvayet kṛtsnam īśasyaiva niyogataḥ 
19.	
yo ‘ntas tiṣṭhati bhūtānāṃ bahir devaḥ prabhañjanaḥ
	
madājñayāsau bhūtānāṃ śarīrāṇi bibharti hi 
20.	
yo ‘pi saṃjīvano nṝṇāṃ devānām amṛtākaraḥ
	
somaḥ sa manniyogena coditaḥ kila vartate 
21.	
yaḥ svabhāsā jagat kṛtsnaṃ prakāśayati sarvadā
	
sūryo vṛṣṭiṃ vitanute śāstreṇaiva svayaṃbhuvaḥ
22.	
yo ‘py aśeṣajagacchāstā śakraḥ sarvāmareśvaraḥ
	
yajvanāṃ phalado devo vartate ‘sau madājñayā 
23.	
yaḥ praśāstā hy asādhūnāṃ vartate niyamād iha
	
yamo vaivasvato devo devadevaniyogataḥ
24.	
yo ‘pi sarvadhanādhyakṣo dhanānāṃ saṃpradāyakaḥ
	
so ‘pīśvaraniyogena kubero vartate sadā
25.	
yaḥ sarvarakṣasāṃ nāthas tāmasānāṃ phalapradaḥ
	
manniyogād asau devo vartate nirṛtiḥ sadā
26.	
vetālagaṇabhūtānāṃ svāmī bhogaphalapradaḥ
	
īśānaḥ kila bhaktānāṃ so ‘pi tiṣṭhan mamājñayā
27.	
yo vāmadevo ‘ṅgirasaḥ śiṣyo rudragaṇāgraṇīḥ
	
rakṣako yogināṃ nityaṃ vartate ‘sau madājñayā
28.	
yaś ca sarvajagatpūjyo vartate vighnakārakaḥ
	
vināyako dharmanetā so ‘pi madvacanāt kila
29.	
yo ‘pi brahmavidāṃ śreṣṭho devasenāpatiḥ prabhuḥ
	
skando ‘sau vartate nityaṃ svayambhūvidhicoditaḥ23
30.	
ye ca prajānāṃ patayo marīcyādyā maharṣayaḥ
	
sṛjanti vividhaṃ lokaṃ parasyaiva niyogataḥ
31.	
yā ca śrīḥ sarvabhūtānāṃ dadāti vipulāṃ śriyam
	
patnī nārāyaṇasyāsau vartate madanugrahāt

201
Chapter Six
32.	
vācaṃ dadāti vipulāṃ yā ca devī sarasvatī
	
sāpīśvaraniyogena coditā saṃpravartate
33.	
yāśeṣapuruṣān ghorān narakāt tārayiṣyati
	
sāvitrī saṃsmṛtā devī devājñānuvidhāyinī
34.	
pārvatī paramā devī brahmavidyāpradāyinī
	
yāpi dhyātā viśeṣeṇa sāpi madvacanānugā
35.	
yo ‘nantamahimānantaḥ śeṣo ‘śeṣāmaraprabhuḥ
	
dadhāti śirasā lokaṃ so ‘pi devaniyogataḥ
36.	
yo ‘gniḥ saṃvartako nityaṃ vaḍavārūpasaṃsthitaḥ
	
pibaty akhilam ambhodhim īśvarasya niyogataḥ
37.	
ye caturdaśa loke ‘smin manavaḥ prathitaujasaḥ
	
pālayanti prajāḥ sarvās te ‘pi tasya niyogataḥ
38.	
ādityā vasavo rudrā marutaś ca tathāśvinau
	
anyāś ca devatāḥ sarvā macchāstreṇaiva dhiṣṭhitāḥ
39.	
gandharvā garuḍā ṛkṣāḥ siddhāḥ sādhyāś ca cāraṇāḥ
	
yakṣarakṣaḥ piśācāś ca sthitāḥ śāstre svayaṃbhuvaḥ
40.	
kalākāṣṭhānimeṣāś ca muhūrtā divasāḥ kṣapāḥ
	
ṛtavaḥ pakṣamāsāś ca sthitāḥ śāstre prajāpateḥ
41.	
yugamanvantarāṇy eva mama tiṣṭhanti śāsane
	
parāś caiva parārdhāś ca kālabhedās tathā pare
42.	
caturvidhāni bhūtāni sthāvarāṇi carāṇi ca
	
niyogād eva vartante devasya paramātmanaḥ
43.	
pātālāni ca sarvāṇi bhuvanāni ca śāsanāt
	
brahmāṇḍāni ca vartante sarvāṇy eva svayaṃbhuvaḥ
44.	
atītāny apy asaṃkhyāni brahmāṇḍāni mamājñayā
	
pravṛttāni padārthaughaiḥ sahitāni samantataḥ
45.	
brahmāṇḍāni bhaviṣyanti saha vastubhir ātmagaiḥ
	
vahiṣyanti sadaivājñāṃ parasya paramātmanaḥ
46.	
bhūmir āpo ‘nalo vāyuḥ khaṃ mano buddhir eva ca
	
bhūtādir ādiprakṛtir niyoge mama vartate
47.	
yāśeṣajagatāṃ yonir mohinī sarvadehinām
	
māyā vivartate nityaṃ sāpīśvaraniyogataḥ
48.	
yo vai dehabhṛtāṃ devaḥ puruṣaḥ paṭhyate paraḥ
	
ātmāsau vartate nityam īśvarasya niyogataḥ

202
Sanskrit Text
49.	
vidhūya mohakalilaṃ yayā paśyati tat padam
	
sāpi vidyā maheśasya niyogavaśavartinī
50.	
bahunātra kim uktena mama śaktyātmakaṃ jagat
	
mayaiva preryate kṛtsnaṃ mayy eva pralayaṃ vrajet
51.	
ahaṃ hi bhagavān īśaḥ svayaṃ jyotiḥ sanātanaḥ
	
paramātmā paraṃ brahma matto hy anyan na vidyate
52.	
ity etat paramaṃ jñānaṃ yuṣmākaṃ kathitaṃ mayā
	
jñātvā vimucyate jantur janmasaṃsārabandhanāt
Chapter 7
īśvara uvāca
1.	
śṛṇudhvam ṛṣayaḥ sarve prabhāvaṃ parameṣṭhinaḥ 
yaṃ jñātvā puruṣo mukto na saṃsāre patet punaḥ
2.	
parāt parataraṃ brahma śāśvataṃ niṣkalaṃ dhruvam 
nityānandaṃ nirvikalpaṃ tad dhāma paramaṃ mama
3.	
ahaṃ brahmavidāṃ brahmā svayaṃbhūr viśvatomukhaḥ 
māyāvinām ahaṃ devaḥ purāṇo harir avyayaḥ
4.	
yoginām asmy ahaṃ śaṃbhuḥ strīṇāṃ devī girīndrajā 
ādityānām ahaṃ viṣṇur vasūnām asmi pāvakaḥ
5.	
rudrāṇāṃ śaṃkaraś cāhaṃ garuḍaḥ patatām aham 
airāvato gajendrāṇāṃ rāmaḥ śastrabhṛtām aham
6.	
ṛṣīṇāṃ ca vasiṣṭho ‘haṃ devānāṃ ca śatakratuḥ 
śilpināṃ viśvakarmāhaṃ prahlādo ‘smy amaradviṣām
7.	
munīnām apy ahaṃ vyāso gaṇānāṃ ca vināyakaḥ 
vīrāṇāṃ vīrabhadro ‘haṃ siddhānāṃ kapilo muniḥ
8.	
parvatānām ahaṃ merur nakṣatrāṇāṃ ca candramāḥ 
vajraṃ praharaṇānāṃ ca vratānāṃ satyam asmy aham
9.	
ananto bhogināṃ devaḥ senānīnāṃ ca pāvakiḥ 
āśramāṇāṃ ca gārhastham īśvarāṇāṃ maheśvaraḥ
10.	
mahākalpaś ca kalpānāṃ yugānāṃ kṛtam asmy aham 
kuberaḥ sarvayakṣāṇāṃ gaṇeśānāṃ ca vīrakaḥ
11.	
prajāpatīnāṃ dakṣo ‘haṃ nirṛtiḥ sarvarakṣasām 
vāyur balavatām asmi dvīpānāṃ puṣkaro ‘smy aham
12.	
mṛgendrāṇāṃ ca siṃho ‘haṃ yantrāṇāṃ dhanureva ca 
vedānāṃ sāmavedo ‘haṃ yajuṣāṃ śatarudriyam

203
Chapter Seven
13.	
sāvitrī sarvajapyānāṃ guhyānāṃ praṇavo ‘smy aham 
sūktānāṃ pauruṣaṃ sūktaṃ jyeṣṭhasāma ca sāmasu
14.	
sarvavedārthaviduṣāṃ manuḥ svāyaṃbhuvo ‘smy aham 
brahmāvartas tu deśānāṃ kṣetrāṇām avimuktakam
15.	
vidyānām ātmavidyāhaṃ jñānānām aiśvaraṃ param 
bhūtānām asmy ahaṃ vyoma sattvānāṃ mṛtyur eva ca
16.	
pāśānām asmy ahaṃ māyā kālaḥ kalayatām aham 
gatīnāṃ muktir evāhaṃ pareṣāṃ parameśvaraḥ
17.	
yac cānyad api loke ‘smin sattvaṃ tejobalādhikam 
tat sarvaṃ pratijānīdhvaṃ mama tejovijṛmbhitam
18.	
ātmānaḥ paśavaḥ proktāḥ sarve saṃsāravartinaḥ 
teṣāṃ patir ahaṃ devaḥ smṛtaḥ paśupatir budhaiḥ
19.	
māyāpāśena badhnāmi paśūn etān svalīlayā 
mām eva mocakaṃ prāhuḥ paśūnāṃ vedavādinaḥ
20.	
māyāpāśena baddhānāṃ mocako ‘nyo na vidyate 
mām ṛte paramātmānaṃ bhūtādhipatim avyayam
21.	
caturviṃśatitattvāni māyā karma guṇā iti 
ete pāśāḥ paśupateḥ kleśāś ca paśubandhanāḥ
22.	
mano buddhir ahaṃkāraḥ khānilāgnijalāni bhūḥ 
etāḥ prakṛtayas tv aṣṭau vikārāś ca tathāpare
23.	
śrotraṃ tvak cakṣuṣī jihvā ghrāṇaṃ caiva tu pañcamam 
pāyūpasthaṃ karau pādau vāk caiva daśamī matā
24.	
śabdaḥ sparśaś ca rūpaṃ ca raso gandhas tathaiva ca 
trayoviṃśatir etāni tattvāni prākṛtāni tu
25.	
caturviṃśakam avyaktaṃ pradhānaṃ guṇalakṣaṇam 
anādimadhyanidhanaṃ kāraṇaṃ jagataḥ param
26.	
sattvaṃ rajas tamaś ceti guṇatrayam udāhṛtam 
sāmyāvasthitim eteṣām avyaktaṃ prakṛtiṃ viduḥ
27.	
sattvaṃ jñānaṃ tamo ‘jñānaṃ rajo miśram udāhṛtam 
guṇānāṃ buddhivaiṣamyād vaiṣamyaṃ kavayo viduḥ
28.	
dharmādharmāv iti proktau pāśau dvau bandhasaṃjñitau 
mayy arpitāni karmāṇi nibandhāya vimuktaye
29.	
avidyām asmitāṃ rāgaṃ dveṣaṃ cābhiniveśakam 
kleśākhyān acalān prāhuḥ pāśān ātmanibandhanān
30.	
eteṣām eva pāśānāṃ māyā kāraṇam ucyate 
mūlaprakṛtir avyaktā sā śaktir mayi tiṣṭhati

204
Sanskrit Text
31.	
sa eva mūlaprakṛtiḥ pradhānaṃ puruṣo ‘pi ca 
vikārā mahadādīni devadevaḥ sanātanaḥ
32.	
sa eva bandhaḥ sa ca bandhakartā 
sa eva pāśaḥ paśavaḥ sa eva 
sa veda sarvaṃ na ca tasya vettā 
tam āhur agryaṃ puruṣaṃ purāṇam
Chapter 8
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
anyad guhyatamaṃ jñānaṃ vakṣye brāhmaṇapuṅgavāḥ
	
yenāsau tarate jantur ghoraṃ saṃsārasāgaram
2. 	
ahaṃ brahmamayaḥ śāntaḥ śāśvato nirmalo ‘vyayaḥ
	
ekākī bhagavān uktaḥ kevalaḥ parameśvaraḥ
3. 	
mama yonir mahad brahma tatra garbhaṃ dadhāmy aham
	
mūlaṃ māyābhidhānaṃ tu tato jātam idaṃ jagat
4. 	
pradhānaṃ puruṣo hy atmā mahān bhūtādir eva ca
	
tanmātrāṇi mahābhūtānīndriyāṇi ca jajñire
5. 	
tato ‘ṇḍam abhavad dhaimaṃ sūryakoṭisamaprabham
	
tasmin jajñe mahābrahmā macchaktyā copabṛṃhitaḥ
6. 	
ye cānye bahavo jīvā manmayāḥ sarva eva te
	
na māṃ paśyanti pitaraṃ māyayā mama mohitāḥ
7. 	
yāś ca yoniṣu sarvāsu saṃbhavanti hi mūrtayaḥ
	
tāsāṃ māyā parā yonir mām eva pitaraṃ viduḥ
8. 	
yo mām evaṃ vijānāti bījinaṃ pitaraṃ prabhum
	
sa dhīraḥ sarvalokeṣu na moham adhigacchati
9. 	
īśānaḥ sarvavidyānāṃ bhūtānāṃ parameśvaraḥ
	
oṅkāramūrtir bhagavān ahaṃ brahmā prajāpatiḥ
10. 	 samaṃ sarveṣu bhūteṣu tiṣṭhantaṃ parameśvaram
	
vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṃ yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati
11. 	 samaṃ paśyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam īśvaram
	
na hinasty ātmanātmānaṃ tato yāti parāṃ gatim
12. 	 viditvā sapta sūkṣmāṇi ṣaḍaṅgaṃ ca maheśvaram
	
pradhānaviniyogajñaḥ paraṃ brahmādhigacchati
13. 	 sarvajñatā tṛptir anādibodhaḥ
	
svatantratā nityam aluptaśaktiḥ

205
Chapter Nine
	
anantaśaktiś ca vibhor viditvā
	
ṣaḍ āhur aṅgāni maheśvarasya
14. 	 tanmātrāṇi mana ātmā ca tāni
	
sūkṣmāṇy āhuḥ sapta tattvātmakāni
	
yā sā hetuḥ prakṛtiḥ sā pradhānaṃ
	
bandhaḥ prokto viniyogo ‘pi tena
15. 	 yā sā śaktiḥ prakṛtau līnarūpā
	
vedeṣūktā kāraṇaṃ brahmayoniḥ
	
tasyā ekaḥ parameṣṭhī parastān
	
maheśvaraḥ puruṣaḥ satyarūpaḥ
16. 	 brahmā yogī paramātmā mahīyān
	
vyomavyāpī vedavedyaḥ purāṇaḥ
	
eko rudro mṛtyur avyaktam ekaṃ
	
bījaṃ viśvaṃ deva ekaḥ sa eva
17. 	 tam evaikaṃ prāhur anye ‘py anekaṃ
	
tv ekātmānaṃ kecid anyat tathāhuḥ
	
aṇor aṇīyān mahato ‘sau mahīyān
	
mahādevaḥ procyate vedavidbhiḥ
18. 	 evaṃ hi yo veda guhāśayaṃ paraṃ
	
prabhuṃ purāṇaṃ puruṣaṃ viśvarūpam
	
hiraṇmayaṃ buddhimatāṃ parāṃ gatiṃ
	
sa buddhimān buddhim atītya tiṣṭhati
Chapter 9
ṛṣaya ūcuḥ
1.	
niṣkalo nirmalo nityo niṣkriyaḥ parameśvaraḥ
	
tan no vada mahādeva viśvarūpaḥ kathaṃ bhavān
īśvara uvāca
2. 	
nāhaṃ viśvo na viśvaṃ ca māmṛte vidyate dvijāḥ
	
māyā nimittam atrāsti sā cātmānam upāśritā24
3. 	
anādinidhanā śaktir māyāvyaktasamāśrayā
	
tannimittaḥ prapañco ‘yam avyaktād abhavat khalu
4. 	
avyaktaṃ kāraṇaṃ prāhur ānandaṃ jyotir akṣaram
	
aham eva paraṃ brahma matto hy anyan na vidyate
5. 	
tasmān me viśvarūpatvaṃ niścitaṃ brahmavādibhiḥ
	
ekatve ca pṛthaktve ca proktam etan nidarśanam

206
Sanskrit Text
6. 	
ahaṃ tat paramaṃ brahma paramātmā sanātanaḥ
	
akāraṇaṃ dvijāḥ prokto na doṣo hy ātmanas tathā
7. 	
anantāḥ śaktayo ‘vyakte māyādyāḥ saṃsthitā dhruvāḥ
	
tasmin divi sthitaṃ nityam avyaktaṃ bhāti kevalam25
8. 	
yābhis tal lakṣyate bhinnam abhinnaṃ tu svabhāvataḥ
	
ekayā mama sāyujyam anādinidhanaṃ dhruvam
9. 	
puṃso ‘bhūd anyayā bhūtir anyayā tattirohitam
	
anādimadhyanidhanaṃ yujyate ‘vidyayā kila26
10. 	 tad etat param avyaktaṃ prabhāmaṇḍalamaṇḍitam
	
tad akṣaraṃ paraṃ jyotis tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṃ padam27
11. 	 tatra sarvam idaṃ protam otaṃ caivākhilaṃ jagat
	
tad eva ca jagat kṛtsnaṃ tad vijñāya vimucyate
12. 	 yato vāco nivartante aprāpya manasā saha
	
ānandaṃ brahmaṇo vidvān bibheti na kutaścana28
13. 	 vedāham etaṃ puruṣaṃ mahāntam
	
ādityavarṇaṃ tamasaḥ parastāt
	
tad vijñāya parimucyeta vidvān
	
nityānandī bhavati brahmabhūtaḥ 
14. 	 yasmāt paraṃ nāparam asti kiñcit
	
yaj jyotiṣāṃ jyotir ekaṃ divistham
	
tad evātmānaṃ manyamāno ‘tha vidvān
	
ātmānandī bhavati brahmabhūtaḥ 
15. 	 tad avyayaṃ kalilaṃ gūḍhadehaṃ
	
brahmānandam amṛtaṃ viśvadhāma
	
vadanty evaṃ brāhmaṇā brahmaniṣṭhā
	
yatra gatvā na nivarteta bhūyaḥ 
16. 	 hiraṇmaye paramākāśatattve
	
yad arciṣi pravibhātīva tejaḥ
	
tad vijñāne paripaśyanti dhīrā
	
vibhrājamānaṃ vimalaṃ vyoma dhāma 
17. 	 tataḥ paraṃ paripaśyanti dhīrā
	
ātmany ātmānam anubhūyānubhūya
	
svayaṃprabhaḥ parameṣṭhī mahīyān
	
brahmānandī bhagavān īśa eṣaḥ 
18. 	 eko devaḥ sarvabhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ
	
sarvavyāpī sarvabhūtāntarātmā

207
Chapter Ten
	
tam evaikaṃ ye ‘nupaśyanti dhīrās
	
teṣāṃ śāntiḥ śāśvatī netareṣām 
19. 	 sarvānanaśirogrīvaḥ sarvabhūtaguhāśayaḥ
	
sarvavyāpī ca bhagavān na tasmād anyad iṣyate 
20.	
ity etad aiśvaraṃ jñānam uktaṃ vo munipuṅgavāḥ
	
gopanīyaṃ viśeṣeṇa yoginām api durlabham 
Chapter 10
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
aliṅgam ekam avyaktaṃ liṅgaṃ brahmeti niścitam 
svayaṃjyotiḥ paraṃ tattvaṃ pare vyomni vyavasthitam 
2.	
avyaktaṃ kāraṇaṃ yat tad akṣaraṃ paramaṃ padam 
nirguṇaṃ śuddhavijñānaṃ tad vai paśyanti sūrayaḥ 
3. 	
tanniṣṭhāḥ śāntasaṃkalpā nityaṃ tadbhāvabhāvitāḥ 
paśyanti tat paraṃ brahma yat tal liṅgam iti śrutiḥ 
4.	
anyathā na hi māṃ draṣṭuṃ śakyaṃ vai munipuṅgavāḥ  
na hi tad vidyate jñānaṃ yatas taj jñāyate param 
5. 	
etat tat paramaṃ jñānaṃ kevalaṃ kavayo viduḥ 
ajñānam itarat sarvaṃ yasmān māyāmayaṃ jagat 
6.	
yaj jñānaṃ nirmalaṃ sūkṣmaṃ nirvikalpaṃ yad avyayam 
mamātmāsau tad evedam iti prāhur vipaścitaḥ
7.	
ye ‘py anekaṃ prapaśyanti te ‘pi paśyanti tat param 
āśritāḥ paramāṃ niṣṭhāṃ buddhvaikaṃ tattvam avyayam 
8.	
ye punaḥ paramaṃ tattvam ekaṃ vānekamīśvaram 
bhaktyā māṃ saṃprapaśyanti vijñeyās te tadātmakāḥ 
9.	
sākṣād eva prapaśyanti svātmānaṃ parameśvaram 
nityānandaṃ nirvikalpaṃ satyarūpam iti sthitiḥ 
10.	
bhajante paramānandaṃ sarvagaṃ yat tadātmakam 
svātmany avasthitāḥ śāntāḥ pare ‘vyakte parasya tu 
11.	
eṣā vimuktiḥ paramā mama sāyujyam uttamam 
nirvāṇaṃ brahmaṇā caikyaṃ kaivalyaṃ kavayo viduḥ 
12.	
tasmād anādimadhyāntaṃ vastv ekaṃ paramaṃ śivam 
sa īśvaro mahādevas taṃ vijñāya vimucyate 

208
Sanskrit Text
13.	
na tatra sūryaḥ pravibhātīha candro 
na nakṣatrāṇi tapano nota vidyut 
tadbhāsedam akhilaṃ bhāti nityaṃ 
tannityabhāsam acalaṃ sad vibhāti 
14.	
nityoditaṃ saṃvidā nirvikalpaṃ 
śuddhaṃ bṛhantaṃ paramaṃ yad vibhāti 
atrāntaraṃ brahmavido ‘tha nityaṃ 
paśyanti tattvam acalaṃ yat sa īśaḥ 
15.	
nityānandam amṛtaṃ satyarūpaṃ 
śuddhaṃ vadanti puruṣaṃ sarvavedāḥ 
tam om iti praṇaveneśitāraṃ 
dhāyāyanti vedārthaviniścitārthāḥ 
16.	
na bhūmir āpo na mano na vahniḥ 
prāṇo ‘nilo gaganaṃ nota buddhiḥ 
na cetano ‘nyat paramākāśamadhye 
vibhāti devaḥ śiva eva kevalaḥ 
17.	
ity etad uktaṃ paramaṃ rahasyaṃ 
jñānāmṛtaṃ sarvavedeṣu gūḍham 
jānāti yogī vijane ‘tha deśe 
yuñjīta yogaṃ prayato hy ajasram 
Chapter 11
īśvara uvāca
1. 	
ataḥ paraṃ pravakṣyāmi yogaṃ paramadurlabham
	
yenātmānaṃ prapaśyanti bhānumantam iveśvaram
2.	
yogāgnir dahati kṣipram aśeṣaṃ pāpapañjaram
	
prasannaṃ jāyate jñānaṃ sākṣān nirvāṇasiddhidam
3.	
yogāt saṃjāyate jñānaṃ jñānād yogaḥ pravartate
	
yogajñānābhiyuktasya prasīdati maheśvaraḥ
4.	
ekakālaṃ dvikālaṃ vā trikālaṃ nityam eva vā
	
ye yuñjantīha madyogaṃ te vijñeyā maheśvarāḥ29
5.	
yogas tu dvividho jñeyo hy abhāvaḥ prathamo mataḥ
	
aparas tu mahāyogaḥ sarvayogottamottamaḥ
6.	
śūnyaṃ sarvanirābhāsaṃ svarūpaṃ yatra cintyate
	
abhāvayogaḥ sa prokto yenātmānaṃ prapaśyati
7.	
yatra paśyati cātmānaṃ nityānandaṃ nirañjanam
	
mayaikyaṃ sa mahāyogo bhāṣitaḥ parameśvaraḥ30

209
Chapter Eleven
8.	
ye cānye yogināṃ yogāḥ śrūyante granthavistare
	
sarve te brahmayogasya kalāṃ nārhanti ṣoḍaśīm 
9.	
yatra sākṣāt prapaśyanti vimuktā viśvam īśvaram
	
sarveṣām eva yogānāṃ sa yogaḥ paramo mataḥ
10. 	 sahasraśo ‘tha śataśo ye ceśvarabahiṣkṛtāḥ
	
na te paśyanti mām ekaṃ yogino yatamānasāḥ
11.	
prāṇāyāmas tathā dhyānaṃ pratyāhāro ‘tha dhāraṇā
	
samādhiś ca muniśreṣṭhā yamo niyama āsanam
12.	
mayy ekacittatā yogo vṛttyantaranirodhataḥ
	
tatsādhanāny aṣṭadhā tu yuṣmākaṃ kathitāni tu31
13.	
ahiṃsā satyam asteyaṃ brahmacaryāparigrahau
	
yamāḥ saṃkṣepataḥ proktāś cittaśuddhipradā nṛṇām
14.	
karmaṇā manasā vācā sarvabhūteṣu sarvadā
	
akleśajananaṃ proktaṃ tv ahiṃsā paramarṣibhiḥ
15.	
ahiṃsāyāḥ paro dharmo nāsty ahiṃsā paraṃ sukham
	
vidhinā yā bhaved dhiṃsā tv ahiṃsaiva prakīrtitā
16.	
satyena sarvam āpnoti satye sarvaṃ pratiṣṭhitam
	
yathārthakathanācāraḥ satyaṃ proktaṃ dvijātibhiḥ
17.	
paradravyāpaharaṇaṃ cauryād vā ‘tha balena vā
	
steyaṃ tasyānācaraṇād asteyaṃ dharmasādhanam
18.	
karmaṇā manasā vācā sarvāvasthāsu sarvadā
	
sarvatra maithunatyāgaṃ brahmacaryaṃ pracakṣate
19.	
dravyāṇām apy anādānam āpady api yathecchayā
	
aparigraha ity āhus taṃ prayatnena pālayet
20.	
tapaḥsvādhyāyasaṃtoṣāḥ śaucam īśvarapūjanam
	
samāsān niyamāḥ proktā yogasiddhipradāyinaḥ
21.	
upavāsaparākādikṛcchracāndrāyaṇādibhiḥ
	
śarīraśoṣaṇaṃ prāhus tāpasās tapa uttamam
22. 	 vedāntaśatarudrīyapraṇavādijapaṃ budhāḥ
	
sattvaśuddhikaraṃ puṃsāṃ svādhyāyaṃ paricakṣate
23.	
svādhyāyasya trayo bhedā vācikopāṃśumānasāḥ
	
uttarottaravaiśiṣṭyaṃ prāhur vedārthavedinaḥ
24.	
yaḥ śabdabodhajananaḥ pareṣāṃ śṛṇvatāṃ sphuṭam
	
svādhyāyo vācikaḥ prokta upāṃśor atha lakṣaṇam
25.	
oṣṭhayoḥ spandamātreṇa parasyāśabdabodhakaḥ
	
upāṃśur eṣa nirdiṣṭaḥ sāhasro vācikāj japaḥ

210
Sanskrit Text
26.	
yat padākṣarasaṅgatyā parispandanavarjitam
	
cintanaṃ sarvaśabdānāṃ mānasaṃ taṃ japaṃ viduḥ
27.	
yadṛcchālābhato nityam alaṃ puṃso bhaved iti
	
yā dhīs tām ṛṣayaḥ prāhuḥ saṃtoṣaṃ sukhalakṣaṇam
28.	
bāhyam ābhyantaraṃ śaucaṃ dvidhā proktaṃ dvijottamāḥ
	
mṛjjalābhyāṃ smṛtaṃ bāhyaṃ manaḥśuddhir athāntaram32
29.	
stutismaraṇapūjābhir vāṅmanaḥkāyakarmabhiḥ
	
suniścalā śive bhaktir etad īśvarapūjanam
30.	
yamāḥ saniyamāḥ proktāḥ prāṇāyāmaṃ nibodhata
	
prāṇaḥ svadehajo vāyur āyāmas tannirodhanam
31.	
uttamādhamamadhyatvāt tridhā ‘yaṃ pratipāditaḥ
	
sa eva dvividhaḥ proktaḥ sagarbho ‘garbha eva ca
32.	
mātrādvādaśako mandaś caturviṃśatimātrikaḥ
	
madhyamaḥ prāṇasaṃrodhaḥ ṣaṭtriṃśānmātrikottamaḥ
33.	
prasvedakampanotthānajanakatvaṃ yathākramam
	
mandamadhyamamukhyānām ānandād uttamottamaḥ
34.	
sagarbham āhuḥ sajapam agarbhaṃ vijapaṃ budhāḥ
	
etad vai yoginām uktaṃ prāṇāyāmasya lakṣaṇam
35.	
savyāhṛtiṃ sapraṇavāṃ gāyatrīṃ śirasā saha
	
trir japed āyataprāṇaḥ prāṇāyāmaḥ sa ucyate
36.	
recakaḥ pūrakaś caiva prāṇāyāmo ‘tha kumbhakaḥ
	
procyate sarvaśāstreṣu yogibhir yatamānasaiḥ
37.	
recako ‘jastraniśvāsāt pūrakas tannirodhataḥ
	
sāmyena saṃsthitir yā sā kumbhakaḥ parigīyate
38.	
indriyāṇāṃ vicaratāṃ viṣayeṣu svabhāvataḥ
	
nigrahaḥ procyate sadbhiḥ pratyāhāras tu sattamāḥ
39.	
hṛtpuṇḍarīke nābhyāṃ vā mūrdhni parvatamastake
	
evamādiṣu deśeṣu dhāraṇā cittabandhanam
40.	
deśāvasthitim ālambya buddher yā vṛttisaṃtatiḥ
	
vṛttyantarair asaṃsṛṣṭā tad dhyānaṃ sūrayo viduḥ
41.	
ekākāraḥ samādhiḥ syād deśālambanavarjitaḥ
	
pratyayo hy arthamātreṇa yogasādhanam uttamam
42.	
dhāraṇā dvādaśāyāmā dhyānaṃ dvādaśadhāraṇāḥ
	
dhyānaṃ dvādaśakaṃ yāvat samādhir abhidhīyate

211
Chapter Eleven
43.	
āsanaṃ svastikaṃ proktaṃ padmam ardhāsanaṃ tathā
	
sādhanānāṃ ca sarveṣām etatsādhanam uttamam 
44.	
ūrvor upari viprendrāḥ kṛtvā pādatale ubhe
	
samāsītātmanaḥ padmam etad āsanam uttamam
45.	
ekaṃ pādam athaikasmin vinyasyoruṇi sattamāḥ
	
āsītārdhāsanam idaṃ yogasādhanam uttamam
46.	
ubhe kṛtvā pādatale jānūrvor antareṇa hi
	
samāsītātmanaḥ proktam āsanaṃ svastikaṃ param
47.	
adeśakāle yogasya darśanaṃ hi na vidyate
	
agnyabhyāse jale vā ‘pi śuṣkaparṇacaye tathā
48.	
jantuvyāpte śmaśāne ca jīrṇagoṣṭhe catuṣpathe
	
saśabde sabhaye vā ‘pi caityavalmīkasaṃcaye
49.	
aśubhe durjanākrānte maśakādisamanvite
	
nācared dehabādhe vā daurmanasyādisaṃbhave
50.	
sugupte suśubhe deśe guhāyāṃ parvatasya tu
	
nadyāstīre puṇyadeśe devatāyatane tathā
51.	
gṛhe vā suśubhe ramye vijane jantuvarjite
	
yuñjīta yogī satatam ātmānaṃ matparāyaṇaḥ
52.	
namaskṛtya tu yogīndrān saśiṣyāṃś ca vināyakam
	
guruṃ caivātha māṃ yogī yuñjīta susamāhitaḥ
53.	
āsanaṃ svastikaṃ baddhvā padmam ardham athāpi vā
	
nāsikāgre samāṃ dṛṣṭim īṣadunmīlitekṣaṇaḥ
54.	
kṛtvātha nirbhayaḥ śāntas tyaktvā māyāmayaṃ jagat
	
svātmany avasthitaṃ devaṃ cintayet parameśvaram 
55.	
śikhāgre dvādaśāṅgulye kalpayitvātha paṅkajam 
	
dharmakandasamudbhūtaṃ jñānanālaṃ suśobhanam
56.	
aiśvaryāṣṭadalaṃ śvetaṃ paraṃ vairāgyakarṇikam
	
cintayet paramaṃ kośaṃ karṇikāyāṃ hiraṇmayam
57.	
sarvaśaktimayaṃ sākṣād yaṃ prāhur divyam avyayam
	
oṃkāravācyam avyaktaṃ raśmijālasamākulam
58.	
cintayet tatra vimalaṃ paraṃ jyotir yad akṣaram
	
tasmin jyotiṣi vinyasya svātmānaṃ tadabhedataḥ
59.	
dhyāyītākāśamadhyastham īśaṃ paramakāraṇam
	
tadātmā sarvago bhūtvā na kiñcid api cintayet 

212
Sanskrit Text
60.	
etad guhyatamaṃ dhyānaṃ dhyānāntaram athocyate
	
cintayitvā tu pūrvoktaṃ hṛdaye padmam uttamam 
61.	
ātmānam atha kartāraṃ tatrānalasamatviṣam
	
madhye vahniśikhākāraṃ puruṣaṃ pañcaviṃśakam
62.	
cintayet paramātmānaṃ tanmadhye gaganaṃ param
	
oṃkārabodhitaṃ tattvaṃ śāśvataṃ śivam acyutam
63.	
avyaktaṃ prakṛtau līnaṃ paraṃ jyotir anuttamam
	
tadantaḥ paramaṃ tattvam ātmādhāraṃ nirañjanam
64.	
dhyāyīta tanmayo nityam ekarūpaṃ maheśvaram
	
viśodhya sarvatattvāni praṇavenāthavā punaḥ
65.	
saṃsthāpya mayi cātmānaṃ nirmale parame pade
	
plāvayitvātmano dehaṃ tenaiva jñānavāriṇā
66.	
madātmā manmayo bhasma gṛhītvā hy agnihotrajam
	
tenoddhṛtya tu sarvāṅgam agnir ityādimantrataḥ
	
cintayet svātmanīśānaṃ paraṃ jyotiḥsvarūpiṇam33
67.	
eṣa pāśupato yogaḥ paśupāśavimuktaye
	
sarvavedāntasāro ‘yam atyāśramam iti śrutiḥ 
68.	
etat parataraṃ guhyaṃ matsāyujyopapādakam
	
dvijātīnāṃ tu kathitaṃ bhaktānāṃ brahmacāriṇām
69.	
brahmacaryam ahiṃsā ca kṣamā śaucaṃ tapo damaḥ
	
saṃtoṣaḥ satyam āstikyaṃ vratāṅgāni viśeṣataḥ
70.	
ekenāpy atha hīnena vratam asya tu lupyate
	
tasmād ātmaguṇopeto madvrataṃ voḍhum arhati 
71.	
vītarāgabhayakrodhā manmayā mām upāśritāḥ
	
bahavo ‘nena yogena pūtā madbhāvam āgatāḥ
72.	
ye yathā māṃ prapadyante tāṃs tathaiva bhajāmy aham
	
jñānayogena māṃ tasmād yajeta parameśvaram
73.	
athavā bhaktiyogena vairāgyeṇa pareṇa tu
	
cetasā bodhayuktena pūjayen māṃ sadā śuciḥ
74.	
sarvakarmāṇi saṃnyasya bhikṣāśī niṣparigrahaḥ 
	
prāpnoti mama sāyujyaṃ guhyam etan mayoditam
75.	
adveṣṭā sarvabhūtānāṃ maitraḥ karuṇa eva ca
	
nirmamo nirahaṃkāro yo madbhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ
76.	
saṃtuṣṭaḥ satataṃ yogī yatātmā dṛḍhaniścayaḥ
	
mayy arpitamanobuddhir yo madbhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ34

213
Chapter Eleven
77.	
yasmān nodvijate loko lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ
	
harṣāmarṣabhayodvegair mukto yaḥ sa hi me priyaḥ
78.	
anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa udāsīno gatavyathaḥ
	
sarvārambhaparityāgī bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ
79.	
tulyanindāstutir maunī saṃtuṣṭo yena kenacit
	
aniketaḥ sthiramatir madbhakto mām upaiṣyati
80.	
sarvakarmāṇy api sadā kurvāṇo matparāyaṇaḥ
	
matprasādād avāpnoti śāśvataṃ paramaṃ padam
81.	
cetasā sarvakarmāṇi mayi saṃnyasya matparaḥ
	
nirāśīr nirmamo bhūtvā mām ekaṃ śaraṇaṃ vrajet
82.	
tyaktvā karmaphalāsaṅgaṃ nityatṛpto nirāśrayaḥ
	
karmaṇy abhipravṛtto ‘pi naiva tena nibadhyate
83.	
nirāśīr yatacittātmā tyaktasarvaparigrahaḥ
	
śārīraṃ kevalaṃ karma kurvan nāpnoti tat padam
84.	
yadṛcchālābhatuṣṭasya dvandvātītasya caiva hi
	
kurvato matprasādārthaṃ karma saṃsāranāśanam
85.	
manmanā mannamaskāro madyājī matparāyaṇaḥ
	
mām upaiṣyati yogīśo jñātvā māṃ parameśvaram35
86.	
madbuddhayo māṃ satataṃ bodhayantaḥ parasparam
	
kathayantaś ca māṃ nityaṃ mama sāyujyam āpnuyuḥ
87.	
evaṃ nityābhiyuktānāṃ māyeyaṃ karmasānvagam
	
nāśayāmi tamaḥ kṛtsnaṃ jñānadīpena bhāsvatā
88.	
madbuddhayo māṃ satataṃ pūjayantīha ye janāḥ
	
teṣāṃ nityābhiyuktānāṃ yogakṣemaṃ vahāmy aham
89.	
ye ‘nye ca kāmabhogārthaṃ yajante hy anyadevatāḥ
	
teṣāṃ tadantaṃ vijñeyaṃ devatānugataṃ phalam
90.	
ye cānyadevatābhaktāḥ pūjayantīha devatāḥ
	
madbhāvanāsamāyuktā mucyante te ‘pi bhāvataḥ
91.	
tasmād anīśvarān anyāṃs tyaktvā devān aśeṣataḥ
	
mām eva saṃśrayed īśaṃ sa yāti paramaṃ padam
92.	
tyaktvā putrādiṣu snehaṃ niḥśoko niṣparigrahaḥ
	
yajec cāmaraṇāl liṅge viraktaḥ parameśvaram
93.	
ye ‘rcayanti sadā liṅgaṃ tyaktvā bhogān aśeṣataḥ
	
ekena janmanā teṣāṃ dadāmi paramaiśvaram

214
Sanskrit Text
94.	
parānandātmakaṃ liṅgaṃ kevalaṃ san nirañjanam
	
jñānātmakaṃ sarvagataṃ yogināṃ hṛdi saṃsthitam
95.	
ye cānye niyatā bhaktā bhāvayitvā vidhānataḥ
	
yatra kvacana tal liṅgam arcayanti maheśvaram
96.	
jale vā vahnimadhye vā vyomni sūrye ‘thavā ‘nyataḥ
	
ratnādau bhāvayitveśam arcayel liṅgam aiśvaram
97.	
sarvaṃ liṅgam ayaṃ hy etat sarvaṃ liṅge pratiṣṭhitam
	
tasmāl liṅge ‘rcayed īśaṃ yatra kvacana śāśvatam
98.	
agnau kriyāvatām apsu vyomni sūrye manīṣiṇām
	
kāṣṭhādiṣv eva mūrkhāṇāṃ hṛdi liṅgaṃ tu yoginām
99.	
yady anutpannivijñāno viraktaḥ prītisaṃyutaḥ 
	
yāvaj jīvaṃ japed yuktaḥ praṇavaṃ brahmaṇo vapuḥ
100.	 athavā śatarudrīyaṃ japed āmaraṇād dvijaḥ
	
ekākī yatacittātmā sa yāti paramaṃ padam
101.	 vased vāmaraṇād vipro vārāṇasyāṃ samāhitaḥ
	
so ‘pīśvaraprasādena yāti tat paramaṃ padam
102.	 tatrotkramaṇakāle hi sarveṣām eva dehinām
	
dadāmi tat paraṃ jñānaṃ yena mucyeta bandhanāt36
103.	 varṇāśramavidhiṃ kṛtsnaṃ kurvāṇo matparāyaṇaḥ
	
tenaiva janmanā jñānaṃ labdhvā yāti śivaṃ padam
104.	 ye ‘pi tatra vasantīha nīcā vā pāpayonayaḥ
	
sarve taranti saṃsāram īśvarānugrahād dvijāḥ
105.	 kintu vighnā bhaviṣyanti pāpopahatacetasām
	
dharmaṃ samāśrayet tasmān muktaye niyataṃ dvijāḥ
106.	 etad rahasyaṃ vedānāṃ na deyaṃ yasya kasyacit
	
dhārmikāyaiva dātavyaṃ bhaktāya brahmacāriṇe
vyāsa uvāca
107.	 ity etad uktvā bhagavān ātmayogam anuttamam
	
vyājahāra samāsīnaṃ nārāyaṇam anāmayam
108.	 mayaitad bhāṣitaṃ jñānaṃ hitārthaṃ brahmavādinām
	
dātavyaṃ śāntacittebhyaḥ śiṣyebhyo bhavatā śivam
109.	 uktvaivam atha yogīndrān abravīd bhagavān ajaḥ
	
hitāya sarvabhaktānāṃ dvijātīnāṃ dvijottamāḥ
110.	 bhavanto ‘pi hi majjñānaṃ śiṣyāṇāṃ vidhipūrvakam
	
upadekṣyanti bhaktānāṃ sarveṣāṃ vacanān mama

215
Chapter Eleven
111.	 ayaṃ nārāyaṇo yo ‘ham īśvaro nātra saṃśayaḥ
	
nāntaraṃ ye prapaśyanti teṣāṃ deyam idaṃ param
112.	 mamaiṣā paramā mūrtir nārāyaṇasamāhvayā
	
sarvabhūtātmabhūtasthā śāntā cākṣarasaṃjñitā
113.	 ye tv anyathā prapaśyanti loke bhedadṛśo janāḥ
	
na te māṃ saṃprapaśyanti jāyante ca punaḥ punaḥ
114.	 ye tv imaṃ viṣṇum avyaktaṃ māṃ vā devaṃ maheśvaram
	
ekībhāvena paśyanti na teṣāṃ punarudbhavaḥ
115.	 tasmād anādinidhanaṃ viṣṇum ātmānam avyayam
	
mām eva saṃprapaśyadhvaṃ pūjayadhvaṃ tathaiva hi
116.	 ye ‘nyathā māṃ prapaśyanti matvemaṃ devatāntaram
	
te yānti narakān ghorān nāhaṃ teṣu vyavasthitaḥ
117.	 mūrkhaṃ vā paṇḍitaṃ vāpi brāhmaṇaṃ vā madāśrayam
	
mocayāmi śvapākaṃ vā na nārāyaṇanindakam
118.	 tasmād eṣa mahāyogī madbhaktaiḥ puruṣottamaḥ
	
arcanīyo namaskāryo matprītijananāya hi
119.	 evam uktvā samāliṅgya vāsudevaṃ pinākadhṛk
	
antarhito ‘bhavat teṣāṃ sarveṣām eva paśyatām
120.	 nārāyaṇo ‘pi bhagavāṃs tāpasaṃ veṣam uttamam
	
jagrāha yoginaḥ sarvāṃs tyaktvā vai paramaṃ vapuḥ
121.	 jñātaṃ bhavadbhir amalaṃ prasādāt parameṣṭhinaḥ
	
sākṣād eva maheśasya jñānaṃ saṃsāranāśanam
122.	 gacchadhvaṃ vijvarāḥ sarve vijñānaṃ parameṣṭhinaḥ
	
pravartayadhvaṃ śiṣyebhyo dhārmikebhyo munīśvarāḥ
123.	 idaṃ bhaktāya śāntāya dhārmikāyāhitāgnaye
	
vijñānam aiśvaraṃ deyaṃ brāhmaṇāya viśeṣataḥ
124.	 evam uktvā sa viśvātmā yogināṃ yogavittamaḥ
	
nārāyaṇo mahāyogī jagāmādarśanaṃ svayam
125.	 te ‘pi devādideveśaṃ namaskṛtya maheśvaram
	
nārāyaṇaṃ ca bhūtādiṃ svāni sthānāni bhejire
126.	 sanatkumāro bhagavān saṃvartāya mahāmuniḥ
	
dattavān aiśvaraṃ jñānaṃ so ‘pi satyavratāya tu
127.	 sanandano ‘pi yogīndraḥ pulahāya maharṣaye
	
pradadau gautamāyātha pulaho ‘pi prajāpatiḥ 

216
Sanskrit Text
128.	 aṅgirā vedaviduṣe bharadvājāya dattavān
	
jaigīṣavyāya kapilas tathā pañcaśikhāya ca
129.	 parāśaro ‘pi sanakāt pitā me sarvatattvadṛk
	
lebhe tat paramaṃ jñānaṃ tasmād vālmīkir āptavān
130.	 mamovāca purā devaḥ satīdehabhavāṅgajaḥ
	
vāmadevo mahāyogī rudraḥ kila pinākadhṛk
131.	 nārāyaṇo ‘pi bhagavān devakītanayo hariḥ
	
arjunāya svayaṃ sākṣāt dattavān idam uttamam
132.	 yad ahaṃ labdhavān rudrād vāmadevād anuttamam
	
viśeṣād giriśe bhaktis tasmād ārabhya me ‘bhavat37
133.	 śaraṇyaṃ śaraṇaṃ rudraṃ prapanno ‘haṃ viśeṣataḥ
	
bhūteśaṃ giriśaṃ sthāṇuṃ devadevaṃ triśūlinam
134.	 bhavanto ‘pi hi taṃ devaṃ śaṃbhuṃ govṛṣavāhanam
	
prapadyadhvaṃ sapatnīkāḥ saputrāḥ śaraṇaṃ śivam
135.	 vartadhvaṃ tatprasādena karmayogena śaṅkaram
	
pūjayadhvaṃ mahādevaṃ gopatiṃ bhūtibhūṣaṇam
136.	 evam ukte ‘tha munayaḥ śaunakādyā maheśvaram
	
praṇemuḥ śāśvataṃ sthāṇuṃ vyāsaṃ satyavatīsutam
137.	 abruvan hṛṣṭamanasaḥ kṛṣṇadvaipāyanaṃ prabhum
	
sākṣād eva hṛṣīkeśaṃ sarvalokamaheśvaram
138.	 bhavatprasādād acalā śaraṇye govṛṣadhvaje
	
idānīṃ jāyate bhaktir yā devair api durlabhā
139.	 kathayasva muniśreṣṭha karmayogam anuttamam
	
yenāsau bhagavān īśaḥ samārādhyo mumukṣubhiḥ
140.	 tvatsaṃnidhāv eṣa sūtaḥ śṛṇotu bhagavadvacaḥ
	
tadvad ākhilalokānāṃ rakṣaṇaṃ dharmasaṃgraham
141.	 yaduktaṃ devadevena viṣṇunā kūrmarūpiṇā
	
pṛṣṭena munibhiḥ pūrvaṃ śakreṇāmṛtamanthane
142.	 śrutvā satyavatīsūnuḥ karmayogaṃ sanātanam
	
munīnāṃ bhāṣitaṃ kṛṣṇaḥ provāca susamāhitaḥ
143.	 ya imaṃ paṭhate nityaṃ saṃvādaṃ kṛttivāsasaḥ
	
sanatkumārapramukhaiḥ sarvapāpaiḥ pramucyate
144.	 śrāvayed vā dvijān śuddhān brahmacaryaparāyaṇān
	
yo vā vicārayed arthaṃ sa yāti paramāṃ gatim

217
Chapter Eleven
145.	 yaś caitac chṛṇuyān nityaṃ bhaktiyukto dṛḍhavrataḥ
	
sarvapāpavinirmukto brahmaloke mahīyate
146.	 tasmāt sarvaprayatnena paṭhitavyo manīṣibhiḥ
	
śrotavyaś cātha mantavyo viśeṣād brāhmaṇaiḥ sadā
Endnotes
  1. dharmatatparaiḥ is a correction of the critical edition’s dharmatparaiḥ.
  2. Using the variant reading aśeṣasaṃsāraduḥkhanāśanam uttamam instead 
of the critical edition’s aśeṣasaṃsāraduḥkhanāśam anuttamam.
  3. pradakṣiṇīkṛtya is a correction of the critical edition’s dakṣiṇīkṛtya.
  4. tapo ghoraṃ is a correction of the critical edition’s tapoghoraṃ.
  5. kiṃkāraṇam is a correction of the critical edition’s kiṃ kāraṇam.
  6. bhagavadvākyaṃ is a correction of the critical edition’s bhagavad vākyaṃ.
  7. Using the variant reading yaṃ . . . svātmany ātmānam īśvaram 
ananyatejasaṃ instead of the critical edition’s yaḥ . . . svātmanyā yogam īśvaram 
ananyatejase.
  8. savāsudevam is a correction of the critical edition’s sa vāsudevam.
  9. Using the variant reading baddhāḥ instead of the critical edition’s 
baddhaḥ.
10. Using the variant reading anyathājñānāt tattvaṃ instead of the critical 
edition’s anyathā jñānaṃ tac ca.
11. na tv is a correction of the critical edition’s natv.
12. Using the variant reading māyāmayaṃ instead of the critical edition’s 
māyāmayo.
13. samāhitā is a correction of the critical edition’s samahitā.
14. Using the variant reading kālāgnir instead of the critical edition’s 
kālo ‘gnir.
15. Using the variant reading niyataṃ instead of the critical edition’s 
niyataḥ.
16. parā śaktir is a correction of the critical edition’s parāśaktir.
17. yatpādapaṅkajaṃ is a correction of the critical edition’s yat pādapaṅkajaṃ
18. Using the variant reading paraṃ ca instead of the critical edition’s 
tatparaṃ ca.
19. Using the variant reading brahmā viṣṇuḥ instead of the critical edi-
tion’s brahmāviśvaṃ.
20. smaḥ is a correction of the critical edition’s sma.
21. prāha is a correction of the critical edition’s prāhaḥ.
22. Using the variant reading prabhavo ‘vyayaḥ instead of the critical edi-
tion’s prabhavāvyayaḥ.
23. Using the variant reading svayambhūvidhicoditaḥ instead of the critical 
edition’s svayaṃbhūr vidhicoditaḥ.
24. māyā nimittam is a correction of the critical edition’s māyānimittam; 
using the variant reading upāśritā instead of the critical edition’s apāśritā.

218
Sanskrit Text
25. anantāḥ is a correction of the critical edition’s anantā.
26. Using the variant reading anādimadhyanidhanaṃ instead of the critical 
edition’s anādimadhyaṃ tiṣṭhantaṃ.
27. Using the variant reading param avyaktaṃ instead of the critical edi-
tion’s paramaṃ vyaktaṃ.
28. bibheti is a correction of the critical edition’s vibheti.
29. yuñjantīha is a correction of the critical edition’s yuñjatīha.
30. Although not listed in the apparatus of the critical edition, I suggest 
that pārameśvaraḥ, not parameśvaraḥ, is a likely reading of this verse.
31. ekacittatā yogo is a correction of the critical edition’s ekacittatāyogo.
32. manaḥśuddhir is a correction of the critical edition’s manaḥ śuddhir.
33. jyotiḥsvarūpiṇam is a correction of the critical edition’s jyotiḥ svarūpiṇam.
34. arpitamanobuddhir is a correction of the critical edition’s arpitamano 
buddhir.
35. Using the variant reading yogīśo instead of the critical edition’s 
yogīśaṃ.
36. Using the variant reading dadāmi instead of the critical edition’s dadāti.
37. labdhavān is a correction of the critical edition’s labdhavād.

219
List of Concordances 
What follows is a list of passages in the Īśvara Gītā that are identi-
cal or nearly identical to passages from the Bhagavad Gītā, Kaṭha 
Upaniṣad, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad, or Taittirīya Upaniṣad. The letters 
“a,” “b,” “c,” and “d” are used to signify the first, second, third, 
and fourth quarters of each verse, respectively. For instance, BhG. 
5.15cd means the third and fourth quarters of chapter 5, verse 15, of 
the Bhagavad Gītā. “=” means “identical to;” “cf.” notes similarity 
between verse quarters.
This list is based on the list of concordances in P.-E. Dumont’s 
1934 publication, L’Īśvaragītā: Le Chant de Śiva. It is, however, updated 
to correspond to the critical editions of each of the relevant texts. 
It is also expanded to note additional similarities between passages 
that Dumont does not list, including passages from the Taittirīya 
Upaniṣad. For a discussion of the significance of some of the appar-
ent borrowings in the Īśvara Gītā, please refer to the introduction.
BhG. = Bhagavad Gītā
Kaṭh. = Kaṭha Upaniṣad
Śvet. = Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
Tait. = Taittirīya Upaniṣad
2.33a	
= Kaṭh. 6.14a
2.33b	
cf. Kaṭh. 6.14b
2.34	
= BhG. 13.30
2.38cd	
cf. BhG. 5.15cd
2.42c 	
= BhG. 5.5c
2.42d	
cf. BhG. 5.5d
2.47ab	
cf. Śvet. 3.19ab
2.48	
cf. BhG. 7.26

220
List of Concordances
3.2	
= BhG. 13.13; Śvet. 3.16
3.3ab	
= BhG. 13.14ab; Śvet. 3.17ab
3.7a	
cf. BhG. 9.4a
3.7bc	
= BhG. 9.4bc
3.11ab	
cf. BhG. 13.21ab
3.18ab	
cf. Kaṭh. 6.7a
3.18d	
cf. Kaṭh. 3.10d
3.19ab	
= Kaṭh. 3.11ab
3.19b	
cf. Kaṭh. 6.8a
4.12d	
= BhG. 9.31d
4.14a	
= BhG. 9.26a
4.15	
cf. Śvet. 6.18
5.24c	
= Śvet. 3.20a
5.27a	
cf. Śvet. 6.1d
5.35a	
= BhG. 11.18a
5.35b	
= BhG. 11.18b; BhG. 11.38b
5.35c	
= BhG. 11.18c
5.35d	
cf. BhG. 11.18d
5.37b	
= BhG. 8.9d
6.46ab	
= BhG. 7.4ab
7.4c	
= BhG. 10.21a
7.5c	
cf. BhG. 10.27c
7.5d	
= BhG. 10.31b
7.7a	
cf. BhG. 10.37c
7.7d	
= BhG. 10.26d
7.12c	
cf. BhG. 10.22a
7.16b	
= BhG. 10.30b
8.3a	
= BhG. 14.3a
8.3b	
cf. BhG. 14.3b
8.7	
cf. BhG. 14.4
8.10d	
= BhG. 5.5d
8.10	
= BhG. 13.27
8.11	
= BhG. 13.28
8.17c	
= Śvet. 3.20a
9.10d	
= Kaṭh. 3.9d
9.11a	
cf. BhG. 7.7c
9.12abc	
= Tait. 2.4.1abc

221
List of Concordances
9.12d	
cf. Tait. 2.4.1d
9.13ab	
= Śvet. 3.8ab
9.15b	
cf. Śvet. 6.6d
9.18ab	
= Śvet. 6.11ab
9.18c	
cf. Śvet. 6.12c
9.18d	
= Kaṭh. 5.13d; cf. Śvet. 6.12d
9.19abc	
= Śvet. 3.11abc
11.71ab	
= BhG. 4.10ab
11.71cd	
cf. BhG. 4.10cd
11.72ab	
= BhG. 4.11ab
11.74a	
cf. BhG. 18.57ab
11.75ab	
= BhG. 12.13ab
11.75c	
cf. BhG. 12.13c
11.75d	
= BhG. 12.14d; BhG. 12.16d
11.76	
= BhG. 12.14
11.77abc	
= BhG. 12.15abc
11.77d	
cf. BhG. 12.15d
11.78abc	
= BhG. 12.16abc
11.78c	
= BhG. 14.25c
11.78d	
= BhG. 12.17d
11.79abc	
= BhG. 12.19abc
11.81ab	
= BhG. 18.57ab
11.81c	
= BhG. 3.30c
11.82ab	
= BhG. 4.20ab
11.82cd	
cf. BhG. 4.20cd
11.82d	
cf. BhG. 4.22d
11.83abc	
= BhG. 4.21abc
11.83d	
cf. BhG. 4.21d
11.84ab	
cf. BhG. 4.22ab
11.86bc	
= BhG. 10.9bc
11.87c	
cf. BhG. 10.11c
11.87d	
= BhG. 10.11d
11.88cd	
= BhG. 9.22cd
11.89b	
cf. BhG. 9.23a
11.90ab	
cf. BhG. 9.23ab
11.104b	
cf. BhG. 9.32b
11.117bc	
cf. BhG. 5.18bc
11.143d	
= BhG. 10.3d


223
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms 
Adharma: “Anti-dharma,” that which is contrary to sacred law. Adhar-
ma is apotheosized as the god of immorality (also see entry for 
Dharma).
Āditya: “The son of Aditi,” an epithet that may refer to any one of a 
group of solar deities, especially Sūrya, god of the sun.
Agni: Fire, also deified as the god of fire.
Airāvata: Indra’s elephant, considered the greatest of all elephants.
Aṅgiras: A sage and teacher. He is a son of Brahmā and is associated 
with the planet Jupiter.
Arjuna: The warrior who received teachings from the god Kṛṣṇa in 
the Bhagavad Gītā. 
Aśvin: “Possessed of horses,” the name of twin gods who appear in 
the sky before dawn in a golden chariot drawn by horses. They 
are the physicians among the gods.
Atri: A great sage, one of the mind-born sons of Brahmā who is 
included among the saptaṛṣi (seven sages).
Badarikā: A holy place in the Himālaya mountains and the site of 
the hermitage where the Īśvara Gītā’s teaching takes place. It 
is associated with Śiva and with Viṣṇu in his dual form as 
Nara-Nārāyaṇa. 
Balarāma: The older brother of Kṛṣṇa.
Bharadvāja: A great sage descended from Aṅgiras, often considered 
one of the saptaṛṣi (seven sages).
Bhava: “Existence,” a name for a peaceful form of Śiva. In the Īśvara 
Gītā, it is this form to which Śiva reverts after he reveals his 
awe-inspiring form as lord of the dance.

224
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Bhṛgu: A great sage. In Vedic mythology, he is a son of Varuṇa. In post-
Vedic mythology, he is considered one of the sons of Brahmā.
Brahmā: The creator god, often portrayed as one of the trio of gods 
responsible for the creation, preservation, and destruction of the 
universe.
Brahman: The ultimate reality and cause of the universe according 
to Vedānta philosophers. Some philosophers depict Brahman as 
an abstract impersonal reality beyond any god; others say that 
Brahman is another name for god.
Brahmin: A member of the highest of the four classes (varṇas), the 
priestly class.
Cāraṇa: A type of demigod associated with singing and music.
Dakṣa: “Skillful,” one of the Ādityas and a son of Brahmā. He is 
remembered in the Purāṇas as the father of Śiva’s consort Satī.
Devakī: The mother of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.
Dharma: In most Hindu contexts, dharma refers to the sacred law that 
faithful worshippers are expected to follow. Dharma is context-
specific, and varies depending on factors such as class (varṇa), 
gender, and stage of life (āśrama). Dharma is apotheosized in 
mythology as the god of sacred law.
Gandharva: A type of male celestial being, often considered a celestial 
musician or attendant of the gods.
Gaṇeśa: The elephant-headed god who is son of Śiva and Pārvatī. He 
is widely worshipped as the “remover of obstacles.”
Garuḍa: The name of a mythical bird, considered to be the vehicle 
of Viṣṇu.
Gotama: A sage, often considered one of the saptaṛṣi (seven sages). He 
is descended from the sage Aṅgiras. He should not be confused 
with Siddhārtha Gautama, the Buddha.
Guṇa: In Sāṃkhya philosophy, there are three guṇas, colored white, 
red, and black, that can be translated as purity (sattva), agitation 
(rajas), and inertia (tamas). These three guṇas constitute the mate-
rial world (prakṛti and its twenty-three evolutes), and all aspects 
of the material world can be understood as being an admixture 
of these three guṇas in different proportions.
Hara: “Seizer,” a name of the god Śiva.

225
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Hari: “Yellow,” a name of the god Viṣṇu.
Hiraṇyagarbha: “Golden-womb,” a name of the creator god. He is 
described in the Īśvara Gītā as being born from Śiva’s body in 
order to create the world.
Indra: The king of the gods. Indra wields a thunderbolt and rides the 
elephant Airāvata. Although one of the most important gods of 
Vedic mythology, by the time of the Īśvara Gītā he was consid-
ered inferior to Śiva and Viṣṇu.
Īśāna: “Ruler,” an epithet of Śiva. This name is also applied to one 
of the Rudras.
Jaigīṣavya: The name of a great sage and yogi.
Jyeṣṭhasāma: A particular chant from the Sāma Veda.
Kaṇāda: A sage and founder of the Vaiśeṣika system of philosophy.
Kapila: A sage and founder of the Sāṃkhya system of philosophy. In 
the Purāṇas, he is often considered to be an incarnation of Viṣṇu.
Kṛṣṇa: “Dark,” the god who narrated the teachings of the Bhagavad 
Gītā to the warrior Arjuna, and is also featured in many Purāṇas. 
Many Hindus consider Kṛṣṇa to be an incarnation of the god 
Viṣṇu. 
Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana: “Island-born Kṛṣṇa,” an epithet of the sage Vyāsa.
Kubera: The god of wealth. 
Manu: The mythical first man and author of several texts. In the plu-
ral, “the Manus” also refer to the first beings created by god at 
the beginning of each “age of Manu” (manvantara).
Marīci: “Ray of light,” the name of a sage.
Marut: Generic name for the storm gods who bear golden weapons 
and are allied with Indra.
Meru: The name of a mythical golden mountain, the center of the 
world according to Purāṇic cosmologies.
Nara: The name of a sage or god, sometimes considered to be a 
twin incarnation of Viṣṇu along with Nārāyaṇa. In the Nara-
Nārāyaṇa pairing, Nara is identified with Arjuna and Nārāyaṇa 
with Kṛṣṇa.
Nārāyaṇa: The name of a sage or god, sometimes considered to be a 
twin incarnation of Viṣṇu along with Nara. In the Īśvara Gītā, 
this is the most common name for the god Viṣṇu.

226
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Nirṛti: “Destruction,” usually given divine form as the goddess of 
death, daughter of Adharma (“immorality”) and Hiṃsā (“vio-
lence”). The Īśvara Gītā describes Nirṛti as male rather than 
female. 
Nirvāṇa: “Extinguishing,” a term used especially among Buddhists 
to denote the cessation of suffering and the freedom from the 
cycle of birth and death. It is also used in Hindu texts, often as 
a synonym for mokṣa, “liberation.”
Pañcaśikha: “Five tufted,” the name of a teacher of Sāṃkhya 
philosophy.
Parāśara: A sage, grandson of Vasiṣṭha and father of Vyāsa.
Pārvatī: “Daughter of Parvata,” a goddess, daughter of the Himālaya 
mountains and consort of Śiva.
Pināka: The name of Śiva’s bow.
Prahlāda: “Joyful,” the name of a demon (asura) prince, son of 
Hiraṇyakaśipu, who worshipped Viṣṇu devoutly and opposed 
his own father.
Pulaha: A sage, one of the sons of Brahmā. 
Purāṇa: “Ancient,” the name of a genre of texts composed primarily 
in the medieval period. The major Sanskrit Purāṇas are tradition-
ally counted as eighteen, divided into three groups of six. Six 
of these texts are devoted to the god Brahmā, six to Viṣṇu, and 
six to Śiva. The Īśvara Gītā itself makes up a small part of the 
Kūrma Purāṇa, the Purāṇa that takes its name from the tortoise 
(kūrma) form of Viṣṇu.
Puṣkara: “Blue lotus,” the name of one of the seven major continents 
according to the cosmology of the Purāṇas.
Rāma: A hero and the protagonist of the epic poem Rāmāyaṇa, usually 
considered one of the incarnations of the god Viṣṇu.
Ṛkṣa: A name for any of the seven stars of the Ursa Major constella-
tion, associated with the seven sages (ṛṣis). Although accounts 
vary, one list from the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad includes Gota-
ma, Bharadvāja, Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, and 
Atri (Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.2.4).
Rudra: “Roarer,” a dangerous Vedic god. In post-Vedic mythology, 
Rudra is another name for Śiva. The Īśvara Gītā describes Rudra 
as the aspect of Śiva that causes the world’s destruction, along 

227
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
with his other aspects Brahmā (the creator) and Nārāyaṇa (the 
preserver). In the plural, “the Rudras” are a group of eleven 
storm gods closely associated with Rudra-Śiva. In the Īśvara 
Gītā, one of the sages in the audience listening to Śiva’s teach-
ings is also named Rudra.
Sādhya: The name of a class of demigods.
Śakra: “Powerful,” an epithet of Indra, king of the gods.
Śakti: “Power,” often apotheosized as a feminine force or a goddess. 
In the Īśvara Gītā, Lord Śiva possesses powers such as māyā, the 
power to create worldly forms. The gods Brahmā, Nārāyaṇa, 
and Rudra are also described as Śiva’s powers for the world’s 
creation, preservation, and destruction, respectively.
Sāma: The Sāma Veda, one of the four Vedas, contains sacred songs 
(sāmans) designed to be chanted during sacrifice.
Śambhu: “Granting happiness,” a name for Śiva in his benevolent 
form.
Sāṃkhya: A school of philosophy that teaches of the existence of 
two basic realities, spirit (puruṣa) and matter (prakṛti). Matter 
is a dynamic feminine principle that evolves into twenty-three 
more principles (tattvas) for a total of twenty-five principles in 
all. Although some Sāṃkhya texts claim that matter is eternal 
and without any higher cause, theistic texts like the Īśvara Gītā 
understand god to be the ultimate cause of spirit and matter. 
In the Īśvara Gītā, the word sāṃkhya is also used to refer to the 
path of knowledge generally (as opposed to yoga, the path of 
practical discipline). For a summary of the tenets of the Sāṃkhya 
philosophical school, see King (1999:166–89).
Saṃvarta: A sage descended from Aṅgiras.
Sanaka: “Ancient,” a sage, one of the mind-born sons of Brahmā. He 
is the brother of Sanandana, Sanātana, and Sanatkumāra.
Sanandana: “Joyful,” a sage, one of the mind-born sons of Brahmā. 
He is the brother of Sanaka, Sanātana, and Sanatkumāra.
Sanātana: “Eternal,” a sage, one of the mind-born sons of Brahmā. He 
is the brother of Sanaka, Sanandana, and Sanatkumāra.
Sanatkumāra: “Eternal youth,” a sage, one of the mind-born sons of 
Brahmā. He is the brother of Sanaka, Sanandana, and Sanātana.

228
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Śaṅkara: “Auspicious,” an epithet of Śiva. He is also depicted as one of 
the eleven Rudras, forms of Śiva. In modern usage, “Śaṅkara” is 
often used to refer to the philosopher Ādi Śaṅkarācārya, founder 
of the Advaita Vedānta school.
Saptaṛṣi: “Seven sages,” a group of sages that is also said to cor-
respond to the names of the stars in the Ursa Major constel-
lation according to Indian astrology. Although accounts vary, 
one list from the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad includes Gotama, 
Bharadvāja, Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, Vasiṣṭha, Kaśyapa, and Atri 
(Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.2.4).
Sarasvatī: The goddess of poetry, learning, and music. She is the con-
sort of the god Brahmā.
Śatarudrīya: A hymn in the Yajur Veda praising the hundred forms 
of the god Rudra.
Satī: “Good woman,” a form of the goddess who is the consort of 
Śiva. In the Purāṇas she is depicted as a daughter of Dakṣa. She 
immolated herself in protest after her father refused to invite her 
husband to a Vedic sacrifice.
Satyavatī: “Truthful,” the mother of Vyāsa. According to legend, she 
was the daughter of a fisherman who begat Vyāsa with the sage 
Parāśara. She later married King Śantanu.
Satyavrata: “Truthful vow,” the name of a royal sage.
Śaunaka: The name of a great sage.
Sāvitrī: the name of a famous mantra from the Ṛg Veda that is also 
known as Gāyatrī. Sāvitrī is also deified in mythology as the wife 
of the god Brahmā and the mother of the four Vedas. 
Śeṣa: “Remainder,” the name of a mythical thousand-headed serpent 
whom the god Viṣṇu rests upon between world-cycles. 
Siddha: “Accomplished,” an epithet used for certain extraordinary 
yogis who have attained supernormal powers known as siddhis. 
Siddhas are sometimes considered demigods, or even to have 
conquered death itself. 
Śiva: “Auspicious,” the name of one of the major gods of classical Hin-
duism. Although sometimes considered the god of destruction, 
the Īśvara Gītā portrays him as the absolute creator, preserver, 
and destroyer of the entire world. He is known by many other 
epithets, such as Īśvara (“the lord”).

229
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Skanda: “Attacker,” a war god and son of Śiva.
Soma: A drink that was worshipped as a god and used by priests 
during Vedic sacrifice. In post-Vedic texts such as the Purāṇas, 
it is also the god associated with the moon.
Śrī: The goddess of wealth, also known as Lakṣmī. She is the consort 
of Viṣṇu.
Śukra: “Bright,” a sage who was the son of Bhṛgu. He is associated 
with the planet Venus.
Sūrya: The sun, which is also deified as the god of the sun.
Sūta: Whereas the word sūta can sometimes just be translated “bard,” 
the name Sūta in this text refers to the bard Lomaharṣaṇa, stu-
dent of the sage Vyāsa and reciter of many Purāṇas.
Svastika: Meaning “auspicious,” this word often refers to a religious 
symbol in the shape of a cross with bent arms. In the Īśvara 
Gītā and other works on yoga, it also refers to a sitting posture 
(āsana) in which the right foot is tucked between the left calf 
and left thigh.
Umā: a goddess, daughter of the Himālaya mountains and consort of 
Śiva. She is also known as Pārvatī.
Upaniṣad: The Upaniṣads are the part of the Vedas that contain teach-
ings of the true nature of the self (ātman) and its relationship 
with brahman, the ultimate reality. These are the texts that are 
analyzed by the sub-schools of Vedānta philosophy.
Vaiśeṣika: The name of a school of philosophy reputedly founded by 
the sage Kaṇāda. It teaches that the universe came into being 
through the agglomeration of atomic particles.
Vālmīki: The sage considered by tradition to have authored the epic 
poem Rāmāyaṇa, “The Deeds of Rāma.” 
Vāmadeva: This epithet may refer either to a great sage or to one of 
the Rudras, the eleven storm gods often seen as aspects of Śiva.
Vārāṇasī: A city often considered the holiest by worshippers of Śiva. 
It is located on the banks of the Ganges River in northeastern 
India. It is also known by the names Banāras and Kāśī.
Varuṇa: A major Vedic god responsible for upholding order on heaven 
and earth. In post-Vedic mythology he is considered god of the 
oceans and rivers.

230
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
Vasu: “Wealthy,” a class of gods of the atmosphere.
Vāsudeva: “Son of Vasudeva,” a patronymic name given to Viṣṇu 
or Kṛṣṇa.
Vasiṣṭha: “Wealthiest,” the name of a great sage, often considered one 
of the saptaṛṣi (seven sages).
Vedānta: “End of the Vedas,” originally a name for the Upaniṣads, 
the part of the Vedas most concerned with philosophical specu-
lation. In later times, Vedānta came to refer to a tradition of 
philosophy and exegesis based on the Upaniṣads. The Vedānta 
philosophical school’s main concern is to analyze the nature of 
the ultimate reality (brahman) and its relation to the self (ātman).
Vedas: The most authoritative texts for most Hindu traditions. There 
are four Vedas: Ṛg, Yajur, Sāma, and Atharva.
Vīrabhadra: A terrifying form of the god Śiva created from his own 
body to destroy Dakṣa’s sacrifice after Śiva was dishonored by 
Dakṣa.
Vīraka: “Little hero,” another name for Nandin, one of the most 
important leaders of Śiva’s troops (gaṇas). This Nandin should 
not be confused with Śiva’s bull, who was also called Nandin 
in later times.
Viṣṇu: The preserver god, one of the most important of gods wor-
shipped in classical Hinduism. He is usually considered to have 
many incarnations (avataras), including the heroes Rāma and 
Kṛṣṇa. In the Īśvara Gītā he is often called Nārāyaṇa.
Viśvakarman: “All-maker,” the craftsman and architect among the 
gods.
Vyāsa: A scholar who, according to Hindu traditions, authored the 
Mahābhārata and the Purāṇas, as well as a commentary on 
Patañ­jali’s Yoga Sūtras. He is considered the author of the Īśvara 
Gītā, as this text is part of the Kūrma Purāṇa.
Yajur Veda: One of the four Vedas. The Yajur Veda is a manual of 
directions for the performance of Vedic sacrifice, including for-
mulations of mantras.
Yoga: In the Īśvara Gītā, yoga often denotes “practical discipline,” 
such as techniques of mental concentration, as opposed to philo-
sophical speculation (e.g., verses 2.40, 2.41). It can also mean 
“method” or “way” (as at 11.72). Etymologically, the word yoga 

231
Glossary of Sanskrit Names and Terms
means “union” or “yoking.” According to the Īśvara Gītā, the 
highest yoga is the yogi’s yoking himself to Lord Śiva. In this text 
it does not usually signify a specific school of philosophy, nor 
does it refer primarily to athletic postures such as headstands 
and shoulder stands. For more on the meanings of yoga, refer 
to the introduction.
Yogi: A practitioner of yoga. In the Īśvara Gītā, Śiva is depicted as 
the greatest of yogis, and instructs his audience of sages in the 
practice of yoga.


233
Bibliography
Bisschop, Peter C. (2006). Early Śaivism and the Skandapurāṇa: Sects and Centres. 
Groningen: Egbart Forsten.
Brown, C. Mackenzie (ed. and tr.) (1998). The Devi Gita: The Song of the God-
dess. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Bryant, Edwin F. (ed. and tr.) (2009). The Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali. New York: 
North Point Press.
Cush, Denise (ed.) (2007). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. London: Routledge.
Chakraborti, Haripada (ed. and tr.) (1970). Pāśupata Sūtram with Pañcārtha-
Bhāṣya of Kauṇḍinya. Calcutta: Academic Publishers.
Dasgupta, Surendranath (1975). A History of Indian Philosophy, Volume V. Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass.
Dimmitt, Cornelia and J.A.B. van Buitenen (1978). Classical Hindu Mythology: 
A Reader in the Sanskrit Purāṇas. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Doniger, Wendy (ed.) (1993). Purāṇa Perennis: Reciprocity and Transformation 
in Hindu and Jaina Texts. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Dumont, P.-E. (1934). L’Īśvaragītā: Le Chant de Śiva. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
Press.
Dyczkowski, Mark S.G. (1988). The Canon of the Saivagama and the Kubjika 
Tantras of the Western Kaula Tradition. Albany: State University of New 
York Press.
Edgerton, Franklin (1934). “Review of L’Īśvaragītā: Le Chant de Śiva by P.-E. 
Dumont,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 54(3):306–10.
Flood, Gavin (1996). An Introduction to Hinduism. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
——— (ed.) (2003). The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Maldon, MA: Black-
well Publishing.
Gambhirananda, Swami (2006). Bhagavad Gītā with the Commentary of 
Śaṅkarācārya. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama.
Gandhi, M. K. (1965). Gita—My Mother. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
Goldberg, Ellen (2002). The Lord Who Is Half Woman: Ardhanarīśvara in Indian 
and Feminist Perspective. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Goldman, Robert and Sally Sutherland (1999). Devavāṇīpraveśikā: An Introduc-
tion to the Sanskrit Language. Berkeley: Center for South Asia Studies.
Goudriaan, Teun (1978). Māyā Divine and Human. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

234
Bibliography
Gonda, Jan (1979). “The Śatarudrīya,” in M. Nagatomi, B. K. Matilal and J. 
M. Masson (eds.), Sanskrit and Indian Studies: Essays in Honour of Daniel 
H. H. Ingalls. Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 75–91.
Gupta, Anand Swarup (ed.) (1971). The Kūrma Purāṇa. Varanasi: All-India 
Kashiraj Trust.
Hadot, Pierre (2002). What is Ancient Philosophy? Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Halbfass, Wilhelm (1990). Tradition and Reflection: Explorations in Indian Thought. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Hara, Minoru (2002). Pāśupata Studies. Vienna: Sammlung de Nobili.
Hazra, R.C. (1987)[1940]. Studies in the Purāṇic Records on Hindu Rites and 
Customs. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Hulin, Michel (1993). “Doctrines et comportements ‘cyniques’ dans certaines 
sects hindoues anciennes et contemporaines,” in Goulet-Caze, M.-O. 
and R. Goulet (eds.), Le Cynisme ancien et ses prolongements. Paris: Presses 
universitaires de France, pp. 557–70.
Ingalls, Daniel (1962). “Cynics and Pāśupatas: The Seeking of Dishonor.” Har-
vard Theological Review 55(4):281–98.
King, Richard (1999). Indian Philosophy: An Introduction to Hindu and Buddhist 
Thought. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Larson, Gerald and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya (eds.) (1987). Encyclopedia of 
Indian Philosophies vol. IV, Sāṃkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philoso-
phy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Malinar, Angelika (2009). Bhagavadgītā: Doctrines and Contexts. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Miller, Barbara Stoler (1986). The Bhagavad-Gita: Krishna’s Counsel in Time of 
War. New York: Columbia University Press.
Minor, Robert (ed.) (1986). Modern Indian Interpreters of the Bhagavad Gita. 
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Nicholson, Andrew J. (2010). Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in 
Indian Intellectual History. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nilakantan, Ratnam. (1989). Gītās in the Mahābhārata and the Purāṇas. Delhi: 
Nag Publishers.
Olivelle, Patrick (ed. and tr.) (1992). Saṃnyāsa Upaniṣads: Hindu Scriptures on 
Asceticism and Renunciation. New York: Oxford University Press. 
——— (ed. and tr.) (1996). Upaniṣads. New York: Oxford University Press.
——— (ed. and tr.) (2005). Manu’s Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Transla-
tion of the Mānava-Dharmaśāstra. New York: Oxford University Press.
Piantelli, Mario (ed. and tr.) (1980). Īśvaragītā, o, Poema del Signore. Parma: 
L. Battei.
Pintchman, Tracy (1994). The Rise of the Goddess in the Hindu Tradition. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Raghavan, V. (1952). Yantras or Mechanical Contrivances in Ancient India. Ban-
galore: Indian Institute of Culture.
Rocher, Ludo (1986). The Purāṇas. History of Indian Literature, v. 2, fasc. 3. 
Wiesbaden: O. Harrassowitz.

235
Bibliography
Sanderson, Alexis (1988). “Saivism and the Tantric Traditions,” in Stewart 
Sutherland (ed.), The World’s Religions, pp. 660–704. London: Routledge.
———. (2005). “The Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate 
between Pañcārthika Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism,” Indian Philo-
sophical Annual 24: 143–217.
Sastri, R. Anantakrishna (ed.) (1940). The Pāśupata Sūtras with Pañcārthabhāṣya 
of Kauṇḍinya (Trivandrum Sanskrit Series no. 143). Trivandrum: Oriental 
Manuscripts Library of the University of Travancore.
Smith, Travis L. (2008). The Sacred Center and its Peripheries: Śaivism and the 
Vārāṇasī Sthala-Purāṇas. PhD diss., Columbia University.
Tarkaratna, Ramamaya (ed.) (1990). The Atharvana Upanishads (Bibliotheca 
Indica v. 76). Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag.
Upadhyaya, Ganga Prasad (tr.) (2008). The Light of Truth: English Translation 
of Svami Dayanand’s Sathyartha Prakasha. Delhi: Govindram Hasanand.
White, David Gordon (2009). Sinister Yogis. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
———. (2012). Yoga in Practice. Princeton: Princeton University Press.



