Lucian of Samosata
A TravellerÕs True Tale
translated by
Alfred J. Church
In parentheses Publications
Classical Greek Series
Cambridge, Ontario  2000


Preface.
I have here rendered into English, allowing myself some liberty of
change, the Vera Historia of Lucian. I hoped that readers, old and young,
might find entertainment in its fanciful and humorous extravagances.
Some, too, I thought, might be interested in seeing the original from
which more than one famous writer in later times have borrowed.
I gladly express my obligations to Mr. C. S. Jerram, in whose excellent
edition (the Clarendon Press, 1879) I made my first acquaintance with the
Vera Historia, from whose annotations I have received much help, and
some of whose ingenious equivalents for LucianÕs strange coinage of
words I have borrowed.
A. C.
Retford Nov. 8, 1879
3

CONTENTS.
I. Lucian starts on a journey, and is carried a long way 
5
II. The battle and the treaty 
10
III. Of the Moon-Folk and their manners and customs
14
IV. Lucian comes to Lantern-City
16
V. Lucian and his men are swallowed up
19
VI. Lucian defeats his neighbours
24
VII. The battle of the islands
26
VIII. Lucian escapes from the beast, and comes to the Sea of Milk and
Cheese Island
29
IX. The travellers meet the Cork-Foot-Folk, and come to the Island of the
Blessed
32
X. The Island of the Blessed
35
XI. The inhabitants of the Island of the Blessed
38
XII. Lucian talks with Homer. Games are celebrated in the island
40
XIII. The island is invaded. The flight of the fair Helen
43
XIV. Lucian bids farewell to King Rhadamanthus and departs. He visit
the abode of the wicked
46
XV. The Island of Dreams. Lucian visits Calypso
49
XVI. Lucian sees the Pumpkin-Pirates, and other strange creatures and
things
52
XVII. The ocean forest. The Ox-Headed People and other marvels
54
4

Chapter I.
Lucian starts on a journey, and is carried a long way.
I was one that had always my head filled with wandering thoughts
and the desire to see strange countries. And especially did I wish to
discover whether there be any opposite shore to the ocean by which I
dwelt, and what manner of men they were that inhabited it. So having
purchased a pinnace, which I strengthened as for a voyage that would
beyond doubt be both long and stormy, I busied myself in making all
things ready for my journey. First I chose me fifty stout young fellows
having the same love of adventure that I myself had; and next I hired the
best captain that could be got for money; and put good store of
provisions and water on board. All this being done, I set sail; and for a
day and a night the wind was fair and gentle. But afterwards it began to
blow and the sea to rise in a terrible manner. We could not even shorten
sail, and so were tossed about for seventy-nine days. On the eightieth
day, the weather abating and the sun beginning to shine, we saw an
island with high cliffs and well covered with trees. On this we landed,
and being very weary lay down to sleep on the shore and rested a good
space. When we awoke I appointed thirty men to guard the ship, and
with the twenty that remained went up into the island to discover the
country.
When we had gone about three furlongsÕ space from the sea we found
a pillar of bronze, whereon was engraved in Greek letters, but these very
faint and hardly to be read, ÔSO FAR CAME HERCULES AND BACCHUS.Õ Hard
by there were two footmarks upon the rocks, whereof one was one
hundred feet long or thereabout, and the other somewhat less. We
judged the smaller to be of Bacchus, and the other of Hercules. After this
we came on a river that was running with wine, and the wine, when we
5

tasted it, was found to be such as they make in the island of Chios. ÕTwas
a pretty strong stream, and in some parts could have carried a
good-sized vessel. This thing made us the more ready to believe that
which was written on the pillar; for we held it to be good proof that
Bacchus had been in the country. After this I judged it well to travel up
the river, that we might learn where it had its beginning. We found
indeed no spring, but only many great vines, full all of them of clusters
of grapes, and from the root of each clear wine flowing. ÕTwas from
these that the river came. Also we saw in it a great store of fish, and
these had the colour of wine, aye, and the taste also. For we caught some
with fishing-lines that we chanced to have with us, which when we had
cooked and eaten, we were as tipsy as if we had drunk two or three
bottles apiece. However we devised a remedy against this, for we caught
other fish in a river of water that was at hand, and so mixing the two,
made a dish that was not more than sufficiently strong.
After this we went back to our comrades at the ship, and the next day
having filled our casks, some with water and others with wine from the
river, set sail, the wind blowing gently. But after a while there fell upon
us a very violent whirlwind, which twisted our ship about, and lifted it
up into the air four hundred miles and more. Nor did we fall back into
the sea; for there came a wind from below, and filled out our sails and so
carried us up for seven days and nights. And on the eighth day we saw
an island, having the shape of a globe, and shining with a very bright
light. To this we came, and having anchored, disembarked. And when
we had gone a little way inland, we found houses in it fairly built and
fields well tilled. Now by day we could see nothing but the island itself;
but at night we saw other islands hard by, some greater and some less,
and all of them bright as fire. And below us we could see another
country, in which were cities and rivers and seas and woods and
mountains. This was judged to be the earth from which we had come.
Travelling farther we came upon a company of people that were called
Vulture-Horsemen. These are men that ride upon mighty great vultures;
and the vultures for the greater part have three heads. And how great
they are, anyone may learn from this, that each of the pinions of their
wings is larger and thicker than the mast of a merchantman. These
Vulture-Horsemen had been commanded to fly about the country, and if
6

they encountered any stranger, to take him to the King. So they laid hold
of us and took us to the King. And when he saw us, knowing our garb,
he said, ÔAre ye not Greeks, my friends?ÕAnd learning that we were, he
inquired how we had come, crossing so great a space as is between the
Earth and the Moon. So we told him the whole truth. And when he had
heard it, he also told to us the truth about himself, that he was a man,
Endymion by name, who had been carried away from the Earth while he
lay asleep, and having been brought to this country had been made king.
ÔFor know,Õ he said, Ôthat this land where you are is in the Moon. But be
of good cheer, and fear nothing. I will furnish you with all that you need.
And also, if I prosper in this war which I am waging with the folk that
dwell in the Sun, you shall have such wealth and happiness as shall fully
content you.Õ
Then I asked him who were his foes, and for what cause be had fallen
out with them? To this he answered:
ÔThe King of the Sun is one Phaeton, and there has been war between
us now these many years. And the beginning of our quarrel was this: I
gathered all the poorest folk in my dominions and would have sent them
as a colony to the Morning Star, which is desert and uninhabited. But
King Phaeton was jealous, and met the colony on its way with his
Ant-Horsemen, and hindered it from going. That time we were worsted
in battle, being much weaker than they. But now I purpose to fight again,
and plant my colony. And if ye be minded to join with me in this
enterprise, so do, and I will furnish you with a vulture for each from the
KingÕs stable and other equipment. For we march to-morrow.Õ
ÔSo be it,Õ I said, Ôif it is your MajestyÕs pleasure.Õ
Then he gave us right royal entertainment. And the next morning
early, we set ourselves in battle array, for the scouts came in with news
that the enemy were hard at hand. Now the number of our army was
one hundred thousand, they that carried the baggage and made the
artillery not being reckoned, nor the infantry, nor the allies from foreign
parts. The Vulture-Horsemen were eighty thousand, and the riders upon
Cabbage-Fowl twenty thousand. Now, the Cabbage-Fowl is a mighty
great bird, with cabbages all over him for feathers; but the swifter have
lettuce-leaves. 
On 
these 
rode 
the 
Millet-seed-Shooters 
and 
the
Garlic-Fighters. We had also many allies from the Great Bear,
7

Flea-Archers thirty thousand, and Wind-Runners fifty thousand. Now,
the Flea-Archers ride upon very great fleas, from which also they have
their name, each flea being as big as twelve elephants; and the
Wind-Runners are foot soldiers, but fly in the air without wings. And the
way of their flight is this. They have cloaks reaching down to the
ground. These they gird about them, and setting them to the wind as
sails are set, they are carried about like the ships. These for the most part
fight as skirmishers.
I heard say also that there would come to fight for us seventy
thousand Acorn-Ostriches and five thousand Horse-Cranes. But these I
saw not, for they had not yet arrived; wherefore I will not venture to
write of them, for the things that were said about them were altogether
beyond belief.
Now, all these soldiers were equipped in like fashion, having helmets
of beans-and the beans in that country are very great and strong-and
breastplates of lupines, plated with scales-Õtis the husk of the lupines that
they sew together to make their breastplates; and in those parts the husk
of the lupine is strong as horn, so that no man can break it. But their
shields and swords were after the Greek fashion.
Now our order of battle was this: On the right wing were the
Vulture-Horsemen, and with them King Endymion. And here also I and
my companions had our place. And on the left wing were the
Cabbage-Fowl Riders; and in the centre the allies, in their order, one
hundred and sixty thousand in all. Now there were with the army a
multitude of very great spiders, bigger each of them than the islands in
the Greek sea. These King Endymion made spin over the space between
the Moon and the Morning Star. And when they had done this, so that
there was a great plain between the two, the King set his infantry in
order. Their captain was Night-Bird, the son of Fair Weather.
On the left wing of the enemy were the Ant-Horsemen, and King
Phaeton among them. Now these are very great beasts with wings, like
to the ants that are upon the Earth, but bigger by much, for the greatest
of them are two hundred feet long and more. Not only did the riders on
these fight, but the beasts also themselves, pushing with their horns. I
heard say that there were fifty thousand of them. On the right wing
were set the Gnat-Troopers, another fifty thousand, archers all of them,
8

riding upon very great gnats; and next to them the Crow-Troopers, light
infantry, and very keen fighters. These had slings, and slung from them
great radishes. And whosoever was wounded by these died forthwith,
his wounds stank so terribly. ÕTis said that they dipped their weapons in
mallow poison. Next to them were the Long-stalk-Mushroomites, ten
thousand in number, stout men-at-arms, and very good at close quarters,
that had mushrooms for shields and asparagus-stalks for spears. Hard by
these were the Acorn-Dogs, that came from the Dog Star, dog-faced
men, riding upon acorns that had wings. Certain also of King PhaetonÕs
allies had not yet come-the Slingers from the Milky Way and the Cloud
Centaurs. These last indeed came when we had now joined battle, and it
had been well, as will be seen hereafter, that they had not come. But the
Slingers came not at all, and I heard say that King Phaeton burned their
country with fire for their default.
9

Chapter II.
The battle and the treaty.
When the two armies had been set in array, and the standards raised,
and the asses had brayed (for the Sun-Folk and the Moon-Folk also have
asses for trumpeters), the battle began. And in a very short space of time
the left wing of the Sun-Folk turned and fled, for they could not abide
that the Horse-Vultures should come to close quarters with them. Then
we pursued, killing not a few as we went, but King PhaetonÕs Air-Gnats,
that were on his right wing, drove back the forces that were posted on
the left of us, and pursued them till they came to the infantry. But when
these charged to help their own people, the Air Gnats broke and fled,
and this all the more speedily, because they saw that the left wing of
their army had been vanquished. And now the Sun-Folk fled all over the
field, and we pursued, taking many prisoners and killing many. There
was, as one may suppose, a great quantity of blood shed, and this
poured down upon the clouds and dyed them till they were altogether
red. This was a thing that I had often seen when I lived upon the Earth,
especially about the time of sunset, but knew not the cause until now.
After a while, when we were near weary of pursuing, we turned back
and set up two trophies which should be monuments of our victory. We
set up two, because we judged that we had won two battles, one with
our infantry on Spiderweb-Field, for so we called it, and one with our
cavalry in Cloudland. But we had hardly done this when our scouts came
running in with all speed, bringing tidings that the Cloud-Centaurs who
should have helped King Phaeton in the battle were coming. And when
we looked out we saw them, monstrous great creatures, of as strange a
shape as ever I beheld. They were half horses and half men, as the
common Centaurs are, but the horses had wings. And the man-half, that
10

is to say from the saddle upward, was as high as the great statue of
Rhodes which they call the Colossus. (Men who have not travelled in
these parts should know that it is of an hundred feet, and stands with its
legs stretched across the mouth of the harbour.) As for the horse-half,
Õtwas as big as a good-sized merchantman. Their number I do not dare to
write, for Õtis quite incredible, and I am not disposed to put such things
in my history as my readers will not readily believe. Their leader was the
Archer from the Zodiac, the same that stands between the Balances and
Capricorn, and receives the Sun into his dominions at the month of
November. These Cloud-Centaurs being come up, and finding that their
friends had been worsted in the battle, sent a message to King Phaeton
that he should try his fortune again. Meanwhile they set to and helped
him to very good purpose, for they charged the Moon-Folk; and being in
orderly array and the others very much confused and scattered, some in
pursuing and some in gathering spoil, put them to flight without much
ado. They pursued King Endymion up to the very walls of his city, and
killed the most part of his birds. After this they tore down the trophies
which we had set up and scoured all Spiderweb-Field, taking no few
prisoners, and among them myself and two of my companions. After this
King Phaeton came and set up two trophies for himself.
That same day we that were prisoners were taken off to the Sun,
having our hands tied behind our backs with a length of spiderweb. As
for the city of the Moon-King, the Sun-Folk decided that it were best not
to besiege it. But returning to their own country, they built up a great
wall between the Sun and the Moon, so that the light should not come
any more from the one to the other. This wall was double, and was built
altogether of clouds. Thus there was brought about a very plain eclipse
of the Moon, which had night everywhere, and that without ceasing.
This was a condition of life which King Endymion and his people could
not endure. He sent therefore ambassadors, beseeching the Sun-Folk to
pull down the wall which they had built, for that else the Moon-Folk
would have to live in darkness for the rest of their days. These
ambassadors promised, on behalf of their King, that they would pay
tribute to Phaeton, and be his allies and good friends for all time to
come, giving hostages by way of surety for that which they promised.
So the Sun-Folk were gathered in public assembly, and the first day,
11

being of a very hot and fiery temper, they did not abate their anger
against the Moon-Folk one jot; but the second day, as commonly happens
with this kind of people, they thought better of it,.and granted the
prayer of the ambassadors. So peace was made, as I have written below:
ÔThere shall be peace and friendship between the Sun-Folk and their
allies of the one part and the Moon-Folk and their allies of the other part
for ever.
Ô1. The Sun-Folk shall pull down the wall which they have built
between the Sun and the Moon, and shall not invade Moonland any
more.
Ô2. The Sun-Folk shall send back all prisoners of war, receiving for
each such sum as shall be agreed between the high contracting parties.
Ô3. The Moon-Folk shall acknowledge all the Stars to be free and
independent, and shall keep the peace with the Sun-Folk for ever.
Ô4. The high contracting parties guarantee to each other their
respective territories.
Ô5. The Moon-Folk shall pay a tribute to the Sun-Folk, ten thousand
barrels of dew by the year.
Ô6. The colony to the Morning Star shall be sent by the high
contracting parties in common; and it shall be lawful for any citizen of
the other Stars to take part therein.
Ô7. This treaty shall be engraved o column of fine brass, which shall be
set up in the air midway between the Sun and the Moon.
ÔTo this have set their hands, on the part of his Highness King
Phaeton, the Lords Firebrace and Summertown and Flashington; and on
the part of his Highness King Endymion, the Lords Night-Rider and
Moonson and Shineall.Õ
So peace was made. And straightway the Sun-Folk pulled down the
wall which they had built, and sent back the prisoners of war, myself
being among them. When we came to the Moon, my comrades came out
to meet us, and King Endymion with them. They were right glad to see
us, even to tears. And the King was very earnest with me that I should
remain in his country; or, if I would, should join this said colony to the
Morning Star. He promised me that if I would consent, he would bestow
the princess, his daughter, on me in marriage. For all that I would not
consent, but asked him to send me back to the sea, for I was minded to
12

prosecute my voyage. And when he saw that I was steadfastly resolved,
he sent us away, having first entertained us right royally for seven days.
13

Chapter III
Of the moon-folk and their manners and customs.
While I lived in Moonland I saw not a few new and strange things,
which I shall now proceed to relate to such as care to hear them. They
use but one kind of food only. There are great multitudes of frogs flying
about in the air; these they catch, and lighting a fire, cook them upon the
coals; and while the frogs are a-cooking, they sit round the fire, just as
men sit round a table, and swallow the smoke, thinking it indeed to be
the finest thing in the world. This is the meat with which they are
nourished. As for drink, they pound air in a mortar, till it gives out a
certain liquid very like to dew. None are counted so beautiful among,
this people as they that are altogether bald and without hair. Such as
have their hair long they hate and abominate. But with those that dwell
in the hairy stars which we call the cornets, Õtis far otherwise, for they
hold long-haired men in great admiration.
This and other things about the Comet-Folk I heard from some of
them who were on their travels in Moonland.
Beards they all have, but these grow a little, above the knee. They
have no nails on their feet, which are indeed of one toe only. When they
shed tears, these tears are honey, very sharp in taste, they told me, for
this I do not know of my own experience; and when they sweat at their
labour or their games, the sweat is milk. Aye, and they make good sound
cheese thereof, with somewhat of the honey dropped in to set it. Their
oil-olive they make of onions, very clear, and the most sweet-smelling
thing that can be imagined.
There are many vines in Moonland, but they bear water, not wine; for
the grapes in the clusters are hailstones, and when the wind shakes the
vines, the clusters are broken and the grapes fall. From these, I take it,
14

comes the hail which falls upon the Earth. Their stomachs they use for
pouches, putting into them such things as they have need of, for they can
be opened and shut at pleasure. They have no liver within them, or such
other organs as men are wont to have. Only these said pouches are
covered very thickly in the inside of them with hair; and the young ones,
if they chance to be cold, use them for shelter.
As for their clothing, Õtis different according to their station. The rich
have garments of glass, very soft and pleasant, but the poor wear woven
stuffs of bronze. YOU must know that the country produces bronze in
great plenty. They steep this in water and so work it, just as wool is
worked.
As to what I have to write concerning their eyes and their fashion of
using them, I fear it will seem to some a thing altogether incredible. For
this reason I am scarcely willing to tell it, yet judge it best, on the whole,
so to do. Their eyes, then, they can take out and put in at their will, so
that a man, if it so please him, can take his eyes from their place, and
keep them by him till he have occasion to see. Many of them lose their
eyes, and are compelled to shift as they can, borrowing from others.
Some, too, that are of the richer sort have a great store of eyes laid up by
them. For ears they have the leaves of plane-trees; but some also have
ears of wood.
When one of the Moon-Folk has come to extreme old age, he dies not,
but vanishes away like smoke into the air.
One more marvellous thing I must tell of that I saw in King
EndymionÕs palace. There was a well, not deeper than wells commonly
are, and set over it a great mirror. Any man that went down into this
well heard everything that was being said here upon the Earth; and if he
looked into the mirror, he saw every nation and every city that there is
in all the world as plain as though he were there. I myself looked into
this mirror, and saw my own kinsfolk and the country in which I was
born; but whether they also saw me I cannot say for certain.
So much then about the Moon-Folk and their customs; and to any man
that does not believe what I have written, I will say this, that whenever
he should chance to go to that country he will find that I have told the
truth.
15

Chapter IV
Lucian comes to Lantern-City.
But now I must speak of out departure from Moonland. We had
audience of King Endymion, and bade farewell to him and his court; and
the King gave me two suits of glass and five of bronze, and a whole set
of the armour which the Moon-Folk make of lupine pods. ÕTis a pity that
I have not these things by me to show as a proof of my truthfulness; but I
left them all in the Whale (a matter of which you shall hear hereafter).
The King also sent a thousand Vulture-Horsemen to escort us some forty
miles or so on our way. So we sailed along past many countries, and
came to the Morning Star, to which, as I have before related, a colony
had been newly sent. Here we landed, and furnished our ship with
water. Setting sail again, we came into the Zodiac, which is, as you know,
the road along which the Sun travels. And indeed we passed the Sun,
coming very close to him but not landing, though my people would very
willingly have done so, only the wind was against us. But we saw that
the country was very flourishing and rich and well watered, and that it
abounded with all manner of good things. Here certain of the
Cloud-Centaurs, who were hired soldiers of King Phaeton, spied us and
came flying after us; but when they knew that we had made alliance with
the King, departed without doing us any damage. (By this time our
Vulture-Horsemen had left us, returning to Moonland.)
All that night we sailed and also the day following, and about evening
came to a fair town that they call Lantern-City. It lies between the
Pleiades and the Hyades, being lower by far than the Zodiac. Here we
landed, but saw not man, woman or child in the whole place, but only
many lanterns, some busy in the streets, and some idling about the
harbour, and others talking in the market-place. Some of these lanterns
16

were small, these I took to be the poor; and a few very bright and easy
to be seen, which were the wealthy and noble. And each of them had his
own dwelling and his own lantern-stand. Also they had every one of
them his proper name, just as we have; and they could speak, for we
heard them talking to one another. These Lantern-Folk did us no harm;
nay, more, they treated us kindly, and would have had us sup with
them. Nevertheless we were terribly afraid; and there was not one of us
that had the heart to sleep or as much as eat or drink while we tarried in
Lantern-City. I should say that their Government House is built in the
middle of their city; and that their Chief Magistrate sits there the whole
night through. And Õtis the custom for him to call every one of the
Lantern-Folk by his name, and have him appear before him, that it may
be seen that he is alight and well trimmed. If anyone obeys not this
summons he is condemned to die. (You must know that among these folk
to be extinguished is to die.) For they think of him as of a soldier that
leaves his place in the battle.
It so chanced that we were present at the Government House and saw
all that happened there, hearing also certain of the Lantern-Folk that had
been accused to the King pleading before him and showing cause why
they had been slow in appearing before him. Among others I saw our
own Lantern that we have at home; and I asked him of the welfare of my
people at home, to which he answered that all was well with them. That
night we abode in Lantern-City; and the next morning, setting sail, came
before long to the region of the clouds, among which we saw the famous
place Cloud-Cuckoo-Town. Of this I heard tell, how that it had been
founded by one Plausible, a man of Athens, who seeking his fortune
abroad, had established a Commonwealth of Birds. But this had been
many years before, for at this time its ruler was King Crow, son of King
Blackbird. So indeed I was told, for to the town itself we could not come,
though we much desired it, because the wind was not favourable.
After this we sailed for three days more, till we could see the ocean
very plainly below us. But no land could we espy, only the lands above
us in the air, from which we had lately come, and these were by this time
bright and shining as the moon and the stars commonly appear. On the
fourth day, half an hour before noon, the wind dropping and dying
away, we settled down upon the sea. I cannot write how glad we were
17

when we touched the water again. Never, I suppose, were men more
rejoiced. We made merry together with such things as we had, and in the
evening, there being no wind and the sea dead calm, nothing would
content us but that we must bathe. But it often happens that they who
change their condition very much, as they think, to their advantage, do
often in truth change it very much for the worse. And so it was with us,
as I shall now  proceed to tell you.
18

Chapter V.
Lucian and his men are swallowed up.
For two days we sailed, the sea being smooth as ever I saw; but on
the third day we saw towards the East, where the Sun had just risen, a
multitude of great beasts, monsters of the sea, and among them one of
the most prodigious size, being one hundred and eighty-eight miles and
four furlongs in length. This came towards us with its mouth wide open,
making a terrible commotion in the water a long way before it as it
moved, the sea being white with foam for miles on either side. Also we
could see its teeth, which were long and sharp as stakes, and white as
ivory.
When we saw this, we gave up ourselves for lost, and so, embracing
each other and having said farewell, we awaited our fate. In a very short
space it was upon us, and swallowed us, with our ship and all its
tackling. By great good luck it did not close its teeth upon us, or it had
certainly broken us to pieces; but we went down whole into the
monsterÕs belly. There at the first all was darkness, nor could we see
anything. But after a while the beast opened his jaws, and we saw into
what manner of place we had come.
ÕTwas a great chamber, very broad and long, and high also. And in
the middle there was a multitude of small fishes and of other creatures,
all of them broken up, and masts of ships, and anchors, and menÕs bones,
and cargo of all sorts. Also there was some land with small hills rising
out of it. This last, I take it, came from the mud which the beast
swallowed when he went down to the bottom of the sea. On this land
there was a forest, and trees of all kinds and many sorts of plants. In
truth, it seemed to be a well-tilled parcel of ground. Afterwards we
measured this island, and found that the circuit was about eighty miles.
19

We saw also a multitude of sea-birds, as cormorants and kingfishers, that
had built their nests and were hatching their young ones on the trees.
For a while, when we found ourselves in this plight, we could do
nothing but weep. But I took heart after a time, and roused my
companions. First, we propped the ship on either side, that it should not
fall. Afterwards we lit a fire, and prepared for ourselves a meal of such
things as were at hand; and indeed, there was a vast store of fish from
which to choose, and as for water, we yet had some of that which we
took on board from the Morning Star.
After we had eaten, we started on a journey, and came as near as
might be to the monsterÕs throat, from which, looking out when he
chanced to open his mouth, we saw sometimes the land and hills rising
from it, and sometimes the sky only. Often we saw islands, for indeed,
as we found, the beast was going with amazing swiftness to all parts of
the sea.
At the first we were overwhelmed with fear, but after a while,
growing used to our abode, judged it best to explore it further. I took,
therefore, some of my companions and went into the wood, being
resolved to make myself acquainted with the whole place. After we had
gone half a mile or thereabouts, I found a temple to Posidon (for so much
we learnt from the writing inscribed upon it). And then again, in a short
space, we came to tombs with columns upon them; and close by to a
spring of clear water; also I heard the barking of a dog; and saw the
smoke of a chimney, from which I gathered that we were coming near to
some dwelling.
We were all eager to know what this might mean, and made all the
haste that we could; nor had we gone far before we saw an old man, and
a young man with him, who were working with right goodwill in a
meadow, which they were watering by conduits from the spring of
which I have just spoken. ÕTwas a great pleasure to us to see them, and
yet we were also somewhat afraid. And they, I take it, were much in the
same case, for they stood looking at us without a word. But at last the
old man said:
ÔAnd who are you,my friends? Sea-gods, or mere unlucky mortals like
as we are? For we are men that were born and bred on dry land, but are
now become a sort of sea-creatures, as it were, living in the middle of
20

this great monster, and always swimming about with him. Indeed, I do
not rightly know what has befallen us, or even whether we are dead or
alive. It seems likely enough that we are dead, but for all, that I feel as if
I were alive.Õ
ÔFather,Õ I said, Ôwe are new comers in this place, for only this morning
the monster swallowed us down with our ship. And when we saw this
wood, how great and thickly grown it was, we desired to know what
there might be to be seen in it, and so we came as you perceive. And, as I
take it, Õtis a good providence that has led us to this place, where we
have made your acquaintance, and learnt that there are others also who
are prisoners in this great monster. Pray tell us your fortunes, and how
you came hither, and how you have fared?Õ
But the old man declared that he would not tell us a word about
himself, or hear anything about us, till he had given us such
entertainment as he could. To this we gladly consented, and he took us
into his house, which was very prettily built and sufficiently furnished
with all things needful, as beds and the like. There he set food before us,
vegetables and fruits and fish, and with all this some good wine also.
When we had had our fill of these good things, he would fain hear of our
adventures, which I told him from the beginning, how a storm had over
taken us at sea, and of what we saw in the island, and how we had
journeyed through the air, and of the great battle in which we had taken
a part. In a word, I told him my whole story up to the time when we
were swallowed by the monster. He was astonished beyond measure at
the things which we related to him, and told us, in return, some of the
things which had happened to himself And his story ran somewhat after
this fashion:
ÔI was a merchant of Cyprus, in which country I was born, and was
accustomed to trade with Greece and Italy, and the neighbouring parts.
This I did with good fortune for some years. But at the last, sailing to
Italy with a cargo of merchandise of many kinds, I met with the
misfortune which has brought me to this plight. I had with me on
shipboard my son being then a young child, and a crew of my own
servants. All went well with us till we came to the Island of Sicily, when
there encountered us a very fierce storm of wind. For three days we
were carried before it till we came to the Pillars of Hercules, and so out
21

into the Western Sea. And here there met us this monster and swallowed
us up together with our ship, which doubtless you saw lying wrecked in
the beastÕs mouth. All the rest of my comrades perished, being hurt by
the beastÕs teeth as we came down, and I only and my son were saved.
So we buried our friends, and built a temple to Posidon as a
thank-offering for such deliverance as he had given. Since that time we
have lived as you see; we have this garden with sundry plants and herbs,
and we have also fish and fruits. As for this wood which you see, it is of
great extent, and has in it abundance of vines from which we get some
excellent sweet wine; nor could there be sweeter and colder water than
we get from this spring. Our beds we make of leaves; nor have we any
stint of fuel for fire. We also take such birds as fly into the beastÕs mouth,
and we catch live fish with our angling lines from the beastÕs gill, bathing
also from there, whenever we desire so to do. And not far from this
place is a salt lake somewhat less than three miles in circumference,
which holds all kinds of fish. Here we bathe and sail at times in a small
skiff which I have built for this purpose. ÕTis now, by my reckoning, the
twenty-eighth year since the beast swallowed us up. And I do not deny
that it would be such a life as a man might very well endure but for our
neighbours, who are a great and grievous trouble to us. For we can have
no dealings with them, so savage and fierce are they.Õ
I wondered much to hear him speak thus, and asked him, ÔHow say
you? have you neighbours in this country, if I may so call this place?Õ
ÔAye,Õ he said, Ôneighbours in plenty, who show no kindness to
strangers, and are, besides, of the oddest shape you can imagine. To the
westward, a hilly country, and part of this wood where we are now,
dwell the Saltfish-Folk, a people that have the faces of eels and the heads
of stag-beetles. They are very bold warriors, and are accustomed to eat
their meat raw. Over against these, along the right side of the beast, are
the Triton-Weasels, whose upper parts are shaped as a manÕs, but their
lower parts are like a weaselÕs. Of all the tribes in this place these are the
best. To the left of these are the Crab-Hands and the Tunny-Heads.
These have lately made alliance together, and are fast friends. The inland
region is inhabited by the Shell-Tails and the Flea-Feet, who are a very
warlike tribe, and the fastest runners that can be imagined. Eastward of
them lies the country that is near to the beastÕs mouth; therein is but little
22

cultivated land, for the sea commonly overflows it, and it is barren. As to
this region that you see, I hold it of the Flea-Feet, paying them tribute by
the year five hundred oysters. And now that you have heard what I have
to tell you about this place, you must weigh the matter well, for you
must consider how you will be able to live here, and whether you can
fight with all these tribes with any hope of victory.Õ
ÔWell,Õ said I, Ôtell me how many are there of them in all?Õ
To this he answered that there were a thousand and more.
ÔAnd what arms have they?Õ
ÔNo arms,Õ he answered, but fish-bones only.Õ
ÔIf that be so,Õ I said, ÔÕtwere best to come to blows with them without
further delay. For if they have no better arms than fish-bones, I take it
they will not be able to stand against men equipped as we are. Let us
deal with them at once; and if things go as I wish and believe, we shall
dwell in peace hereafter.Õ
To this counsel all agreed. So we departed to our ship and made such
preparations as were needed.
23

Chapter VI.
Lucian defeats his neighbours.
When we had thus fixed in our minds that we would make war with
these creatures, we cast about for a cause; and at last came to this
resolve, that the old man of the wood should not pay his tribute
according to custom, for the appointed day was now close at hand. And
so it was done; for the ambassadors came, after the custom, to ask their
due, but the old man made them a very scornful answer, and chased
them from his house.
This stirred up the Flea-Feet and Shell-Tails to great anger, and they
marched against the old man with prodigious uproar and confusion.
Now we shrewdly conjectured what they would do, and so waited for
them, having first equipped ourselves in full armour. And we set an
ambush of five-and-twenty men on the road by which they would come,
with this instruction, that when the enemy had passed them, they should
rise upon them. This they did very exactly, rising upon them as soon as
ever they were gone past and cutting down the rear-guard. And at the
same time we others, being also five-and-twenty in number-for the old
man and his son were with us- met them in front, and fought against
them with all our might. After some little trouble we put them to flight,
and chased them to their dens.
In this battle we killed not less than one hundred and seventy of the
enemy. Of our side there were slain two only, of whom one was the
captain of the ship. He was run through the midriff with the fin of a
mullet. The rest of that day and the night following we remained
encamped on the field of battle, and set up a trophy which should be a
memorial of our victory. This trophy was the dried backbone of a
dolphin. By this time the other inhabitants of the place had heard of what
24

had befallen the Flea-Feet and their allies, and marched against us with
all their forces.
Their order of battle was this: On the right wing were the
Saltfish-Folk, commanded by General Sturgeon; and on the left wing the
Tunny-Heads, the Crab-Hands being in the centre. As for the
Triton-Weasels, they sat still, not wishing to help either us or our
enemies. Nothing dismayed, we went out to meet the host as it
advanced, and encountered it hard by the temple of Posidon. And as
soon as we saw it, we raised a great shout, and so came to blows. It was
marvellous to hear the echo, how it sounded again from the monsterÕs
sides as from the walls and roof of a cave.
Our enemies could not stand against us for a moment; indeed, they
had not armour as we had, and so did not venture to come to close
quarters. So chasing them into the wood, we were masters of the whole
country. In a short space of time they sent their heralds to us, asking that
they might have their dead for burial, and wishing also to make peace.
As for the dead, they had what they wished, but peace we would not
have with them on any conditions whatsoever.
Accordingly, the next day we marched into their country, and
destroyed them root and branch. Only with the Triton-Weasels we did
not meddle; but they, when they knew what had befallen their
neighbours, escaped through the gills of the monster, and threw
themselves into the sea.
The whole country being now cleared of all enemies, we took
possession of it with great joy and peace of mind. And there we dwelt in
quietness and cheerfulness for a time, entertaining ourselves with such
things as boxing and wrestling, and the like, and with hunting also, there
being much game in the wood. Also we cultivated the vines of the
country, and made liquor from them, and gathered a good store of fruit
from the other trees. We were like men in a prison from which there is
no escaping; only the prison was large and we were not bound, but lived
in much ease and plenty.
25

Chapter VII.
The battle of the islands.
In this fashion we lived for a year and eight months, nothing
happening that was beyond the usual course of events. But in the ninth
month, on the fifth day of the month, about the second opening of the
month-the monster opened his mouth twice in every hour, which was,
indeed, the thing by which we reckoned the time-about the second
opening of the mouth, I say, we heard all of a sudden a great shouting
and uproar; and when we listened we heard words of command and the
cries which they use to rowers to encourage them.
This noise disturbed us not a little, so we went as near as might be to
the mouth of the monster, and standing there just within the teeth, we
saw the strangest sight that ever I beheld with my eyes-mighty great
men, some hundred yards and more in height, that were sailing on great
islands, just as men are wont to sail on ships.
Now that what I say will seem to some incredible, I know well; but
for all that I shall tell my tale to the end. These islands were long, but
they rose a little only from the sea, and each, as I should reckon, was
twelve miles and more in circumference. Also upon each there sailed, as
nearly as we could count, one hundred and twenty of these giants. Some
of these sat in rows upon each side of the island and rowed, using for
oars great cypress-trees, with all their branches and leaves upon them.
And on the end, which was, as it were, the stern of the island, on a high
hill, sat the steersman, with the tiller of a great rudder of brass in his
hand, the rudder being of two hundred yards and more. On the prow
there stood about forty men in full armour, who were the fighting men. I
call them men, and such they were in shape-only their stature was very
great-excepting as to their hair only. For where the hair grows on menÕs
26

heads, these had a burning fire, which, I take it, served them for helmets.
The islands had no masts upon them, nor sails; but in each of them
was a great wood, and the wind, blowing on this, made just as it does
when it fills out a sail. On each island there was a man who gave the time
to the rowers; and these rowed with all their might, just as they do in
ships of war.
Now, of these islands and their crews, if I may so say, we saw when
we first looked out of the monsterÕs mouth but two or three; afterwards
there came in sight full six hundred, which we saw form themselves into
two fleets and fight a pitched battle. Some of the ships, or islands-for I
scarcely know how I should call them-met each other bow to bow, and
some were rammed at their sides, and so sank, and others were
entangled together and fought furiously, not separating till one or the
other was taken. As for the soldiers in the forecastles, I never saw men
fight more fiercely, boarding their enemiesÕ ships and cutting them
down; for as for quarter, none was given.
They had not grappling-irons, such as are commonly used in
sea-fights, but a kind of sea beast, the name of which is polypus. These
were very great creatures, and they fastened them to their own ships,
and after threw them on to that which they wished to hold fast. And
when this was done, the polypus would wind its limbs about the wood
of the other ship and hold it fast.
By way of artillery, they had oyster-shells so big that they would have
filled each a waggon, and sponges of fifty feet long or thereabouts. The
names of the admirals were, of the one fleet, Kino, Nimble, and of the
other, King Sea-Drinker.
As for their quarrel, Õtwas, as far as we could understand, for some
plundering business. For King Sea-Drinker had harried, we heard, not a
few herds of dolphin from King Nimble. So much we learnt from what
they cried to each other as they fought: ÕTwas thus also that we knew the
names of the two kings.
After a while King NimbleÕs men had the best of the battle, for they
sank one hundred and fifty of the enemyÕs islands and took three other
with their crews. As for the others, they escaped; for though they were
not able to go forward, yet they backed water, and so got clear away. To
these King NimbleÕs ships gave chase, but after no long while returned, it
27

being now late in the day, and busied themselves with the wrecks. Of
these they took the greater part, recovering all such as belonged to
themselves; for of their fleet there had been sunk full eighty in number.
After this they set up a trophy, to be a memorial of their victory, which
they had won in this Battle of the Islands. This was one of the enemyÕs
ships, or islands, which they fixed end-wise in the monsterÕs head. For all
that night they rode at anchor hard by, with their hawsers made fast to
the beast. I should say that their anchors were very large, and of
glass.The next day they offered sacrifices upon the back of the beast, and
buried their dead in it, and so departed with loud singing and shouting.
28

Chapter VIII.
Lucian escapes from the beast and comes to the Sea of Milk and Cheese
Island.
By this time our life in the monster had become well-nigh intolerable
for weariness, and we sought to devise some means by which we might
escape from him. At the first our purpose was to dig through his right
wall, so to speak, or side, and so make our way out. But having set about
the task, and accomplished a thousand yards and more of our digging,
we judged it to be a hopeless business, and so desisted.
Then we thought that we would set fire to the wood, thinking that so
the beast would die and that we should easily escape. This we did, first
setting fire to the hilly part of the wood, where the trees, being pines
and such like, burnt more readily. For seven days and nights he seemed
not to heed the burning, but on the eighth and ninth we perceived that
he began to sicken, for he was slower inopening his mouth, and if ever
he opened it, would shut it again speedily.
On the tenth day, and yet more manifestly on the eleventh, its inward
parts had mortified and even begun to give out a stench. And on the
twelfth we perceived, not without some fear, that unless, when it opened
its mouth, we could by some means so keep the teeth apart that they
should not close, we should be all shut up in the dead creature, and run
great risk of perishing miserably. We therefore propped the mouth open
with great beams, and having so done, put our ship, which by good luck
had taken no harm, in readiness for a voyage, taking on board as much
water as we could carry, and such things as we needed and had at hand.
I have said that the captain of the ship was killed in the battle with the
Shell-Tails. I made, therefore, the old man of the wood captain in his
place, he having been a sailor in time past. The next day the beast was
29

now wholly dead, and we dragged our ship up his throat and through
his teeth, to which fastening cables, we let it down gently into the sea.
After this we climbed on to the beast, and did sacrifice to the god of
the sea close by the trophy which King NimbleÕs people had set up. There
we spent three days, it being a dead calm all the while; and on the fourth
day departed. For a long way as we sailed, we came across the dead
bodies of those that had been slain in the Battle of the Islands, and
measuring some, were astonished to see how great they were. For a
while the wind was warm, but afterwards there came a very great storm
from the North and a great frost, so that the whole sea was frozen, not
on the top only as is wont to be the case, but very deep, as much as four
hundred fathoms. When we saw this we left the ship and ran about on
the ice, but the wind still blowing very strongly, the cold was altogether
more than we were able to endure. Doubtless it would have gone hard
with us, but that the old man, the captain, contrived a remedy, bidding
us dig a great and deep cavern in the ice, in which we all dwelt for thirty
days, keeping great fires and having fish for food, for these we had in
plenty for the digging. But our provisions failing, we must needs move
from the place. So having dug out our ship from the place where it was
frozen into the ice, we set all sail and were so dragged along smoothly
and pleasantly, for all as if we had been sailing. By the fifth day Õtwas
warm weather again, and the ice thawed, and all was water as before.
After sailing some thirty or forty miles we came to a small uninhabited
island, from which we took a store of water, for ours had by this time
given in. Also we shot two wild bulls which were like the bulls which we
used to see, save that they had their horns not on their foreheads but
under their eyes, so seeing, I suppose, the better how to toss.
Sailing on from this island we came to sea that was not of water but of
milk, and in this sea to an island with white cliffs and covered with
vineyards. Now this island was one marvellously great cheese, very
firmly set through, as we found afterwards when we came to eat of it.
The circuit of it was a little more than three miles. As to the vines, they
were very heavy laden with bunches of grapes; only from these bunches
when we squeezed them there came not wine, but milk. In the middle of
the island was a temple, and on it an inscription Ôto Galatea, daughter of
NereusÕ (now Galatea by interpretation means ÔLady of MilkÕ). For all the
30

time that we dwelt in this island we got provision in plenty from the
earth, and from the vines good milk to drink. We heard say that the
queen of this country was one Tyro, daughter of Salmoneus; and as
Galatea signifies milk, so does Tyro signify cheese.
31

Chapter IX.
The travellers meet the Cork-Foot-Folk, and come to the Island of the
Blessed.
In this island we remained five days, and on the sixth day set sail,
having a fair wind that drove us on quickly enough, but the sea, as was
indeed to be expected, was calm and smooth. On the eighth day we were
clear of the milk, and found ourselves in water that was both salt and
blue. Here we saw a multitude of men running hither and thither upon
the sea, who were like us in shape and size, and indeed in all respects
except their feet only, for they were of cork; for which reason, as I
understood, this people was called the Cork-Foot-Folk. ÕTwas very
strange to see that they went where they would without sinking; moving
on the top of the waves without any difficulty or fear. Some of these
wayfarers came to us and bade us welcome in the Greek tongue, saying
that they were on their way to the city of Cork, which was their native
country. And when they had gone with us for a space, running along the
water by our side, they turned and went on their way, wishing us a
good voyage.
After no long time we saw a multitude of islands before us; Cork city,
to which the travellers were bound, being on our left. This town was
built on one cork, but this very large and round. And on the right hand
we saw five islands, very large and lofty, and many miles distant, as it
seemed; and one right before which was both broad and low, which we
judged to be sixty miles away and more. To this we held a straight
course, and when we had got near to it we perceived a marvellously
sweet and fragrant air blowing from it, such as the historian Herodotus
declares to blow over the neighbouring parts of the sea from Araby the
Blest. For the fragrance was as of roses and narcissus and hyacinths and
32

lilies and violets mingled together, with myrtle flowers also, and bay and
the blossom of the vine.
Never were men more pleased than we for we hoped that now at last,
after all our toils and dangers,we should have some happy and peaceable
days. And when still sailing on we came near to the island, we saw that
all about it there were harbours very large and deep and wholly
defended from the waves. Also we saw rivers clear as crystal that
flowed down into the sea with a very gentle stream, and about these
rivers meadows and woods full of all manner of sweet-singing birds, of
which some haunted the shore and some the branches of trees, but all
gave forth the most ravishing music you can conceive. And all blew
breezes very light and pleasant. And especially through the wood there
came a very sweet and gentle wind that stirred it in the most delicate
fashion, so that from the moving of the boughs there was given forth
without ceasing a most delightful melody. And from the whole country
we heard a mingled noise, not by any means confused or tumultuous, but
such as might be heard at a banquet where there are flute-players, and
minstrels reciting their pieces, and others dancing to the music of flutes
or harps. All this fairly enchanted us, and so we made for the shore. And
when we had moored our ship we landed, leaving only the old man and
two of the crew to keep watch.
Close to the shore was a meadow well covered with flowers, across
which we walked, and so came to the city, where the guards and sentries
spied us. These laid hold on us and bound us with chains, but the chains
were of roses only; and this is the strongest chain that they use in this
island. Having bound us, they took us before their King, telling us, as we
went, that the country wherein we now were was the Island of the
Blessed, and that their King was Rhadamanthus of Crete. Being brought
into the presence, we found that there were other causes to be tried, and
so stood waiting for our turn and listening to what we heard.
There were four causes in all, and ours the last. The first cause was
that of Ajax, son of Telamon; and the matter in dispute was this, whether
he was fit to be admitted into the company of the heroes, the accusation
against him being this, that he had fallen into madness and had laid
violent hands upon himself. The judgment of Rhadamanthus was this,
ÔLet Ajax, the son of Telamon, be delivered to the care of Hippocrates,
33

the physician of Cos, that he may drink hellebore, which is the remedy of
madness, and when he is healed, let him come back to this place and take
his place at the banquet of the heroes.Õ
After this was a trial of Love, Theseus and MenelŠus disputing about
Helen the Fair, which of the two should have her to wife. For Theseus
had carried her away while she was yet a girl, only her brothers, the
Twins,had taken her from him; but MenelŠus had married her when she
was grown to womanhood. Here the judgment of the King was this, ÔLet
MenelŠus have her, because he endured many toils and dangers for her
sake. As for Theseus, he has wives already, the Queen of the Amazons to
wit, and Ariadne, who was daughter to King Minos of Crete.Õ
The third trial was a contest for the preeminence between great
generals, Alexander of Macedon, the son of Philip, on the one side, and
Hannibal the Carthaginian on the other. Here the judgment was for
Alexander and there was assigned to him a throne close by Cyrus the
Persian, who I perceived had the first place of all.
And the fourth case that was tried was ours. The King asked us, ÔWhy
did you come, being yet living men, to this holy place?Õ
To this we made such answer as we could, telling him all our history
from the day that we set sail upon the ocean. After this we were taken
from the Court, and the Judge considered our cause for a long time,
consulting also with his assessors (among whom, with many other wise
and learned men, was Aristides of Athens, that was surnamed the Just).
At last he delivered his sentence, which was to this effect: ÔFor your
busying yourselves in things not concerning you and leaving your
country, you shall give account hereafter. But now you are permitted for
a certain time to sojourn in this island, and to live with the heroes; but
afterwards you must depart without fail: and the time that I appoint for
your sojourn is seven months, and no more.Õ
34

Chapter X.
The Island of the Blessed.
When this sentence had been given, immediately our chains fell off of
their own accord, and we were loosed by our guards and led into the
city to the Banqueting House of the Blessed. Now this city is wholly built
of gold, and the wall which encircles it is of emerald; and it has seven
gates, each of them of cinnamon wood, made in one piece. And the
pavement of the city and all the space that is within the walls is of pure
ivory. There are temples to all the gods in it, these being built of beryl
stones, and in the temple very great altars of amethyst, every altar being
of one amethyst. On these altars they offer sacrifice, and every sacrifice is
of a hundred beasts. And round about the city there flows a river of
fragrant oil more beautiful than can be conceived, the breadth of which is
one hundred royal cubits, and the depth such that a man can easily swim
in it. There are baths in the city, great houses of glass, and these are
heated with fires of cinnamon wood. But in these baths they use not
water, but dew. The clothes which they wear are of spider web, very
fine and of a purple colour. They have no bodies, nor flesh, nor can they
be touched; but yet though they have the form and semblance only of
men, they stand and move, and think and speak. It seemed to me when I
saw them, as if it were the bare soul, clothed only with a certain likeness
of the body, that did these things. But no man would know that what he
sees has not a bodily substance, unless he sought to touch it. For these
people, though they are shadows, are yet shadows that stand upright,
and not such as we see here cast upon the ground or upon a wall. In this
country none grow old, but whatever a manÕs age may be when he
comes hither, at that he remains. Nor have they in their land any night,
nor yet the day in its full brightness; but as the twilight is with us, when
35

it grows very near to the morning, but the sun has not yet risen, such is
the light that prevails continually among them. Also they have but one
season in their year, for it is always springtime with them; and they have
only one wind that blows, and that is the west wind. And the whole land
is covered with every kind of flower and shrub that is, both of the wild
and of the garden sorts. The vines which they have, bear their fruit
twelve times in the year, so that in every month there is a vintage. As to
the pomegranates and the apples and all other kinds of fruit, these, they
told me, ripened not twelve but thirteen times in the year, for that in one
month which they call the month of Minos they ripen twice. As to their
wheat, it does not bear ears such as we have among us, but loaves at the
end of the stalk, ready made and baked for eating. Round about the city
there are three hundred and sixty and five springs of water, and as many
more of honey, and of perfume five hundred, though these indeed are
smaller than the springs of water and honey; there are seven rivers of
milk, and of wine eight.
The Banqueting of the Heroes is held outside the city in a field that is
called the Elysian Meadow. ÕTis a very beautiful meadow, and round
about it is a wood of all kinds of trees,very thick, which shade those that
sit at the banquet; and under them are couches to lie on, made of
flowers. The meat which they eat is carried about and served to them by
the winds; but these do not serve them with the wine. This service,
indeed, they want not at all, for there are great trees of the very clearest
and brightest glass that can be round about the banqueting place. And
these trees have for fruit cups of all manner of sizes and shapes. When a
hero comes to the banquet he gathers from one of these trees a cup, or it
may be two cups, and sets them by his side. And these of their own
accord are filled with wine. Such is the fashion of their drinking. They do
not wear garlands on their heads; but, in the place of this, nightingales
and other sweet-singing birds gather flowers with their beaks from the
meadows that are hard by, and when flying over the heads of the
feasters let them fall upon them. And as to perfume the manner of the
place is this. There are continually thick clouds which draw up perfume
from the rivers and springs. These same clouds gather over the place of
the banquet, and being very gently stirred by the winds, rain down that
which they hold in a very fine rain. While the heroes are at their meal
36

they have a very plentiful entertainment of singing and music. And the
songs which they most love to hear are the songs which Homer made.
Indeed Homer himself is one of their company, and has his accustomed
place next by Ulysses. The quires that sing are of boys and maidens; and
they that lead them are famous poets, as Eunomus the Locrian, for
whom, when he had chanced to break a string of his harp, a grasshopper
made music; and Arion, whom a dolphin carried on his back lest such
sweet music should be lost, and Anacreon, and Stesichorus. This last had
made friends again, I perceived, with the Fair Helen, against whom he
had written in his lifetime very sharp verses. And when the quire have
ceased their singing, then begins another quire that is not one whit less
sweet, of swans and swallows and nightingales. Last of all, when these
two have come to the end of their music, there is heard the sweetest
melody from the whole wood, of which the winds themselves are the
leaders. But of all things which make for the joy and pleasure of the
feasters the chief is this, namely two fountains, the one of Delight and
the other of Laughter. Every man takes a draught from each of the
fountains at the beginning of the feast, and thenceforward spends his
time in delight and laughter without ceasing.
37

Chapter XI.
The inhabitants of the Island of the Blessed.
Now that I have described the place to the best of my power, I should
like to say somewhat of those that dwelt there. First, there were all the
heroes of old time, and all they that took a part in the war against
Troy-all, that is to say, excepting the Lesser Ajax. Of him they told me
that for his impiety he had been banished to the dwellings of the wicked.
And of barbarians, I saw Cyrus the Elder, that was the first king Of
Persia; and Cyrus the Younger, who marched with the Ten Thousand to
win for himself the throne of Persia; and Anacharsis, the wise Scythian;
and Numa, that gave laws and religion to Rome; and Phocion and Tellus,
men of Athens, that did good service to Greece in their day, and the
Seven Wise Men-all but Periander, who indeed was a cruel and wicked
tyrant.
I saw also Socrates, the philosopher, whom the men of Athens put to
death. He had what he had hoped for; for he talked with the famous
men of old times, as with Nestor and Palamedes. He had also gathered
about him many handsome youths, as Hyacinthus and Narcissus and
Hylas, among whom he seemed to prefer Hyacinthus. For so I judged,
perceiving that he asked more questions of him than of the others.
As for this asking of questions, he did it without ceasing. Indeed, I
heard say that King Rhadamanthus liked it not, and had threatened that
he would send him away Out of the country, unless he would cease from
such trifling, nor trouble himself or others any more, but make merry
like the rest.
Plato I did not see; indeed, they told me that he dwelt in the Republic
which he fashioned for himself, living according to the constitutions and
the laws which he imagined. Of all the philosophers, they that were in
38

the best repute were the Epicureans, who were right pleasant, gracious
and jovial fellows. In their company I saw ®sop, the Phrygian, who
indeed served as a jester to them. As for Diogenes that was used to live
in a tub, there never was man so changed as he; for now he was married
to the gayest woman in the world, and would drink till he was tipsy, and
dance in the merriest fashion.
Of the Stoics, I could not see a single one. It was told me that they
were all busy climbing up the steep hill of virtue, nor ever getting nearer
to the top. As to Chrysippus, who was the chief of this set of people, it
had been told him that be should never have entrance into the Island till
lie drenched himself with hellebore, not once, but many times, so mad
was he. As to the School of the Academy, men that doubted of
everything, I heard that they were wishful to come to the place, but
stayed questioning about it; and indeed were not all come to any
certainty whether or no there was such an island. For my part, I believe
that they stood in no small fear of the judgment of King Rhadamanthus,
seeing that they had done their utmost to prove that there was no such
court or judgment anywhere, or, indeed, any test by which a man may
judge whether a thing be good or bad. I was told, indeed, that sundry of
these wise men had started on their journey to the Island, following
some of those that had come to the place, but had always lagged behind
or stopped half-way for sheer laziness and want of will.
Now I have told the names of the most notable of the inhabitants of
the Island. But none, I perceived, was so much honoured as Achilles, and
after Achilles the next in place was Theseus.
39

Chapter XII
Lucian talks with Homer. Games are celebrated in the island.
After we had passed two or three days in the island very agreeably, I
made a visit to the poet Homer; and it so chancing that both of us had
leisure and could talk as much as we would, I asked many questions
about himself and his poems. And first I inquired of him of what country
he came, for about this, I said, the learned dispute violently up to this
day. To this he answered, ÔI know well what they say about me; how
some will have it that I was born in the island of Chios, and others again
that I was a man of the city of Smyrna, and a third party that I belonged
to Colophon. Now the real truth is this, that I am come from none of
these places, and indeed am no Greek at all, but was born in the city of
Babylon, and among my own people had the name of Tigranes. As for
this name of Homer, I got it because I was sent as a hostage to the land
of Greece, where, as you know, Homer signifies hostage.Õ Then I asked
him, ÔThe wise men have noted many verses in your poems as ill-made
and not such as you would have written. Tell me if this be so.Õ ÔNot so,
indeed,Õ he answered, Ôfor I wrote them all, and these men do not know
the good from the bad.Õ Next I wished to know whether he wrote the
book of the Odyssey before the book of the Iliad, as is commonly said.
To this he replied, that the Iliad was the first written. As to the common
tale that he was blind, I had no need to ask him any question, for I could
perceive for myself that his eyes were just as good as my own. I often
talked with him and asked him questions about many things, whenever
he chanced to be at leisure, and these he would always answer as
pleasantly as can be imagined. He was all the more friendly with me
after a certain cause had been tried, in which he won the day. And the
cause was this: He writes in the Iliad of one Thersites, how he was ugly
40

and mis-shapen and had a scurrilous tongue, and how he was beaten for
his insolence by Ulysses. This Thersites indicted him before the Judge for
slander; but the Judge gave his sentence for Homer, whose advocate, I
should tell you, was Ulysses himself. It was about the time of this trial
that there came into the country a very famous man, Pythagoras of
Samos, who had lived seven different lives in seven different bodies, and
was now come to the Island, his soul now having duly accomplished all
the time of its sojourn. I had heard before when on the earth that this
man had a golden thigh; and now looking at him as narrowly as I could,
I saw that half of him was of gold. It was agreed that he should be
admitted to be of the company of the Blessed; only, as he had lived in
the bodies of seven men, it was doubted by what name he should be
called; or indeed who he was, as, for instance whether he was Euphorbus
the Trojan, that MenelaŸs killed, as he was wont to say of himself, or
Pythagoras. Empedocles of Sicily also came to the Island, wishing to be
received into this company. I had heard of this man, that wishing his
countrymen to believe that he had been carried up into heaven and
received among the gods, he threw himself down into the crater of
Mount Etna, but that the deceit had been discovered by one of his
golden slippers which the fire of the place had not been able to melt. I
perceived that he was scorched all over; but he was not received into the
company, for all his prayers.
Not long after this coming of Pythagoras, there happened the great
gathering which they call in the place the ÔDeath-Feast,Õ and in which
they have sports of all kinds, and contests of singing and the like. The
two presidents of the festival were Achilles and Theseus, of whom
Theseus had held this office six times before, and Achilles four.
It would weary you were I to relate the whole of what was done at
this festival, but some of the chief things shall be told. In the wrestling
match, one Carus, who was said to be son to Hercules, won the prize,
throwing Ulysses, whom none of the Greek heroes had been able to
overcome, when Achilles held the funeral games of Patroclus. In boxing,
there was an equal match between Areus-who, strange to tell, was a
philosopher of Alexandria, in Egypt-and EpeŸs, that won the prize
against all comers in the funeral games of Patroclus. There was a contest
of poets, in which Homer and Hesiod contended. Homer was manifestly
41

and by far the better of the two. Nevertheless the prize was given to
Hesiod; for even in this island such judgments are not always according
to justice. The prize that was given to those who gained the victory in
these contests was a crown woven out of peacock-feathers.
42

Chapter XIII.
The island is invaded. The flight of the fair Helen.
We had scarcely ended these games and contests, when there came
tidings that certain of the vilest of those that were in prison, suffering
punishment in the abode of the wicked, had burst their bonds, and
having mastered the guards that were set to watch them, were coming
with all speed against the island.
Further, it was said that the leaders of this host were Phalaris of
Agrigentum, the same that burnt men in the bull of brass that Perillus
made for him; and Busiris of Egypt, that had offered men in the place of
cattle for sacrifice on his altars; and Diomed of Thrace, who fed his
horses with the flesh of men.
Also there were said to be with them some of the famous robbers of
old time, as Sciron, who threw travellers from the cliffs into the sea, and
Sinis, who killed such as fell into his hand by binding them to the top of a
fir, which he bent and then let spring again.
When King Rhadamanthus heard this news, he set the heroes in order
of battle on the sea-shore, their leaders being Theseus, and Achilles, and
Ajax the Greater, who by this time was restored to a sound mind.
These were scarcely drawn up, when the enemy fell upon them, and
there was a great battle, in which the heroes were the conquerors. All
bore themselves well, but the most valiant of all was Achilles. Socrates
also, the philosopher, showed most excellent courage in the place where
he was set, on the right wing, and, indeed, obtained the prize of valour,
which was a very fine and spacious park neighbouring to the city, to
which he thenceforward would invite his friends, and talk to them and
ask them questions without end. This place he called the ÔAcademy of the
Dead.Õ
43

After the battle we took such of the vanquished as were left, and
bound them, and sent them back to the place whence they had come, to
suffer worse punishment than before.
On this battle Homer wrote a poem, aye, and gave me the book to
take with me to the Earth; but this, with many other of my goods, I have
lost. Nevertheless, the first verse of the poem I can well remember. It ran
thus:
ÔSing, Muse, the fight which the dead heroes fought.Õ
After the battle they had a great Bean-feast, as is their custom when
they have won a victory, and had a banquet to celebrate their success,
and altogether held high festival. Only with this Bean-feast Pythagoras
would have no concern, but kept himself apart and fasted, holding that
to eat beans was a most evil thing.
Now, after six months, and one half or thereabouts of the seventh,
had passed, there befell us that for which I shall never cease to be sorry.
The son of the old man of the wood was a tall man and handsome. His
name, I should say, was Cinyras. He became very much enamoured of
the Fair Helen, and it was plain to see that she had no small liking for the
young man. For we could perceive how they looked one at the other as
they sat at the banquet, and how they would wander about, the two of
them alone, in the woods.
At last the young manÕs passion and folly grew to such a height, that
he conceived the idea of flying with the Fair Helen from the Island. To
this scheme she consented, and they agreed between them that they
should escape to one of the neighbouring countries, Cork City or Cheese
Island. They had also got accomplices, three of the most daring fellows in
my shipÕs crew. But the young man said not a word of the matter to his
father, knowing that the old man would have hindered him. So one
night, as soon as ever it grew dark, they took the Fair Helen on board a
ship and departed with all haste.
It so chanced that I slept that night in the Banqueting House, and as
for my comrades, they knew nothing of the matter. But about midnight
MenelaŸs chanced to awake, and finding that the Fair Helen was not by
his side, raised hue and cry, and ran with all speed to King
44

Rhadamanthus, his brother Agamemnon being with him. When the day
broke came the look-out men, saying that they could see the ship, but
that it was now many miles distant.
But when King Rhadamanthus heard that the ship could be seen, he
took fifty men of the heroes, and put them into a vessel built of a single
piece of asphodel wood, and bade them pursue the runaways with all
speed. Whereupon they started, and rowing with good-will, about
noonday overtook the other ship, which had just come into the Milk Sea,
and, indeed, was not far from Cheese Island. So near were they to
escaping altogether. Then the heroes made fast the ship with a chain of
roses to their own, and so returned.
As for the Fair Helen, she wept and blushed and hid her face in her
veil; but Cinyras and his companions were brought to trial before King
Rhadamanthus. First the King examined them, whether they had any
other accomplices, and finding they had none such, sent them to the
abode of the wicked, having first commanded that they should be beaten
with rods of mallow.
45

Chapter XIV.
Lucian bids farewell to King Rhadamanthus and departs. He visits the
abode of the wicked.
When the malefactors had been dismissed, the King and his
counsellors determined that though the time of our sojourn had not yet
come to an end, we must nevertheless depart within the space of a single
day. At this I was much troubled, and wept to think that I must leave
such happiness behind me, and must set out again on my travels. But the
Blessed people comforted me, saying that before many years I should
come thither again to them, and that there was a seat and a reward for
me at the banquet, next to the very best, for that such was the honour
which they pay to those that love the truth and speak it. Before I
departed I had audience of the King, and entreated him that he would
instruct me about the things which should happen to me thereafter, and
should give me such teaching as would cause me to finish my voyage
safely. To this the King made answer:
ÔYou shall return to your native country, but not until you have
wandered far and passed through many dangers; but the time of your
return I cannot tell.Õ
After he had said so much he pointed to the islands that were near.
These were five in number, with a sixth that was much farther away.
ÔThese that you see,Õ he said, Ôfrom which you commonly see smoke and
fire going up, are the dwellings of the wicked. And the sixth is the City
of Dreams. And still farther beyond this city is the Island of Calypso, but
that you cannot yet see. When you have sailed past this, you will come to
the great Continent that lies over against this Island. In this you shall
meet with many adventures, and pass through many nations, having to
do with strange and barbarous people, and so come at last to your own
46

country.Õ When he had said this he plucked a root of mallow from the
ground, and bade me pray to it when I should find myself in any peril
greater than ordinary. And last he said, ÔSee, when you come to this
land, that you never stir a fire with a sword, nor eat lupines, nor kiss a
maid that shall be of more than eighteen years. If you remember this you
may hope in good time to come to this place.Õ After this I made
preparation of such things as I needed for my voyage; and in the evening
feasted with the heroes. The day following I went to Homer and asked
him to write for me verses that should serve for an inscription; and this
he did. So I engraved them on a pillar of beryl stone, which I set up by
the harbour. And the verses were these
ÔAll marvels of this land did Lucian see,
Great Lucian of the blessed gods beloved;
And having seen them, to his home returned.Õ
So the rest of that day I abode with the Blessed, but on the morrow
set sail, the heroes wishing us all good luck and sending us on our way.
And when we were on the point to start, Ulysses came by stealth with a
letter which I should take, he said, to Calypso, in the island of Ogygia,
where she dwelt. This matter he was careful, I perceived, to hide from
Penelope. And King Rhadamanthus sent with us his chief ferryman, so
that when we came to the other islands to which we were bound the
people might not lay hands on us, for it was forbidden to have trade
with these places. When we had got beyond the region of the
sweet-smelling winds, of which I spoke before, there encountered us a
terrible smell of bitumen and sulphur and pitch burning together, and the
air began to be very misty and dark. But of the things that I saw in that
country I think it best not to speak. One thing only will I say; namely,
that of all that I beheld, none suffered more grievous punishment than
those who had lied when they were alive, especially such as had written
false things, either in history or travel. Among these I saw Ctesias of
Cnidus, and Herodotus also; yet when I saw them I was at peace in my
own heart, and had good hope that it would be well with me when I
should depart from life; for that I had not knowingly written anything
that was false. After I had seen so much I returned with my comrades to
47

the ship, for we could not endure the place any more. So we bade
farewell to the ferryman of King Rhadamanthus, and went our way.
48

Chapter XV.
The Island of Dreams. Lucian visits Calypso.
In a short space of time after we had set sail we espied the Island of
Dreams close to us. But the place seemed to be very like to that which
men see in their dreams upon the Earth; for it appeared to fly before us
as we went forward, and to grow more distant. But at the last we came
up with it, and sailing into a certain harbour which they call Sleep Haven,
so disembarked. Close to the place where we landed was an Ivory Gate,
and a temple that was said to be the Temple of the Cock.
The time of our coming, I remember, was late in the afternoon. As
soon as we had passed through the Gate into the city, we saw a great
multitude of all manner of dreams. But before I speak of these, I would
first say something of the city, about which no man, as far as I know, has
written anything, excepting Homer only, who has erred in more than one
matter, and neglected to tell, or it may be knew not, others.
About the city on every side there stands a great wood, of which the
trees are mighty tall poppies and mandragores. On these there dwell
great swarms of bats; nor indeed are there other birds besides bats in
this country. Near to the city there flows a river, which the people of the
country call Nightfare, and by the gates are two fountains, which they
call Wake-not and Night-long. The wall of the city is very high and of
many colours, like to the colours of a rainbow. In this wall there are
gates-not two only, as Homer tells us, but four; of which four, two look
upon the Plain of Indolence, the one being of iron and the other of clay.
By these go forth, for so they told me in the city, all such dreams as are
fearful and bloody and cruel. The two other gates look out upon the
harbour and the sea, and of these two, one is horn and the other ivory,
by which last, as have said, we entered the city. On the right hand, as a
49

man goes into the city, stands the Temple of Night. There is indeed no
god whom they worship more than Night, excepting only the Cock, as I
have said, to whom the people of the city have built a temple hard by the
harbour. This god, as being the wakener of man and the enemy of
dreams, they seek, I take it, to make propitious.
On the left band stands the palace of Sleep. For the King of the city is
Sleep, having under him two satraps, or lieutenants, whose names are
Trouble-Wit, the son of Vanity, and Purseproud, the son of Display. In
the middle of the market-place there is a fountain, which they call the
Spring Heaviness, and near it two temples, the one of Deceit and the
other of Truth. Here, too, is the Holy Place of the city and the oracle,
whereof one Concord is the chief prophet, having been appointed to this
office by King Sleep.
As to the dreams that dwell in this city, they are of many kinds,
differing greatly one from the other in nature and aspect. Some were tall
and fair and stately, and others mean of aspect and shapeless, and some
were all of gold, as it seemed to us when we regarded them, and others
very low and base. Also I saw among them some that had wings and
were of marvellous form and beauty, and others arrayed as if for some
great show, some in the garb of kings and some in the semblance of gods
and the like majestic personages.
Not a few of these dreams we knew by sight, having seen them of old
time upon the Earth; these would come up to us and greet us, as being
familiar acquaintance. So friendly, indeed, were they, that nothing would
content them but they must take us to their homes and use us with all
hospitality. And of all the entertainment which they furnished, and it
was indeed of the finest, nothing was more splendid than the promises
which they gave us, how that they would make us kings and satraps and
the like. And some of the dreams took us to our own country and our
homes, and showed us our friends and kinsfolk, bringing us back
nevertheless the very same day.
For a full month of thirty days we remained in the City of Dreams,
making merry and sleeping, for in these two things we mostly spent our
time. At the end of the month there broke over the city of a sudden a
very violent thunderstorm. This roused us from our sleep, so that we
leapt up in all haste, and, having put into our ship such provisions as we
50

needed, so set sail.
On the third day we came to the Island of Ogygia, and landed upon it.
Then I bethought me of the letter which Ulysses bad given me to deliver
to Calypso. But I judged that it would be well first to read it. This I did,
and found it to be as follows:
ULYSSES TO CALYPSO GREETING.-Know that after I left your island on the
raft which I built, I suffered shipwreck, and being in great peril, was scarcely saved
by Leucothea, and so came to the country of PhÏacia, from which, returning, to
Ithaca, my native land, I found in my palace a crowd of men that were suitors to
my wife. These all I slew, and afterwards was myself slain by Telegonus, that was
son of Circe. And now I dwell in the Island of the Blessed. But be sure that I
repent me with all my heart that I left the life which I had with you, and the
immortality of which you gave me promise. But if find occasion I will escape from
this place and come to you.Õ
The letter was to this effect, speaking also of us, that we should have
good entertainment. I took it, therefore, in my hand, and going
somewhat in advance of my comrades, found the cave, even as Homer
has written of it, and Calypso herself sitting within and spinning.
For a while, when she had taken the letter and read it, she wept much;
but afterwards, being somewhat recovered, invited us to a banquet, and
gave us royal entertainment. And while we sat at the feast together, she
asked us many questions about Ulysses, how he fared, and also about
Penelope, whether she was a fair woman, and also whether she was wise
and good above all others, as Ulysses had boasted about her. To all
which things we made such answers as we thought best would please
her. And after the feast we went back to our ship, where it was drawn
up on the shore, and there slept.
51

Chapter XVI.
Lucian sees the Pumpkin-Pirates and  other strange creatures and things.
The next morning early we set sail, but the wind beginning shortly to
blow with much vehemence, we were driven before the storm for two
days. On the third we fell in with the Pumpkin-Pirates. These are
savages, who are wont to sally forth from the islands that lie in the seas
hereabouts, and plunder them that sail by. For ships they have pumpkins,
the biggest that ever I saw, being not less than ninety feet in length.
These pumpkins they dry, and afterwards dig out all the inner part of
them till they are quite hollow, and so sail in them. For masts they have
reeds, and for sails, in the place of canvas, pumpkin-leaves. These
savages engaged us with two ships, or, I should rather say, two
pumpkinsÕ crews, and wounded many of our company. For stones they
used the pumpkin-seeds, which were, I should say, of about the bigness
of an apple of the larger size. We fought for some space of time without
any considerable gain either to us or to them; but about noon we saw
coming 
towards 
us, 
in 
the 
rear 
of 
the 
Pumpkin-Pirates, 
the
Nut-shell-Sailors. These two tribes were at war with each other, as we
had soon reason to know. For so soon as the Pumpkin-Pirates had
knowledge that the others were approaching, they left off fighting with
us, and prepared to give battle to them. Which we perceiving,
immediately set our sails and departed with all speed, leaving the others
fighting. But looking back we could see that the Nut-shell-Sailors had the
best of the battle, being superior in number (as having five crews against
two), and also because their ships were the stronger. As for their ships,
they had the shells of nuts, which had been split into two, each half being
of the measure of fifteen fathoms or thereabouts. As soon as these were
out of sight we set ourselves to dress the wounds of our companions;
52

and from that time we wore our armour continually, as not knowing
how soon an enemy might come upon us. And indeed it was well that we
so did; for before sunset, from a certain desert island there came forth,
riding on great dolphins, twenty men or thereabouts, who also were
pirates. The dolphins carried them right well, and leapt in the water, and
neighed, just as though they had been horses. When these came near our
ship they separated, after the fashion of skirmishers, and assailed us with
dry cuttle-fish and crabsÕ eyes. But when we shot at them with our
arrows and threw our javelins at them they fled; and most of them, I
perceived, were wounded, but of us they had not hurt a single man.
About midnight, there being then a dead calm, we struck, not
knowing whither we went, against the most marvellously large
kingfisherÕs nest that ever I saw. ÕTwas seven or eight miles round; and
the kingfisher was on it, hatching her eggs. The bird, indeed, was
well-nigh as big as the nest, and, rising up when we came upon it, had
almost sunk the ship with the wind from her wings. We heard her fly
away, uttering a very doleful cry. So we lay by the nest till morning; and,
when it was light, we landed upon it, and marvelled to see it, for it was
like a very large raft, made of great timber trees. There were five
hundred eggs upon it, each of them of about the size of a barrel of wine.
These were nearly hatched, for the young birds were breaking through
the shells, and made a noise of cawing. One of these eggs we broke
through with our axes, and found within a young bird, that had not got
its feathers, but yet was bigger than twenty vultures.
When we had sailed some two or three miles from this nest, there
happened to us many strange things, of which we had never seen the like
before; for the end of the stern, which was bent (as is the fashion in
ships), somewhat like to the neck of a goose, grew of a sudden to be
covered with feathers, and cackled as a bird; and the old man, our
captain, who had long been bald, found his hair grow long as a young
manÕs; and the mast of the ship sent forth branches, aye, and fruit also.
And the fruit was figs and great clusters of grapes. When we saw these
things we were much troubled, and prayed to the gods that if the
marvels portended any evil to come, it might be turned away from us.
53

Chapter XVII.
The ocean forest. The Ox-Headed People and other marvels.
We had sailed sixty miles or so when we came to a very great and
thick forest of pines and cypresses. This, when we first espied it, we took
to be an island; but, coming close, we found that it grew upon the deep
sea (and so deep was it that we found no bottom by sounding), and that
the trees had no roots in the earth. Nevertheless they stood firm and
upright. When we were come near to the place, and saw how the matter
stood, we were in no small perplexity, for it was not possible to sail
through the trees, so many were they and so close grew they to each
other; nor, on the other hand, was it easy to return. Thereupon I climbed
the very tallest tree which I could find, and looked from the top over the
country to see how it lay. The wood was some sixty miles or more in
breadth; but beyond it I could see that there was again the ocean. So,
taking counsel together, we devised this plan, that we should put our
ship upon the top of the wood, for the leaves of the trees were close and
thick beyond anything that I ever saw, and so pass over, if it might be, to
the sea upon the other side. This we did, but not without much trouble.
We fastened a great cable to the ship, and having ourselves climbed to
the tops of the trees, so with much struggling lifted it after us. But when
it was lifted, we put it without much ado upon the branches, and setting
the sails, so travelled along even as if we had been on the sea, for it
chanced that there was a strong wind behind us which drove us forward.
Not indeed were we the first, I take it, to sail in this fashion, for I
remember that a poet of Alexandria, Antimachus by name, says
somewhere of certain travellers:
ÔSo on their woodland voyage they went.Õ
54

This Ôwoodland voyageÕ I understand to mean something of the same
kind. So we made our way across the wood, and when we were come to
the other side let down our ship again by the cable into the sea, and
sailed away without taking any harm. This we did without hindrance for
many miles, the water being marvellously pure and clear, till we came to
a great chasm, where the sea was divided into two, even as we often see
in the earth great rifts made by earthquakes. As soon as ever we saw this
chasm, we let down the sails and so hardly stopped our ship, which
indeed came very near to falling into it. ÕTwas a terribly deep place, as
we could see by leaning over the side, for, as far as we could judge, the
height of the side was one hundred and twenty miles. Here too we were
in a great strait, but looking about we saw on our right hand, and that
not far off, a bridge of water that lay across the chasm and joined the
two seas, being indeed a stream that flowed from the one to the other.
Into this stream therefore we, getting out our oars, rowed the ship, and
with much toil, and beyond all our hope, brought her across.
In no great space of time, sailing over this sea, which we found to be
very calm, we came to an island, fair and easy of access. Here there
dwelt a savage tribe, that had the heads and the horns also of oxen. This
we knew not at the first, but landed, and went some way inland, seeking
for water and provender, if perchance we might find some, for that
which we had remaining had now given out. As for water we found it
without much trouble, but food we found not at all. But we heard a great
bellowing that seemed to come from hard by. This we supposed to be a
herd of oxen; and thinking that we had found that which we sought, we
ran towards the voice, and so came suddenly on the savage people.
Thereupon we turned and fled, and the people pursued us, and took
three of our companions alive, the rest of us escaping to our ship. But
being there we armed ourselves, thinking that it would be a shameful
thing if we should suffer our friends to perish unavenged; and coming
back quickly to the place, fell upon the Ox-headed Folk while they were
in the act of dividing the flesh of our companions. And when we saw
them we all shouted, and as they straightway fled, pursued them, killing
some fifty and taking two alive. With these we returned to our ship. But
of food we had found nothing. For which reason some would have had
55

me slay the prisoners; but to this I would not consent, but bound and
kept them in ward, till, as indeed I had hoped, there came envoys from
the Ox-headed Folk to agree on a ransom for the prisoners. For so much
we understood from their signs and the pitiful way in which they lowed.
For ransom they gave us a good store of cheese, and dried fish, and
onions, and four hinds, strange beasts with three legs only, of which two
were behind and one in front, into which, as it seemed, two had grown
together. So we gave back the prisoners, and having remained on the
island for what was left of that day, so departed. In a short space we saw
signs as of land close by, fish, and birds flying about us, and the like.
Also we saw men sailing in the strangest fashion by themselves, so that
we said that they were at the same time both ships and sailors; and
others we saw sitting on corks and driving dolphins, each of them a pair
yoked together. They did us no harm, nor seemed to have any fear of us,
but quietly and peacefully drove their steeds; only they marvelled much
at our ship, and observed it on every side.
After this we came into the very greatest peril that we had yet
encountered. For as we sailed we came to a small island, in which there
dwelt a race of women, very fair and well spoken, and using, as we
perceived, the Greek tongue. These received us with much hospitality.
Yet did I suspect something; and looking about me more narrowly,
perceived many bones and skulls of men lying about. And at the first I
thought that I would make an alarm, and called to my comrades that
they should arm themselves, but afterwards judged otherwise. Yet I did
not cease to watch; and after a while I saw that one of the women (now
they all had their tunics very long so as to touch the ground), while she
busied herself in the house, let her tunic open a little space by the feet.
And looking, I saw that she had not the feet of a woman but the hoofs of
an ass. Whereupon I drew my sword and laid hands upon her and bound
her; and after this she confessed the whole matter, though much against
her will, saying that they were called the Donkey-legs, and that they
were used to devour any strangers that came among them. ÔFor,Õ she
said, Ôwe make them drunk with wine, and slay them in their sleep.Õ
When I heard this, I mounted on the roof, and called aloud to my
companions, and bade them assemble. When they all came together I
declared the whole matter to them, showing them the bones. After this I
56

took them to show them the woman whom I had bound; but lo! when we
came into the house she was changed into water. Yet, by way of a trial, I
drove my sword into the water, and drew it out red as with blood. After
this we went back to our ship with all haste, and departed. As soon as it
was day we saw land, and judged it to be the Continent lying opposite to
that on which we dwelt. And when we came near to the land we knelt
down on the deck and prayed, and afterwards took counsel as to what
we should do. Some thought that it would be well to land for a time
only, and so come back to the ship; but others judged it best to leave our
ship and to march up the country that we might find out what manner of
men dwelt there. But while we were debating this matter with no little
heat, there came a violent storm, and drove the ship against the rocks,
and broke it to pieces. And we swam to the land, but that not easily,
carrying every man his arms and anything beside that he had been able
to snatch up in his haste.
So far the end of my journey was accomplished, for we had come to
the land which lies on the other side of the ocean. But what befell us
there I shall tell, if indeed I tell it at all, at some other time.
The End
57

