(Update) Roll Call Car Show – July
20,
 2024
 –
 Special
 Traffic
Campaign
Written by Matt Weir | July 17, 2024 at 07:53:am
Update: Tuesday, July 23, 2024, 7:15 a.m.
The Saint John Police in cooperation with the Department of Public Safety
(JPS) are pleased to report on the impact of the special traffic campaign
that took place during the weekend.
As a result of the campaign, over 6,000 vehicles came through various
checkpoints:
–24 tickets were issued
-279 warnings issued
-28 voluntary removals of window tint/stickers
-2 vehicles towed
The Saint John Police would like to thank the event organizers and the
public for their patience. We would also like to thank the Department of
Justice and Public Safety for ensuring that this year’s event was safe for
everyone.
………………………………………
Car enthusiasts from across the Maritimes will descend on Saint John this
weekend for the 2024 Complex Union Roll Call Car Show being held on July 20,
2024, at TD Station.
This event attracts thousands of spectators and participants. As a result, the Saint
John Police will be conducting a special traffic initiative to ensure those attending
and participating in the show, as well as other visitors to the city and of course,
our citizens, enjoy a positive and safe experience.
The mission of this traffic initiative is to keep our city safe, given the significant
increase in motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic. Members of the Saint John Police

and New Brunswick Justice and Public Safety will enforce a zero-tolerance policy
with respect to offences related to the Criminal Code of Canada and provincial
legislation.
The public can expect increased police presence and some traffic delays near the
TD station event site, as well as impaired driving checkpoints across the city.
“We appreciate the public’s patience as our members work to ensure all involved
in the Roll Call Car Show, other visitors, and our residents enjoy our beautiful city
safely and to the fullest this weekend. Thank you.” Chief R.M. Bruce
Together a safe, secure, healthy community.
For more news, visit News | Saint John Police Force

