ADLER'S PSYCHOLOGY AND EDUCATION 
A thesis written in partial fulfilment 
of requirements for the degree of Master 
of Arts. 
Michael R. Mac Millan 
Saint Mary's University 
School of Education . 
April 30, 1 964. 
fJ Copyright 
1 
~ l 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
INTRODUCTI ON........................................ 
1 
Chapt er 
l . 
ADLER ' S I NDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY FOR EDUCATIONAL 
USES . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
4 
11 . 
APPLI CATIONS OF ADLERIAN THEORY TO FAMILY AND 
SCHOOL LI FE . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
1 8 
111 . 
PRACTI CAL APPLI CATI ON OF ADLERIAN THEORY FOR 
BETTER CLASSROOM OPERATI ON ••••••••••••••••• 
30 
BI BLI OGRAPHY. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 
4 3 

INTRODUCTION 
Modern theories concerning the deep sources of 
human motivation and the unconscious mind derive in the 
main from the work of three men: 
Sigmund Freud, Carl 
Gustav Jung, and Alfred Adler. 
By general consent the 
originating genius was Freud, and psycho-analytic theory 
as developed by him, provided a basis for the theories 
of Jung and Adler. 
Nevertheless, the doctrines of Jung 
and Adler are each of distinctive interest and importance. 
Teachers, physicians and social workers have often said 
that Adler's Psychology can be more readily turned to 
practical account in their work than can the principles 
of Freud or the principles of Jung. It is with this 
thought in mind that I selected Adler for this study. 
Adler is best known for his discovery and des-
cription of the ninferiori ty complex," and for his 
analysis of compensatory processes. 
The systematic and 
ingenious development of the theory of inferiority, and 
of compensation provides a major thesis of the Adlerian 
system. 
Individual Psychology, as the Adlerian system 
is described, is essentially an expression of the in-

dividuality of its creator. 
In Adler's own life 
story we can see his own ttstyle of life.
11 
Alfred Adler was born in 1870 in a suburb of 
Vienna called Penzing. 
His father was a corn merchant 
and this fact is significant because it created a 
situation which put Alfred in touch with both country 
and city life as well as people of all walks of life. 
In spite of a sickly childhood he possessed great 
physical and mental powers. 
With this strength was 
associated a love of beauty and a protective tender-
ness toward all weaker things. 
He took great pleasure 
in nature, in towns and people. 
11There is no music 
I prefer to the traffic of a great street full of 
human beings moving about their daily business. 111 
His emphasis with his patients was always focused 
on getting them to join their group. 
It is certain that he came very early to 
his decision to be a physician and that he experi-
enced none of those changes of mind through which the 
ordinary child attains to a final choice of profession. 
1phyllis Bottome, Alfred Adler Atostle of 
Freedom, 2nd ed., {London: Faber and Fa er Ltd., 
1957), p. 27. 
2 

3 
His own sickly childhood, coupled with certain experiences 
of the fact of death, were undoubtedly contributing factors 
to his decision. 
As a medical man, Adler swiftly gained 
a reputation as a diagnostician. 
His extreme sensitivity 
to the sufferings of others was a contributory factor in 
urging him on to the plane of psychiatry. 
This sensi-
tivity brought him his psychological insight and his 
power of identification with others. 
It is the purpose of this paper to show what there 
is in the theory of Adler for educational uses and how 
this applies in home and school and finally what this 
theory offers the teacher for more efficient classroom 
operation. 

CHAPTER 1 
ADLER'S INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOLOGY FOR EDUCATIONAL USES 
Individual Psychology begins with the assumption 
of the unity of the individual. 
With this approach an 
attempt is made to obtain a picture of this unified per-
sonality regarded as a variant of life-manifestations and 
forms of expression. 
This method of looking upon man's 
psychic life is by no means new or unique, however, it 
can be especially useful particularly in the study of 
child psychology. 
The actions of an individual are directly a result 
of preconceived goals. If this were not so, all activity 
would consist of uncontrolled gropings and we would be 
unintegrated in every aspect of our motion. 
This is 
suggested by the attempts at walking made by a small child. 
It seems certain that before the first step has been 
. taken the objective of the child's movement has already 
been determined. 
In the same way, all psychic activi-
ties are given a direction by means of previously deter-
mined goals. 
The conclusion to be drawn from the study 
of any personality viewed from the standpoint of Individual 
Psychology leads us to this proposition: 
"Every psychic 
4 

phenomenon, if it is to give us any understanding of 
a person, can only be grasped and understood if regarded 
as a preparation for some goal."1 
this goal may be real 
or imagined depending on the needs of the individual 
concerned. 
Adler speaks of this goal again. 
Since life in any given society, life without 
any of the preconceptions of science, has always 
been under the ban of the question "whither", 
we are warranted in definitely stating that, 
scientific views to the contrary notwithstanding, 
no man has ever made a judgment about an event 
without endeavouring to strain towards the point 
which seems to bind together all the psychic 
manifestations of an individual; even to an 
imagined goal if necessary.2 
The discovery of the goals of an individual 
leads us to an intimate knowledge of him. It is only 
then that the parts may be understood. 
Adler states that he does not wish to approach 
the psychic life of the individual with a dry formula, 
as the Freudian school attempts to do. 
His most general 
presupposition is that the psyche has as its objective 
the goal of superiority, to gain control over an object 
or a person becomes the prime goal of life. 
To gain 
control, a person may proceed directly by being obstinate 
or cruel or perhaps, the individual has learned by 
lAifred Adler, The Practice and Theorf of 
Individual Psychology, trans. P. Radin Ph.D.London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1923), p . 4. v 
2Ibid., p . 2. 
-
5 

experience to r esort to by-paths and circuitous routes 
to gain ~ictory by obedience, submission, mildness , and 
modesty . 
Traits of character are adjusted to whichever 
of the life plans the person chooses. 
This superiority 
goal arises not from reality but rather is fictictious. 
It introduces into our life a fighting and hostile 
tendency and robs us of simplicity of feelings. 
Many 
psychologists have attributed the cause of this tendency 
to heredity or environment or both. 
Heredity and environment are the twin pillars 
of every psychology but they are not the causes of 
behavior, but mere data. It is on the development of 
the psyche and on the manner in which its activity 
interacts with these data that our attention must be 
focused in order to explain human behavior. 
A child 
cannot lie passively until understanding and judgment 
become ripe. 
He must and does venture forth and 
selects from impressions a cours€ of behavior. 
Most 
marked attitudes of man can be traced back to an 
origin in childhood. 
Towards the end of the nursing period , when the 
child acquires th~ abi.li ty to carry out indepen-
dent purposeful actions which are not merely 
directed towards the gratification of appetite, 
when he takes his place in the family and begins 
to adapt himself to his environment, he already 
posseses abilities, psychic gestures and prepar-
ations. 
Besides this, his conduct has acquired 
6 

8 
Whether he struggles actively or remains passive, whether 
he rules or serves, whether he is sociable or egotistical, 
brave or cowardly, whatever be the variations in rhythm 
or temperament, whether he is easily moved or apathetic, 
the child makes his decision for the whole of his life 
and develops his law of movement in harmony, as he 
supposes, with his environment. 
He conceives of this 
environment and reacts to it in his manner. 
The course 
towards the goal differs in every individual, v_arying in 
countless details.l 
In his study of the question of perception, Adler 
is brought face to face with one of the main problems of 
philosophy, that of appearance and reality. 
From time 
immemorial philosophers have been asking themselve~: 
What can we know? 
How far is human perception capable 
of apprehending the truth of things? 
How greatly is truth 
falsified by our senses? 
The ~nswer which Adler gives 
to the appearance-reality question is in the tradition 
of the nee-Kantian school. 
The existence of a reality 
external to ourselves is accepted but this reality is too 
vast and too complicated to be grasped as a whole and 
our adaptation to it can at best be an approximation. 
nHuman beings,n said Adler, "live in the realm of meanings. 
1Alfred Adler, Social Interest A Challenge To 
Mankind, trans. J. Linton and R. Vau@ffi,, {London: 
Faber 
and Faber Ltd., 1938), p. 75. 

9 
We experience reality through t he meaning we give te it; 
not as itself, but as something interpreted. 111 
The trans-
forming power of the human psyche is so great that it 
must be considered to play the predominant role in the 
shaping of our lives. 
The man who suffers from hydro-
phobia behaves in just the same manner as if there was 
truly a cause for his fear. 
A suicide finds death pre-
ferable to a life which he assumes to be hopeless; he 
would act in the same fashion if his life were really 
hopeless. 
Thus we reach the conclusion that everyone 
possesses an idea about himself and his problems, a 
life pattern that keeps hold of him without his necessarily 
understanding it. "This law of movement arises within 
the narrow compass ~f childhood."2 
A person's law of movement is manifested in what 
Adler called his "style of life''. 
If we look at a pine tree growing in the valley, 
we will notice that it grows differently from one 
on top of a mountain. It is the same kind of tree 
but it has two different styles of life. 
The 
style of life of a tree is the individuality of 
the tree expressing itself and moulding itself in 
an environment.
113 
ed. A. 
lllen 
lAlfred Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, 
Porter, (London: Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1932), p. 3. 
2Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, pp. 26-27. 
3Alfred Adler, The Science of Livins, (London: 
and Unwin Ltd., 1930), p. 98. 

In somewhat the same manner, each person expresses him-
self in a purely individual fashion. 
What he observes 
and fails to observe, how he interprets events, his 
slightest gestures and mannerisms are all uniquely his 
10 
own and are expressions of his style of life. 
There may 
occur on the surfac~ contradictions in a person's behavior 
but this could be accounted for by our failure to under-
stand or grasp the unique life-style. 
I believe Adler 
chose the name Individual Psychology for his science in 
order to emphasize the fact that each person is unique 
and that we can only understand him if we approach him 
as such. 
In examining the therapeutic and educational aspects 
of Individual Psychology we find that it is fruitless to 
treat a symptom as a single expression, we must discover 
the mistake made in the whole style of life, in the way 
the mind has interpreted its experiences, in the meaning 
it has given to life. Styles of life are thus the proper 
subject-matter of psychology and the material for investi-
gation are to be found there. 
In Individual Psychology we are considering the 
psyche itself, the unified mind; we are examining 
the meaning which individuals give to the world 
and to themselves, the goals, the directions of 
their strivings, and tie approaches they make to 
the problems of life." 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, pp. 47-48. 

Adler reduces all the questions of life to three 
major problems: 
the problems of communal life, work and 
love. 
These three problems might be compared with what 
other psychologists have termed the three principal 
instincts: 
the herd, nutrition, and sex instincts. For 
Adler, these are not instincts from within but are pro-
blems with which our existence on earth confronts us. 
"They arise :from the inseparable bond that of necessity 
links men together for association, for the provision of 
livelihood and for the care of offspring. 111 
These three problems are closely related so that 
a solution to one helps the other. 
Conversely, a failure 
in one can result in a loss to the others. 
uWhen an 
individual fails to square himself with one or more of 
these inexorable demands of life, beware of feelings of 
abasement, beware of the consequent neurosis. •12 
The first five years of a child's life are 
extremely important in shaping his unique personality 
and in determining in what fashion he will handle life's 
problems. 
During the scientific era of psychology, personality 
has been variously defined: 
in terms of several 
typal-systems; e.g., introverts, ambiverts, and 
extoverts (Jung); asthenic, pynic, athletic, and 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean ·To You, pp. 7-8. 
2Alfred Adler, Problems of Neurosis, (London: 
Routledge .and Kegan Paul Ltd., .,1929), p. 20. 
11 

dysplastic types (Kretschmer); normal, hysteroid, 
cycloid, schizoid, and epileptoid types (Rosanoff); 
cerebrontic, somatotonic, and viscerotonic types 
(Sheldon); in terms of developmental-descriptive 
concepts (Gesell); in terms of psychological traits 
or telenomic trends (Allport, Catell and others); 
in terms of various resolutions of a dominating 
purpose in life, e.g. trying to overcome a feeling 
of inferiority {Adler); in terms of a consistent 
complex of self regarding attitudes, or ego 
structures (Lecky, Sherif, and Cantril, Snygg 
and Combs,); and in terms of a dynamic complex 
of psychological needs, motor perceptual systems, 
and characteristic mode! of conflict resolution, 
(Freud, Lewin, Murray). 
12 
In examining these representative interpretations of 
personality it is easy to appreciate the variety of types 
of the personality construct. Adler's approach to 
personality is through compensation for weaknesses organic, 
physical, or intellectual. 
Janet was perhaps the first to recognize this 
weakness. 
In his 
11sent1ment d 1incompletude 11 (a sense of 
insufficiency-my own brackets) we may recognize the origin 
of Adler's famous 
11inferiority feeling", the basic factor, 
in his view, in every neurosis. 
A neurosis may be defined 
as a failure in compensation and a retreat from the pro-
blems of life. As long as a child is training himself 
towards socially useful forms of compensation for his 
weaknesses, he is fitting himself to cope with the demands 
of life and he is on the road to correct adaptation. 
1 George Thompson, Child Psffhology. ed. L. 
Carmichael, (Boston: 
Houghton Mif in Co., 1952), p. 594. 

"The efforts and training of the first four or five years 
of life are decisive for the child's main sphere of action 
in adult life. 111 
Every neurosis can be understood as an attempt 
to free oneself from a feeling of inferiority in order 
to gain a feeling of superiority. 
The path of the neurosis 
usually leads to the isolation of the patient where he 
lives a life of imaginations and phantasies which free 
him from all responsibilities. 
These illnesses give him 
a substitute for his original hazardous goal of superiority. 
This escape is really a counter-compUlsion, a revolt, 
which serves the purpose of directing the patient's 
attention away from his life problems. 
In this manner, 
he provides anxiety and compulsion situations, sleep-
lessness, swooning, perversions, hallucinations, various 
complexes, etc. all of which are to serve him as excuses. 
Logic, the will to live, love, human sympathy, co-opera-
tion and language all arise out of needs of human communal 
life. 
The neurotic individual striving for isolation and 
lusting for power is automatically against communal life 
or social feeling in any shape or form. 
Human relations 
in all circumstances represent a struggle. 
The method 
of comparison (our own attitude in their place, attitudes 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 242. 

of other neurotics, the patient's attitude and behavior 
especially in what he is side-stepping in life) allow us 
to arrive at some conception of the power lines along 
which an individual strives to attain superiority.1 
To cure a neurosis and a psychosis it is neces-
sary to change completely the whole up-bringing of the 
patient and turn him definitely and unconditionally 
back upon human society with a view to a better handling 
and adjustment of the three great problems. 
Neurosis, in Adler's view, is a style of behavior 
which can arise out of an uncompensated feeling of 
-inferiority. 
The neurotic may have been pampered, neg-
lected or suffered physical handicap when he was a child. 
These might only be contributing factors in the formation 
of a neurosis. 
The origin of the neurosis lies not in 
objective circumstances but in the person's own sub-
jective evaluation of his circumstances. 
That is, every 
neurotic has an inferiority feeling in common, where they 
differ is in the kind of situation in which they feel 
themselves unable to continue on the useful side of life. 
The neurotic carries his feelings of inferiority 
constantly with him. 
He has been constantly drawing 
comparisons between himself and others, at first 
perhaps with his father, as the strongest of the 
family, sometimes with his mother, his brothers 
and sisters, later with every person with whom he 
1Adler, Individual Psychology. pp. 23-24. 
14 

comes in contact. 
In this way one finds that the 
neurotic flways aperceives after the manner of a 
contrast. 
Feelings of superiority, unrelated as they are 
to any actual achievements, may reach heights which Adler 
described as godlike. 
The loftiest goals are to be found 
in the most severe cases, that is, the psychoses. 
Unlike psychoses, neurosis is only a partial 
failure in adaptation. 
The neurotic has not failed in 
all three problems of life. A person is not a failure 
because he chooses to disregard one of life's problems; 
15 
he is a failure only if he experiences himself as a 
failure. It is only when a person feels that he is inept 
to cope with one of the major problems that his personality 
is thrown into disharmony. 
The goal of personal superiority is such that it 
invariably magnifies one of the three problems of 
life out of all proportion. 
We find that a person's 
ideal of success becomes unnaturally limited to 
social notoriety, to business success or sexual con-
quests. 
Thus we see the social careerist, fighting 
and jealous, the business magnate, extending his 
interest at the expense of others, and the amorous 
intriguer, the would be Don Juan. 
Each disturbs 
the harmony of his life by thus leaving many neces-
sary demands unsatisfied, and then tries to com-
pensate by still more fran~ic strivings in his 
narrowed sphere of action. 
1Adler, The Neurotic Constitution, pp. 7-9. 
2Adler, Problems of Neurosis , p. 130. 

A person may be neurotic only in certain aspects or before 
certain situations but wherever the neurosis is in ques-
tion, we will find all traits and aspects of personality 
geared to forward the neurotic goal. 
When a person's circumstances change we see 
tested his real power to co-operate with life. Adler 
called this the "test situation.u 
An example to illus-
trate this would be the case of a man who falls into 
neurosis after the death of his wife, perhaps he had 
been interested only in his wife, not in human beings 
in general. He may even have been interested in his work 
primarily in relation to her and not for the work itself 
or what good it brought to others. All of this would 
reveal how narrow had been the limits within which he 
was prepared to co-operate with life. Life without her 
would be useless, apart from her he had no other social 
interest. 
Test situations confront the human being all 
through life; in childhood with loss of attention, in 
school with examinations and necessary allowance for 
the feelings of others,at puberty with the three great 
problems of adult life, a loss or a change in jobs, in 
marriage , in middle age and old age. 
Adler says that ours 
i s an age where "present performance" is of utmost impor-
tance. 
Even in old age the test situation is severe.l 
lAirred Adler, Understanding Human Nature trans. 
W. B. Wolfe, (London: Allen and Unwin Ltd.,- 1928~, 
pp . 144-145. 

The grandparents are always in the position of 
having to prove - what they should not have to 
prove - that they are still alive and count in 
the world. 
In trying to prove this they are 
always interfering with the education of their 
grandchildren. 
They pamper the children terribly, 
for it is only the children who will take notice of 
them.1 
1Alfred Adler, The Education of Children, (London: 
Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1930), p. 202. 

CHAPTER 11 
APPLICATIONS OF ADLERIAN THEORY TO FAMILY AND SCHOOL LIFE 
The child.----- Preparation for life, whether 
it is right or wrong, starts from the beginning of the 
child's life with his mother. 
The child works continually. 
Daily he becomes stronger at acquiring dexterity in 
handling objects, learning first to crawl, then to stand, 
then to walk. 
Each point successfully reached is for him an 
achievement which brings with it the courage to 
make a further advance. 
In most cases the ex-
panding mental worl~ proceeds pretty much at the 
same rate as his other capacities, and his goal 
of compensation marches an even pace or two ahead 
of him.I 
Success, in compensation for inferiority, breaths more 
success but failure deepens the inferiority and lessens 
the chance for compensating in the future. 
The gap 
between the goal and the level of attainment grows 
with a feeling of helplessness. 
n 
t 
Adler distinguished three types of children 
in whom this failure in adaptive training may occur: 
those with defective organs, those who are pampered, 
and those who are neglected. 
Children with imperfect 
1Lewis Way, Alfred ·Adler,- An Introduction To His 
Psychology, (Baltimore: Penguin books Inc., 1956) p. 99. 
18 

organs have difficulty in fulfilling the demands of 
the environment and the shock of all this is usually 
felt by the mind . 
These children are often avoided 
or ridiculed by others. 
uThese are all circumstances 
in which they may turn in upon themselves, lose hope 
of playing a useful part in our common life, and 
consider themselves personally humiliated by the world. 111 
The second type, the pampered child, is granted 
prominence without working to secure it. He has been 
trained to expect and not to give . 
"When he has 
difficulties before him, he has only one method of 
meeting them -- to make demands on other people. 112 
The third situation, the neglected child, is 
one who never found another trustworthy person . 
Such 
a child has never known what love and co-operation 
can be. 
He makes an interpretation of life which 
does not include these friendly forces. It will be 
understood that when he faces the problems of life 
he will over-rate their difficulty and under-rate 
his own capacity to meet them with the aid and good-
will of others. 
He has found society cold towards 
him and he will expect it always to be cold. 
Espe-
cially, he will not see that he can win affection 
lAdler, 
_ __ -•"ean To You, pp. 14-15. 
2Ibid., PPo 15-18. 
-

and esteem by actions which are useful to others. 
He 
will thus be suspicious of others and unable to trust 
himself. 
There is really no experience which can take 
the place of disinterested affection. 
The first task of 
the mother is to give the child the experience of another 
trustworthy person.l 
While the child needs all the support and encour-
agement which love can bring him, Adler has pointed out 
that it must be a love which does not interfere with 
his own self-training. 
Children at a very early age can 
acquire the habit of relying on another instead of relying 
on their own efforts. 
Often a mother seeing a child 
attempting to button a garment, for instance, will inter-
vene to spare him, 
This practice, if repeated often, 
could promote an attitude of too much reliance on others. 
Adler felt that one of the worst injustices 
committed against a child was to pamper him. It means 
primarily, to do for the child what the chi~d could and 
should do for himself. 
Once pampered, the child will use 
his weakness to wield control over adults instead of 
control over things. 
This pampering may continue up 
to the age of puberty, but at some time or other, it is 
almost inevitable that the child will lose his over-
protected position and be forced to face the world alone 
1lli.2,., pp. 17-18. 
20 

and unprepared. Actually it is at this point that the 
child becomes neglected. 
The neglected child will per-
haps show more actively aggressive traits than the 
pampered child, who has learned to rely upon expressions 
of inability and weakness to gain its ends. 
From here 
on, the behavior of the pampered child can only continue 
in a vicious circle. 
He has failed to adjust and this 
leaves him with a sense of inferiority uncompensated. 
Comparison of his lack of achievement with the achieve-
ment of other children in the family and lack of atten-
tion from his parents help to kindle the fires of 
inferiority. 
He has failed at self development and will 
continue to exploit his weakness for all it 1s worth. 
The goal of emphasizing weakness is logically 
incompatible with the goal of self-training. 
He 
must therefore turn aside more and more from the 
road to adaptation, becoming always more weak, 
more anxioue and timid, and more dominating. 
His 
is now a road which, unless or until he himself 
understands and corrects the mistake he has made, 
must lead him towards ill£ess as a refuge from 
the problems set by life. 
Family influences.----- From the moment of birth 
and for -many months to follow the mother plays an over-
whelmingly important role in a baby's life. 
She is 
his first bridge to social life and in every incident she 
is providing an opportunity for the child to like her 
or dislike her, to co-operate or reject co-operation. 
1way, Alfred Adler, p. 106. 
21 

22 
It may appear here that the experiences of a child are 
most important and possiblJ) dictate his actions. 
We are 
back to a fundamental view of Individual Psychology (part 1-
p. 8. my brackets) that is, it is not the child's experi-
ences that are most important but rather, the conclusions 
which he draws from his experiences. 
This is the data 
which will directly affect his development. 
The relation-
ships of a mother to her family are not simple. 
A mother 
is intricately related to her children, to her husband, 
and to the whole social life around her. After securing 
the co-operation of the child with herself, her next 
task is to spread his interest towards his father and 
finally to the social life around him. 
If the mother becomes occupied only with inter-
esting the child in herself, later he will resist 
attempts to interest himself in others. 
Any interest 
shown by the mother to the husband or others will be felt 
by the child as a deprivation. 
In the Freudian theory of the Oedipus Complex, 
it is supposed that children have a tendency 
to fall in love with their mothers and to wish 
to marry them and hate their fathers and wish 
to kill them. 
Such a mistfke could never arise 
if we understood children. 
The so called Oedipus Complex could appear only in a 
child who wished to occupy his mother's whole attention 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 126. 

23 
and to get rid of every one else. 
This is most certainly 
not- a sexual desire but rather is a desire to subjugate 
the mother, to control her as a servant. 
This situation 
could only develop if the mother lacked the skill required 
to interest the child in the father, the other members 
of the family and people in general. 
When a child, whose mother has bound him only 
to herself, is placed in a situation where he is no longer 
connected with her, trouble always begins. 
When he goes 
to school, for exa~ple, or plays with other children his 
goal will always be to remain with her and he will resist 
attempts to be separated from her. 
A child quickly 
becomes experienced in finding out the means by which he 
can best attract attention. He may weep or fall sick or 
have outbursts of temper, or fight with anyone in sight 
just to be noticed. 
Where the marriage is unhappy, the situation for 
the child is dangerous. 
The first co-operation among other people which 
the child experiences is the co-operation of 
his parents; and if their co-operation is poor, 
they cannot hope to teach him to be co-operative 
himself. 
Moreover, it is from the marriage of 
their parents that children gain their first idea 
of marriage and the partnership of the sexes.l 
1Ibid., p. 133. 
-

If co-operation between father and mother is 
attained the co-operation of children among themselves 
is almost assured. It is particu~arly in this relation-
ship that the mother and father's parental skills are 
put to the test. In personality, basically, their 
24 
children will all be different. If one child is a thinker 
and is frequently introspective it will be up to the 
parents to provide opportunities for him to think as wall 
as guide him to play. 
A second child may be brave and 
daring and like to handle material things and experiment 
with them. 
The skillful parent will recognize this 
difference while the child is very young and make allowance 
for his human resources. 
Adler likened a family to a constellation. 
The 
father and mother being the sun and moon and the children 
smaller and larger, brilliant and less brilliant bodies 
grouped about them as stars. 
From each star the con-
stellation will have a different perspective. 
The eldest 
child was at one time a single star and he must reconcile 
himself to sharing his position with other stars. All 
the stars will choose the mother first and their first 
evidences of superiority will be recognized by her. It 
will be up to the mother to guide these strivings and 
channel them. 

It is the striving for superiority which is behind 
every human creation and it is the source of all 
contributions which are made to our culture. 
The 
whole of human life proceeds along this great 
line of action from below to above, from minus 
to plus, from defeat to victory. 
The only 
individuals who can really meet and master the 
problems of life, however, are those who show 
in their striving a tendency to enrich all others, 
who~ ahead in such a way that others benefit 
also. 
Adler has advanced the theory that children's 
behavior and development are highly influenced by their 
fetlings of inferiority. 
The struggle and the course of 
action of every child to reach a vantage position is the 
key to his personality. 
In order to master the great 
problems of life, human co-operation is a necessity. 
Parents have the responsibility and the privilege of 
guiding the conduct, ideals, goals, actions and person-
alities of their ch~ldren towards human co-operation. 
School influences.----- When a child first goes 
25 
to school, he is facing a new test -in social life; and 
this t ,est will reveal any mistakes in his development so 
far. 
Now he must co-operate in a wider field than before. 
Adler says, it is the task of school teachers to notice 
the difficulties of children and to correct the mistakes 
of parents where possible. 
Teachers are the natural 
intermediaries between Individual Psychology and the lay 
11Jl!.g,., p. 69 

pubiic because they have a trained understanding of the 
problems which concern it. 
Just as Individual . Psychology does not offer the 
mother any rigid prescriptions for upbringing, so it 
does not offer the teacher any one thorough method to 
solve its pedagogical problems. It suggests only an 
attitude to the problems which face the teacher. 
The 
sugg~stions made may be used in high schools, colleges, 
or kindergartens. 
The teacher:s sphere of activity is the class-
room and the attitude that ~he adopts toward his class is 
most significant. 
Individual Psychology would say that 
over and above its purpose of imparting instruction, 
the classroom can have the purpose of educating the child 
in the art of living with his fellows. 
We no longer wish to train children only to 
make money or to take a position in the 
industrial system. 
We want fellow-men. 
We 
want equal ·independent and responsible co1-
laboration in the common work of culture. 
Interest is the handiest tool of the skillful 
teacher. 
In order to attract the interest of a child, 
the teacher will try to understand what the child's 
interests have been and convince him that he can be 
successful at this new interest. 
This can only be done 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 157. 
26 

27 
if the teacher is truly interested in his students. 
With-
out this interest there could only be rare successes. 
In order to enlist interest and co-operation, the teacher 
must use all the arts of his profession and in many 
instances let his imagination run to the fullest. 
It will also become apparent to a teacher, if it 
is not already known, that order in a group situation is 
a prerequisite to learning. Adler did not consider it 
realistic to eliminate punishment entirely in order to 
set a desirable tone in a classroom. 
However, there is 
evidence that the need for punishment diminishes as the 
co-operative spirit develops. 
Where a teacher wields 
only personal authority over the class any child who can 
win a minor point against the teacher would be a hero 
in the eyes of his fellow classmates. 
The strategy of 
the teacher could be to turn mischievous offences against 
his personal authority into offences against the class 
as a whole. If he has succeeded in getting their interest 
aroused, this interrupter will be looked down upon. 
The 
class will become impatient with anyone who threatens to 
hold up the progress of the group. 
This disciplinary 
method could prove especially effective at the high-
school level where children are of adolescent age and 
acceptance by their peers is of such great importance. 

There can be found in all school classes children 
who - to use current terminology - have no "apti-
tude" for arithmetic, and who constantly interfere 
with the other pupils owing to their own defective 
accomplishments. 
We are all familiar with the peace 
disturber who derives pleasure from disturbing 
and hindering the work of the class, with the 
buffoon who is ready to play a silly trick at 
the decisive moment and in this way to paralyze 
the energy of the other members of the class, with 
the bully and similar types. It is these in-
tractable children that render the solution of the 
problem of social education so uncommonly dif-
ficul t.l 
To change these intractable children, to incorporate 
them into society and make them useful must be the aim 
of all teachers. 
1 
If a child fails to adjust to school life and 
lacks co-operation with teachers and classmates the worst 
approach for a teacher would be to criticize and scold. 
This method would certainly show him that he was right 
in disl~king school. It is precisely at this point that 
a teacher should make use of his psychological training 
and create for the child object lessons which teach the 
child that this kind of behavior is injurious to the whole 
class. 
This whole approach to discipline hinges on the 
capability of the teacher in bringing about interest in 
learning. If the child suffers a defeat the good teacher 
will bring him back. 
none who knows the part played in 
the life of a child by the experience of a defeat in 
lAlfred Adler, Guiding The Child, trans. B. 
Ginzburg, (London: Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1930), p. 68. 
28 

--. 
the tasks will apply all his efforts to make such 
defeats impossible."1 
For Adler, the greatest factor in the development 
of mental faculties is interest. 
In order to create 
interest and keep it, teachers should get to know their 
pupils and discuss with them their own matters as well 
as academic matters. 
No one can know the minds of children so well as a 
teacher who lives with them and work-s with them. 
He sees so many types of children and, if he is 
skillful, establishes a connection with each of 
them. It rests with him whether the mistakes a 
child has made in family life shall continue or 
be corrected. Like the mother, he is the guardian 
of the future of mankin~ and the service he can 
render is incalculable. 
1Adler and associates, Guiding The Child, p. 70. 
2Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 181. 
29 

CHAPTER 111 
PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF ADLERIAN THEORY FOR BETTER 
CLASSROOM OPERATION 
Adler's theory for living hinges on social 
feeling and co-operation among all human beings. 
The 
roots of social feeling spring from the mother, the 
father, the immediate family, and relatives and friends, 
in that order. 
As the child moves from one social realm 
to another, the demands for co-operation grow into a 
wider field than ever before. 
Under our present educational system we generally 
find that when children first come to school they are 
more prepared for competition than for co-operation; and 
the training in competition continues throughout their 
schooldays. 
This is a disaster for the child; whether 
he goes ahead and strains to beat the other children or 
falls behind and gives up the struggle he will be prima-
rily interested in himself. 
As the family should be a unit, with each 
member an equal part of the whole, so too, 
should the class. 
When they are trained in 
this way, children are really interested in 
one another and enjo11 co-operation. 
I have 
seen many '1d1fficult 1 children whose attitude 
was entirely changed through the interest and 
co-operation of their fellow-children.l 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 163. 
30 

If the teacher is to enlist this co-operation he must 
use great finesse and strategy. 
He is the leader who 
sets the tone for learning. If the class is to be 
co-operative, it must see a goal that interests it. 
A goal cannot be imposed simply by the will of the 
teacher, it can be attained if some measure of self-
direction and class participation in planning is permit-
ted. 
At one time the normal method by which a teacher 
imparted information was by directly lecturing and 
demonstrating his subject matter and then questioning 
the pupils about it. 
A modern method and the present 
trend, is to set the pupils a problem the answer to which 
they must puzzle out in discussion either amongst them-
selves or with their teacher. 
This method may be 
characterized as the active approach to teaching, since 
it requires the pupils to arrive at results by their own 
efforts, in coritrast to the passive method, whereby the 
answers are given to them by the teacher to be studied. 
The teacher's role, in the active method, is one of 
guiding the discussion and encouraging the pupils to 
produce from their store of knowledge whatever material 
contributes to the solution of the problem. 
(This 
Adlerian influence on teaching was experimented with 
31 

successfully in the Vienna State Schools under the 
leadership of Professors Oscar Spiel and Ferdinand 
Birnbaum) •1 
Adler's view of the active teaching method was 
one which was absolutely teacher-centered. 
There are 
indications in this age, that soon much information on 
problems will be supplied to the pupil by the assistance 
of computers. 
Teaching machines are already available 
which present material to students, ask questions about 
the material, and check the answers. 
Some machines do 
not even present the information in the same order to 
every student, the order depends upon the answers of the 
individual student. 
Now think of a computer connected with twenty 
or thirty such machines, each working a differ-
ent student. It can monitor the entire situation. 
It can receive information about the progress of 
all the students, analyze and compare records, 
and evaluate the effectiveness of different ways 
of presenting information. It can bring learning 
problems to the attention of the teacher, who 
will have time for individuals requiring special 
help. 
Routines are as much of a burden to 
teachers as to other workers, and machines wil~ 
play a major role in classrooms of the future. 
It is difficult to conceive of Adler's reaction to such 
a mechanistic view of learning. 
I suspect that his 
1Ibid., pp. 163-164. 
-
York: 
2 John Pfeiffer, The Thinking Machine, (New 
J.B. Lippincott Co., 1962), p. 234. 
32 

attitude would be one of acceptance of these aids insofar 
as these machines would handle routine chores and leave 
the teacher free to do more important work. 
It has already been suggested that Adler con-
sidered interest to be the handiest tool of the teaching 
profession. 
(Chapter 11, p. 27.) 
In this light, I feel 
that the active method of teaching, described above, is 
superior as a means of creating a learning situation for 
pupils as well as training them to think for themselves. 
It relates book knowledge to practical values and gives 
all pupils an opportunity to share intellectually in 
the solution of various problems at their own level. 
The major difficulties in the active method are 
involved with teaching the pupils to speak their own 
minds and to listen when another is speaking. 
Your children must realize that there are two 
helpful ways they may participate in a group 
discussion; either by speaking or listening. 
By far the greater part of discussion is giving 
attention to whomever is speaking. 
To the 
less aggressive child this comes naturally and 
he may never speak unless you make a special 
note of the fact that he needs guidance in 
expressing himself as a member of the group.l 
1Edith M. Leonard, Dorothy D. VanDeman, 
Lillian E. Miles , Foundations of Learning in Childhood 
Education, (Ohio: 
Charles E. Merrill Books, Inc., 1963), 
p. 287. 
33 
" 

Adler speaks of this problem where he says: 
The same results will be found if we inves-
tigate in regard to listening, and you can 
understand the little progress made by a child 
or a grown-up if he does not listen interestedly, 
if he is not attentive, and does not connect 
himself in hearing sounds and words and so on, 
and we know how important it is for the devel-
opment of one of the most important fllfctions 
of the human mind -- that of speaking. 
The passive method of teaching avoids, of 
course, all of these difficulties. 
Nevertheless, it is 
in the process of overcoming the difficulties raised by 
the active method that the Adlerian ideal of the class 
as an object les~on in co-operation can be realized and 
the·children taught self-control, tolerance for each 
other's views and opinions, readiness to· accept proper 
criticism and equality of contribution. It seems to me 
that if education is to be something more than mere 
instruction, the difficulties of the active method must 
not only be faced but welcomed. 
There are many types of discussion that draw 
upon the resources of the individuals within the gToups. 
Some e~amples of such discussion topics are: 
1. Setting up a scientific experiment 
and following it through.. 
2. 
Solving a problem in Mathematics. 
1AJ.fred Adler and associates, Individual 
Psychology and Social Problems, (London: 
C.W. 
Daniel Co., 1932), p. 13. 
34 

nd on this point we say that it can only 
be done by education: 
education in the broadest 
sense. 
Therefore such an explanation as this 
today means putting back education on its right 
throne again, against all other views, against 
the views of heredity and environment. 
We are 
all responsible, we educators. 
And we say that 
ability to co-operate can be and must be trained. 
It is as with a subject like history or geog-
raphy, if a person is not trained in geography, 
and would solve a geographical question, you 
will see that he fails.I 
Adler did not consider it realistic to suppose 
that. there would not be disciplinary problems in the 
active teaching approach. 
Rather than taking the 
school child's problems in isolation, he would rest his 
belief on the totality of the human being. 
In all 
cases he would advise teachers to examine the hidden 
motives which have been influencing the child, either 
consciously or unconsciously. After these had been 
sought out and brought to light, a way out of the dif-
ficulty _would be pointed out to the child, once this 
was made clear and comprehensible the child would cease 
to cause trouble to his surroundings. 
36 
Individual Psychology offers a teacher a better 
understanding of the behavior of children and human nature 
in general. 
A child must feel that he is important and 
necessary and that he belongs as every adult does. 
The 
lAdler and associates, Individual Psychology 
and Social Problems, p. 21. 

problem child is simply taking the wrong approach 
to compensation for his feelings of inferiority 
and he must be taught that there are· socially 
acceptable means of reaching the same goals. 
The 
basis of his educability lies in the striving to 
compensate for his weakness. 
The psychologically trained teacher will 
recognize movements and gestures as evidence 0£ 
general attitudes. 
An understanding of inferiority 
and superiority feelings and compensations can be of 
great assistance to a teacher who is attempting to 
lead a class through the paths of learning • • With 
students who suffer from shyness, embarrassment and 
feelings of guilt, the teacher can find the inferiority 
complex on the surface; these children readily admit 
> 
their weakness and their inability to look after 
themselves. 
What they hide from view, of course, 
is their heightened goal of supremacy, their desire 
to be first at all costs. 
The loud child, who boasts 
continously, on the other hand, displays its superiority 
complex at first view. If we examined its behavior 
rather than its words, we would soon recognize the 
unadmitted feelings of inferiority.1 
1Adler, What Life Should Mean To You, p. 54. 
37 

Teachers can train themselves to recognize 
the symptoms and danger signals displayed by a child 
with a warped style of life. 
The successful teacher 
will attack the root of the problem and not the symptom . 
When a child is backward in arithmetic, or has had 
bad school reports, it is useless to concentrate 
our attention on these points and try to improve 
him in these special expressions. 
Perhaps he wants 
to bother the teacher; or even to escape from school 
altogether by getting himself expelled. If we check 
him at one point, he will find a new way to reach 
his goa1.l 
The root of such a problem often lies in the attitude 
to life, and if this is discovered by a teacher the 
opportunity to correct and improve the life-style of 
a child presents itself. 
The gist of Adler 's theory of organ inferiority, 
from the purely educational side, is that the weakness 
of the organs will be reflected in their functioning. 
It may well be that one of the sense organs is part-
icularly developed. 
Some people take in impressions 
chiefly by means of the ears, others by means of the 
eyes. 
The present extensive use of audio-visual aids 
in our school systems is possibly an extension of 
Adler's view on the use of the sensitive faculties. 
There has even been a classification of people into 
1Ibid., p. 63. 
-
38 

visual, auditive, olfactory, and other types according 
to whether they make predominant use of one organ or 
another. 
On this point Adler had this to say. 
We must find out which sense organ is the 
most used and what type of sensations fascinate 
the child most. 
There are many children who 
are better trained in seeing and looking, others 
in listening, still others in moving, etc. If 
a teacher finds a child of the visual ~ype, he 
should understand that he will have things easier 
1n subjects in which he has to use his eyes-
as, for example, geography. It will be better 
for him to see than to listen to a lecture.l 
The importance of organ inferiorities trans-
cends their merely medical significance. Historical 
examples are numerous of outstanding men who persisted 
in their lifetime to overcome a serious bodily defi-
ciency. 
The classical example was Beethovan. 
Mozart 
had a malformation of the ear • . Michelangelo and 
Leonardo were left-handed. 
Napoleon, Nelson, Wellington, 
Lloyd George were all short men . 
The short man, in 
many instances, desires to be greater than all the 
others. 
The short student often develops a highc:1 
degree of combativeness and ends up as a leader, or 
an orator, or at least in a heightened position. 
Alexander Pope had much of the spiteful character of 
a person who is weak and deformed but at the same 
1Adler, The Education of Children, p. 185. 
39 

time an exquisite aesthetic sensibility. 
Socrates' 
excessive ugliness is well known, nevertheless he 
combined the deepest social feeling with the purest 
sense of ethical beauty. 
In all cases noted here, we see that the 
inferiorities initiated strivings which carried the 
person from weakness to success to over-compensation. 
From the psychological point of view, it is important 
for the teacher to recognize that the significance 
of an inferiority, physical or psychical, is in the 
manner in which a child experiences it. What the 
child with weak sight often experiences is that, 
sitting at the back of the class, he cannot see the 
demonstrations which the teacher is making on the 
blackboard and he may therefore feel himself to be 
more stupid than the other children. 
The psycho_-
logically trained teacher can recognize these organ 
deficiences and their effects, and help the child 
regain his confidence. 
I have tried, in this paper, to show some 
of the Adlerian psychological insights and under-
standings that may be helpful to teachers. 
Adler 
40 

r~alized that there was no hope of reaching all 
parents and helping _them to avoid mistakes in 
educating their children. 
He did hope, however, 
to reach all teachers and through them all the 
children. 
Individual Psychology has as its subjects 
the whole of mankind-- not only families, school 
classes, but nations. 
War, punishment, prejudice, 
hatred, neurosis, suicide are all to be looked upon 
as the results of inferiority complexes. 
Adler had 
a dynamic belief in human responsibility and he 
developed the view that the meaning of life is to 
be found in contribution and co-operation. 
There are no simple answers to the many 
questions facing educationalists any more than there 
are simple answers to the questions confronting the 
modern medical physician or the atomic scientist. 
Teachers must bring psychological insight to their 
classrooms, and in a sense, be scientists, ever in 
search of better solutions to old problems. 
Teachers have a grave responsibility to 
mankind, not only to lead children along the avenues 
41 

of knowledge , but to release them from the com-
pulsion of their own desires and bring them to 
that trust and love of other men which I believe 
to be the goal of Adler ' s Psychology . 
42 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Adler, Alfred. 
Individual Psychology. 
trans. P. Radin. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1923. 
--------· 
--------· 
--------· 
--------· 
Understanding Human Nature. 
London: 
trans. 
w. B. Wolfe. 
Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1928. 
The Neurotic Constitution. 
New York: Moffatt, 
Yard and Co., 1917. 
The Science of Living. 
Unwin Ltd., 1930. 
London: Allen and 
Social Interest, A Challenge To Mankind. 
trans. J. Linton and R. Vaughn. 
London: 
Faber and Faber Ltd., 1938. 
____ • 
What Life Should Mean To You. 
ed. A. Porter. 
--------· 
--------· 
London: Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1932. 
Problems of Neurosis. 
London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1929 • . 
The Education of Children. 
and Unwin Ltd., 1930. 
London: Allen 
____ • 
Guiding the Child. 
trans. B. Ginzburg. 
London: Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1930. 
Adler, Alfred and associates. 
Individual Psycholosy 
and Social Problems. 
London: o. W. Daniel 
Co., 1932. 
Bottome, Phyllis. Alfred Adler Apostle of Freedom. 
2nd ed. London: Faber and Faber Ltd., 1957. 
Eysenck, H.J. Uses and Abuses of Psychology. 
Baltimore: Penguin Books Inc., 1953. 
43 

Ganz, M. 
The Psycholog.y of Alfred Adler and the 
Development of the Child. 
London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1953. 
Highet , Gilbert . 
The Art of Teaching. 
New York: 
Vintage Books Inc., 1958. 
Jung, Carl G. 
Collected Works of. vol. 12. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1953. 
Leonard, Edith., and VanDeman, Dorothy., and Miles , 
Lillian. 
Foundations of Learning in Childhood 
Education. 
Ohio: c. E. Merril Books Inc., 1963. 
Mouly, G. J. 
Psycholog.y for Effective Teachin~. 
New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 19 o. 
Orgler, Hertha . 
Alfred Adler: The Man and His Work. 
2nd ed. London: c. W. Daniel Co., 1948. 
Pfeiffer, John. 
The Thinkin~ Machine . 
Lippincott Co., 19 2. 
New York: J.B. 
Piaget, 
• 
Judgment and Reasoning In the Child. 
trans. 
----
M. Caoain. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul 
Ltd., 1928. 
Progoff, Ira. 
Jung's Psycholog.y and Its Social Meaning. 
New York: Grove Press, 1955. 
Thompson, G. 
Child Psychology. 
ed. L. Carmichael. 
Boston: Hough.ton Mifflin Co., 1952. 
44 

