


Published 2013 by Prometheus Books Magnificent Principia: Exploring Isaac Newton's Masterpiece.
Copyright © 2013 by Colin Pask. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, digital, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, or conveyed via the Internet or a website without prior written
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Cover image © Media Bakery/Martin Barraud Cover design by Jacqueline Nasso Cooke Inquiries should be
addressed to Prometheus Books
59 John Glenn Drive
Amherst, New York 14228–2119
VOICE: 716–691–0133 • FAX: 716–691–0137
WWW.PROMETHEUSBOOKS.COM
17 16 15 14 13    5 4 3 2 1
The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows: Pask, Colin, 1943—
Magnificent Principia : exploring Isaac Newton's masterpiece / by Colin Pask.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-61614-745-7 (hardcover) ISBN 978-1-61614-746-4 (ebook) 1. Newton, Isaac, 1642-1727.
Principia. 2. Mechanics—Early works to 1800. 3. Celestial mechanics—Early works to 1800. I. Title.
QA803.P37 2013
531—dc23
2013012120
Printed in the United States of America

 
 
 

Preface: Why You Should Read This Book
Acknowledgments
Plan of the Book and Reading Plans
PART 1. INTRODUCTORY MATERIAL
1. Introducing Our Hero
2. Setting the Scene
3. A First Look at the Principia
PART 2. HOW THE PRINCIPIA BEGINS
4. Newton's Preface: Setting Out Methods and Aims
5. Fundamentals
6. Newton's Laws of Motion and Their Immediate Consequences
7. Mathematical Methods
PART 3. DEVELOPING THE BASICS OF DYNAMICS
8. Down to Business
9. What Isaac Did Next: Finding Forces
10. The Inverse-Square Law: Triumph and Controversy
11. Interlude: The Modern Formulation
12. Time and a Mathematical Gem
13. Completing the Single-Body Formalism
14. Rotating Orbits
PART 4. ON TO MORE COMPLEX SITUATIONS
15. Constrained Motion
16. Many Bodies: Triumphs and Challenges
17. Big Bodies and Superb Theorems

18. Here Endeth Book I
PART 5. ABOUT PRINCIPIA BOOK II
19. Starting on Book II
20. Newton the Experimentalist
21. What Lies Beneath
PART 6. THE MAJESTIC PRINCIPIA BOOK III
22. Book III and Gravity
23. Theory of the Solar System
24. Earthly Phenomena
25. Challenges: The Moon and Comets
26. The Concluding General Scholium
PART 7. RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE OF PRINCIPIA
27. Reception and Influence
28. Mechanics after Newton
Epilogue
Notes
Index

In a 1987 book celebrating the three hundredth anniversary of the first
publication of Isaac Newton's masterpiece, Steven Hawking writes:
The Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica by Isaac Newton, first published in Latin in
1687, is probably the most important single work ever published in the physical sciences.1
The impact of the Principia, as it is usually called, can be summed up in
Alexander Pope's immortal words marking Newton's death:
Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night:
God said, Let Newton be! and all was light.
In case you think time has changed things, here, two hundred years after Pope,
is Albert Einstein:
The whole evolution of our ideas about the processes of nature, with which we have been concerned
so far, might be regarded as an organic development of Newton's ideas.2
Yet very few people, including professional scientists and mathematicians
who would readily agree with Pope and Einstein, have ever looked in the
Principia or have a good idea of its actual contents. I suspect that most people
have little idea beyond “Newton's Laws of Motion and Gravitational Theory of
the Solar System.” If so, that is a tragedy, not just for professionals, but for
everyone who is curious about exactly how science has developed and the nature
of Newton's seminal contributions.
The literature on Newton's life and work is vast. One reason is that he was
such a wonderfully complex and intriguing character. Another is that, in addition
to his major books Principia and Opticks, Newton churned out a very large
number of notes, letters, papers, and draft documents, and he hoarded all of
them. It is possible therefore to follow his thought processes and map out the
various routes, stages, and controversies in his scientific (and other) endeavors.
All of this makes fascinating reading, but it can mean that Newton's actual final
products seem to get less attention than their history!
My aim here is simpler: I take the third and final edition of Newton's
Principia and explain how it sets out his (and now our) approach to science; how

the framework of classical mechanics is established; how terrestrial phenomena
like the tides and projectile motion are explained; and how we can understand
the dynamics of the solar system and the paths of comets. In this way I
concentrate on the results themselves (with just a little of their historical context
as appropriate). In each case, I explain the ideas behind and the conceptual
importance of the result and how it fits into the scheme of mechanics that
Newton is building. I also briefly elaborate on particular results that have
interesting modern applications, or those through which Newton identified
problems and puzzles that have shaped later developments of science.
Newton's mathematical methods are notoriously difficult to follow. A famous
story tells of the comment made by a student as Newton himself passed by:
There goes the man that writ the book that neither he nor anyone else understands.3
I will present details for a few examples in order to illustrate Newton's
approach, but mostly I will avoid his more complicated mathematical arguments.
That way I can concentrate on the concepts and ideas as Newton introduces
them. It must be remembered that in science, it is the underlying concepts and
ideas that are most important, rather than the type of mathematical formalism
used to represent them. In addition, I will give the modern formulation in
separate sections so a reader wishing to do so can appreciate in more detail that
Newton's mechanics is essentially the same as that which we use today. For
some readers, that may represent an introduction to mechanics or a review of the
subject, probably emphasizing some ideas and methods that you had previously
glossed over.
I have given references to the extensive literature so that interested readers
may further explore particular topics, their history, and Newton's detailed
working. It will be apparent that I rely on a range of wonderful Newtonian
scholars, both past and present: Bruce Brackenbridge, S. Chandrasekhar, I.
Bernard Cohen, Dana Densmore, Niccolo Guicciardini, A. R. Hall, Robert Iliffe,
Michael Nauenberg, Bruce Pourciau, George E. Smith, Richard Westfall, Tom
Whiteside, Curtis Wilson, and many others. In particular, if you are interested in
how the Principia evolved over its earlier editions, or in relevant work that
Newton completed and might have put into the Principia, then you should
consult their impressive scholarly writings. Parts of the Principia are intricate
and subtle, and for in-depth analysis you should consult their interpretations.
We shall also come to appreciate the originality of Newton's overall approach.
He shows us how to develop a mathematical formalism, and how the theorist can
explore the properties and predictions of that formalism using a selection of

examples and mathematical manipulations. With that basis established, Newton
shows us how experimental and observational data should be used to select the
most appropriate theory. Few people realize that Principia itself contains details
of experiments and Newton's attempts at data analysis. The situation is
beautifully summarized by the great Newtonian scholar I. Bernard Cohen:
Newton's Principia is a book of mathematical principles applied to nature insofar as nature is
revealed by experiments and observation. As such, it is a treatise based on evidence. Never before
had a treatise on natural philosophy so depended on an examination of numerical predictions and
numerical evidence.4
Most people do not realize that Newton saw his approach of using a
mathematical theory of dynamics, suitable forces, and experimental verifications
as the one to use more generally in physics, and not as one restricted to the
motion of projectiles, pendulums, planets, and comets. Indeed, in Book II of the
Principia he attempts to apply his methods to liquids and gases, to understand
their behavior, how they resist motion of bodies through them, and how they
support sound and other waves. He set the challenges and gave us the directions.
According to Nobel laureate Steven Weinberg:
Newton's hope, “I wish we could derive the rest of the phenomena of nature…” has not been
fulfilled, but we are working on it, very much in the Newtonian tradition: the formulation of
increasingly comprehensive quantitative laws. From this high viewpoint, all that has happened since
1687 is a gloss on the Principia.5
We recognize that the Principia is a work of monumental importance, far too
significant to allow us to be frightened off by stories of mathematical
complexities.
Before embarking on my tour through the Principia, there are three
introductory chapters. It is impossible to read the Principia without considering
just who was (in Einstein's words) “this brilliant genius, who determined the
course of western thought, research and practice like no one else before or
since.”6 So the first chapter is a short description of Newton the man and his life.
To fully appreciate the steps made by Newton, it is necessary to know the state
of science as he began his work. The second chapter briefly reviews the situation
as Newton found it. The third chapter gives a general introduction to the
Principia, its publishing history, its form, and its major objectives and
achievements. After the tour, I will present some conclusions and tell you how
the Principia was received and how it influenced Enlightenment thinking.
One final point: it is true that in extreme situations, like the processes at
atomic and subatomic levels or the cases where speeds approach the speed of

light, Newton's mechanics must be modified. However, Newton's mechanics
remains the theory we use in everyday life and beyond, as when we send people
to the Moon or plan missions to Mars. It is worth noting Einstein's comment
when writing about his theory of relativity:
No one must think that Newton's creation can be overthrown in any real sense by this or any other
theory. His clear and wide ideas will forever retain their significance as the foundation on which our
modern conceptions of physics have been built.7
Each time I delve into the Principia, I find myself more and more amazed at
the extent, level, and sophistication of the results that Newton produced. Over
and over, I find myself asking how any one man could have taken such a leap
forward and produced such innovative and groundbreaking work. I understand
why the Marquis de l'Hôpital asked, “Does he eat and drink and sleep? Is he like
other men?”8 I invite you to share my sense of wonder and understand Newton's
supreme achievement.
Finally, I recognize that this is an ambitious book and readers will find errors,
significant omissions, or points that I should have developed more carefully. Let
me end with Newton's concluding words from his preface to the first edition of
the Principia: “I heartily beg that what I have here done be read with candour;
and that the defects in a subject so difficult be not so much reprehended as kindly
supplied, and investigated by new endeavours of my readers.”

This book began life in material used for public lunchtime lectures and in
undergraduate lecture courses. I thank everyone who discussed the subject with
me and made useful suggestions. I am greatly indebted to Peter McIntyre and
Ravi Sood for their careful reading of the manuscript and giving me many
corrections and suggestions for improving the text. Of course, the remaining
errors are entirely my own. Other colleagues supplied advice and ideas and, most
importantly, encouragement to continue when I was struggling. Great thanks are
due to the wonderful Annabelle Boag for turning my rough sketches into
beautiful figures. (Unless otherwise indicated, the figures in this book have been
created by her.) Much must be done to turn a manuscript into a polished book,
and I wish to thank Mariel Bard for her meticulous editorial work and for her
patience in dealing with an inexperienced author. Many scholars have studied
Newton and his work, and I have made great use of their writings, as explained
in my preface.
It is over fifty years since I first met Johanna, and she remains my greatest
love and inspiration. Quite simply, without her, this book would not exist.

This is a large book, so to help you understand its structure, I have divided it into
seven parts. Before the relevant chapters for each part, you will find a short
introduction and some advice about which chapters to read to suit your particular
interests. Below is a list of the parts. You may wish to read their brief
introductions in order to formulate a reading plan if the idea of reading the whole
book seems a little daunting! Also, remember that most chapters have
introductory sections and concluding remarks that can be easily read to get an
idea of the material being covered.
PART 1. INTRODUCTORY MATERIAL
Newton the man, the scientific scene, a first look at the Principia PART 2. HOW THE PRINCIPIA
BEGINS
approach to science, conceptual matters, definitions, the laws of motion PART 3. DEVELOPING
THE BASICS OF DYNAMICS
describing how a force determines the motion of a body, the theory of orbits PART 4. ON TO
MORE COMPLEX SITUATIONS
motion with constraints and two or more interacting bodies, large bodies PART 5. ABOUT
PRINCIPIA BOOK II
theory, measurement and origin of resistance forces, motion and waves in fluids PART 6. THE
MAJESTIC PRINCIPIA BOOK III
gravity and the solar system, terrestrial phenomena and comets, conclusions
PART 7. RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE OF PRINCIPIA
how the Principia was received and used, how mechanics evolved
A very basic plan would be to read chapter 1, chapters 3 through 8, and all of
part 6; then return to other chapters later. Experts might appreciate the wonders
in chapters 12 to 17. Part 5 may be a surprise and of interest to everyone, experts
or not.

Most people are curious to learn at least a little about Newton the man (chapter
1). The magnitude of Newton's achievement is clearer when we know something
about the development of science leading up to the situation as it was when he
began work at Cambridge University (chapter 2). The third chapter gives a few
details about how Newton came to write the Principia, its basic structure, and its
major themes. As such, it is a useful chapter to read before coming to grips with
the book's details.
 
Chapter 1. INTRODUCING OUR HERO
Chapter 2. SETTING THE SCENE
Chapter 3. A FIRST LOOK AT THE PRINCIPIA
 
Reading plans: Though it is not essential to read the first two chapters, I think
they help us to appreciate the achievement of Newton the man and the scientist.
Chapter 2 is long and can be left out if you are keen to get directly to the
Principia. Chapter 3 is important for appreciating the Principia as a whole.

It is virtually impossible to read the Principia without thinking about just what
sort of man could have written it. Furthermore, there are places where knowing
something of the nature of the author makes it easier to understand why certain
topics and approaches are discussed. So a brief introduction is in order. It would
be impossible to cover Newton and his life in detail here; therefore, this sketch is
more in the nature of scene setting, with suggestions for further reading at the
end.
In 1927, on the two hundredth anniversary of the death of Isaac Newton,
Einstein wrote that “we feel impelled at such a moment to remember this
brilliant genius, who determined the course of western thought, research, and
practice like no one else before or since.”1
What sort of a man could have gained such a reputation? Was he a boy genius,
like Mozart, taught and encouraged by a talented father? No; there was nothing
in Newton's origins to indicate that he would become the man who changed our
view of the world and set us on the pathway to modern science.
1.1. ORIGINS
Hannah Newton gave birth to son Isaac on Christmas Day 1642. (A table of
important dates in Newton's life is given at the end of the chapter.) The
birthplace was a manor house at Woolsthorpe, about seven miles south of the
midlands town of Grantham in Lincolnshire (see figure 1.1). Isaac was named
after his father, an illiterate but prosperous yeomen farmer who had died three
months earlier. The baby was premature, tiny and sickly. An unlikely start for the
man who was to die eighty-four years later revered as the greatest man of his
times.
Three years later, Hannah married the reverend Barnabas Smith and moved to
the rectory in nearby North Witham. Isaac was left with his maternal
grandmother, Margery Ayscough, until 1653, when Barnabas Smith died and
Hannah moved back to Woolsthorpe with her three Smith children. The young
Isaac did not have a fond relationship with his grandmother, and grandfather
Ayscough left him out of his will. Between the Newtons, Ayscoughs, and

Smiths, there was a rising level of prosperity, so Isaac grew up in relatively well-
off circumstances.
It seems that Isaac was destined to take over the family farming business, but
there were educated members on the Ayscough side of the family and, after a
little time in a nearby village school, Isaac was sent to the Free Grammar School
of King Edward VI (also called the King's School) in Grantham. Isaac was now
twelve and lodged with Joseph Clark, an apothecary. Latin was a major subject,
which was lucky for Isaac, as Latin was something of a universal language of
science at the time. It is possible that the school's headmaster, Mr. Stokes, may
have been interested in mathematics and helped Isaac along that road too. There
is evidence of Isaac's skills at making models of all kinds and at drawing.
In 1659, as he was approaching seventeen, Isaac was taken home by his
mother to learn how to run the estate and gain some farming experience. By all
accounts, this was not a success and Isaac neglected his duties in favor of things
like model building and reading. The situation must have been summed up by
his uncle Reverend William Ayscough, who urged that Isaac be sent back to
school to prepare for university studies. Headmaster Stokes also told Newton's
mother that such talents should not be buried under various rural pursuits. It
worked, and in 1660, Isaac returned to school in Grantham, although none could
have guessed what a critical and momentous step that was.
Figure 1.1. The author seeks inspiration at Newton's birthplace. (Photograph by Johanna Pask.)

1.2. A LIFE AT CAMBRIDGE
Isaac Newton finally escaped rural life in June 1661 when he entered the
University of Cambridge. He would remain at Cambridge first as a student, then
as a fellow and as a professor for the next thirty-five years. Newton was exposed
to a variety of subjects as a student, but most importantly he studied mathematics
and science with great intensity and was largely self-taught in many important
areas. He graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in early 1665.
An outbreak of the plague caused a closure of the university, and Newton
spent most of 1665 to 1668 back in the quiet of farms in Lincolnshire. Here
came the famous anni mirabiles when Newton developed so many of his early,
brilliant ideas in mathematics, optics, and mechanics. As the plague subsided,
Cambridge University reopened in spring 1667 and Newton returned to be made
a fellow of Trinity College. Two years later, at the age of just twenty-six, he was
appointed as the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics. This gave Newton security
in his position and the chance to devote his life to study and research. The chair
came with an income of one hundred pounds per annum and, on top of that, he
had income from his fellowship and from the Lincolnshire estate. His required
duties were comparatively light, with one lecture per week to be given for three
terms. Ten lectures had to be deposited in the university library each year.
Newton does not seem to have been an inspiring lecturer, and it is said that
sometimes he gave the lectures to an empty room. (What would you or I give
now to have heard a lecture by Isaac Newton!)
Newton continued his mathematical studies and teaching, although little was
published. He was also working on optics, and his invention of the reflecting
telescope was an early triumph. It was presented to the Royal Society in late
1671, and Newton was made a fellow in 1672 with seven of his papers published
by the society that year. In 1672 he published Light and Colours, which
described his theories on those subjects, and his Hypothesis Explaining the
Properties of Light was published in 1675. But it was not until 1704 that the
comprehensive treatise Opticks appeared. Newton now had the opportunity to
mix and interact with major figures like Robert Boyle, but around this period, he
also spent much time in secret work in alchemy and religious studies,
interpreting the various versions of the Bible and evaluating chronological
studies of ancient kingdoms.
The year 1679 marked important changes in Newton's life. He returned to
Woolsthorpe to nurse his dying mother and spent much of the year attending to
family affairs after her funeral in June. Later in the year, correspondence began

between Robert Hooke and Newton on questions about planetary motion. In the
years 1681–1682 Newton observed comets (that in 1682 being the famous
Halley's comet), and his interest in dynamics was increasing. All of this was to
culminate in the publication of the first edition of the Principia in 1687 after
urging on by Edmond Halley, who actually funded the publication. With this
event, Newton's reputation was ensured.
Despite his retiring nature, Newton did play a part in university affairs. In
1688 he was elected Member of Parliament for Cambridge University (not that
he seems to have made many great contributions in that line). He also made a
notable friend in John Locke, the famous thinker and philosopher, and Newton is
most kindly mentioned in Locke's major work An Essay concerning Human
Understanding.
Newton was now deep into his chemical and religious studies, and 1692 saw
important events in this area. Newton had interacted with Robert Boyle about
chemical matters, and he attended Boyle's funeral in 1692. In his will, Boyle left
money for annual lectures supporting the Christian religion and defending it
against “infidels” and others. Richard Bentley was chosen as the first Boyle
lecturer. Bentley had been in earlier contact with Newton, and now he sought
Newton's help in the preparation of his lecture material. The result was a series
of letters in which Newton discussed issues in science and religion. These
private letters also reveal some of Newton's most important concerns about his
system of dynamics.
In 1693 Newton had what today we would probably call a mental breakdown.
The reasons are not completely clear, but someone with Newton's self-imposed,
almost-manic workload, while at the same time playing with strange chemicals
and dealing with numerous personal disputes and problems, would be a
candidate for physical and mental problems. He recovered and continued his
various activities, but clearly his greatest inventive days were over. His friends
persuaded him to move on and, in 1696, he left Cambridge for London to
assume the position of warden of the Royal Mint.
1.3. THE FINAL PHASE
Newton was now changing from retiring scholar to public figure, and he was
exerting power and influence in a number of ways. He took his mint position
very seriously, supervising the recoinage that was necessary to deal with a
monetary crisis and taking steps to deal severely with “coiners” who debased the
coins in circulation. In 1700 his title changed to master of the Royal Mint.

Newton continued with his scientific and mathematical work, and during this
phase of his life, the second and third editions of the Principia were published,
along with Opticks and Arithmetica Universalis (based on his earlier lectures on
algebra) and other mathematical works. He also befriended and promoted a
number of younger scholars who spread the Newtonian doctrine and supported
Newton in his various intellectual struggles.
In 1703 Newton was elected as president of the Royal Society. The Royal
Society (of London) is one of the oldest such organizations, having been founded
in 1662. It had become a little run-down in the years before Newton took on the
presidency, but his prestige and ever-present drive and organizational skills
meant that it again began to flourish. Between 1703 and 1726 there were 175
society council meetings, of which Newton attended 161 (compared with his
predecessor, who had attended none during the previous five years). He also
attended most ordinary meetings ensuring that the society, and with it science,
flourished. He presided over his last Royal Society meeting in 1727, just weeks
before he died.
Newton was now at the height of his public esteem, and Queen Anne made
him Sir Isaac Newton in 1705. Newton died in 1727 on the twentieth of March.
He was buried in Westminster Abbey on the fourth of April. On his tomb is
written:
Let Mortals rejoice That there has existed
such and so great an Ornament to the Human Race
1.4. NEWTON'S INTERESTS
Isaac Newton was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, and his work in many
areas of mathematics has had a profound effect on the development of the
subject. However, Newton's interests ranged far beyond mathematics. His works
on dynamics and astronomy (culminating in the Principia) and in optics
(expounded in Opticks, first in English rather than scientific Latin) were also
fundamental and set the course of science for future generations. To have written
even just a part of any of those works would have been a claim to fame and
immortality, so it will come as a surprise to many people to learn that Newton
was equally, if not more so, involved in even more areas.
During his adult life, Newton had a deep interest in religion and theological
questions. He made incredibly detailed and thorough studies of the Bible and the
writings of the early founders of the Christian church. His writings were

voluminous but remained secret during his lifetime, and only now is the full
extent of his work in this area becoming evident as more manuscripts are edited
and published. Newton was particularly interested in chronological matters and
prophesies that had been set out in the Bible and ancient writings. The
Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended was published in 1728. However,
Newton's 323-page book, Observations upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the
Apocalypse of St. John, was not published until 1733. It was not until 1756 that
the Four Letters from Sir Isaac Newton to Dr. Bentley was published. (I return to
these religious matters shortly.)
When Newton left Cambridge for London, his papers were packed into a large
box and were untouched until Bishop Horsley in 1779 and the physicist Sir
David Brewster in 1855 took a look at them. It is generally said that they soon
closed the box in horror, and it was many years later that the documents were
finally revealed. It was bad enough that there were extreme religious writings,
but it was also apparent that Newton had been an alchemist. In fact, he had
explored chemical and alchemical matters over a long period with the same
energy, thoroughness, and zeal (and secrecy) that characterized his more
conventional scientific and mathematical studies. Newton had his own chemical
laboratory and spent large amounts of time there. He interacted with Robert
Boyle and owned twenty-three of his works.
Some idea of the spread of Newton's interests can be gained by looking at the
books in his personal library. (He also had access to the Trinity College library
of course.) For example, Newton owned thirty Bibles, almost as many as books
on astronomy. Table 1.1 gives some details.
What should we make of all of this? One striking opinion was offered by John
Maynard Keynes, the great economist. Mathematical works from the box of
Newton's papers went to the Cambridge University library in 1888, and the
remainder finally came up for auction in 1936. Lord Keynes was responsible for
buying and preserving as many of those papers as he could, and he became
involved in their analysis. (A Jewish scholar bought many other documents,
which are now in Israel—they too are now available on a National Library of
Israel website. For details about these manuscripts, see the section in this chapter
titled “Further Reading.”) Keynes wrote an article called “Newton, the Man” for
a meeting planned to celebrate the three hundredth anniversary of Newton's
birth, but World War II intervened. The paper was finally presented at the
postponed meeting in 1946 by Geoffrey Keynes, brother of the then deceased
Lord Keynes. After poring over the contents of the box, Keynes was moved to
write:

Newton was not the first of the age of reason. He was the last of the magicians, the last of the
Babylonians and Sumerians, the last great mind that looked out on the visible and intellectual world
with the same eyes as those who began to build our intellectual inheritance rather less than 10,0000
years ago.2
Later in the article, he explains:
Why do I call him a magician? Because he looked on the whole universe and all that is in it as a
riddle, as a secret which could be read by applying pure thought to certain evidence, certain mystic
clues which God had laid about the world to allow a sort of philosopher's treasure hunt to the esoteric
brotherhood…. By pure thought, by concentration of the mind, the riddle, he believed, would be
revealed to the initiate.3
Whether or not we see this as an extreme viewpoint, clearly the genius of
Isaac Newton was amazingly diverse and complex. It would be unfair to classify
all of Newton's work in alchemy and chemistry as strange and magical, since in
that work would also be his thinking about matter and interactions, thinking that
led to some of his greatest ideas.

Figure 1.2. Books in Newton's personal library
1.5 THE ROLE OF RELIGION IN NEWTON'S
LIFE
We must remember that religion played a large part in most people's lives in
Newton's time, and he was certainly a very religious person. Early in his time at
Cambridge, on Whit Sunday 1662, he recorded forty-nine sins that he had
committed, ranging from actions (“eating an apple at Thy house, making pies on

Sunday night”) to thoughts (“having uncleane thoughts words actions and
dreamese”). However, he soon began his theological studies, and they took him
down his own individual religious road.
Newton's studies led him to a Unitarian religious viewpoint, so that he
recognized one God the Father rather than the Trinity of conventional religion as
set out in the Nicene Creed. In particular, Newton did not accept Jesus as God
but as an agent and creation of God. Among his documents is Twelve Articles on
Religion in which he makes his position very clear:
 1.  There is one God the Father everliving, omnipresent, omniscient, almighty,
the maker of heaven and earth, and one Mediator between God and Man
the Man Christ Jesus.
…
12.  To us there is but one God the Father…we are to worship the father alone
as God Almighty and Jesus alone as the Lord the Messiah.4
Newton decided from his biblical studies that such things formed the old
position until the Council of Nicaea in 325, after which the doctrine of the
Trinity became official Church teaching. One of the great figures in establishing
this position was Athanasius, a deacon at the Council of Nicaea and later the
bishop of Alexandria. Newton researched these events with great intensity and
wrote large numbers of documents about this change, conspiracies, and the evil
ways of Athanasius. Today I suppose we might label it as an obsession.
If such religious questions were purely personal matters, Newton would have
had no difficulties. However, the 1688 Act of Toleration specifically excluded
from protection those who were against “the Blessed Trinity.” A following act in
1689 barred such people from holding public office. Newton kept his views
secret to avoid such problems. At Cambridge, it was a requirement for
continuation in a fellowship that the holder become ordained, something that
Newton's personal religious beliefs could never allow. It appeared that he would
leave Cambridge, but powerful supporters organized a royal mandate that
excused the Lucasian Professor from this requirement. (In fact, Newton's
successor in the Lucasian Professorship, William Whiston, came to views much
like Newton's, which he made public with the result that in 1710 he lost his
position and was banished from the university.) Newton maintained his religious
stance to the very end and even on his deathbed refused the sacrament of the
Anglican Church.
Newton appears to have kept religion and science separate to a large degree in
his official writings, as we will learn when reading the Principia. In fact, he

begins his Seven Statements on Religion as follows:
 1.  That religion and Philosophy are to be preserved distinct. We are not to
introduce divine revelations into Philosophy, nor philosophical opinions
into religion.5
 
There are some references to God in Newton's scientific work, and no doubt
his deep religious views did both motivate and influence his scientific thinking.
The idea that studying the natural world was like reading “God's other book”
(other than the Bible, that is) was a widespread one, and Newton began his first
letter to Richard Bentley with:
When I wrote my treatise [meaning the Principia] about our system, I had an eye upon such
principles as might work with considering men, for the belief of a deity, and nothing can rejoice me
more than to find it useful for that purpose.6
These matters are further discussed in chapters 26 and 27.
1.6. NEWTON'S CHARACTER
In recent years much has been discovered and written about Newton the man and
his character. The picture that has emerged is not a particularly attractive one.
Today some would say that his disrupted and emotionally disturbing early
childhood set the tone for his development and character formation.
There was conflict in Newton's early life, with the young Isaac's separation
from his mother and her wishing for a farmer and manager while he had interest
only in mechanisms, models, and studies. His absentminded and shoddy
approach to his duties would not have endeared him to the servants who had to
cover for him. In his 1662 list of sins, we find:
12.  Refusing to go to the close at my mother's command
13.  Threatening my father and mother Smith to burne them and the house
over them
…
24.  Punching my sister
…
30.  Falling out with the servants.
At school and in his free time, Isaac was happy making models and dolls’

furniture for girls, but he seems to have spent little time with other boys.
The move to Cambridge did not change Newton's way of life. He met a
similarly solitary and dejected figure in Nicholas Wickins, and they shared
rooms for twenty years. Newton did have a few select friends, but it says much
about him that even after twenty years there appears to have been no lasting,
deep friendship between Newton and Wickins. Newton appears to have been the
fabled intense, driven, eccentric, and absentminded scholar and professor, as
these irresistible recollections of his assistant Humphrey Newton (no relation)
indicate:
I never knew him to take any recreation or Pastime, either in riding out to take the air, Walking,
bowling, or any other exercise whatever, Thinking all Hours lost, that was not spent in his Studyes, to
which he kept so close, that he seldom left his Chamber….
    So intent, so serious upon his Studies, that he eat very sparingly, nay, oftimes he has forget to eat at
all, so that going into his Chamber, I have found his Mess untouch'd, of which when I reminded him,
would reply, have I; and then making to the Table would eat a bit or two standing….
    He very rarely went to Bed, till 2 or 3 of the clock, sometimes not till 5 or 6….
    He very rarely went to dine in the Hall unless upon some Publick Dayes, and then if he has not
been minded, would go very carelessly, with shoes down at the Heels, stockins unty'd, surplice on, &
his head scarcely comb'd….
    At some seldom Times when he design'd to dine in the Hall, would turn to the left hand, & go out
into the street, where making a stop, when he found his mistake, would hastily turn back, & then
sometimes instead of going into the Hall, would return to his chamber again.7
However, adjectives such as kindly, jolly, or entertaining that so often go
along with the absentminded-professor image do not seem to be applicable in
Newton's case. Over five years, Humphrey Newton saw Isaac Newton laugh but
once. There was a darker side to Newton, and the picture of a secretive, fearful,
lone scholar with his hidden interests in alchemy and religious issues is not an
attractive one.
Newton was reluctant to publish his findings, although he seems to have
craved recognition and respect. His infamous disputes with many people are
revealing. Robert Hooke managed to upset Newton in several ways, and there
were bitter disputes about Hooke's contributions to optics and mechanics (and
one cannot help believing that Hooke was a little hard-done-by). There are
suggestions that Newton's famous conciliatory statement in a letter to Hooke (“if
I have seen further it is by standing on ye shoulders of Giants”) contained a
veiled insult, because Hooke was short and somewhat deformed. Newton was
certainly dissuaded from publishing by disputes, and perhaps that is why Opticks
did not appear until 1704, the year after Hooke's death.
Newton had great arguments over data availability with the Astronomer
Royal, John Flamsteed, a similarly strong-willed and bad-tempered man.

Flamsteed once described Newton as “insidious, ambitious, excessively covetous
of praise and impatient of contradiction.”8 After Newton's knighthood,
Flamsteed referred to Sir Isaac Newton by his initials, SIN. Newton's best-
known disputes were with Leibnitz, particularly over the invention of calculus.
The Royal Society set up a committee to investigate the various claims, and it
appears that Newton strongly influenced both the choosing of a subservient
group of people and the writing of their report. The extent of Newton's
deviousness can be judged by the fact that he then wrote an anonymous review
of that report for publication in the Royal Society's journal Philosophical
Transactions.
In later life, there is evidence of Newton's kindness and generosity to his
friends, but clearly he was selective and careful. Newton recommended that
William Whiston be his successor as the Lucasian Professor, but then Newton
did nothing to come to Whiston's aid when religious matters led to his dismissal.
Whiston described Newton as having a “prodigiously fearful, cautious, and
suspicious temper.”9 It was Whiston who finally publicly revealed Newton's
secret religious attitudes, but not until 1727–1728, after Newton's death.
Newton makes a good hero for the mathematician or scientist, but as a man
there is a mass of contradictions and flaws. Perhaps William Whiston accurately
summarizes the matter in his 1749 Memoirs:
So did I then enjoy a large portion of his favour for twenty years together. But, he then perceiving
that I could not do as his other darling friends did, that is, learn of him without contradicting him,
when I differed in opinion from him, he could not in old age bear such contradiction, and so he was
afraid of me the last thirteen years of his Life.10
Two hundred years later, the playwright George Bernard Shaw gave this pithy
summary: “Newton was able to combine prodigious mental faculty with
credulities and delusions that would disgrace a rabbit.”11
In terms of his achievements and influence on the future course of science,
Newton certainly warrants the label of “hero.” However, when we consider
Newton the man as well as Newton the mathematician and scientist, we are left
with the impression of hero, yes, but a flawed hero.

Figure 1.3. Portrait of Newton from the studio of Enoch Seeman, circa 1726. He holds a copy of the
Principia, the third edition of which was published that year. (Image reproduced by permission from the
National Portrait Gallery, London.)
1.7. CHRONOLOGY

Figure 1.4. Some important dates in Newton's life.
1.8. FURTHER READING
The literature on Newton and his work is vast, so the following represents a very
limited personal choice. The definitive biography comes from Richard S.
Westfall and is now in three forms as follows:
 
Isaac Newton. Oxford: Oxford University Press, in the VIP series, 2007. [small-
format book, 113 pages, a good and quick read]
The Life of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. [the
abridged version, 328 pages]
Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1980. [magnificent, 908 pages]

Other works include:
Fauvel, J., R. Flood, M. Shortland, and R. Wilson, eds. Let Newton Be! Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1988. [excellent collection of chapters by experts in
fields related to this and later chapters of this book]
Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986. [an invaluable reference for all things Newtonian]
Iliffe, Rob. Newton: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
in the VSI series, 2007. [small-format book, 141 pages, but still manages to be
quite comprehensive, ch. 6 is a good introduction to Newton's work on
religion and prophecies]
Janiak, Andrew, ed. Isaac Newton: Philosophical Writings. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004. [gives a selection of Newton's writings,
including the four letters to Bentley and his review of the report on the
conflict with Leibnitz]
Keynes, John Maynard. Newton, the Man. Available (in part) in The World of
Mathematics. Vol. 1. Edited by James R. Newman. London: Allen and Unwin,
1956.
Manuel, Frank E. A Portrait of Isaac Newton. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1968. [concentrates on Newton's personality and sometimes
referred to as psychological study]
Westfall, Richard. Science and Religion in Seventeenth-Century England. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1973. [includes a chapter called “Isaac
Newton: A Summation”]
White, Michael. The Last Sorcerer. New York: Basic Books, 1997. [a “popular”
biography of Newton with emphasis on his personality and his alchemical
studies and how they influenced his other work; refers to the relevant
“scholarly works” of Betty Jo Dobbs]
 
The Newton Project (http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk) is a website
directed by Professor Rob Iliffe with the goal of compiling Newton's known
works into one electronic edition. [this is a wonderful website where you can
read original writings by Newton (and others, like William Whiston and
Humphrey Newton) including many of the “Keynes documents” that came out
of the famous leaving-Cambridge box]
Many of the other documents from the famous box are now available on a
Newton-manuscripts 
website 
at 
the 
National 
Library 
of 
Israel:
web.nli.org.il/sites/NLI/English/collections/Humanities/pages/newton.aspx.

The story of Newton's papers and their sale is given in the following source:
 
Spargo, P. E. “Sotheby's, Keynes and Yahuda—the 1936 Sale of Newton's
Manuscripts.” In The Investigation of Difficult Things: Essays on Newton and
the History of the Exact Sciences, in Honour of D. T. Whiteside. Edited by P.
M. Harman and Alan E. Shapiro. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1992.
 
Finally, the seventeenth century was a period of enormous change and
significance for the development of England; to gain an impression of Newton's
times, one much-acclaimed reference is the following:
 
Hill, Christopher. The Century of Revolution. London: Routledge, 2006.

This is a long chapter and is not essential for reading the rest of the
book. However, it is also not very demanding and will help to give
added meaning to many things that follow. Understanding what the
scientific scene was like when Newton began work also lets us
appreciate further the immensity of the advances he made.
Newton's Principia was first published toward the end of the seventeenth
century, and many people view it as the culmination of the Scientific Revolution.
This book discusses the revolutionary ideas that we find in the Principia, but
before doing that we should try to understand what was being overthrown in the
Scientific Revolution. Only then will we be able to appreciate fully the steps
made in the Principia.
The great questions driving the Principia are:
How do we understand and describe motion?
How do we use those ideas to discuss motion on Earth, motion in the heavens,
and the connections between them?
When tackling those questions, it is necessary to involve a third question:
 
How do we do science?
 
Those questions did not originate with Newton, as they are at the heart of
science, stretching back to the very earliest attempts of mankind to come to
terms with the world and how we live in it. Thus, Newton had to contend with
many centuries of work by earlier mathematicians and scientists; some of that
work was extremely helpful, and some led to confusion and errors that hindered
progress. This is the context in which Newton began his education and research,
and it is necessary to understand that context in order to appreciate the greatness
of Newton's achievements and the importance of the Principia. The aim of this
chapter is to briefly introduce that context. A long time period is involved, so
only a few of the most salient points can be mentioned here. The interested
reader is referred to the literature cited in the “Further Reading” section at the

end of the chapter.
2.1. ANCIENT BEGINNINGS
Civilizations like those in Babylon and Egypt were skilled in technology,
building, surveying, practical astronomy and calendar making, using
mathematics, and developing writing systems for keeping records. For example,
the Egyptians used information about the rising of the star Sirius to design an
accurate calendar. However, we have no evidence of a widespread search to
understand the natural world and to explain why things happen. Those initial
stirrings in science appear to belong to the ancient Greeks, who absorbed and
built on knowledge from those earlier civilizations. The Greeks also had an
alphabetical system of writing, so that even today we can read the books they
created. A key step involved looking beyond myths, gods, and supernatural
beliefs to consider the cosmos as a natural place and, thereby, as a
comprehensible one. This applied equally in medicine, as the Hippocratics wrote
around 400 BCE: “Every disease has a natural cause, and no event occurs
without a natural cause.”1
An indication of the timing of these developments is given by the (often
approximate) lifetime dates for some of the major contributors: Thales (624–546
BCE), Pythagoras (582–497 BCE), Empedocles (492–432 BCE), Democritus
(470–390 BCE), Hippocrates (460–370 BCE), Socrates (469–399 BCE), Plato
(427–348 BCE), Aristotle (384–322 BCE), Eudoxus (408–355 BCE), Euclid
(325 BCE–unknown), Archimedes (287–212 BCE), Eratosthenes (276–195
BCE), Apollonius (262–190 BCE), and Ptolemy (100–170 CE). These men (for
they were all men) and many others contributed to the beginnings of the science,
mathematics, and philosophy that has come down to us today. Five of them are
particularly important for this book.
2.1.1. Euclid
Euclid's Elements is the first great mathematics book. It is an enduring
masterpiece, going through more editions than any book except the Bible. The
development of geometry that it presents remains valid today. There are three
reasons for the enormous influence of the Elements. First, it shows us how a
subject may be developed on the basis of definitions, axioms, and logical rules
for working. Euclid provided a model for use in other fields. Second, it gave us
the first systematic approach to a branch of mathematics—geometry in a plane

and in three dimensions—as well as certain aspects of number theory.
The third thing Euclid gave us is an accurate and consistent piece of
theoretical physics, the first such work, according to Einstein. There was debate
about the nature of Euclid's diagrams, but clearly they can be (and were)
interpreted in a practical sense. They can also be used to describe the physical
world either as direct properties of objects or as paths traced out by moving
particles.
2.1.2. Plato and Aristotle
The philosopher-mathematician A. N. Whitehead famously wrote in 1929 that
the European philosophical tradition “consists of a series of footnotes to Plato.”
His influence on science also lingers today. Plato championed the importance of
mathematics in science (with “let no one ignorant of geometry enter here”
allegedly written over the entrance to his academy), suggesting a path for
scientists and philosophers ever since. Plato held that the most perfect shapes,
like the circle and the five regular or perfect solids (the “Platonic solids”), should
be at the heart of the forms underlying the most basic elements of the world. In
his Timaeus, he identified the four basic constituents—earth, water, air, and fire
—with perfect solids, and, hence, to two basic triangles used in their formation.
The idea of elementary particles fitting into a mathematical scheme related to
symmetry remains with us today.
Aristotle was a pupil of Plato, but he set out to create his own universal
picture and procedures. Aristotle was a towering figure whose ideas and writings
dominated intellectual life for many centuries. His output was truly amazing,
with works ranging from Physics to On the Soul, from Prior Analytics to
Nicomachean Ethics, from On the Heavens to On Length and Shortness of Life,
from Meteorology to Poetics. Aristotle's biological books (such as History of
Animals, Parts of Animals, On Respiration, Movement of Animals and
Generation of Animals, with his emphasis on observing, recording, and
interpreting) has led many to see him as the founder of biology. His Analytics
books gave us the basics of logic and the exploration of the form of arguments
such as syllogisms.
In contrast to his “modern” approach to biology, Aristotle approached physics
in a more philosophical manner, perhaps believing that observation and
experimentation could not help with some of his key philosophical questions
such as: What is change? What is place? What is time? He was less
mathematically inclined than Plato, although he did retain Plato's ideas about
things like the perfection of the circle. The result is that much of Aristotle's work

in physics is now seen as wrong (and maybe even irrelevant and bizarre). But
that does not mean we can ignore it. Such was Aristotle's reputation that his
work was accepted as the final word for many people over hundreds of
years and right up to Newton's time. Four facets of Aristotle's most
influential thinking are particularly important for our story.
(i) Causes
In his Physics, Aristotle sets out a principle that dominates much of his work: “A
prerequisite for knowing anything is understanding why it is as it is—in other
words, grasping its primary cause.”2 He then goes on to define four kinds of
cause that he will use to explain events in the physical world.
One way in which the word “cause” is used is for that from which a thing is made…for example, the
bronze of a statue.
    A second way in which the word is used is for the form or pattern (i.e., the formula for what a
thing is,…for example, the ratio 2:1 and number in general, cause the octave).
    A third way in which the word is used is for the original source of change or rest. For example, a
deviser of a plan is a cause, a father causes a child….
    A fourth way in which the word is used is for the end.3
In a remarkably modern-sounding example, Aristotle writes “if asked, ‘why is
he walking?’ we reply, ‘to get healthy’, and in saying this we mean to explain the
cause of his walking.”4
These causes embody Aristotle's idea of teleology; and, as it had to be used in
all cases, there came a problem that was answered by his famous first-agent
proposal:
There cannot be an infinite regress of movements caused by other movements…since everything that
changes must be changed by something.
    There is a first agent of change which is eternal, and is not changed even coincidentally.
    The eternal first agent of change has no magnitude, and is located at the outer edge of the
universe.5
(ii) Motion
Aristotle had to reconcile his need for causes with the idea of motion, and this
led to: “Proof that there is no void separate from bodies,” which involves the
argument that “if each of the simple bodies naturally has its own proper motion
(as fire moves upwards and earth moves downwards and towards the centre of
the world), it is easy to see that void is not responsible for their motion.”6 For

Aristotle, there is no vacuum possible.
A little later he makes the points: “What about the fact that when things are
thrown they continue to move when the thrower is no longer touching them?…It
would be impossible to explain why something which has been set in motion
should stop anywhere: why should it stop here rather than there?”7
Here we have Aristotle wrestling with the problem of how motion actually
“works,” and, using his causes approach, he concludes that “the agent of change
and the object changed must be in contact.”8 This conceptual difficulty
remained up to and beyond Newton's time.
Notice that Aristotle is also introducing the concept of natural motion, and it is
a distinguishing motion, “for if the natural motion is upward, it will be fire or air,
and if downward, water or earth.” There is also the link to weight and which
bodies fall fastest: “A given weight moves a given distance in a given time; a
weight which is as great and more moves the same distance in a less time, the
times being in inverse proportion to the weights. For instance, if one weight is
twice another, it will take half as long over a given movement.”9
(iii) Circular Motion
Aristotle followed Plato and thus imposed ideas about perfect circles on future
generations trying to understand motion. There can be no doubting his
viewpoint:
Circular movement is the primary kind of movement.
    As for the fact that circular movement is the primary kind of movement, this is obvious. Every
movement is either circular or rectilinear or a combination of the two…. Also, the higher degree of
simplicity and completeness possessed by circular movement means that it has priority over
rectilinear movement.10
Aristotle is led directly to the most vital property of circular motion:
Only circular motion can be continuous and eternal…. We now go on to claim that it is possible for
there to be an infinite change, which is single and continuous, and that this is circular movement.11
(iv) Earth and the Heavens
Aristotle believed there was a sublunar region that was changing and made up of
earth, water, fire, and air; he also believed there was a heavenly region that was
perfect, unchanging, and materially different.

On all these grounds, therefore, we may infer with confidence that there is something beyond the
bodies that are about us on this earth, different and separate from them; and that the superior glory of
its nature is proportionate to its distance from this world of ours.
    These premises clearly give the conclusion that there is in nature some bodily substance other than
the formations we know, prior to all of them and more divine than they.
    The shape of the heaven is of necessity spherical; for that is the shape most appropriate to its
substance and also by nature primary.12
2.1.3. Archimedes
Archimedes was the great mathematician and applied mathematician of the
ancient Greek era. His reputation is undiminished today. He built on Euclid's
Elements, and Archimedes's On the Sphere and the Cylinder, Measurement of a
Circle, On Conoids and Spheroids, On Spirals, and Quadrature of the Parabola
are masterpieces of geometry and contain early versions of aspects of calculus.
His books On the Equilibrium of Planes or the Centre of Gravity of Planes and
On Floating Bodies are the founding works in statics. They established what we
might call a scientific approach by following Euclid in setting out definitions,
postulates, and propositions to be established using logical development of the
subject. This was the example for Galileo and others to follow.
2.1.4. Ptolemy
There were various views about how the Earth, Sun, planets, and stars were
arranged (including some with the Sun at the center), but the authoritative
description was produced by Ptolemy working in Alexandria toward the end of
the ancient Greek era. Ptolemy maintained the ideas of Plato and Aristotle, but in
his Almagest, he showed how detailed mathematical models could be
constructed to describe the motion of the planets and to fit and predict a large
variety of astronomical results. Even today, the Almagest impresses by its size
and comprehensive approach.
Ptolemy followed the rule that heavenly motions are perfect and so must be
circular. However, he knew that the simple model of Sun and planets moving on
circular paths centered on the Earth could never give accurate results. The
solution was a combination of circles. A planet moves around a circle, the
epicycle, whose center moves around another circle, the deferent, whose center
is a little displaced from the Earth. Adjusting these parameters gave Ptolemy an
accurate astronomical model. The time taken for motion around the deferent
gave the zodiacal period and the epicycle fine-tuned, orbital-shape details and
could account for retrograde motion of the planets. Motion around the deferent

was uniform with respect to a point called the equant, which did not coincide
with the deferent center, and this allowed for speeds to differ for different parts
of an orbit. The diagram in figure 2.1 shows the Ptolemaic model. This brilliant
piece of what today we might call “mathematical modeling” was to be the
dominant picture for over a thousand years.
Those various works contained big ideas that the Greeks passed on to future
scientists and philosophers. It should not be assumed that they represent the sum
of Greek science, for there were many other contributors over those early
centuries and not all of them agreed with the views expressed by Aristotle and
Ptolemy, for example. There were those who believed in an atomic theory and
others who suggested different astronomical models, including those with a
moving Earth in them. Nevertheless, those works by the likes of Plato, Aristotle,
Archimedes, and Ptolemy were the ones that had the greatest influence for future
generations of thinkers.
Figure 2.1. Ptolemy's model of the solar system. (From C. M. Linton, From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History
of Mathematical Astronomy [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004], reprinted with the permission
of Cambridge University Press.)
2.2. BEYOND THE GREEKS
The decline of the Greek world and the fall of the Roman Empire saw Europe
move into a low period sometimes called the Dark Ages, although that term is

not favored today. For our story, the important trend is the shift of activity to the
Arab world and the development of Islamic science. The years from 400 CE
onward saw Greek works translated into Arabic, and the influence of Indian and
Chinese science and mathematics also absorbed into a new intellectual tradition.
Places like Baghdad and Cordoba became the new intellectual centers.
Greek works were not only preserved but they were also given commentaries,
corrected, and extended. Islamic science could build on the works of Euclid and
Ptolemy, and it is only in recent times that this role of Islamic science has come
to be appreciated. For example, the Arab mathematician al-Khwarizmi (circa
780–850) lived in Baghdad and produced work that brought the Hindu decimal
system into use and gave us basic ideas in algebra. There was also progress in
astronomy and optics.
Around the twelfth century, there was a major development: the works
preserved in the Arab world were translated into Latin and introduced into
Europe. For example, Gerard of Cremona (1114–1187) translated about seventy
books of all kinds (including works by Aristotle, Ptolemy, Galen, and many
Islamic writers), and William of Moerbeke (1215–1286) did similarly for about
fifty such books.
There were challenges to Aristotle, and critical commentaries were written by
people like John Philoponus, who was living in Alexandria around 550 CE. Of
great interest is his statement about falling bodies:
Our view may be corroborated by actual observations more effectively than by any sort of verbal
argument. For if you let fall from the same height two weights, one many times as heavy as the other,
you will see that the ratio of the times required for the motion does not depend on the ratio of the
weights, but that the difference in time is very small. And so, if the difference in the weights is not
considerable, that is, if one is, let us say, double the other, there will be no difference, or else an
imperceptible difference, in time.13
These views were both attacked and defended by Islamic scholars, and the
Aristotelian tradition had its strong supporters, such as Averroes. Similarly, when
the Greek and Islamic works reached Europe in translations, there were
commentaries written about them and debates about their validity.
Two aspects of motion were contentious over the centuries: (1) how to
understand the causal processes such as the way in which an arrow is maintained
in its flight, and (2) how to describe the details of motion. The early challenges
of people like Philoponus and Avicenna raised questions about motion in air or
in voids and the role of a medium in maintaining or resisting motion. The
Parisian professor Jean Buridan (1295–1358) introduced the term impetus to
stand for an internal impressed force that maintained motion. Some see this as

the first groping toward an idea of inertia and its role in motion. Others, such as
Thomas Bradwardine (1290–1349), devised the Merton rule (uniformly
accelerated motion can be related to the mean speed over the time of motion),
and Nicole Oresme (1320–1382) gave it a geometrical picture and proof (which
surfaced in much the same form in Galileo's writings). Contrary to the
impression often created, there was scientific activity over this period, but what
did not emerge was a comprehensive and consistent treatment of dynamics.
The debates about the validity of Aristotle's ideas were also tangled up with
religious ideas and the power of the Church. As one of the Fathers of the
Church, Saint Augustine (354–430) set the trend when he said that in matters
where reason and faith collided, faith must win, “for if reason be found
contradicting the authority of the Divine Scriptures, it only deceives by a
semblance of truth, however acute it be, for its deduction cannot in that case be
true.”14 When the translations of Aristotle reached the West, there were new
challenges for the Church. But eventually Saint Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274)
wrote a commentary that served to combine Church, Augustinian, and
Aristotelian ideas in a satisfactory manner so that it became something of an
official Church doctrine. (As late as 1879, Pope Leo XIII pronounced
“Thomism” to be the official doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church.)
At various times, there were heated debates and bans on the discussion of
Aristotle's works. However, their study in universities continued, and the
“schoolmen” maintained a dominant influence in education right up to Newton's
time.
2.3. TWO MAJOR STEPS
After many centuries of reliance on Greek texts and Islamic modifications, it
was time for some new works that set out to be major and comprehensive and to
suggest a new way forward. These came from the Pole Nicolaus Copernicus
(1473–1543) and the German Johannes Kepler (1571–1630).
2.3.1. Copernicus
Although there were Greek and Islamic scientists who suggested models with
the Earth at the center of the universe, and Nicole Oresme had given a careful
analysis of the possibility of a rotating earth, it was Copernicus who finally gave
the complete challenge to Ptolemy in the former's On the Revolutions of the
Celestial Spheres. Copernicus put the Sun in the center and the Earth and other

planets in orbits around the Sun. The Earth was also given a daily rotation.
Although this was a major step, Copernicus still retained elements from Plato
and Aristotle, as is evident when we read section headings such as “The World Is
Spherical” and “The Movement of the Celestial Bodies Is Regular, Circular, and
Everlasting—or else Compounded of Circular Movements.”
In fact, Copernicus used a scheme involving circles and epicycles much like
Ptolemy, so his model was not much (if any) simpler to use. However, it had
made that fundamental change in astronomical thinking, with the Earth now one
of the planets orbiting the Sun. For some people, the year 1543—when
Copernicus’ book was published—marks the start of the Scientific Revolution.
Copernicus had long delayed publication of his book. He might be seen as a
perfectionist and he worried over data to support his heliocentric model. In his
dedication to Pope Paul III, he expected some readers of his book to
“immediately shout to have me and my opinions hooted off the stage.”15 There
also had to be religious concerns. Martin Luther had described Copernicus as the
“fool who wanted to turn the art of astronomy on its head.”16 Although the ideas
in On the Revolutions were counter to Church and Bible teachings, there was no
immediate adverse reaction and, in part, this is due to a foreword or introduction
inserted by the Lutheran theologian Andreas Osiander, who was responsible for
seeing the book finally printed and who gave Copernicus, laying on his
deathbed, a first copy. In To the Reader concerning the Hypotheses of the Work,
Osiander suggested that the book should be viewed as a calculational scheme,
and he wrote, “for it is not necessary that these hypotheses should be true, or
even probable; but it is enough if they provide a calculus which fits the
observations.”17 It was over seventy years later, in 1616, that the Catholic
Church formally suspended its approval of On the Revolutions until it should be
corrected. Among Copernicus's “dangerous ideas” was work on the scale of
planetary orbits and statements about the vast distances to the stars. It might be
recalled that Giordano Bruno used those ideas to suggest that there could be
other suns with orbiting planets such as ours; he was burned at the stake in 1600!
2.3.2. Kepler
Kepler was something of a mystic and originally planned to be a Lutheran
clergyman. His long, rambling books show that he still maintained his religious
bent as he sought the glory and methods in God's ways in his astronomical
discoveries. For Kepler, there was to be no religious conflict. A letter reveals that
“for a long time I wanted to become a theologian, for a long time I was restless.

Now, however, behold how through my effort God is being celebrated through
astronomy.”18
Kepler had available the extensive data of the great Danish astronomer Tycho
Brahe, and he worked with staggering determination to fit planetary orbits to
mathematical models. Despite his heroic efforts, he was defeated by Mars until
he took the radical step of challenging the venerable domination of the circle.
We now summarize Kepler's greatest achievements in his three laws:
Law 1: The orbit of each planet is in the shape of an ellipse with the Sun at
one focus.
Law 2: In any equal time intervals, a line from the planet to the Sun will
sweep out equal areas.
Law 3: The squares of times of revolution of any two planets around the Sun
are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the Sun. (We
now tend to say that, for a planet, the square of its period is proportional to
the cube of its mean distance.)
By these discoveries, Kepler removed the requirement for orbits to be
described in terms of circles. Furthermore, he removed the idea of uniform
motion around circles since his second law tells us how the planet's speed varies
around the orbit.
With these discoveries, Copernicus and Kepler made the great break from
Greek ideas that had dominated thinking for almost two thousand years. What
did remain, however, was the use of mathematics in science, as advocated by the
Pythagoreans and Plato. The books of Copernicus and Kepler contain intensely
mathematical chapters.
2.4. THE CHALLENGES
Even today we all naturally think of the Sun as rising and traveling across the
sky rather than a fixed Sun only apparently moving as our Earth rotates.
Similarly, it is not obvious that we are moving in an orbit around the Sun. The
first great challenge of the new astronomy was to find evidence for the new
scheme, something Copernicus was acutely aware of.
There was a second so-called common-sense argument against the new
proposals. The description of motion and the underlying mechanisms needed for
understanding the flight of projectiles and other such problems now became of
even more importance as the work of Copernicus and Kepler became accepted.

If the Earth really was rotating on its axis and also traveling around the Sun, then
simple calculations showed that extremely large speeds are involved. This
immediately raises a new problem: How is it that objects do not fly off the Earth,
and why are cannonballs, clouds, and flying birds not left way behind?
Copernicus had ideas about the air and objects somehow rotating with the Earth,
but there was no coherent scheme of dynamics to understand how everything
worked. Even comparatively slow motions, like galloping horses, could show
how objects flew off and were left behind; to many people, such a rapidly
moving Earth was incomprehensible.
There was also a new emphasis on what it was that controlled the motion of
the Moon and the planets. Old Greek ideas of an ordered, perfect, unchanging
heavens, crystalline spheres, and Aristotle's “causes” were now inadequate
notions. Although Copernicus clearly wondered about the role of the Sun in the
planetary orbits, it was Kepler who saw that astronomy had reached a turning
point:
Astronomers should not be granted excessive licence to conceive anything they please without
reason: on the contrary, it is also necessary for you to establish the probable causes of your
Hypotheses which you recommend as the true causes of Appearances. Hence, you must first establish
the principles of your Astronomy in a higher science, namely Physics or Metaphysics.19
He tried to discover how the Sun might have an extending influence that
somehow swept the planets around in their orbits, and he considered the
possibility that magnetic effects might be involved. Kepler had found an overall
pattern into which all planetary motion fit, and he recognized that the next step
was to find the corresponding unifying underlying mechanism, one that clearly
involved the Sun. This was the great challenge to which Newton would find a
response, and so it is interesting to read Kepler's wonderful statement:
My goal is to show that the heavenly machine is not a kind of divine living being but similar to a
clockwork insofar as almost all the manifold motions are taken care of by one single absolutely
simple magnetic bodily force, as in a clockwork all motion is taken care of by a simple weight. And
indeed I also show how this physical representation can be presented by calculation and
geometrically.20
This was a great step forward, and here was the move from what we might
call “mathematical modeling” to astronomy as a branch of physics. Kepler failed
to find the appropriate physics, but he was the one who pointed the way for those
following him.

2.5. HOW TO RESPOND: GUIDING PRINCIPLES
There are three important methodological principles that guided scientists as the
Scientific Revolution gradually unfolded (and it is that gradualness that makes
some question the use of the word revolution with its implications of dramatic,
rapid changes).
2.5.1. The Mathematization of Science
This takes us back to Pythagoras and Plato and is already apparent in the works
of Archimedes and Ptolemy. Over the centuries, many people supported the
views expressed, for example, by Roger Bacon (1219–1292) in his On the
Importance of Studying Mathematics, which has chapter 3 headed “In which It Is
Proved by Reason That Every Science Requires Mathematics.” Copernicus
clearly used a mathematical approach, and in his book, we can see a good
example of two different interpretations: Instrumentalists believed that
mathematical models are used to facilitate calculations and to make predictions,
whereas Realists believed that a successful mathematical treatment then actually
reveals how things must be. The foreword slipped in by Osiander suggested an
Instrumentalist approach, but Copernicus himself was a Realist. He believed that
the accuracy of his mathematical description did reveal things about how the
planets were arranged and why physically we observe retrograde motion for
some of them. Kepler too believed that his work revealed physical facts about
the solar system.
Perhaps the most famous—and certainly one of the most beautifully expressed
—statements of this guiding idea came from Galileo:
Philosophy is written in that great book which ever lies before our eyes—I mean the Universe—but
we cannot understand it if we do not first learn the language and grasp the symbols in which it is
written. This book is written in the mathematical language, and the symbols are triangles, circles and
other geometrical figures, without whose help it is humanly impossible to comprehend a single word
of it, and without which one wanders in vain through a dark labyrinth.21
Mathematics provides the language or framework in which science should
operate. On the religious side, nature obeys mathematical laws because God
used those laws in creating Nature.
2.5.2. Experiment

Gradually, people began to challenge the authority of Aristotle and the idea that
if something required identification or explanation, then the solution was to
examine his writings on the subject. The philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–
1626) wrote extensively on this, stating that “books must follow sciences and not
sciences books.”22 The performing of experiments became a standard event at
the early meetings of the Royal Society, and Albert Einstein wrote that one of the
great developments of this period was “the discovery of the possibility to find
out causal relationships by systematic experiment.”23
2.5.3. The Mechanical Philosophy
There was a clear move away from the approach of Aristotle and his ideas about
causes and teleology. The new approach saw the universe in terms of matter and
motion. This did not remove a role for God, but now man could understand
God's works with a new philosophy. One of the great proponents of this new
approach was Robert Boyle (1627–1691), and under the title About the
Excellency and Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis, he wrote:
Thus the universe being once framed by God and the laws of motion settled and upheld by his
perpetual concourse and general providence; the same philosophy teaches that the phenomena of the
world are physically produced by the mechanical properties of the parts of matter, and, that they
operate upon one another according to mechanical laws.24
Boyle supported the corpuscular view of matter, and so the ancient atomists
were again of interest. Descartes, one of the most influential founders of the
mechanical philosophy, did not see the need for the atomic hypothesis; however,
he did set out clearly how a new analogy with machines might be invoked and
used to see how we can delve deeper into the physical world:
Men who are experienced in dealing with machinery can take a particular machine whose function
they know and, but looking at some of its parts, easily form a conjecture about the design of the other
parts, which they cannot see. In the same way I have attempted to consider the observable effects and
natural parts of bodies and track down the imperceptible causes and particles which produce them.25
2.6. TWO GREAT PIONEERS
There was great and widespread scientific activity in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, but for our story, two people—Galileo and Descartes—are
worthy of particular attention.

2.6.1. Galileo Galilei (1564–1642)
The person who best marks the transition between the scientific era begun by
Aristotle and the ancient Greeks and the start of the modern era is surely Galileo.
Galileo was a follower of Archimedes in his mathematical approach. He
presented some of his work in Dialogues in which the views of Aristotle were
exposed, discussed, and discredited. Galileo believed in the experimental
approach to science and also refused to be cowed by Church doctrine, boldly
stating that “I think that in discussions of physical problems we ought to begin
not from the authority of scriptural passages, but from sense-experiences and
necessary demonstrations.”26
Galileo supplied observations that supported the astronomical revolution
begun by Copernicus. In 1604, he observed a nova (as had Tycho Brahe in 1572)
and that, together with records of comets, challenged the idea of a perfect and
unchanging heavens beyond the Moon. Galileo provided more evidence when
the telescope became available, and he observed features on the Moon, which he
interpreted as mountains and craters, and spots on the Sun. He observed the
phases of Venus, something that clearly demonstrated the superiority of
Copernicus's heliocentric model. The astronomical realm was greatly extended
as Galileo saw an enormous number of stars and observed the satellites around
Jupiter.
In his Dialogue on the Two Great World Systems, the Ptolemaic and
Copernican, Galileo set out the arguments that made the transition to the
Copernican viewpoint inevitable (and caused his problems with the Catholic
Church!). However, his book makes no mention whatsoever of Kepler's laws,
and the planetary orbits are still taken as circles. (Drake has argued that this is all
about ease of presentation; see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter.) Galileo's diagram in the Dialogue is much like Copernicus's, except
that four moons are now shown orbiting Jupiter. (Galileo knew nothing about the
planets beyond Saturn.)
In his Two New Sciences, Galileo set out experimental and mathematical
results that are often taken as the first coherent starting point for the science of
mechanics. His experiments on motion down inclined planes and with
pendulums, as well as his considerations of falling bodies, led him to two major
results. First, in uniform motion, a body moves equal distances in equal times.
Second, in uniformly accelerated motion, the distance moved depends on the
square of the elapsed time. (How original some of Galileo's conclusions are is
debatable, but he set out the results in a comprehensive and easily
understandable form.) Galileo made a major step when he combined a uniform

horizontal motion with a vertical motion under gravity to prove that the path of a
projectile is a parabola (if, as he pointed out, we ignore air resistance).
In an important methodological step, Galileo used his parabolic-projectile
theory to prove that maximum range occurs for a launch angle of forty-five
degrees. He was obviously proud of this step and sets out the important
underlying principle:
The knowledge of a single fact acquired through a knowledge of its causes prepares the mind to
ascertain and understand other facts without need of recourse to experiments, precisely as in the
present case, where by argument alone the Author proves with certainty that the maximum range
occurs when the elevation is 45 degrees.27
Figure 2.2. Galileo's diagram for modeling the solar system. (From R. Taton and C. Wilson, eds., The
General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise of
Astrophysics [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989], reprinted with the permission of Cambridge
University Press.)
Galileo was close to stating what today is often called the principle of inertia

when he wrote:
Now it is evident from what has been said elsewhere at greater length that equitable [i.e., uniform]
motion on this plane would be perpetual if the plane were of infinite extent.28
However, in practice Galileo saw such motion as occurring along a circular
path:
Hence, along the horizontal by which we understand a surface, every point of which is equidistant
from this common centre, the body will have no momentum [i.e., impetus to change] whatever.29
Galileo made enormous steps and set the scene for those like Newton who
followed. We should note, however, that Galileo was giving results and a
mathematical formulation of kinematics rather than dynamics. He left behind
the causal notions of Aristotle, but he did not introduce the idea of force and
dynamical equations. His work contains the words natural tendency in his
discussions of motions of falling bodies and projectiles. He did not supply the
Sun-centered mechanism that Kepler sought for control of the planets. However,
in terms of the experimental and mathematical approaches, his work was of the
greatest importance.
2.6.2. René Descartes (1596–1650)
Descartes, as a founder of the mechanical philosophy, was critical of Galileo's
work, despite praising his break with the ancient doctrines and his use of
mathematical methods. He wrote:
Without having considered the first causes of nature, he has merely sought reasons for certain
particular effects; and thus he has built without a foundation…. As to what Galileo has written about
balance and the lever, he explains very well what happens, but not why it happens, as I have done in
my Principles.30
By “Principles,” Descartes is referring to his masterpiece Principia
Philosophiae, or Principles of Philosophy, which was first published in Latin in
1644. If Galileo's work is a prime example of the experimental and mathematical
approach, then Descartes represents the mechanical philosophy in action.
Principia Philosophiae is an impressive attempt to build a new universal
intellectual structure for understanding everything. Descartes was the first person
since Aristotle to attempt such an ambitious project. The work of Descartes was
highly regarded and, since we shall see how it influenced Newton and more so
the reception of his work, it is useful to focus on some key points.

Principia Philosophiae is arranged in four parts. Part I, On the Principles of
Human Knowledge, covers the way we think and gain knowledge and how God
is involved. It includes the following sections (among others):
 1.  That whoever is searching after truth must, once in his life, doubt all
things; insofar as this is possible.
…
 9.  What thought is
…
14. That from the fact that necessary existence is contained in our conception
of God, it is properly concluded that God exists
…
20. That we were not created by ourselves, but by God, and that consequently
He exists.
All of this leading to the final section of part I:
76. That divine authority is to be preferred to our perception: but that apart
from divine authority, it does not become a philosopher to assent to things
other than those which have been perceived.
 
Part II, On the Principles of Material Objects, sets out the fundamentals, with
sections such as:
 1.  The reasons why we know with certainty that material objects exist.
…
 4.  That the nature of body does not consist in weight, hardness or colour, or
similar properties; but in extension alone.
…
11. That space does not in fact differ from material substance.
…
16. That it is contradictory for a vacuum, or a space in which there is
absolutely nothing, to exist.
…
20. That this also shows that no atoms can exist.
Then come important sections in which Descartes sets out some significant
steps in dynamics:

27. That movement and rest are merely diverse modes of the body in which
they are found.
…
36. God is the primary cause of motion; and that He always maintains an
equal quantity of it in the universe.
37. The first law of nature: that each thing as far as is in its power, always
remains in the same state; and that consequently, when it is once moved, it
always continues to move.
…
39. The second law of nature: that all movement is, of itself, along straight
lines; and consequently, bodies which are moving in a circle always tend to
move away from the centre of the circle which they are describing.
There is very little mathematics in the Principia Philosophiae, but part II ends
with the following:
64. But I do not accept or desire in Physics any other principles than in
Geometry or abstract Mathematics; because all the phenomena of nature
are explained thereby, and certain demonstrations concerning them can be
given.
 
Part III, On the Visible Universe, contains Descartes's mechanism for the solar
system:
30. That all the Planets are carried around the Sun by the heaven.
 
Descartes postulates “that the matter of the heaven, in which the Planets are
situated, unceasingly revolves, like a vortex having the Sun as its centre,”31 and
it is by this motion that the planets are moved around the Sun. This was a
universal mechanism that achieved great prominence, and Descartes gave
diagrams showing how it is constructed (see figure 2.3).

Figure 2.3. Descartes's system of vortices. The Earth moves in the Sun's vortex (left), and a comet's path is
controlled by the vortices it travels through (right). (From “Tycho Brahe to Newton,” in The General
History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics, ed.
R. Taton and C. Wilson [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989], reprinted with the permission of
Cambridge University Press.)
In part IV, Of the Earth, Descartes deals with a vast range of subjects
including heat and fire, earthquakes, glass and steel, fluids and tides, and
magnetism. In fact, he concludes: “199. That no phenomena of nature have been
omitted in this treatise.” His very last section reveals again the power of religion
in that time: “207. But that I submit all my opinions to the authority of the
Church.”
It is easy to see why Principia Philosophiae was such a dominant force in the
intellectual life of the times of Descartes and Newton, particularly in continental
Europe. It provided what seemed like plausible explanations for the way the
world works and how we can understand everything around us without offending
those who revered the ancients and their ideas. (In part IV we find this section:
“200. That I have used no principles in this treatise which are not accepted by
all; and that this Philosophy is not new but extremely ancient and
commonplace.” And there he states that he has used “no principle that was not
accepted by Aristotle.”) There is virtually no mathematical modeling or
analytical development of the ideas (for example, just how the vortex model of

planetary motion works and leads to elliptical orbits). That certainly made it
accessible to most readers, but it limited the rigor and technical scope of its
achievements.
2.7. OTHER GIANTS AND THEIR SHOULDERS
Newton stated that one reason for his success was that he had “stood on the
shoulders of giants,” and we have already met some of those people. It would be
unjust not to at least mention others who were known to Newton and who made
significant contributions to the development of seventeenth-century science.
Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was the son of the Earl of Cork, and he had the
time and money to be a scientific virtuoso. Newton was much influenced by
Boyle and had twenty-three of his works in his personal library. The two men
interacted, and Newton presented Boyle with a first edition of the Principia and
even attended his funeral. Boyle's support for the mechanical philosophy (a term
he coined) and the experimental method were important in forming Newton's
own approach to science.
Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) was a continental philosopher, a scientist, and a
religious figure who championed the old Greek atomic hypothesis of Epicurus.
This set him apart from Descartes. Gassendi also espoused the experimental
approach and influenced both Boyle and Newton. He had clear ideas about
inertia, and it was Gassendi who had performed the experiment of dropping a
stone from the mast of a moving ship to show that the stone fell at the foot of the
mast and was not left behind. Gassendi believed that the composition of motions
was a universal effect. In astronomy, he observed—and named—the aurora
borealis. In 1631 he recorded the first transit of Venus within five hours of the
time predicted by Kepler and in so doing added strong support to the theories of
Copernicus and Kepler.
Edmond Halley (1656–1742) was a talented astronomer (at age sixteen he
showed how three observations could be used to fix the main features of a
planet's orbit) and mathematician (he published the first printed version of
Appolonius's Conics in 1710). Halley was appointed Savilian Professor of
Geometry at Oxford in 1704. It was Halley who ensured that Newton's Principia
was published (see chapter 3) and who supplied the editorial skills. In some
ways, it is surprising that Newton and Halley maintained their relationship
throughout Newton's life since Halley had a reputation as a libertine and an
atheist. Of course, Halley is now best known for his work on comets and his
great prediction for the return of the 1682 comet (Halley's comet) in 1758. He

became Astronomer Royal in 1720.
Robert Hooke (1635–1703) was a gifted man across a whole range of
activities. He excelled as an experimentalist and invented or improved numerous
instruments and mechanical devices. He began his career helping Boyle to
develop the air pump that was so important in the study of gases and their
properties. He was long associated with the Royal Society, serving as secretary
from 1677 to 1683, and, from 1662 until his death, he was Curator of
Experiments. Hooke is known now for his work on springs and elastic effects
and for his beautiful book Micrographia in which his excellent draftsmanship
allowed him to display the microscopic structure of such things as insects,
feathers, and fish scales. Hooke had many ideas in optics and mechanics, and he
clashed with many people (especially Newton) about the validity and precedence
of his ideas. In particular, Hooke had key ideas about orbital motion and the
roles played by inertia and a central force. His weakness was his lack of the
mathematical background needed to show where these ideas led.
Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) was one of the most brilliant men of the
period, working in dynamics and optics with emphasis on mathematical
methods. His work on centrifugal forces, gravity, regular and cycloidal
pendulums, and the theory of collisions was groundbreaking. His ideas are set
out in a clear, logical, and mathematical style in his very impressive 1673 work
titled Horologium Oscillatorium. Therein he advances new ideas for accurate
clock design. As an astronomer, Huygens described the rings around Saturn and
discovered Titan, one of Saturn's satellites. Newton had great respect for the
work of Huygens.
John Wallis (1616–1703) was Oxford's Savilian Professor of Geometry from
1649 until 1703. His most important work was published in1655 as Arithmetica
infinitorum, the first British work on calculus. That and other works by Wallis
had a major impact on Newton. Wallis tried hard to get Newton to publish more
(a failure) and incorporated some of Newton's discoveries into his own books,
such as the 1685 Algebra. Wallis is also famous for his work in cryptography
and for his bitter clashes with the philosopher Thomas Hobbes over Hobbes's
claim to have squared the circle.
Christopher Wren (1632–1723) is best known as the architect who rebuilt
London after the great fire of 1666. (Robert Hooke was also involved.) However,
Wren was a multitalented man who held professorships in astronomy and
geometry at Oxford. Newton classed Wren with Wallis and Huygens as the
leading geometers of the time. Wren helped to found the Royal Society, probably
preparing its preamble, and became president in 1681. He did important work on
collision theory and was also a meteorologist and a naturalist, using the new

microscope to study the structure of insects.
2.8. NEWTON'S STARTING POINT
The influence of Aristotle remained in universities when Newton moved to
Cambridge in 1661. People like Boyle and Galileo worked outside the university
system and so were less hampered by constraints, often legally imposed, on their
activities. Newton had to study the old curriculum with its emphasis on logic,
rhetoric, and ethics going back to the ancient Greeks. Newton appreciated the
value of some of this material but, by his famous notebook entry “Amicus Plato
amicus Aristoteles magis amica veritas [Plato is my friend, Aristotle is my
friend, truth is a greater friend],” he showed that he understood the limitations,
and soon he had gone beyond the official curriculum.
Newton began to read very widely and tackled the works of Copernicus,
Galileo, Kepler, Gassendi, Descartes, and others either directly or through
translations and commentaries. It was then that he saw the breadth of Descartes's
approach, but he also began to question its validity and thus began his long battle
to establish a better world picture. Newton also read widely in mathematics, and
his interest in history also began around this time.
2.9. FURTHER READING
There is an extensive literature covering the topic of this chapter; the following
is a highly selective list of personal recommendations at different levels. To
begin, there are three very readable books by leading experts in Newtonian
studies:
 
Bertoloni Meli, Domenico. Thinking with Objects: The Transformation of
Mechanics in the Seventeenth Century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2006. [comprehensive work by a Newton expert]
Cohen, I. Bernard. The Birth of a New Physics. New York: Norton, 1985.
[particularly good on evaluating Galileo's contributions]
Westfall, Richard. The Construction of Modern Science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1977.
 
A wonderful collection of relevant articles can be found in the following:
 

Park, Katherine, and Lorraine Daston, eds. The Cambridge History of Science,
Volume 3: Early Modern Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2006. [the article “Physics and Foundations” by Daniel Garber is particularly
useful]
 
For study of the earlier periods, see:
 
Crombie, A. C. Augustine to Galileo. 2 vols. London: Penguin 1969. [first
published in this revised version in 1959, so it's a little dated but still a great
source; something of a classic]
Gregory, Andrew. Eureka! The Birth of Science. London: Icon Books, 2001. [a
light once-over of ancient Greek science; easy and entertaining to read]
Hannam, James. God's Philosophers: How the Medieval World Laid the
Foundations of Modern Science. London: Icon Books, 2009. [very readable
“popular account”]
Lindberg, David C. The Beginnings of Western Science. 2nd ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2007. [a comprehensive account up to 1450; for
the second edition, the chapter on the Islamic influence has been rewritten to
better reflect recent findings]
 
Here are some examples of recent popular books dealing with the Arab
influence:
 
Lyons, Jonathan. The House of Wisdom. London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2009.
Masood, Ehsan. Science and Islam: A History. London: Icon Books, 2009.
 
Concentrating on astronomy:
 
Hoskin, Michael. The History of Astronomy: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2003. [an expert's concise tour of the subject in one
of the highly successful Oxford VSI series]
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. [gives a comprehensive
coverage of the subject; manages to be readable and not too daunting as far as
the mathematics is concerned]
 
There are many books and papers on the Scientific Revolution, and debates
about it continue. Some recent books include:
 

Boas, M., and R. Hall. “Newton's ‘Mechanical Principles.’” Journal of the
History of Ideas 20 (1959): 167–78. [discusses how Newton uses the
mechanical hypothesis and microscopic particle theory]
Dear, Peter. Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its
Ambitions, 1500–1700. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave, 2001.
Henry, John. The Scientific Revolution and the Origins of Modern Science. 3rd
ed. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. [a short book but with a good
coverage of the topics in this chapter and a very useful bibliography listing
332 items]
Jardine, Lisa. Ingenious Pursuits: Building the Scientific Revolution. London:
Abacus, 2000. [readable, light introduction; particularly good on experimental
work]
Osler, Margaret J. Reconfiguring the World: Nature, God and Human
Understanding from the Middle Ages to Early Modern Europe. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010.
Principe, L. M. The Scientific Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press in
the VSI series, 2011.
Shapin, Steven. The Scientific Revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996. [includes an extended, comprehensive bibliographic essay]
 
The original works of authors such as Archimedes, Aristotle, Plato, Ptolemy,
and Galileo are readily available. Major relevant works by Copernicus, Galileo,
Kepler, and Newton (and Einstein) are conveniently gathered together in:
 
Hawking, Steven, ed. On the Shoulders of Giants. London: Penguin, 2002.
 
There are several collections of selections of significant scientific writings,
and two good examples are:
 
Grant, Edward, ed. A Source Book in Medieval Science. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1974. [a massive collection of original writings
with expert introductions]
Sambursky, Shmuel, ed. Physical Thought from the Presocratics to the Quantum
Physicists: An Anthology. New York: Pica Press, 1975.
 
Stillman Drake has written extensively about Galileo and translated his work
into English. His recent book in the Oxford VSI series offers a new
interpretation of Galileo's work and the religious connotations:
 

Drake, Stillman. Galileo: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2001.
 
An entertaining picture of people and events involved in the founding of the
Royal Society is given in:
 
Gribbin, John. The Fellowship. London: Allen Lane, 2005.

Before plunging into the Principia, it may be useful to present an
overview so that you have some idea of what is in store and how it will
all fit together.
3.1. PUBLISHING HISTORY
Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica was first published in
1687. The title page (figure 3.1) shows that the imprimatur, or license to print,
was given for the Royal Society by its president, Samuel Pepys, on July 5, 1686,
and the printer's date is given as 1687. Up to four hundred copies were printed,
and a bound version cost nine shillings. Forty copies were sent to Newton on
July 5, 1687. The second edition was published in July 1713, and the third
edition in March 1726, a year before Newton died. It is the third edition that I
discuss in this book.
The Principia (as it is usually called) was written in Latin. A translation into
English by Andrew Motte was published in 1729, and that became the definitive
version. A revision of Motte's translation was made by Florian Cajori and
published in 1934. In 1999, a new translation was published by a great
Newtonian scholar, the late I. Bernard Cohen, and Anne Whitman. That book
gives a slightly more modern approach to the language, discusses translation
matters, and contains a superb “A Guide to Newton's Principia” by I. Bernard
Cohen. A detailed publishing history is given by Derek Gjertsen. (See this
chapter's “Further Reading” section for more details.)
Newton used the second and third editions of the Principia to make
corrections, improve certain sections, and insert new results. There is evidence
that he planned a thorough revision, but he failed to carry out the sweeping
changes that some people believe were needed to improve the flow of the book
and make it easier to follow. My own view, as I explain later, is that, remarkably,
the underlying structure of large parts of the Principia already has a quite
modern feel about it; it was probably beyond the ageing Newton, with his other
duties to consider, to carry through a whole rewrite.
Four editions of the Motte translation were published in New York by Daniel

Adee in 1848, 1849, 1874, and 1885. In this book, I use the 1848 version, as
published again in 1995 by Prometheus Books (see this chapter's “Further
Reading” section). (There are copyright problems involved in using the Cajori or
Cohen versions.) I have changed a few of the more archaic expressions and
occasionally inserted a modern version or “translation” shown in brackets.
I will quote extensively from the Principia so that you get a flavor of
Newton's own style. Although you can read this book without looking at the
Principia itself, it would be useful if you have a copy of the Principia to
actually look at and perhaps read a little more for yourself. There are many
versions available, including that by Prometheus Books, costing very little.
It is often possible to find copies in secondhand bookshops. An Internet
search may turn up large parts of the book that can be downloaded for free.
3.2. THE STORY OF THE PRINCIPIA
My aim in this book is to look at the actual contents of the Principia rather than
its history, but since the path that led to it is one of science's great stories, I will
outline a few of the steps. (It is explored in detail by many historians of science
—for example, see the 1980 book by Westfall.)
As a student, Newton naturally became interested in the great problems of the
time, of which how to describe motion and how to account for the orbits of the
planets were the most outstanding. We know Newton claimed that, in the plague
year of 1666, he pondered motion and gravitation while at his home in
Lincolnshire. It is likely that he continued on and off in those investigations,
although optics and other interests took up much of his time. We know that
Newton's correspondence with Robert Hooke in 1679 spurred his interest in
dynamics, and he almost certainly gained more from Hooke's suggestions and
probing than he would ever admit.

Figure 3.1. The title page of the first edition of the Principia. (Image reproduced by permission of the State
Library of Victoria, Australia.)
Several people were coming to the conclusion that the force moving the
planets around the Sun fell away inversely as the square of the distance of the
planet from the Sun. Edmond Halley, Christopher Wren, and Robert Hooke
discussed the matter in 1684 and agreed on a prize of a book worth forty
shillings for the one who could demonstrate the link between the inverse-square
law and the form of the planetary orbits. Hooke claimed to be able to do it but
never produced his working. Thus it was that Halley had his momentous meeting
with Newton at Cambridge in August 1684. According to one account:

After they had been some time together, the Dr asked him what he thought the curve would be that
would be described by the planets supposing the force of attraction towards the sun to be reciprocal
to the square of their distance from it. Sr Isaac replied immediately that it would be an Ellipsis, the
Dr struck with joy & amazement asked him how he knew it, Why saith he I have calculated it.
Whereupon Dr Halley asked him for his calculations without any further delay. Sr Isaac looked
among his papers but could not find it, but he promised him to renew it, & then send it to him.1
Given Newton's propensity for secrecy and his various squabbles, it is
unlikely that he would immediately hand over any document to Halley.
However, in November 1684, Newton did send Halley a document, De motu
corporum in gyrum (On the motion of bodies in an orbit). This paper was only
nine pages long but showed how the inverse-square law and an elliptical path
were linked. Nothing more was heard for over a year, but then, in April 1686,
Halley was able to inform the Royal Society that Book I of the Principia had
been received. The Society agreed on May 19 that it should be printed and that
Halley should oversee the operation. (The Principia comprises three “Books”—
see section 3.3, “Organization of the Principia.”) There were various difficulties
and upsets (not least of which was the claim by Hooke that it was really his
work), but Halley managed to secure from Newton Book II on March 7, 1687,
and Book III on April 4. Halley wrote to Newton on July 5 that he had “at last
brought your book to an end.”2
The role played by Halley was major and vital. He somehow managed to
convince the ever-reticent Newton to complete his work and hand it over for
publication. That must have been a most testing and exasperating task! However,
Halley had to go even further, for the Royal Society did not have the funds at the
time to publish the Principia; Halley himself covered the financial costs
involved. Most people have heard of Halley's comet, but probably few realize his
pivotal role in getting science's greatest book actually published.
Little is known about Newton's life during the period from 1684 to 1687, but
during that time, the nine-page De motu was converted into the weighty
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (460 pages in manuscript form).
The foundations of dynamics and its applications were set out basically in the
form that we use today. It is a staggering achievement, and it is hard to grasp that
one man could have produced so much in sustained effort over just two or three
years. Of course, Newton had been thinking about mechanics and planetary
motion for many years; his route to the Principia is fascinating and covered in
detail in references given at the end of this chapter.
3.3. ORGANIZATION OF THE PRINCIPIA

The contents page for the third edition of the Principia is shown in figure 3.2.
The basic structure is:
 
  Prefaces   Definitions Axioms, or Laws of Motion   Books I, II, and III.
 
The Preface Newton wrote for the first edition was important, and, because it
sets out his general approach and philosophy, I will discuss it in detail in the next
chapter. He wrote additional brief prefaces for the second and third editions in
which he simply mentioned some of the changes and those who had assisted
him. Roger Cotes helped with the revision and publication of the second edition
and also wrote a long preface for it. There is also a poem, “Ode to Isaac
Newton,” supplied by Edmond Halley.
The Principia begins with Definitions, and Newton deals with the basic
concepts needed when discussing motion and dynamics. In Axioms, or Laws of
Motion, Newton states his celebrated laws of motion and gives a general
discussion of them and some immediate consequences. Now he has the basics in
place for the study of dynamics.
It is in Book I, called “Of the Motion of Bodies,” that Newton explores the
theory of dynamics. He begins by describing the mathematical methods to be
used. Then he builds up from problems involving a single particle acted on by a
force to successively more-involved situations, such as those with two or more
interacting particles and the motion of bodies formed from many particles.
Newton stresses that this is a theoretical development, and he expands the
formalism and provides examples without worrying about physical applicability.
To me, in places in Book I, Newton is the modern “theorist at play,” but, as we
shall see later, his deliberate delineation into theory and practice was an
important methodological approach.
Book II is called “Of the Motion of Bodies (continued).” Newton now shows
how to build in such things as air resistance and its effect on projectile and
pendulum motion. He thereby starts to describe effects of continua, so that he
can consider how his dynamics can apply to waves, fluids, and the propagation
of sound. In this way, he also has the background for analyzing Descartes's
vortex theory for planetary motion. In Book II, Newton describes more
experimental work, so it is more of a mixture of theory and application.
It is in Book III that Newton moves from the mathematical formalism of the
first book to astronomical science. He first sets out the Rules for Reasoning,
which embody a framework for doing science—a framework that still makes
sense today. He begins by presenting data about the solar system and then blends
theory and phenomena to develop the theory of gravity. This is Newton's great

triumph, as he explains how the solar system works, discusses the motion of the
Moon and the paths of comets, derives the shape of the Earth, and gives the
origin of terrestrial phenomena like tides. The book concludes with a General
Scholium, in which Newton reviews the achievements of Book III, contrasts his
approach with that of Descartes, and comments on the strengths and problems in
his work. It is only in this General Scholium that Newton allows himself to
delineate the role of God in his description of the universe.
Figure 3.2. Contents of the Principia (3rd edition).

3.3.1. DETAILED STRUCTURE
As figure 3.2 shows, the Books are divided up into Sections, each with a
descriptive title. The basic structure of each section is a series of main results
called Propositions. Often a Proposition is followed by one or more Corollaries,
which contain results following from and complementing it. The central results
in Propositions are also called Theorems, and the applications or special cases
are called Problems. So, for example, we have things like “Proposition III.
Theorem III.” and “Proposition VIII. Problem III.” Mixed in with the
Propositions are Lemmas, which usually present additional mathematical results
that are needed as the theory is developed.
Groups of Propositions are followed by a Scholium, or discussion, and it is in
these that Newton expands on the more formal presentation with a variety of
ideas and examples that help the reader to understand and appreciate what has
just been done. Some of the scholiums are vital for the conceptual development
of the work and have become famous for highlighting difficulties and identifying
areas of concern that have had a profound effect on the growth of physics.
3.4. STYLE OF THE PRINCIPIA
The full title of the book, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
extends Descartes's Philosophiae Principia to emphasize that Newton is giving a
far more mathematical exposition than Descartes had attempted.
It comes as no surprise to find that Newton, as a follower of Galileo, wrote a
mathematical book. However, the modern reader will not find the extensive use
of symbols, algebra, and equations that characterize modern books on dynamics.
Rather, we find something more like Euclid's writing from over two thousand
years ago. There are many diagrams with labeled points and lines, and
arguments related to those figures are presented in prose form. Nor is the
Principia written in the colloquial style employed by Galileo, rather it is more in
keeping with the works of Euclid, Archimedes, and Huygens.
If the modern reader struggles with Newton's somewhat archaic mathematical
approach, his contemporaries were, for the most part, totally bewildered, and
very few of them could fight their way through the whole book. One approach
was that followed by Newton's friend, the philosopher John Locke, who
absorbed the thrust of the arguments and then checked with an expert, Christiaan
Huygens, that the mathematical details were correct. Newton obviously
recognized that dynamics could properly proceed only in a mathematical form,

but his uncompromising approach was also linked to his dislike of criticism and
controversy. As William Derham reported after talking with Newton:
And for this reason, mainly to avoid being baited by little Smatteres in Mathematics, he told me, he
designedly made his Principia abstruse; but yet so as to be able to be understood by Mathematicians,
who he imagined, by comprehending his Demonstrations would concur with him in his Theory.3
I will say more about Newton's sensitivities and mathematical disputes in
chapter 7.
The legendary mathematical difficulty of the Principia can overshadow the
totality of the work (something I hope to combat for readers of this book). The
Principia sets out ideas, concepts, methods, and a formalism for dynamics. It
creates a path through the subject of dynamics that is in large part exactly the
one we follow today. To a certain extent, there must be a mathematical setting,
but the mathematics provides a language and a tool, so that it plays an essential
but ancillary part in the whole exercise.
Much of the Principia, then, is presented in prose form. Unfortunately some
parts are still demanding, and we can feel Newton struggling to explain his
thinking and to present key conceptual points. The eminent Newtonian scholar
D. T. Whiteside gave a blunt assessment, but it was also an excuse: “The logical
structure is slipshod, its level of verbal fluency none too high, its arguments
unnecessarily diffuse and repetitive and its very content on occasion markedly
irrelevant to its professed theme…. But these faults can largely be excused by
the very rapidity with which the Principia was written.”4
Even Newton recognized some of this when he wrote in his Preface to the first
edition of the Principia:
Some things, found out after the rest, I chose to insert in places less suitable, rather than change the
number of the propositions and the citations. I heartily beg that what I have done may be read with
forebearance.
We should remember that the Principia was written in a short period over
three hundred years ago and it contains material that was largely completely new
and being presented for the first time. It seems unfair to expect brilliant writing
as well as brilliant science, especially in a book produced long before our era of
word processors and expert supporting editorial processes. Nevertheless, it is
hard to imagine Sir Isaac readily submitting to the stringent editorial review
process used today!

3.5. MAJOR ACHIEVEMENTS
As we saw in the previous chapter, until Newton's time, most results were
kinematic in form. Kepler gave his three laws to define and characterize the
motion of the planets. Galileo showed how projectile motion on Earth
corresponded to parabolic paths. There was no underlying causal theory; Kepler
gave three independent laws, and certainly there was no connection between
Galileo's parabolas and Kepler's ellipses. As Einstein pointed out, “We have to
realize that before Newton there existed no self-contained system of physical
causality which was somehow capable of representing any of the deeper features
of the empirical world.”5
Newton introduced the conceptual framework for dynamics; in particular, he
introduced forces and a theory to tell how bodies in motion respond to the forces
acting on them. There is also an important shift in viewpoint resulting from
Newton's approach. Results such as Kepler's elliptical orbits and Galileo's
parabolic projectile trajectories concern whole-of-path properties. Newton's laws
tell us what happens at a given point, how the current motion and the impressed
forces dictate the immediately following motion. In mathematical language,
Newton gave us differential laws that we integrate to find the whole motion. And
Newton showed the way this theory works for a whole array of forces and
conditions.
Newton introduced a force to describe the effects of gravity and could then
show the common origin of Kepler's three laws. He could also take the
monumental step of showing how the motion of bodies on Earth, like pendulums
and Galileo's projectiles, are linked to the motion of bodies like planets and
comets in the heavens. The enormous step was made from specific examples of
paths of motion to a universal and unifying theory capable of dealing with all
cases. Newton recognized the significance of that step, and we shall see that he
carefully set down the assumptions and tests needed to make it.
To make those advances, Newton also devised a program of working that
many have followed ever since. The great Newtonian scholar I. Bernard Cohen
called it the “Newtonian Style.” Newton began by setting out a general
mathematical theory of dynamics, and that allowed him to do two things: First,
he could obtain results like the conservation of momentum Law, which are
general and independent of specific force details. Second, he could assume a
variety of mathematical forms for the force and theoretically explore the
resulting motions. With that mathematical formalism in place, he could turn to
physical phenomena and the results of observations and experiments in order to

find the appropriate forces for describing actual physical motions. This split
allowed Newton to match theory and experiment in a major way unseen before
his time. In Cohen's words, “Newton's Principia is a book of mathematical
principles applied to nature insofar as nature is revealed by experiment and
observation. As such, it is a treatise based on evidence. Never before had a
treatise on natural philosophy so depended on an examination of numerical
predictions and numerical evidence.”6
It is interesting to note that Einstein begins a famous essay, “The Theory of
Relativity,” with a statement echoing Newton's position:
Mathematics deals exclusively with the relations of concepts to each other without consideration of
their relation to experience. Physics too deals with mathematical concepts; however, these concepts
attain physical content only by the clear determination of their relation to the objects of experience.7
Newton's split of his program into a theoretical, mathematical part followed
by an application to natural phenomena also allowed him to deal with a
philosophical problem that caused him great discomfort, as we shall see right
from his initial Preface to the first edition to the concluding General Scholium.
In the previous chapter, we saw that the Scientific Revolution was underpinned
by three guiding principles: (1) mathematics must be used to describe the
physical world, (2) experiments should be used to explore the physical world, (3)
and the mechanical philosophy suggests that all is to be explained in terms of
matter and motion. The latter principle was designed to remove mysterious
causes and “occult effects” from consideration. Newton embraced these
principles and introduced forces into the mechanical philosophy.
But now came the problem; a force is not a simple or physically obvious
entity causing interactions. Contrast that with Descartes's use of continuous
matter and effects transmitted through contacts and collisions. The nature of
force, the question of physical mechanisms, was a whole new physical and
philosophical problem. Newton planned to describe forces using a mathematical
formula that can be inserted into the laws of motion so that the paths of bodies in
motion under the influence of those forces can be determined. This he insists is a
valid mathematical exercise. Beyond that, he also insists that the formalism so
developed provides a useful way to describe and study natural phenomena.
Dealing with those who found it hard to go beyond the origin-of-forces
philosophical problem was a major task for Newton. The fact that he succeeded,
and that the Principia came to be such a major step forward for science, is one of
his greatest achievements.

3.6. SUMMARIZING PRINCIPIA
Newton introduced the concepts and mathematical formalism for a general
theory of dynamics. One of his most influential critics, the mathematician and
philosopher Ernst Mach (1838–1916) was quite clear about Newton's role:
He completed the formal enunciation of the mechanical principles now generally accepted. Since his
time no essentially new principle has been stated. All that has been accomplished in mechanics since
his day has been a deductive, formal, and mathematical development of mechanics on the basis of
Newton's laws.8
That is a rather extreme point of view, and later (chapter 28) I will discuss the
ways in which Newton's work had to be extended for a complete system of
dynamics. However, it is true that Newton gave us the basis for dynamics.
Arnold Sommerfeld puts it nicely in the introduction to his classic text
Mechanics:
We commence with Newton's fundamental analysis in his “Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica” (London, 1687); not that Newton lacked important predecessors, such as Archimedes,
Galileo, Kepler, and Huygens, to mention only a few. It was, nevertheless, Newton who first created
a firm foundation for general mechanics. Even today, apart from some changes and reinforcements,
the foundation laid down by him provides us with the most natural and didactically simplest
approach to general mechanics.9
Newton's theory is general. It applies to discrete bodies such as the weight on
the end of a pendulum, a projectile like a cannonball, and a planet orbiting the
Sun. Beyond that, Newton indicated that it could extend to liquids and gases, and
to phenomena like water waves and sound waves.
Newton introduced the idea of a universal theory; his theory of gravity
applies to all bodies whether they are on the Earth or in the heavens. The success
of this approach changed our thinking about the nature of the universe as a
whole; we now accept that the physics we discover on Earth can be applied
across the whole universe.
Finally, Newton insists that the theory must be matched to experimental
data and observations in order for it to become part of physics rather than
mathematics.
3.7. FURTHER READING
Cajori, Florian. Newton's Principia: Motte's Translation Revised. Berkeley:

University of California Press, 1934.
Cohen, I. Bernard. The Birth of a New Physics. New York: Norton, 1985.
Einstein, Albert. “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the
Development of Theoretical Physics.” In Ideas and Opinions. New York:
Crown Publishers, 1954.
Fauvel, J., R. Flood, M. Shortland, and R. Wilson, eds. Let Newton Be! Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1988. [ch. 2 by John Roche is an excellent short
introduction to the Principia]
Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986. [an invaluable reference for all things Newtonian—including good
sections on the Principia]
Newton, Isaac. Isaac Newton: The Principia. Translated by I. Bernard Cohen and
Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999. [this is a
completely new translation; also contains the comprehensive and invaluable
“A Guide to Newton's Principia” by I. Bernard Cohen]
———. The Principia. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995.
Smith, George E. “Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica.” In
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University Metaphysics
Research 
Lab. 
Article 
first 
published 
December 
20, 
2007.
http://plato.stanford.edu (accessed May 2, 2013).
Sommerfeld, Arnold. Mechanics: Lectures on Theoretical Physics. Vol. 1. New
York: Academic Press, 1964. First published 1942.
Westfall, Richard. The Construction of Modern Science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1977.
———. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1980. [ch. 10 is a wonderful introduction to Newton's book]

Newton begins with the Preface in which he sets out the various philosophical
and methodological points that guide his work. Next come definitions of mass
and other things needed in mechanics, plus a discussion of space and time. Now
Newton is ready to give his laws of motion and to set out their immediate
consequences, such as the principle of conservation of momentum. Finally, he
sets out the mathematical methods he will use to fully develop the theory of
mechanics and its applications.
 
Chapter 4. NEWTON'S PREFACE: SETTING OUT METHODS AND
AIMS
Chapter 5. FUNDAMENTALS
Chapter 6. NEWTON'S LAWS OF MOTION AND THEIR IMMEDIATE
CONSEQUENCES
Chapter 7. MATHEMATICAL METHODS
 
Reading plans: This is where Newton explains the basis for his whole work, so it
is really essential reading. If your mathematical background is not too strong,
you might lightly read over section 6.6, where I introduce the modern
formulation, but I do suggest you try just to see how the symbolic form flows.
Chapter 7 gets technical only in sections 7.3 and 7.4, but they can be lightly
scanned without too much loss.

Newton wrote The Author's Preface for the first edition of the
Principia, and it remained in later editions. The writing was completed
at Cambridge, Trinity College, May 8, 1686. Newton was apparently
satisfied with his introduction because his supplemental prefaces to the
second and third editions are merely short comments on minor
changes and additions to the book. (Roger Cotes wrote a separate
fourteen-page preface for the second edition.)
In around two pages, Newton sets out his methods, philosophical
approach, and overall aims. It is remarkable that many of the ideas
and concepts that Newton introduces in this preface are those that
have guided the work in science since then and remain of importance
today.
4.1. NEWTON'S SCIENTIFIC MANIFESTO

Mathematical Framework
The Preface, and hence the Principia, opens with the following sentence:
Since the ancients (as we are told by Pappus) made great account of the science of mechanics in the
investigation of natural things; and the moderns, laying aside [rejecting] substantial forms and
occult qualities, have endeavored to subject the phenomena of nature to the laws of mathematics, I
have in this treatise cultivated mathematics as far as it regards to philosophy.
Newton is paying his respects to the ancient founding fathers of mathematics
and science (called “natural philosophy” or “philosophy” in Newton's time), but
he is telling us that he will follow those modern ideas underpinning the
Scientific Revolution, as discussed in chapter 2, section 2.5. In particular, he is
stressing the importance of mathematics.
Newton specifically notes the rejection of “occult qualities,” and this takes us
back to Aristotle and the insistence on causes for everything. Newton introduced
forces, and challenging questions about the possible underlying physical
processes and mechanisms were raised by his critics. This was a great worry for
Newton; he deals with the lack of such things at various places in the book and
finally in the great General Scholium with which he concludes the Principia. For
some people, forces that were not related to contact between bodies and
collisions but which operated over a distance still seemed to involve the
forbidden “occult qualities.”

The Two Aspects of Mechanics
Newton next considers the nature of his subject:
The ancients considered mechanics in a twofold respect: as rational, which proceeds accurately by
demonstration; and practical. To practical mechanics all the manual arts belong, from which
mechanics took its name.
Today we still make such distinctions and talk about motor mechanics, for
example.

Mechanics and Geometry
Newton sees a strong, natural link between geometry and mechanics, which I
detail in section 4.5. For us, it is important to recognize that Newton saw
geometry as the branch of mathematics to use when formulating a theory of
dynamics. More details of this will come in chapter 7.
Newton slips in a statement showing the deep impression Euclid's geometry
has made on him. Today most of us who see the edifice that Euclid erected on
just five postulates using simple rules of logic find ourselves similarly amazed
and would agree with Newton when he writes that “it is the glory of geometry
that from those few principles, brought from without, it is able to produce so
many things.”
The style of the Principia is clearly modeled on that of Euclid's Elements, and
now we are in the position of admiring the great development that Newton too
constructs on the basis of a relatively few stated definitions and axioms. We
might say that Newton's Principia is to mechanics what Euclid's Elements is to
geometry.
Newton sums up and says how geometry relates to mechanics:
Therefore geometry is founded in mechanical practice, and is nothing but that part of universal
mechanics which accurately proposes and demonstrates the art of measuring. But since the manual
arts are chiefly conversant [used] in the moving of bodies, it comes to pass that geometry is
commonly referred to their magnitudes, and mechanics to their motion.

Defining Rational Mechanics
After that somewhat difficult introduction to mechanics and geometry, Newton is
ready to define his subject:
In this sense rational mechanics will be the science of motions resulting from any forces whatsoever,
and of the forces required to produce any motions, accurately proposed and demonstrated.
Notice that Newton says “any forces whatsoever”; he is aiming for complete
generality. He makes it clear that he is going beyond the ancient world of levers
and pulley systems:
This part of mechanics was cultivated by the ancients in the five powers which relate to manual arts,
who considered gravity (it not being a manual power) no otherwise than as it moved weights by those
powers. Our design, not respecting arts, but philosophy, and our subject not manual but natural
powers, we consider chiefly those things which relate to gravity, levity, elastic force, the resistance of
fluids, and the like forces, whether attractive or impulsive.
Newton is to deal with motion as it occurs in all ways, as produced by man
and as it is found in the natural world, and as it is generated or resisted by a
whole range of forces. This is not a practical manual, but “I offer this work as the
mathematical principles of philosophy.”
Newton's Methodology
Newton now gives a concise and remarkably modern view of the way to
proceed:
For all the difficulty of philosophy [what we today might call “natural philosophy” or “science”]
seems to consist in this—from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature, and then
from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena.
That is a basic approach in science; that is, study certain phenomena and
produce theories to explain them, then use those theories to predict and
understand a wider range of phenomena. Recognizing this approach is vitally
important for Newton, as we will see. In Book III, Newton returns to general
questions of methodology and sets out rules for carrying out his program.
Applied in the Principia
The Principia is organized so that theories are first developed and then they are

applied to a dazzling range of phenomena. Thus Newton continues the above
methodological quote:
And to this end the general propositions in the first and second books are directed. In the third book
we give an example of this in the explication of the System of the World; for by the propositions
mathematically demonstrated in the former books, we in the third derive from the celestial
phenomena the forces of gravity with which bodies tend to the sun and the several planets. Then from
these forces, by other propositions which are also mathematical, we deduce the motion of the planets,
the comets, the moon, and the sea.

The Method in General
Newton knew that his approach was wonderfully successful for gravitational
problems, and he believed that it is the one to be used in all other cases. He goes
on:
I wish we could derive the rest of the phenomena of Nature by the same kind of reasoning from
mechanical principles; for I am induced by many reasons to suspect that they may all depend upon
certain forces by which the particles of bodies, by some causes hitherto unknown, are either mutually
impelled towards each other, and cohere in regular figures, or are repelled and recede from each
other; which forces being unknown, philosophers have hitherto attempted the search of Nature in
vain; but I hope the principles here laid down will afford some light either to this or some truer
method of philosophy.
It is this suggested plan of action to which Nobel laureate Steven Weinberg is
referring in the quote from this book's preface (“all that has happened since 1687
is a gloss on the Principia”).
Newton is again confirming his support for the mechanical philosophy or
hypothesis, but now he couches it in terms of forces yet to be discovered. Of
course, his mathematical approach and theory-fitting ideas are the basis for
applying that hypothesis. We will see examples in the Principia where Newton
does tackle other than gravitational problems; the last three hundred years have
shown that he was correct in his assumption that he had identified the approach
to be used in general.
Notice that in his statement “particles of bodies…are repelled and recede from
each other,” we have the first hint of Newton's acceptance of an atomic
hypothesis and particles moving in a void.
It is fascinating to find, about three hundred years after Newton wrote those
words, Nobel Prize–winner and expositor supreme Richard Feynman writing in
The Feynman Lectures:
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only one sentence passed
on to the next generation of creatures, what statement would contain the most information in the
fewest words? I believe it is the atomic hypothesis (or atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it)
that all things are made of atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting
each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling on being squeezed into one another. In
that one sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount of information about the world, if just a
little imagination and thinking are applied.1
Newton's speculations have become today's orthodoxy.

4.2. PUBLICATION AND PAYING TRIBUTE TO
HALLEY
It is heartening to see that Newton next gives a glowing and unequivocal thank-
you to Edmond Halley for his part in giving us the Principia:
In the publication of this work the most acute and universally learned Mr. Edmund2 Halley not only
assisted me with his pains in correcting the press and taking care of the schemes [geometrical
figures], but it was to his solicitations that its becoming public is owing; for when he had obtained of
me my demonstrations of the figures of the celestial orbits, he continually pressed me to communicate
the same to the Royal Society, who afterwards, by their kind encouragement and entreaties, engaged
me to think of publishing them.
Newton goes on to explain how turning to other problems and delaying
publication allowed him to broaden his work into the comprehensive
masterpiece it finally became:
But after I had begun to consider the inequalities of the lunar motions, and had entered upon some
other things relating to the laws and measures of gravity and other forces; and the figures that would
be described by bodies attracted according to given laws; and the motion of several bodies moving
among themselves; the motion of bodies in resisting mediums; the forces, densities, and motions, of
mediums; the orbits of comets, and such like, we deferred that publication till I had made a search
into those matters, and put forth the whole together.
In the previous chapter, I mentioned that certain people have criticized the
order of some things in the Principia and that even Newton was humble enough
to recognize that there are a few organizational problems:
What relates to the lunar motions (being imperfect), I have put all together in the corollaries of
Proposition 66, to avoid being obliged to propose and distinctly demonstrate the several things there
contained in a method more prolix than the subject deserved, and interrupt the series of the several
[other] propositions. Some things, found out after the rest, I chose to insert in places less suitable,
rather than change the number of propositions and the citations.
Presumably it was just too much trouble to renumber everything to neatly
insert the very final discoveries.

A Final Plea
The last sentence gives us a picture of an unusually humble Newton:
I heartily beg that what I have here done may be read with candour; and that the defects in a subject
so difficult be not so much reprehended as kindly supplied, and investigated by new endeavours of my
readers.
This may refer in part to the organizational defects he mentioned, but for me it
seems to entail more than that. Newton must have been aware that some of his
ideas (such as gravitational forces attracting bodies over large distances without
any specified underlying mechanism) were certain to encounter criticism.
Knowing his dislike of disputes and controversy, it seems likely that he was
making a plea for a fair hearing and a thorough evaluation of his ideas.
4.3. DISCUSSION
Newton's Preface tells us what to expect in the Principia and introduces
approaches and concepts that became the basis for science from then on. In that
sense, it is a remarkable document.
But what of the style and feel of the Preface itself?
Newton's Preface is very matter-of-fact and almost impersonal. There is no
dedication or recognition of the personal struggles that must have been involved
in writing the Principia. Perhaps the character traits outlined in chapter 1 should
tell us not to expect such things. A dedication of the type To the Glory of God
might have been appropriate, given his deep religious feelings, but again the
secretive and private nature of his beliefs might have stood in the way. In fact, it
is surprising that God is not mentioned in the third-edition Principia until the
final General Scholium, in which we find a major and forceful statement
thereon.
We do glimpse a human side of Newton when he speaks about Edmond
Halley. However, in contrast to many of today's books, there is no mention of
others who have given him support and helped with the development of his
ideas. Unsurprisingly, his rival and sparring partner Robert Hooke is not
mentioned, but then neither are people like Christopher Wren, Robert Boyle,
John Flamsteed, and Christiaan Huygens, nor Isaac Barrow and his old teachers
and others living at Trinity College. However, knowing the complex nature of
the man, as discussed in chapter 1, perhaps this is just the kind of preface we

should expect him to have written.
4.4. FURTHER READING
Garrison, James W. “Newton and the Relation of Mathematics to Natural
Philosophy.” Journal of the History of Ideas 48 (1987): 609–27.
Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986. [an invaluable reference for all things Newtonian—good sections on
the Principia and Newton's Preface]
4.5. APPENDIX: MECHANICS, GEOMETRY,
THEORY, AND APPLICATIONS
We now come to a somewhat technical matter. Newton talks about accuracy and
what we might term the theory-application distinction. He introduces the
importance of geometry and its relevance for mechanics:
But as artificers do not work with perfect accuracy, it comes to pass that mechanics is so
distinguished from geometry, that what is perfectly accurate is called geometrical; what is less so, is
called mechanical. But, the errors are not in the art, but in the artificers. He that works with less
accuracy is an imperfect mechanic; and if any could work with perfect accuracy, he would be the
most perfect mechanic of all, for the description of right lines and circles, upon which geometry is
founded, belong to mechanics.
Newton is now on to the subtle point that geometry tells us about ideal
geometrical figures, but it does not require us to actually produce those ideals.
This is the link between practical matters and the ideal theory that was discussed
by Plato and, much later, was covered by Hermann von Helmholtz in his famous
essay “On the Origin and Significance of Geometrical Axioms.” Einstein also
discussed this when he suggested that geometry can be taken as the first example
of theoretical physics. The problem of constructing actual geometrical figures is
part of practical mechanics, but the theory tells us what to expect in those
figures, as Newton explains:
Geometry does not teach us to draw these lines, but requires them to be drawn; for it requires that
the learner should first be taught to describe these accurately before he enters upon geometry; then it
shows how by these operations problems may be solved. To describe right lines and circles are
problems, but not geometrical problems. The solution of these problems is required from mechanics,
and by geometry, the use of them, when so solved, is shown.

As we get farther into the Principia, we will see Newton setting out the
problems of dynamics in geometric form and then showing how the methods of
geometry lead to solutions.

Some readers might expect the Principia to begin with the famous laws of
motion. However, before setting out the laws, Newton needs to deal with some
fundamental conceptual matters, including the still-puzzling nature of space
and time. In introducing these and in the subsequent discussions, Newton
actually gives us his (and now our) theory of motion. The mathematical
treatment follows later in Book I, with the applications in Books II and III.
The Principia opens with Definitions, and, over twelve pages, Newton
introduces basic things needed for dynamics and discusses their nature and
importance. Aspects of some of these matters can be found in the writings of
Kepler, Galileo, Descartes, and Huygens, but it was Newton who finally
produced the clear basics for dynamics. The strength of his achievement can be
gauged by the fact that these matters are just as relevant—and in parts as
controversial—today as they were when Newton first wrote them down. Newton
begins with what has turned out to be one of the cornerstones of modern physics:
mass.
5.1. MASS
The Principia opens with:
DEFINITION I. The quantity of matter is the measure of the same, arising from its density and bulk
conjointly [density multiplied by volume].
In the discussion that follows, Newton says, “It is this quantity that I mean
hereafter everywhere under the name of body or mass.” Today we just say,
“mass.” The 1979 Concise Dictionary of Physics (from Pergamon Press) still
echoes Newton: the definition of mass is listed as “the quantity of matter in a
body.”1
Often, Newton has been criticized for the circularity of that definition; how
can the density be used when it is found using the mass of a given volume of
matter? But reading on (and did the critics actually read the little discussion?), it
is clear that the definition is framed so that Newton can establish two important
properties of quantity of matter or mass. He goes on to say:

Thus air of a double density, in a double space, is quadruple in quantity; in a triple space, sextuple in
quantity. The same thing is to be understood of snow, and fine dust or powders, that are condensed
by compression or liquefaction, and of all bodies that are by any causes whatever differently
condensed.
Thus the mass is linear in density and volume, so increasing either by a given
factor will give a body with the mass increased by that factor. Also, we may
change the density by processes like compression and liquefaction, and the mass
does not change. Even changing the state of matter, from solid to liquid, for
example, does not change the mass. These are key properties of mass.
Newton is using an atomic theory of matter, as he makes clear when he adds,
“I have no regard in this place to a medium, if any there such is, that freely
pervades the interstices between the parts of bodies.” There is no contribution
from an aether. The particles of matter may be rearranged and moved closer
together or farther apart without changing the value of the mass. (For Newton,
there are particles or bodies in space; he considers space later.)
Now Newton comes to the question of how mass is to be measured:
And the same is known by the weight of each body; for it is proportional to the weight, as I have
found by experiments on pendulums, very accurately made, which shall be shown hereafter. [The
details are in Book III of the Principia.]
There is a connection between mass and weight. After just a few lines,
Newton tells us about an idea, and its experimental verification, that was to
have a profound effect on Einstein in setting the course of modern physics. I
will return to this in a moment and also later, when discussing pendulum theory
in Book II and experimental results in Book III.
5.2. MOMENTUM
Having introduced mass, Newton can now use it to define what we call
momentum:
DEFINITION II. The quantity of motion [momentum] is the measure of the same, arising from the
velocity and quantity of matter conjointly [velocity multiplied by mass].
If there is more than one particle involved, then “the motion of the whole is the
sum of the motions of all the parts.” Increasing either mass or velocity increases
momentum or, as Newton says, “Therefore in a body double in quantity, with
equal velocity, the motion is double; with twice the velocity, it is quadruple.”
Momentum is a key quantity in physics, and it remains so even with

relativistic or quantum modifications.
5.3. INERTIA
The concept of inertia and its role in mechanics was troublesome for those who
first tried to come to grips with the nature of motion, its creation, and its
destruction (see chapter 2). Newton gives the following:
DEFINITION III. The vis insita, or innate force of matter, is a power of resisting, by which every
body, as much as in it lies, endeavours to persevere [continues] in its present state, whether it be of
rest, or of moving uniformly forwards in a right [straight] line.
Personally I do not like the use of the word force in this definition; it would
better be property or characteristic. Because this concept had caused so much
confusion, it is interesting to read Newton's explanation:
This force is always proportional to the body whose force it is and differs nothing from the inactivity
of the mass, but in our manner of conceiving it. A body, from the inactivity of matter, is not without
difficulty put out of its state of rest or motion. Upon which account this vis insita may, by a most
significant name, be called vis inertiae [inertia] or force of inactivity. But a body exerts this force
only when another force, impressed upon it, endeavours to change its condition.
Thus we are talking about inertia, which is related to the mass of the body
and tells us how hard it is to change its state of motion. Notice that mass is now
linked with inertia. In his 2008 book about the origin of mass, The Lightness of
Being, Nobel-laureate physicist Frank Wilczek defines mass in his glossary as “a
property of a particle or system, which is a measure of its inertia (that is, a
particle's mass tells us how difficult it is to change the particle's velocity).”2
Surely that is a neat paraphrase of what Newton was intimating. We now
speak about inertial mass. Newton has already mentioned weight, which we
measure using the gravitational pull of the Earth. This leads to the concept of
gravitational mass. It is the consideration of these two masses that so
influenced Einstein (more of which, later).
The sophistication of Newton's thinking is evident in his final discussion
point:
Resistance is usually ascribed to bodies at rest, and impulse to those in motion; but motion and rest,
as commonly conceived, are only relatively distinguished; nor are those bodies always truly at rest,
which commonly are taken to be so.
Newton is already introducing ideas of relativity as he recognizes

fundamental matters concerning motion.
5.4. FORCES
We are now at the point where Newton introduces the concept that allows him to
move beyond the essentially kinematic treatment of motion given by Kepler and
Galileo to a full-blown theory of dynamics. In the discussions, Newton explains
how motion works, paving the way for the formal laws and mathematical
treatment in Book I, then their application in Books II and III. Newton gives:
DEFINITION IV. An impressed force is an action exerted upon a body, in order to change its state,
either of rest, or of moving uniformly forward in a right [straight] line.
Newton now makes it clear that a force acts on a body, after which it has a
new state of motion:
This force consists in the action only, and remains no longer in the body when the action is over. For
a body maintains every new state it acquires, by its inertia only. Impressed forces are of different
origins, as from percussion, from pressure, from centripetal force.
Together with what has been said about motion and inertia, Newton has now
contradicted the Aristotelian viewpoint: a force will change the state of
motion, but then there is no need of a cause for maintaining that motion. He
next elaborates the concept a little more.
5.4.1. Centripetal Force
The kind of force of greatest importance is what we now refer to as a central
force, but Newton uses the term centripetal (allegedly in honor of Huygens, who
used the term centrifugal force when discussing the outward acceleration
associated with circular motion).
DEFINITION V. A centripetal force is that by which bodies are drawn or impelled, or any way tend,
towards a point as to a centre.
Newton immediately points out that gravity is a centripetal force pulling
things toward the center of the Earth and that the planets are also controlled by
such a force. He uses the (now rather archaic-sounding) example of a stone in a
sling that is kept whirling around by the force exerted through the string and that
flies off when the user releases the sling. Generally:

The same thing is to be understood of all bodies, revolved in any orbits. They all endeavour to recede
from the centre of their orbits; and were it not for the opposition of a contrary force which restrains
them to, and detains them in their orbits, which I therefore call centripetal, would fly off in right
[straight] lines, with an uniform motion.
Similarly, a projectile is continuously drawn away from a straight-line path by
the centripetal force of gravity. Newton now links projectile motion and orbits in
a superb thought experiment. A diagram helps to follow the discussion, and
figure 5.1 reproduces the one from Newton's “popular” version of Book III (see
chapter 27).
If a leaden ball, projected from the top of a mountain by the force of gunpowder, with a given
velocity, and in a direction parallel to the horizon, is carried in a curved line to the distance of two
miles before it falls to the ground; the same, if the resistance of the air were taken away, with a
double or decuple velocity, would fly twice or ten times as far. And by increasing the velocity, we may
at pleasure increase the distance to which it might be projected, and diminish the curvature of the
line which it might describe, till at last it should fall at the distance of 10, 30 or 90 degrees, or even
might go quite round the whole earth before it falls; or lastly, so that it might never fall to earth but
go forward into the celestial spaces, and proceed in its spaces in infinitum.
Newton is linking the idea of projectile motion on Earth with orbits around the
Earth (see figure 5.1) and even the modern concept of escape velocity, which
ensures that a projectile or rocket will escape the Earth's gravity and fly off into
space.

Figure 5.1. The fate of cannonballs shot off with varying speeds. (From Newton, System of the World, Book
III of the Principia, in The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
With these thoughts, Newton has now explained how a centripetal force can
give orbital motion; at last, the old ideas of some power sweeping or pushing the
planets around their orbits has been replaced. Newton has challenged the
vortices theory of his rival Descartes and his Principia Philosophiae statements:
24. That the heavens are fluid
25  That the heavens carry with them all the bodies which they contain.
Newton uses the example of the Moon, telling us that it would fly off in a
straight line were it not for the Earth continually pulling it back into Earth's
orbit. All of this leads to following the challenge (answered, of course, in the
Principia):
It is necessary, that the force be of a just quantity, and it belongs to the mathematicians to find the
force that may serve exactly to retain a body in a given orbit with a given velocity; and vice versa, to
determine the curvilinear way into which a body projected from a given place, with a given velocity,
may be made to deviate from its natural rectilinear way, by means of a given force.

5.4.2. Measures of Force
Newton's theory of dynamics, in stark contrast to Descartes's, was designed to
lead to a mathematical formalism and quantitative results, so he needs to say
how “the quantity of any centripetal force may be considered.” He gives three
more definitions:
DEFINITION VI. The absolute quantity of a centripetal force is the measure of the same,
proportional to the efficacy of the cause that propagates it from the centre, through the spaces round
about.
DEFINITION VII. The accelerative quantity of a centripetal force is the measure of the same,
proportional to the velocity which it generates in a given time.
DEFINITION VIII. The motive quantity of a centripetal force is the measure of the same,
proportional to the motion which it generates in a given time.
Newton discusses these with reference to magnetic and gravitational forces,
and of course they are to be treated more mathematically when the laws of
motion are given and used. During the course of these discussions, Newton
makes clear his mathematical approach:
For I here design only to give a mathematical notion of those forces, without considering their
physical causes and seats.
And again, a little later, even more emphatically:
I likewise call attractions and impulses, in the same sense, attractive and motive; and use the words
attraction, impulse, or propensity of any sort towards a centre, promiscuously, and indifferently, one
for another; considering those forces not physically, but mathematically: wherefore the reader is not
to imagine that by those words I anywhere take upon me to define the kind, or manner of action, the
causes or the physical reason thereof, or that I attribute forces, in a true and physical sense, to
certain centres (which are only mathematical points); when at any time I happen to speak of centres
as attracting, or as endued with attractive powers.
One can almost feel Newton struggling to counter the (inevitable) criticism
that he does not give physical mechanisms for the transmission and effect of his
forces—something he famously returns to in the very final General Scholium of
the Principia. Remember that his aim in the first part of the book is to
present a mathematical formalism that later can be applied to physical
problems.
Much has been written about Newton's definitions of force and the subtleties
involved; I return to this topic in chapter 6.

5.5. SPACE AND TIME
It might seem that we are ready to move on to the laws and their applications,
but in defining things as we have above, we have implicitly made certain
assumptions; for example, we need to know about position and its change with
time in order to discuss velocity. It is a measure of Newton's thoroughness that
he realizes this and adds a Scholium, which begins:
Hitherto I have laid down the definition of such words as are less known, and explained the sense in
which I would have them to be understood in the following discourse. I do not define time, space,
place, and motion, as being well known to all.
However, if those things are to be used in a theory of dynamics, there are
some further, more-subtle points that should be considered. The discussion
Newton gives is one of the most quoted and analyzed parts of the Principia. It is
also an indication of the sophistication and depth of his thinking. Thus I must
make some comments about this Scholium, but I refer the interested reader to the
references given in the “Further Reading” section at the end of the chapter for
greater detail.
The quote just given continues:
Only I must observe that the vulgar [ordinary people] conceive those quantities under no other
notions but from the relation they bear to sensible objects. And thence arise certain prejudices, for
the removing of which it will be convenient to distinguish them into absolute and relative, true and
apparent, mathematical and common.
I think it is fair to say that most people are happy to work using the everyday
time and position specifications that are an integral part of our lives. Most
scientists do that most of the time too (although, from the viewpoint of certain
parts of advanced physics and philosophy, a deeper analysis is required). You
may be one of those people, and that includes many scientists, who share the
sentiment expressed long ago by essayist Charles Lamb: “Nothing puzzles me
more than time and space; and yet nothing puzzles me less, for I never think
about them.”3
In that case, you may like to find out a little more about just what the puzzle
entails, which we'll discuss in the following sections. A few more comments on
connected practical matters will come in the next chapter.
5.5.1. Time

We all may feel that there is some overall time that “marches on,” and we all
measure our own local or private time using watches and clocks. Newton's
words still seem convincing today:
Absolute, true and mathematical time, of itself, and from its own nature, flows equably without
regard to anything external, and by another name is called duration: relative, apparent, and common
time, is some sensible and external (whether accurate or unequable) measure of duration by the
means of motion, which is vulgarly [commonly] used instead of true time; such as an hour, a day, a
month, a year.
It is our local measures of time that we use when studying motion (like
Galileo's pulse counting, or his water clocks for balls rolling down inclined
planes). In certain modern experiments, the passing of time may be measured
with exquisite accuracy.
We do seem to have some natural “feel” for time, but for many of us, Saint
Augustine's famous words probably still ring true: “What, then, is time? If no
one ask of me, I know; if I wish to explain to him who asks, I know not.”4
5.5.2. Space
Newton begins with what has become one of his most famous statements:
Absolute space, in its own nature, without relation to anything external, remains always similar and
immovable. Relative space is some movable dimension or measure of the absolute spaces; which our
senses determine by its position to bodies; and which is vulgarly [commonly] taken for immovable
space; such is the dimension of subterraneous, an aereal, or celestial space determined by its
position in respect of the earth.
Why is Newton concerned with a possible absolute space when it is the
relative space that we all use? Already in the above definitions and discussions,
Newton has introduced the ideas of inertia and rest or, equivalently, the idea of
motion in a straight line when no forces act (“but motion and rest, as commonly
conceived, are only relatively distinguished”). As he makes even clearer when
the laws of motion and their consequences are introduced (see the next chapter),
the theory of mechanics uses what today we call an inertial frame of reference in
which those properties of bodies to be at rest or in uniform motion are apparent.
But are there any such reference frames (or relative spaces, as Newton might
say)? One response is to say that we do use mechanics and that it works, so
operationally we can use suitable reference coordinates; I will expand on that
approach in the next chapter. Newton too is very clear on this point and its
necessity:

But because the parts of space cannot be seen, or distinguished from one another by our senses,
therefore in their stead we use sensible measures of them. For from the positions and distances of
things from any body considered as immovable, we define all places; and then with respect to such
places, we estimate all motions, considering bodies as transferred from some of those places into
others. And so, instead of absolute places and motions, we use relative ones; and that without any
inconvenience in common affairs.
The whole scheme might work well, but what if we think a little more deeply?
Newton continues the above quote about using everyday measurements:
but in philosophical disquisitions, we ought to abstract from our senses, and consider things
themselves, distinct from what are only sensible measures of them. For it may be that there is no body
really at rest, to which the places and motions of others may be referred.
Newton is saying that there are (in our modern terminology) suitable and
useable inertial frames of reference that allow us to use his theory of mechanics,
but is there any independent way of being certain that such reference frames do
truly exist? Before tackling that, it is worthwhile noting that Newton understands
relative motion and makes it clear to the reader.
5.5.3. Relative Motion
Newton gives an example of dealing with relative motion involving a sailor on a
moving ship and recognizing that, from some larger viewpoint, the Earth is also
moving (see figure 5.2). Newton explains:
If the body [the sailor] moves also relatively to the ship, its [his] true motion will arise, partly from
the true motion of the earth [remembering that larger viewpoint] in immovable space, and partly
from the relative motions as well of the ship on the earth, as of the body in the ship; and from these
relative motions will arise the relative motion of the body on the earth.
And to make things clear, Newton goes on with an example (see figure 5.2):
As if that part of the earth, where the ship is, was truly moved towards the east, with a velocity of
10010 parts; while the ship itself with a fresh gale, and full sails, is carried towards the west, with a
velocity expressed by 10 of those parts; but a sailor walks in the ship towards the east, with 1 part of
the said velocity; then the sailor will be moved truly in immovable space towards the east, with a
velocity of 10001 parts, and relatively on the earth towards the west with a velocity of 9 of those
parts.

Figure 5.2. Relative velocities of sailor, ship, and Earth.
5.5.4. Absolute Motion and the Bucket Experiment
We still have the problem of the immovable space, although Newton raises the
possibility of the so-called fixed stars providing the reference frame (something
we still do today). However, “absolute rest cannot be determined from the
position of bodies in our regions.” But although we cannot detect absolute space,
we can look at motions and discuss their relative and true forms. To this end,
Newton now gives an example in a simple but highly thought-provoking
experiment. Basically, a bucket of water is made to rotate by suspending it with a
twisted cord and the state of the water is observed. Here is Newton's famous
description:
If a vessel, hung by a long chord, is so often turned about that the chord is strongly twisted, then
filled with water, and held at rest together with the water; after, by the sudden action of another
force, it is whirled about the contrary way, and while the chord is untwisting itself, the vessel
continues for some time in this motion; the surface of the water will at first be plain [flat], as before
the vessel began to move; but the vessel, by gradually communicating its motion to the water, will
make it begin sensibly to revolve, and recede little by little from the middle, and ascend to the sides of
the vessel, forming itself into a concave figure (as I have experienced), and the swifter the motion
becomes, the higher will the water rise, till at last, performing its revolutions in the same times with
the vessel, it becomes relatively at rest in it.
Newton is identifying the three stages illustrated in figure 5.3. Stage (a) has
the bucket at rest and the water lying in it with a flat surface; in (b), the
untwisting cord makes the bucket rotate, and the water surface initially remains

flat; in (c), the water and the bucket are both rotating together, and the water has
formed a concave surface.
Figure 5.3. Stages in the rotating-bucket experiment.
What should we make of this? Newton points out that in both stage (a) and
stage (c), the water is at rest relative to the bucket, but we can observe a quite
different surface. He concludes:
This ascent of the water shows its endeavour to recede from the axis of its motion; and the true and
absolute circular motion of the water, which is here directly contrary to the relative, discovers itself,
and may be measured by this endeavour.
The water is not rotating relative to the bucket, but we have detected that it is
finally rotating around some axis in space; we have learned about “the true and
absolute circular motion of the water.” Newton continues with a long discussion,
and interested readers may wish to study it and come to their own conclusions.
This bucket experiment is discussed in many books and papers, and at the end of
the chapter, I give references to some more-recent comprehensive analyses of the
experiment and the types and validity of any conclusions that may be drawn
from it. One thing is clear: this is an incredibly ingenious experiment, the sort of
experiment that only an Isaac Newton would suggest!
5.5.5. The Globes Thought Experiment
In the bucket experiment, we may think about the motion in a larger sense, with
the fixed stars proving a suitable reference. But what if they were not there?
Would we still get the same rotation phenomena? These sorts of problems were
raised by the philosopher and scientist Ernst Mach (1838–1916), and they
influenced Einstein as he struggled to produce his general theory of relativity.
Newton does not explicitly discuss such questions, but he does consider the
case where all extraneous matter is taken away. How can he do that? While the
bucket experiment is one that we, like Newton, can actually try, there is another

class of “experiments” known as thought experiments (see the “Further Reading”
section at the end of this chapter) in which the experiment is imagined. Newton
sets the scene with this summary of the situation:
It is indeed a matter of great difficulty to discover, and effectually to distinguish, the true motions of
particular bodies from the apparent; because the parts of that immovable space, in which those
motions are performed, do by no means come under the observation of our senses. Yet the thing is not
altogether desperate; for we have some arguments to guide us, partly from the apparent motions,
which are the differences of the true motions; partly from the forces which are the causes and effects
of the true motions.
If we accept the ideas about forces and motion that Newton has presented,
then we may use them to interpret examples and make deductions. Then comes
the thought experiment:
For instance, if two globes, kept at a distance from one another by means of a chord that connects
them, were revolved about their common centre of gravity, we might, from the tension of the chord,
discover the endeavour of the globes to recede from the axis of their motion, and from thence we
might compute the quantity of their circular motions.
Newton elaborates a little more and concludes that:
We might find…the determination of this circular motion, even in an immense vacuum, where there
was nothing external or sensible with which the globes could be compared.
Newton takes the discussion a little further, but I leave that for interested
readers to follow as they wish. This experiment too has provoked great
discussion (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter), and
once again we must recognize the inventive genius at work in the Principia.
5.6. MODERN NOTATION
Throughout the book, an outline of Newton's theory will also be given in its
modern form. I begin with the basic definitions and notations. Newton used
classical geometry where today we use a symbolic, algebraic form. I encourage
everyone, even readers with less-developed mathematical skills, to read over
these sections, because I believe you will gain both a feeling for the modern
theory and, often, a better idea of what Newton was describing.
5.6.1. Kinematics
We begin with the basic problem of specifying a body's position in space and

how that varies with time. (In calculus, differentiating a quantity with respect to
time gives us its derivative, which measures how that quantity is varying with
time. Thus we go from position to velocity, and from velocity to acceleration.)
In modern notation, we begin with a reference frame, often taken to give a set
of Cartesian axes x, y, and z. A “body” or “particle” is assumed small enough
(the idealized “point particle”) so that its position in space is given by the
position vector r = (x, y, z). Where necessary, and for larger bodies, we may sum
or integrate over the collection of smaller particles forming that body, a
procedure Newton uses to great effect.
The position vector r may be represented by an arrow from the coordinate-
system origin to the particle, as in figure 5.4. It has a magnitude r (length of the
arrow), and its direction may be described by the unit vector . (A unit vector has
a length or magnitude of one.) The algebraic form r = (x, y, z) indicates that the
coordinates of the body, x, y, and z, are the components of r.
The velocity vector v and the acceleration vector a of the particle are given by
differentiation with respect to time t. If we use Newton's dot notation (which is
neat and concise and does still appear in mechanics texts, although not widely in
most other mathematics and science writing) so that a dot over a symbol
indicates the derivative,

then
The vector v is tangent to the particle's path, and its magnitude gives the speed
(see figure 5.4).
Figure 5.4. Position and velocity vectors for a particle at the point P with coordinates x, y, and z. The
velocity vector v is tangent to the particle's path. In the illustrated example, motion is confined to the x–y or
z = 0 plane.
If our coordinate system is attached to an inertial frame, then a particle
initially (time t = 0) at the origin, r = (0, 0, 0,), say, and moving with speed s in
the x direction will have the position vector r = (st, 0, 0) for all future times if no
forces are acting on it. Similarly, if it was initially at rest at the origin, it would
remain there until such time as a force acted on it.
5.6.2. Introducing Dynamical Quantities
A body with mass m has momentum p = mv. Momentum, like velocity, is a
vector quantity; it has both magnitude and direction. (Ignoring that directional
property caused problems in some early studies in dynamics; Descartes slipped

up in this way.) If more than one body is present, we use subscripts to label the
relevant vectors, so r2 is the position vector for particle 2. Then for two particles,
Newton defines the following:
total momentum = p1 + p2 = m1v1 + m2v2.
A force is represented by the vector F. The magnitude F of F tells us the size
of the force, and the direction of F indicates the direction in which the force acts
on a particle. For Newton's special case of a centripetal force acting on a particle,
where  is the unit vector pointing away from the origin along the position vector
r (see figure 5.4). The center of force has been chosen as the origin for the
position vector r. If F = 6, say, the force has magnitude 6 in some units and is
pointing away from the origin, so it is repelling the particle. If a minus sign is
introduced, we have F = –6  = 6(– ), so now we have a force of magnitude 6
acting in the –  direction, which is back toward the origin. This is an attractive
force.
5.6.3. Moving between Reference Frames
Consider two reference frames (such as the ship and the Earth in Newton's
example) in which the x axes are in relative motion. Let us call the second
coordinate xobs,1 so that it could be an observer watching a passenger using the
coordinate x on a train (as in Einstein's favorite example). If the train has
constant speed s, then particle 1 has passenger and observer coordinates linked
by
assuming that the origins coincide when t = 0. In the two reference frames, the
particle speeds 1 and obs,1 are related by
This is the sort of equation Newton used when working out relative speeds for
the sailor on the moving ship.
Notice that if we have a second particle, then the distance between particles is

the same in both coordinate systems:
The differentiating equation (5.4) shows that the particle accelerations are also
measured to be the same in the two coordinate systems or frames of reference, as
long as the relative speed s remains constant:
5.7. DISCUSSION
It is remarkable that in just the first five pages, Newton has defined the key
quantities to be used in mechanics and indicated how inertia and forces combine
to explain how motion works (for a summary, see figure 5.5).
There are now two challenges. The first challenge is to develop these ideas
into a mathematical formalism that may be applied to a variety of problems, and
that is what Newton does in the rest of the Principia. The second challenge is to
find the mechanisms behind the forces (or risk being accused of using occult
notions). Newton does not respond to that in the Principia; his position is made
clear both here (“for I design only to give a mathematical notion of those forces,
without considering their causes and seats”) and at other points later in the book.
It is amusing to compare the words used three hundred years later by Murray
Gell-Mann after his Nobel Prize–winning work on quarks, the entities forming
and locked inside protons, neutrons, and other “elementary particles”:
I referred to such quarks as “mathematical”, explaining carefully what I meant by the term, and
contrasted them with what I called “real quarks”, which would be capable of emerging so that they
could be detected singly. The reason for the choice of language is that I didn't want to face arguments
with philosophically inclined critics demanding to know how I could call quarks “real” if they were
always hidden.5
Newton's fundamental ideas remain as the basis for classical mechanics. Some
books (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section for details) give an
introductory discussion something like that of Newton's; for example, see
Thomson (Lord Kelvin) and Tait (writing in 1888 that “we cannot do better, at
all events in commencing, than to follow Newton somewhat closely”6), or the
1942 Sommerfeld classic, or the 1966 Kibble text, or the 2004 Thornton and
Marion book. Others are much less forthcoming, and Goldstein's highly
acclaimed and sophisticated book opens thusly:

Basic to any presentation of mechanics are a number of fundamental physical concepts, such as
space, time, simultaneity, mass and force. For the most part, however, these concepts will not be
critically analyzed here; rather, they will be assumed as undefined terms whose meanings are familiar
to the reader.7
Perhaps even more remarkable is the fact that Newton has already identified
the puzzle of mass, with its involvement in two apparently distinct roles (inertia
and weight or gravitation), and the need for an analysis of the part played in
physics by time and space. These deep and most-fundamental problems
remained puzzling for over two hundred years, until Einstein appeared on the
scene. (For many people, they remain puzzling!)
Einstein's theory of special relativity uses inertial frames of reference (just as
Newton understood them) but incorporated other laws (those describing
electrodynamics) into the physics and mechanics. However, Einstein also
introduced the fact that the speed of light is the same in all inertial frames of
reference, no matter what their relative motions are. That led to a new approach
to time and simultaneity. It also means that the transformations between
descriptions in different frames of reference must be changed, so the rules used
by Newton in his sailing-ship example and used in equation (5.4) must be
modified. However, it is vitally important to note that the introduced corrections
depend on the speed s of the particles being studied through the ratio s2/c2,
where c is the speed of light, equal to 3 × 105 kilometers per second. Although s
might be large in some elementary-particle-physics processes, in everyday use it
is very small relative to c. For example, for a speed s of 1,000 kilometers per
hour, s2/c2 is about 10−12, or one part in a million million; the corrections are
negligible, and Newton's mechanics can be used with great accuracy.

In 1916 Einstein went on to present his general theory of relativity. The great
clue for Einstein was that puzzling equality of inertial and gravitational masses.
He produced a whole new theory of gravity linked to the geometry of space and
time. Newton has bodies moving in a three-dimensional space and described by
Euclidean geometry. Einstein has matter influencing space-time, controlling its
geometry, and, hence, the way particles move in it. Matter, space, and time are
inextricably linked. Newton's puzzle with mass might be removed, but the
conceptual questions around space still stir debate to this very day (see the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter). Finally we should note
that, once again, for everyday situations (and even far beyond them),
approximations may be made in Einstein's theory, and the result is that we are
led back to Newton's mechanics.
5.8. FURTHER READING
For the history of this subject, consult the books listed at the end of chapters 2
and 3. Highly recommended for history and analysis are the articles by DiSalle,

Cohen, and Smith in:
 
The Cambridge Companion to Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002).
 
There are a great many books on classical mechanics. Here is a short personal-
favorites list of both old and recent books:
 
Barger, V. D., and M. G. Olsson. Classical Mechanics: A Modern Perspective.
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Goldstein, Herbert, C. Poole, and J. Safko. Classical Mechanics. 3rd ed. 1950.
Reprint, New York: Addison-Wesley, 2002.
Kibble, T. W. B. Classical Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.
Sommerfeld, Arnold. Mechanics: Lectures on Theoretical Physics. Vol. 1. 1942.
Reprint, New York: Academic Press, 1964.
Thomson, Sir William (Lord Kelvin), and P. G. Tait. Principles of Mechanics
and Dynamics. 1888. Reprint, New York: Dover Press, 1962.
Thornton, S. T., and J. B. Marion. Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems.
5th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson, 2004.
 
Recent, very approachable books on the origin of mass and time, their
histories, and their measurement include the following:
 
Callender, C., and R. Edney. Introducing Time. Royston, UK: Icon Books, 2004.
Jones, Tony. Splitting the Second: The Story of Atomic Time. Bristol, UK: IoP
Publishing, 2000.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being: Mass, Ether, and the Unification of
Forces. New York: Basic Books, 2008.
 
Two books about thought experiments are listed below. (Both take Newton's
bucket experiment as a thought experiment, even though he clearly writes “as I
have experienced.”)
 
Brown, J. R. The Laboratory of the Mind: Thought Experiments in the Natural
Sciences. 2nd. ed. New York: Routledge, 2011.
Cohen, Martin. Wittgenstein's Beetle and Other Classic Thought Experiments.
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005. [a “popular” book]
 
The material in this chapter is linked to the theory of relativity; books on that

subject cover and debate the issues involved. The first two books listed below
are classics by masters of the subject and do not require the reader to have much
background therein. The third is a modern example of a nontechnical book. The
next three are technical treatments (although some of the discussion sections are
not too difficult). The final book (highly recommended and very readable)
assesses the subject and surveys the experimental confirmation of the accuracy
of the various theories of dynamics.
 
Einstein, Albert. Relativity: The Special and General Theory. 15th ed. New
York: Crown Publishers, 1952.
Eddington, Sir Arthur. Space, Time and Gravitation: An Outline of the General
Relativity Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920. [later
reprinted by other publishers]
Stannard, Russell. Relativity: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008.
Rindler, Wolfgang. Essential Relativity. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold,
1969.
Weinberg, Steven. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: John Wiley, 1972.
Lambourne, R. J. A. Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Will, Clifford. Was Einstein Right? 2nd. ed. New York: Basic Books, 1993.
 
There is an enormous literature on the topic of space and time. Appendix V,
“Relativity and the Problem of Space,” in the above book by Einstein contains
some of his final thoughts on the subject. For some history and a range of
viewpoints, see:
 
Grant, Edward. Much Ado about Nothing: Theories of Space and Vacuum from
the Middle Ages to the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981.
Huggett, Nick. Space from Zeno to Einstein: Classic Readings with a
Contemporary Commentary. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999.
 
Here are references to Mach's original criticism of Newton's ideas, two recent
papers discussing the Scholium, and a list of some of the very useful entries in
the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP) (http://plato.stanford.edu):
 
DiSalle, Robert. Space and Time: Inertial Frames. SEP.
Huggett, Nick, and Carl Hoefer. Absolute and Relational Theories of Space and

Motion. SEP.
Laymon, Ronald. “Newton's Bucket Experiment.” Journal of the History of
Philosophy 16 (1978): 399–413.
Mach, Ernst. The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its
Development. 1893. Reprint, La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing, 1960.
Rynasiewicz, Robert. “By Their Properties, Causes and Effects: Newton's
Scholium on Time, Space, Place and Motion.” Studies in the History and
Philosophy of Science 26 (1995): 133–53.
———. Newton's Views on Space, Time and Motion. SEP.

With those preliminaries taken care of, Newton is now ready to set out his
famous laws of motion and to identify some immediate consequences. As you
might expect, there is an enormous interest in the details and history of this
subject; some references are given later in this chapter, in the “Further Reading”
section. My approach is to follow Newton's text and his discussions without too
much attention to origins and the particular nuances that so fascinate some
people. I concentrate on what Newton bequeathed to us in the final, third edition
of the Principia, and I use his own words as much as possible.
This part of the Principia extends over sixteen pages and comprises the laws
of motion, six Corollaries, and a final Scholium in which Newton discusses
justifications and examples of the laws in action. It gives the last of the basics to
be put in place before Newton begins the mathematical treatment of dynamics in
Book I.
6.1. THE LAWS OF MOTION
Newton headed this part of his book “Axioms, or Laws of Motion.” The word
axioms reminds us of texts on Euclidean geometry, and we know from his
preface that Newton had great respect for that subject and its use both as a tool
and as a model for his treatment of mechanics.
6.1.1. The First Law
LAW I. Every body perseveres [remains] in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right [straight]
line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed thereon.
Newton gives the example of a projectile that would follow a straight-line
path but for the effects of air resistance (which destroys the uniformity) and
gravity (which bends the path). Obviously Newton is considering motion with
respect to an inertial frame of reference, and he discusses that a little later.

6.1.2. The Second Law
LAW II. The alteration [change] of motion is ever proportional to the motive force impressed; and is
made in the direction of the right line in which that force is impressed.
Notice that Newton uses the word proportional and he does not write down an
equation. (More on that in the next chapter.) Also, he uses the word motion,
implying that he is talking about the change in momentum, which is what the
second law is really all about. (See section 6.6 for the modern formulation and
interpretation.)
In his discussion, Newton shows us the thoroughness and care he takes in his
formulation as he notes two important facets of this law. First, the change is
linear in the force, therefore:
If any force generates a motion, a double force will generate double the motion, a triple force triple
the motion [and so on].
Second, the force may change an existing motion, but only in the direction of
its application:
And this motion (being always directed the same way with the generating force), if the body moved
before, is added to or subtracted from the former motion, according as they directly conspire with or
are directly contrary to each other; or obliquely joined when they are oblique, so as to produce a
new motion compounded from the determination of both.
Today this is probably just taken as a property of the vector nature of force
and motion (hopefully to be appreciated by the student at some stage!) rather
than explicitly spelled out as Newton does here.
The second law is the key to Newton's mathematical formulation of
mechanics, and so it is worthwhile to look carefully at what he is saying. Notice
that Newton talks about “the alteration [change] of motion,” whereas today we
tend to begin with the rate of change (again, see section 6.6 for the modern
formulation). Newton is talking about an impulse (as when two bodies collide),
and his first comment on Law II given above continues, “whether that force be
impressed altogether and at once, or gradually and successively.” We shall see
later, in chapter 8, that Newton uses a limiting process to deal with cases where
the force acts continually. He certainly does understand such cases (and the role
of mass), as this quote from the discussion of Proposition XXIV in Book II
indicates:
For the velocity which a given force can generate in a given matter in a given time is as the force and
the time directly, and the matter [mass] inversely. The greater the force or the time is, or the less the

matter, the greater the velocity will be generated. This is manifest from the second Law of Motion.
In the Scholium coming up shortly, he gives the example of gravity, which
may be taken as constant locally near the Earth:
When a body is falling, the uniform force of its gravity acting equally, impresses, in equal intervals of
time, equal forces upon that body, and therefore generates equal velocities; and in the whole time
impresses a whole force, and generates a whole velocity proportional to the time.
This seems to be a case where Newton could have been more explicit (less
“slipshod,” as we saw Whiteside complaining in section 3.4) and perhaps saved
some confusion and debate around his second law by immediately expanding his
comment on forces “gradually and successively” instead of leaving it to later
applications.
6.1.3. The Third Law
LAW III. To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction; or, the mutual actions of two
bodies upon each other are always equal, and directed to contrary parts.
As homely illustrations, Newton points out that “if you press a stone with your
finger, the finger is also pressed by the stone.” This law also tells us about forces
transmitted by the rope used when a horse pulls a stone.
The enunciation of the third law is one of Newton's greatest achievements. It
is crucial for moving beyond cases of a single body moving under the action of
given forces to those dealing with several interacting bodies. The simplest case
concerns the collision between two bodies, and Newton comments:
If a body impinge upon another and by its force change the motion [momentum] of the other, that
body also (because of the equality of the mutual pressure) will undergo an equal change, in its own
motion, towards the contrary part. The changes made by these actions are equal, not in the velocities
but in the motions of bodies; that is to say if the bodies are not hindered by any other impediments.
For, because the motions [momentums] are equally changed the changes of the velocities made
towards contrary parts are reciprocally proportional to the bodies [their masses]. [In other words, the
magnitudes of the changes in the bodies’ momentums are the same, but because momentum is mass
multiplied by velocity, the velocity changes depend on the masses.] This law takes place also in
attractions, as will be proved in the next SCHOLIUM.
6.2. MORE THAN ONE FORCE
There will be cases in which more than one force acts simultaneously on a body;
for example, the Moon is subject to gravitational forces from both the Earth and

the Sun, and a projectile is subject to gravity and the force produced by air
resistance. Newton spells out what today is commonly referred to as the
parallelogram rule. He first deals with effects and then with manipulation of the
forces themselves.
COROLLARY 1. A body, by two forces conjoined will describe the diagonal of a parallelogram in the
same time that it would describe the sides by those forces apart [separately].
    If a body in a given time, by the force M impressed apart in the place A, should with an uniform
motion be carried from A to B, and by the force N impressed apart in the same place, should be
carried from A to C, complete the parallelogram ABCD, and, by both forces acting together, it will
in the same time be carried in the diagonal from A to D. [The forces in this example are impulses
acting at A.]
Figure 6.1. Newton's diagram for discussing the first Corollary. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
COROLLARY 2. And hence is explained the composition of any one direct force AD, out of any two
oblique forces AC and CD; and, on the contrary, the resolution of any one direct force AD into two
oblique forces AC and CD: which composition and resolution are abundantly confirmed from
mechanics.
The second Corollary tells us how to combine forces and also how to resolve
a given force into two components (which Newton will need to do later in his
studies of the motion of the Moon).
Today a student reading a mechanics text probably accepts the parallelogram
law, usually expressed, or even hidden, in the vector addition of forces, without
any further thought. However, notice Newton's comment: “abundantly
confirmed from mechanics.” He appears to appreciate that these properties of
forces do not follow from the laws of motion but require an independent
statement and justification. Arnold Sommerfeld considered this to be so
important that, in his classic 1942 text, he suggests the parallelogram of forces
should be the fourth law. The assumption is that forces act independently, so
they may be linearly superposed. This physical property of forces is vitally
important for work in mechanics, although it is not universally true in all
branches of physics (see references given in this chapter's “Further Reading”
section).
Newton ends his discussion of the second Corollary by noting its widespread
importance in practical systems:

For from hence are easily deduced the forces of machines, which are compounded of wheels, pullies,
levers, cords, and weights, ascending directly or obliquely, and other mechanical powers; as also the
force of the tendons to move the bones of animals.
6.3. CONSEQUENCES
Newton is now ready to give us two of the great general results in mechanics,
results that are of major significance physically and that also allow us to take
simplifying steps in the mathematical theory. These results lean heavily on the
third law and show the transition from one particle being acted on by given
forces to a system of particles mutually interacting through their various forces.
COROLLARY 3. The quantity of motion [momentum], which is collected [found] by taking the sum of
the motions directed towards the same parts, and the difference of those that are directed to contrary
parts, suffers no change from the action of bodies among themselves.
For a system of particles with no external forces acting on them, the total
momentum is constant. This is the conservation of momentum. Newton shows
how this follows from his third law; in section 6.6, the argument is given in
modern notation.
Notice that momentum is a vector quantity so we must carefully use
appropriate signs to take account of directions. This is something Descartes
appeared to have trouble with. It is also interesting to see that, for Newton, this
conservation law follows mathematically from the laws of motion, whereas for
Descartes (in his Principles of Philosophy), “God is the primary cause of
motion; and that He always maintains an equal quantity of it.”1
Newton considers collisions of two bodies in his discussion of Corollary 3, as
the total momentum must be the same before and after the collision. In an
impressive measure of his thoroughness, he notes that the case where the
collision is not “head-on” (“moving in different right lines, impinge obliquely
one upon the other”) can be dealt with by examining how the impact occurs and
using the resolution result presented in Corollary 2. You can find the theory of
oblique collisions in modern textbooks, for example, see Thornton and Marion
or Barger and Olsson.
There is also something that can be said about the motion of the whole
system:
COROLLARY 4. The common centre of gravity of two or more bodies does not alter its state of
motion or rest by the actions of the bodies among themselves; and therefore the common centre of
gravity of all bodies acting upon each other (excluding outward [external] actions and impediments)

is either at rest, or moves uniformly in a right [straight] line.
For the cases considered here, we can equivalently use the center of mass (the
average position of the bodies weighted by their masses). Newton gives an
argument for this Corollary based on the laws, and in section 6.6, I give the
modern derivation. This property of the center of mass will be vitally important
when dealing with planetary motion and the solar system (see chapter 23).
6.4. REFERENCE FRAMES AND RELATIVITY
The final two Corollaries very clearly set out Newton's ideas about what today
we might call relativity principles.
COROLLARY 5. The motions of bodies included in a given space are the same amongst themselves,
whether that space is at rest, or moves uniformly forwards in a right line without any circular motion.
Newton discusses this in terms of his laws and then gives the physical picture:
A clear proof of which we have from the experiment of a ship; where all motions happen after the
same manner, whether the ship is at rest, or is carried uniformly in a right line.
This example was given by Galileo (with rather more colorful descriptions of
life in the ship's cabin). By the time of Einstein, it was common to use trains
instead of ships, and today, airplanes take over! In the previous chapter, we saw
how Newton used the motion of a ship to explain how relative velocities are to
be calculated when comparing these different situations. That allows us to move
between the inertial frames of reference to which this Corollary is linked.
Consideration of physics in different and uniformly moving reference frames
is the business of relativity theory, and Corollary 5 is a statement of the classic
theory that Einstein modified to produce his special theory of relativity, as
discussed earlier in section 5.7.
6.4.1. A Remarkable Extension
Einstein went on to consider frames of reference related in other ways, and that
led to his general theory. It is a measure of Newton's genius that he too thought
about other situations and gave a result that would be used in Book III when
discussing planets and their moons, a key topic in establishing his theory of
gravitation (see chapter 22). His result is:

COROLLARY 6. If bodies, any how moved among themselves, are urged in the direction of parallel
lines by equal accelerative forces, they will continue to move among themselves, after the same
manner as if they had not been urged by those forces.
Newton adds an explanation that also makes clear how the term equal
accelerative forces means forces proportional to the mass of the body acted upon
(obviously with gravitation in mind). Then:
For these forces acting equally (with respect to the quantities of the bodies to be moved), and in the
direction of parallel lines, will (by Law II) move all the bodies equally (as to velocity), and therefore
will never produce any change in the positions or motions of the bodies among themselves.
Here is a case then where the “excluding outward [external] actions and
impediments” caveat, as in Corollary 4, may be removed and a useful result still
obtained. (It is amusing to note that Einstein considered locally parallel
gravitational forces in his famous laboratory in a rocket-ship thought experiment
leading up to general relativity!)
6.5. NEWTON'S SCHOLIUM
It is hardly surprising to find that such a comprehensive basis for mechanics is
followed by a discussion section that contains both justifications and illustrations
of the above material. What is surprising is that Newton begins by saying that
Galileo used the first two laws in his work on projectiles. This untypical
generosity seems to be stretching it a bit; Galileo still retains vestiges of perfect
circular motion in his ideas about inertia and does not introduce forces or use
anything like Newton's second law. It might have been more appropriate to
mention Descartes, but Newton was not too well disposed toward him (and, in
fact, parts of the Principia seem to be designed specifically to discredit
Descartes's theories).
Newton shows how his thinking gives the results for projectile motion and,
furthermore,
On the same Laws and Corollaries depend those things which have been demonstrated concerning
the times of vibration of pendulums, and are confirmed by daily experiments of pendulum clocks.
Newton moves on to collisions as it is there that the third law reveals its
importance. He acknowledges the work of Christopher Wren, John Wallis, and
Christiaan Huygens, as well as the colliding-pendulum experiments of
Frenchman Edme Mariotte. Newton carried out his own refined experimental
program using pendulums with both equal and unequal bobs. In order to obtain

the greatest accuracy, he devised a method for correcting for air resistance.
Figure 6.2 reproduces Newton's diagram, and the marks show how he measured
swings to make the necessary corrections in the experiments in which the
pendulum bobs A and B collide. He took great care with these experiments,
using ten-foot pendulums; the Scholium contains a detailed report. In addition to
hard balls, like steel and glass, he also investigated collisions using a variety of
softer materials, like balls of wool and cork. In effect, he introduced what today
we call the coefficient of restitution as a measure of the change in relative
velocities—just another passing touch of brilliance. (See the modern texts listed
in section 6.9.1, “To Help as We Read the Principia.”) After everything, he
concludes:
And thus the third Law, so far as it regards percussions and reflections, is proved by a theory exactly
agreeing with experience.
Figure 6.2. Newton's figure for colliding pendulums, showing how he marked the points of successive
swings in order to correct for air resistance. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1995].)
He next tackles the case of attractive forces, beginning with another thought
experiment. Two bodies, A and B, are attracting one another, and an object is
placed between them so that the bodies now press on the intervening obstacle.
Newton argues that unless the attractions are equal and opposite, the whole
system will “go forward in infinitum with a motion perpetually accelerated;
which is absurd and contrary to the first Law.” He concludes that the bodies
must press equally on the obstacle and “be equally attracted one by the other.”
He states that he also “made the experiment on the loadstone [magnet] and iron.
If these, placed apart in proper vessels, are made to float by one another in
standing water, neither of them will propel the other; but, by being equally
attracted, they will sustain each other's pressure, and rest at last in equilibrium.”
Obviously Newton wanted to be sure that his major innovation, the third law,
was correct, so he gives a further (somewhat curious and not altogether
convincing) example involving planes cutting opposite, symmetrical sections of
the Earth. He argues that, unless the attractions are equal, “the whole Earth

floating in the nonresistant aether would give way to the greater weight, and,
retiring from it, would be carried off in infinitum”!
The Scholium concludes with a discussion of the importance of his laws of
motion for understanding clocks, balances, pulleys, screw presses, mallets, and
other practical devices. It is clear that Newton did not see his work as just some
abstract theoretical notion, but that its physical validity could be perceived in all
the mechanical devices around us.
6.6. MODERN FORMULATION
This is a continuation of the basis set out in section 5.6. The task is to put the
laws of motion and their consequences into algebraic form using simple ideas
from calculus.
Asked what is Newton's law of motion, a great many people will respond “F
= ma” and, using the notation introduced in section 5.6, we can indeed write for
a particle of mass m
as a modern form of Newton's second law. If we recall that acceleration a is the
time derivative of the velocity v, and that mv is the momentum p, we can rewrite
equation (6.1) as
(I have dropped Newton's dot notation for derivatives to use the more
conventional notation.) The first form for equation (6.2) also assumes the mass
m is a constant. This is not really the law as Newton gave it because equation
(6.2) expresses the rate of change of the momentum. To go to Newton's form,
we assume a constant force, say F0, then the rate of change of p is constant, and
equation (6.2) implies that
the change in the particle's momentum
= F0 multiplied by the time it is acting.
Newton gives the limiting form of this for an impulse and then generalizes to
continually acting forces, as we saw above.
In the general case, by integrating equation (6.2), we find the momentum p(t)

at times t1 and t2 is given by
For the constant force F0, this becomes
This is the algebraic expression for Newton's general change of momentum
result.
When two forces, say F1 and F2, are acting on a particle, the total force is
Ftotal = F1 + F2,
which is just the algebraic-vector form of the diagrammatic parallelogram rule
for combining forces. Newton's diagram is just the geometric representation of
the algebraic formula for the addition of two vectors.
6.6.1. The Third Law and Conservation of Momentum
If we have two interacting particles, the second law equations of motion are
where F12 is the force exerted by particle 2 on particle 1, and F21 is the force
exerted by particle 1 on particle 2 (see figure 6.3). Now, by Newton's third law,
those two forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction, so F21 = −F12
and equations (6.4) can be written as
If we add these two equations, we get
This tells us that if particles 1 and 2 interact through forces obeying Newton's

third law, then their total momentum does not vary with time. Thus, we have
conservation of momentum:
This derivation can be extended to cover any number of particles interacting
among themselves.
Figure 6.3. Position vectors for bodies 1 and 2 and their center of mass C.
6.6.2. The Center-of-Mass Theorem
For two particles, the position vector for the center of mass rcm is defined by
See figure 6.4. Taking the time derivative of that equation (and recalling that
mdr/dt = mv = p), we find

However, equation (6.6) tells us that (p1 + p2) is constant, so drcm/dt, the
velocity with which the center of mass moves, is also a constant (which I call
vcm0). Thus the position of the center of mass is given by
We have shown that the center of mass moves with a uniform velocity vcm0 or
remains at rest at the time t = 0 position, rcm0, as Newton showed. The derivation
can be readily extended to any number of particles.
6.6.3. Frames of Reference
Newton's laws are to be used with inertial frames of reference. If no force is
acting on a particle, equation (6.1) tells us that
From equation (6.9), we see that the particle is moving with constant velocity
v0, or it is at rest (v0 = 0) at r = r0, as the first law requires. If a second inertial
reference frame is moving relative to the first one with constant velocity w0, then
an observer using that second frame of reference will report
v = v0 + w0 and r = (v0 + w0)t + r0,
and the first law is still satisfied.
If particles are interacting through forces depending on only the distance
between them, then transforming to a different reference frame still gives the
same equations for their internal motion since, as we saw in section 5.6, both
those interparticle distances and accelerations remain unchanged when different
inertial reference frames are used.
I will return to the case with particular external forces, as in Corollary 4, in a
later chapter.
6.7. DISCUSSION
Newton has now set out the formalism to be used for mechanical problems,
essentially the same formalism we use today. (Perhaps rather than simply
“mechanics,” we should say “point mechanics,” because some problems with

composite bodies require summation or integration over the small bodies
forming them; there are theory extensions as made later by Leonard Euler and
others—see chapter 28.) Newton has also established some general
consequences; that is, he has shown how the laws of motion lead directly to
certain results that do not depend on specific force details. That process has
become a standard part of theoretical physics, and conservation of momentum
remains an essential part of the foundations of physics.
We have also begun to see Newton's mathematical style, which might be
called geometrical and rhetorical rather than algebraic (as in the modern
formulation just given). The Scholium demonstrates that Newton also recognizes
the importance of experiments for justifying and confirming his theoretical
approach. We see that Newton himself was a skilled and innovative
experimentalist, a natural extension of his childhood toys and model-making
enterprises.
In keeping with his commitment to the mechanical philosophy (see chapters 2
and 4), Newton emphasizes the importance of particles directly interacting
through collisions, and he refers to both his own and others’ experimental and
theoretical work in support of his formalism. He was probably unaware of or
chose not to use Huygens neat use of different reference frames for solving the
problem of the collision of two equal bodies. Observer 1 sees body 1 with speed
s approaching a second body at rest and wishes to know what will be the result
of the collision. To solve this problem, Huygens imagines an observer 2 moving
toward body 2 with speed s/2 relative to observer 1; now for observer 2, the
bodies are each moving with speed s/2, as shown in figure 6.4. (Huygens
imagines one observer in a moving boat and the other on the river bank.) For
observer 2, the situation is symmetrical and obviously the bodies bounce off
each other with equal speeds. This final state will be viewed by observer 1 as a
stationary first body and the second one now moving off with speed s. Notice
that, for observer 2, the center of mass is at rest (at all times, of course), and this
use of “the center-of-mass frame” has become an important technique for
analyzing problems in modern physics. This is a beautiful example of Newton's
Corollaries 3, 4, and 5 in operation.

Figure 6.4. Outline of Huygens's collision theory.
6.7.1. The Meaning of the Laws
There has been much analysis of and debate about Newton's laws and his
struggles toward the formulation of the theory of mechanics (see this chapter's
“Further Reading” section). I will deal with only one important point, which
concerns the status of the laws and definitions of mechanical quantities. The
second law involves force and mass, and some people see philosophical or
methodological problems here: What are those two things; and is the second law
just a definition of force? I follow the lead of physicists. Rudolf Peierls was one
of the greatest physicists in the twentieth century, and here he is in The Laws of
Nature:
People sometimes argue whether Newton's second law is a definition of force or of mass, or whether
it is a statement of an objective fact. It is really a mixture of all these things; and as this is a very
typical situation for a physical law, it is worth making this point quite clear.2
First, I consider mass. Suppose we have a force, magnitude F acting in the x
direction, and we measure the accelerations given to two particles by that same
force. According to equation (6.1), we will find
This means that once we choose a reference mass m1, all other masses may be
determined in terms of it using equation (6.10). One may object that arranging
such a force is virtually impossible, but if we let the two particles interact, then
the third law tells us that they are both acted on by the same force but with
opposite directions. For this case, equation (6.10) becomes
Thus, in principle, at least, the laws tell us how to measure the inertial mass of
a particle. We may go on to deduce properties of the inertial mass—see the
Kibble source, for example. (Of course, as mentioned in chapter 5, once we
know that inertial and gravitational masses are the same, it is easy to find mass
by weighing. Newton revisits this point in Book III.)
This approach to laws and the concepts involved in them is important; it is
worth reading the strong statement made by physicist Taylor and theoretical
physicist Wheeler in their acclaimed book Spacetime Physics:

All the laws of physics have this deep and subtle character, in that they both define for us the needful
concepts and make statements about these concepts. Contrariwise, the absence of some body of
theory, law, and principle deprives us of a means properly to use or even define concepts. How far
out of date is that view of science which used to say, “Define your terms before you proceed”! The
truly creative nature of any step forward in human knowledge is such that theory, concept, law, and
method of measurement—forever inseparable—are born into the world in union.3
That is the “operational” approach taken by the physicist. However, to use
Newton's theory, we also need to have a way of specifying forces since,
otherwise, as Einstein stressed, the theory is logically incomplete. We should
take a lead from master expositor and physics Nobel laureate Richard Feynman:
The real content of Newton's laws is this: that the force is supposed to have some independent
properties, in addition to the law F = ma; but the specific independent properties that the force has
were not completely described by Newton or by anybody else, and therefore the physical law F = ma
is an incomplete law.4
Finding the appropriate form for the force is a part of physics. Newton did it
for the gravitational force and made progress toward finding the force due to air
resistance. Charles-Augustin de Coulomb found the form of the force to be used
for the electrical interaction between charged particles. Johannes Diderik van der
Waals discovered a formula for modeling the force between molecules in order
to study properties of a gas (something Newton alluded to in his Preface). For
each new physical situation under consideration, the scientist must find the form
of the force to use in F = ma, and that is an independent piece of physics, as
Feynman explained. Of course, before they are used to study other phenomena,
suggested force types are checked by using F = ma and seeing how well the
results fit the observational data. This is really what Newton's program as set out
in the Preface is all about: “for all the difficulty of philosophy seems to consist in
this—from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature, and
then from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena.”
We can also substitute various mathematical forms for the force in the
equations of motion and then explore theoretically what sorts of results they
produce. In that way, we can have ready a set of results against which
experimental data can be compared in order to pick out the most suitable force
type. This is exactly what Newton does in the Principia.
6.7.2. A Great Piece of Physics Is Put in Place
The second law is one of Newton's great (if not his greatest) contributions to
physics. Recall that before Newton, the work of people like Kepler and Galileo

was essentially kinematics and, to repeat (from chapter 3) Einstein's words:
We have to realize that before Newton there existed no self-contained system of physical causality
which was somehow capable of representing any of the deeper features of the empirical world.5
The equation for the second law has, on one side, quantities characterizing the
moving body (mass and position and change of position with time), and, on the
other, a quantity (force) that describes how the world acts on that body to give its
dynamical path. Thus the planetary paths described by Kepler are related to the
force of gravity or to a “deeper feature of the empirical world.” This use of
forces is Newton's great step forward, and his third law tells us how to use forces
when they result from the interaction of two bodies.
We are so familiar with Newton's laws of motion that it is easy to miss the
remarkable step forward in physics they represent. In recent times, that obvious
form, “F = ma,” has been questioned by certain astrophysicists. The result has
been a modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND) in which the right-hand side
changes from the simple ma form to something else when very small
accelerations are involved. MOND has been introduced in response to
astronomical observations that seem to require the presence of large amounts of
“dark matter” for their explanation. MOND offers an alternative approach in
which force laws are unchanged but the basic dynamics is varied. There are now
experimental tests of Newton's second law (see the “Further Reading” section at
the end of this chapter), and so far, the form suggested by Newton seems to be
holding its own.
Those who found the concept of force troublesome and questioned the logical
use of it in physics were relieved when two hundred years after Newton, Einstein
introduced his general theory of relativity for which forces are not required.
Nevertheless, as always, it is worth repeating that Newton's formulation remains
useful and acceptably accurate in all but the most extreme situations. Chapter 28
expands on these topics.
6.8. HIGHLIGHTS SUMMARY
The material in this chapter is of such profound importance in the subject of
dynamics that it is worth making a few summary points. A diagrammatic
summary is given in figure 6.5.
In formulating his three laws of motion, Newton gave the final statement on
inertial motion, showed how to introduce forces and how to add and resolve

them, and explained how the equal-action-and-reaction third law allowed us to
move to a system of interacting particles. Newton set out the framework for
classical mechanics, a framework that remains valid today. Newton took what
was previously known and incorporated it into one coherent system.
Next, Newton demonstrated a most powerful approach for the theorist to
follow: he showed how mathematical manipulations of the framework leads
to general dynamical results, like the conservation of momentum law and the
result for the motion of the center of mass. Today we still follow that quest for
such general results using the approach that Newton pioneered (see chapter 28).
In all of that, we saw the care and thoroughness of Newton's working, and that
carried over into the complementary experimental work, both in thought
experiments and in physical demonstrations. Newton's work with colliding
pendulums showed his attention to detail in the corrections for air resistance and
in the investigation of a range of materials for the collisions. With little fanfare,
he showed how to deal with inelastic collisions and oblique collisions.
Only a scientist of Newton's stature could have produced this great part of the
Principia.

Figure 6.5. Newton's Laws and consequences.
6.9. FURTHER READING
As might be expected, there is an enormous literature on the topic of this chapter.
Apart from the books listed in section 6.9.1, see those by Cohen, Bertoloni Meli,
and Westfall referenced at the end of chapter 2, as well as M. J. Crowe,
Mechanics from Aristotle to Einstein (Santa Fe, NM: Green Lion Press, 2007).
Crowe gives an excerpt from Huygens's paper on colliding bodies; the full

paper can be read at Christiaan Huygens, “The Motion of Colliding Bodies,”
trans. J. Blackwell Isis 68 (1977): 574–97.
Other interesting and very readable articles on this topic are:
 
Cook, I. “Newton's ‘Experimental’ Law of Impacts.” The Mathematical Gazette
70 (1986): 107–14.
Erlichson, H. “The Young Huygens Solves the Problem of Elastic Collisions.”
American Journal of Physics 65 (1997): 149–54.
Hall, A. Rupert. “Mechanics and the Royal Society, 1688–70.” British Journal
for the History of Science 3 (1966): 24–38.
Smith, George E. “The Vis Viva Dispute: A Controversy at the Dawn of
Dynamics.” Physics Today 59 (October 2006): 31–36.
 
A small selection of other relevant papers includes:
 
Lange, Marc. “Why Do Forces Add Vectorially? A Forgotten Controversy in the
Foundations of Classical Mechanics.” American Journal of Physics 79 (2011):
380–88.
Marquit, E. “A Plea for a Correct Translation of Newton's Law of Inertia.”
American Journal of Physics 58 (1990): 867–70.
Pourciau, Bruce. “Newton's Interpretation of Newton's Second Law.” Archive for
the History of the Exact Sciences 60 (2006): 157–207.
———. “Is Newton's Second Law Really Newton's?” American Journal of
Physics 79 (2011): 1015–22.
Whitrow, G. J. “The Laws of Motion.” British Journal for the History of Science
5 (1971): 217–34.
 
The references for Peierls, Feynman, and Taylor and Wheeler are:
 
Feynman, R. P., R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on
Physics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1963.
Peierls, R. E. The Laws of Nature. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1955.
Taylor, Edwin F., and John Archibald Wheeler. Spacetime Physics. San
Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1963.
 
On modifications of Newton's second law, see:
 
Gundlach, J. H. “Laboratory Test of Newton's Second Law for Small
Accelerations.” Physical Review Letters 98 (2007): 150801.

Haycan, Shahen. “What Does It Mean to Modify or Test Newton's Second
Law?” American Journal of Physics 77 (2009): 607–609.
6.9.1. To Help as We Read the Principia
For this and the following chapters, valuable commentaries on the Principia may
be consulted in:
Brackenridge, J. Bruce. The Key to Newton's Dynamics. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1995.
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995. [do not be fooled by the title; this is a highly
mathematical book]
Cohen, I. Bernard. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The
Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999.
Cohen, I. Bernard, and George E. Smith, eds. The Cambridge Companion to
Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Densmore, Dana. Newton's Principia: The Central Argument. Santa Fe, NM:
Green Lion Press, 2003.
Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986.
Guicciardini, Niccolo. Reading the Principia. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
Smith, George E. Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. In the
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://plato.stanford.edu).
Westfall, Richard S. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1980.
 
In particular, to find Newton's mathematical working explained in
considerable detail, see the books by Chandrasekhar and Densmore, also those
by Brackenridge and Guicciardini.
There are many books giving the modern treatment of classical mechanics.
Here are some personal favorites. (Fowles, Goldstein, and Thornton may be
taken as standard modern references; Moulton is an excellent older text.)
 
Barger, V. D., and M. G. Olsson. Classical Mechanics: A Modern Perspective.
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.
Fowles, G. R. Analytical Mechanics. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders College
Publishing, 1986.

Goldstein, Herbert, C. Poole, and J. Safko. Classical Mechanics. 3rd ed. 1950.
Reprint, New York: Addison-Wesley, 2002.
Kibble, T. W. B. Classical Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.
Moulton, F. R. An Introduction to Celestial Mechanics. 2nd ed. 1914. Reprint,
New York: Dover, 1970.
Sommerfeld, Arnold. Mechanics: Lectures on Theoretical Physics. Vol. 1. 1942.
Reprint, New York: Academic Press 1964.
Thornton, S. T., and J. B. Marion. Classical Dynamics of Particles and Systems.
5th ed. Belmont, CA: Thomson, 2004.

Some readers might find the title of this chapter a little threatening.
However, most of it is a discussion about the role and style of
mathematics in the Principia, and about how that impacted Newton
and his contemporaries. Section 7.3 deals with the mathematical base
set out by Newton in the Principia, and section 7.4 presents an example
of Newton's working alongside a modern version, so that the methods
and styles may be compared. Readers averse to mathematical details
might gloss over those two sections (although section 7.3.5 on
Newton's use of ratios rather than equations and section 7.4.2 on what
we learn from the example contain material that is useful to know
when reading the Principia).
To move beyond the essentially kinematic approach of Galileo and the world of
constant accelerations, two things were needed: some more physics and a
mathematical formalism. In the last three chapters, we saw how Newton gave the
philosophical, conceptual, and physical foundations. To complete the
preliminaries, he now turns to the required mathematics.
While those conceptual foundations were given separately, the mathematical
methods are introduced as the first of the fourteen sections forming Book I of the
Principia. Interestingly, this approach is also taken in two other major
groundbreaking writings. James Clerk Maxwell begins his Treatise of Electricity
and Magnetism with a thirty-one-page preliminary giving the mathematical
methods he intends to use. Albert Einstein's “The Foundation of the General
Theory of Relativity” (the great successor to Newton's theory in the Principia)
comprises fifty-four pages, twenty-two of which form part B, “Mathematical
Aids,” which comes after a discussion of basic physical matters much on the
Principia pattern. (Incidentally, Einstein knew that his theory must contain
Newton's remarkably successful theory, so his section 21 explains “Newton's
Theory as a First Approximation.” In fact, as we saw earlier, it is a very good
first approximation in most cases.)
The role of mathematics in the Principia is a complex topic, and in this
chapter, I enlarge on the brief comments made in chapter 3. Some
mathematically inclined readers might see even this as inadequate, in which case

I refer them to the enormous literature devoted to the subject. References are
given in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter, but I
particularly recommend (and have leaned on) the works of Guicciardini and
Whiteside.
7.1. MATHEMATICS FOR THE PRINCIPIA
Before dealing with the mathematical methods themselves, there are four
questions that might be asked.
7.1.1. Why Does Newton Need Mathematics?
Newton followed in Galileo's footsteps, recognizing the need for mathematics in
science, and we saw him writing in his Preface that “I have endeavoured to
subject the phenomena of nature to the laws of mathematics, I have in this
treatise cultivated mathematics as far as it regards to philosophy.” The key point
is this: mathematics is essential for exploring his formulation of physics. We
shall see that, by using mathematics, Newton leads us inexorably from his laws
to the theory of the solar system and much about the Earth and motion on it. This
“system of physical causality,” as Einstein put it,1 can be manipulated and
developed only by using a mathematical framework.
This contrasts with Descartes's Principia Philosophiae, with its claim that
vortices in the material of the heavens carry the planets around the Sun, but then
giving no accompanying mathematics to show how such a theory can lead to
things like Kepler's laws. Newton was scathing on this point and Descartes's
approach in general:
But if without deriving the properties of things from Phaenomena you feign hypotheses and think by
them to explain all nature you may make a plausible system of Philosophy for getting your self a
name, but your systeme will be little better than a Romance.2
7.1.2. Why Does Newton Need a New Type of Mathematics?
The work of Galileo and Huygens concerns uniform motion, or motion with
constant acceleration, with an emphasis on straight-line motion (as for falling
bodies, either freely or on inclined planes) and circular motion (as in the
constrained motion of a pendulum's bob). Newton is going much further with his
objective (see his Preface) to produce “the science of motions resulting from any

forces whatsoever.” He needs mathematics to deal with that generality and to
allow for particles moving on any sort of curved path.
A plot of speed versus time as used by Galileo for constant acceleration
(equivalent to a constant force) is a straight line. The distance traveled is given
by the area under that line and so requires only knowledge of the area of a
triangle. Newton will need to relate results to the areas under other types of
curves and under even general curves (see section 7.4 for an example). The
velocity of a particle moving along a circular path is in the direction of the
tangent, which was well known to Euclid, but Newton needs to know the
properties of a particle's motion along more complex curves.
Those two requirements can be met only by introducing ideas in the calculus.
Thus, Newton is not just introducing a whole new approach to the physics of
motion, he is also insisting on a whole new branch of mathematics for
formulating and exploring that approach. Einstein too had to introduce a new
mathematical formalism (tensor analysis), but while he could draw on the work
of people like Gauss, Riemann, and Christoffel, for Newton it was a matter of
also developing the mathematical formalism almost from scratch (see section
7.5).
7.1.3. What Guidance Does Newton Give to the Reader?
The Principia is in many ways an uncompromising book, and Newton seems to
have made little attempt to guide the reader through it. It might have helped if,
right at the start, Newton had advised his readers as he does at the start of Book
III: “It is enough if one carefully reads the Definitions, the Laws of Motion, and
the first three sections of the first book. He may then pass on to this book, and
consult such of the remaining Propositions of the first two books, as the
references in this, and his occasion, shall require.” As if even that wasn't a
daunting enough prospect for virtually all readers!
Newton did give some individual advice to Richard Bentley:
Next after Euclid's Elements the Elements of ye Conic sections are to be understood. And for this end
you may read either the first part of ye Elementa Curvarum of John De Witt, or De la Hire's late
treatise of ye conick sections, or Dr Barrow's epitome of Apollonius.
    For Algebra read first Bartholin's introduction & then peruse such Problems as you will find
scattered up & down in ye Commentaries on Carte's Geometry and other Algebraical writings of
Francis Schooten. I do not mean you should read over all those Commentaries, but only ye solutions
of such problems as you will here & there meet with.3
Clearly Newton was assuming a considerable background for the times.

7.1.4. What Are the Implications of All of This?
The use of mathematics, and a new type of mathematics at that, meant reading
the Principia was extremely difficult for all but a few experts, people like
Christiaan Huygens, Gottfried Leibnitz, Pierre Varignon, Abraham de Moivre,
and Richard Cotes. Others could check with those experts that everything did
indeed make sense, or simply give up. (I return to such matters in section 7.5.)
It is interesting to recall that when Einstein's theory of general relativity was
published, it too contained radical new ideas and unfamiliar mathematics and
few people could understand it in any detail. One of those few people was Sir
Arthur Eddington, and there is a lovely story of his being asked whether it was
true that only three people could understand Einstein's work; after a short silence
and on being asked not to be so modest, Eddington finally replied that he was
merely wondering who the third person might be!
A modern reader, even one familiar with mathematics, might still feel baffled
when confronting the Principia for reasons I will make clear in a moment.
However, we should note that it is not so difficult to appreciate what Newton's
Propositions are about and to follow his exposition of classical mechanics (the
main aim of this book), even if we need to consult an expert to unravel his
mathematical proofs. (Of course, for modern readers, a presentation in analytical
form is relatively simple, and that is why I include it in this book.)
7.2. NEWTON'S MATHEMATICAL CHOICES
Newton had to decide on a basic framework for his mathematical developments.
It is one of the great strengths of mathematics that things can be approached in a
variety of equivalent ways, each of which may be particularly useful or apt for a
given application. For example, conic sections may be related to slices through a
cone, seen as curves generated by focus-directrix rules or by projecting a circle
onto various planes or as the result of plotting curves representing second-order
polynomial equations in x and y. This last case belongs to the analytical or
coordinate geometry pioneered by Fermat and Descartes.
Newton studied analytical geometry but also came to appreciate the elegance
and power of Euclidean geometry—recall his Preface statement that “it is the
glory of geometry that from those few principles, brought from without, it is able
to produce so many things.” He had now given “those few principles” for
mechanics and wished to show how the methods of geometrical synthesis could
extract so much from them too. (I return to that point in section 7.5.)

Today the analytical or Cartesian approach seems the natural setting for
calculus, but Newton wished to present it in a more classical geometric form.
Clearly, a mixture of approaches can be discerned in the Principia (see sections
section 7.4 and section 7.5), but Newton sets out his mathematical base in Book I
in the geometric mode.
7.3. SETTING OUT THE MATHEMATICAL
METHODS
Book I begins, then, with Section I: “The Method of First and Last Ratios of
Quantities, by the Help whereof We Demonstrate the Propositions That Follow.”
Before getting to the details, I note that any impression that what follows is all
that is needed is somewhat off the mark. Also, mathematical interludes come
elsewhere in the Principia. For example, Sections IV and V present stunning
geometrical results for fitting orbits in thirteen Lemmas and eleven Propositions,
such as Proposition XXIII: “To find a conic that shall pass through four given
points, and touch a given right line.” The amazing Lemma XXVII, assessing the
possibility of solving a particular transcendental equation, will be discussed
when we come to Section VI. In Section II of Book II, we shall find Lemma II,
where Newton slips in three pages of details of his approach to calculus.
I will discuss in detail three of the eleven lemmas forming Section I as
examples. See section 7.3.4 for a summary in modern terms.
7.3.1. The Idea of a Limit
LEMMA I. Quantities and the ratios of quantities, which in any finite time converge continually to
equality, and before the end of that time approach nearer the one to the other than by any given
difference, become ultimately equal.
Newton adds further explanation in the Scholium for the case of ratios:
For those ultimate ratios with which quantities vanish are not truly the ratios of ultimate quantities,
but limits towards which the ratios of quantities decreasing without limit do always converge; and to
which they approach nearer than by any given difference, but never go beyond, nor in effect attain to,
till the quantities are diminished in infinitum.
It is remarkable how close Newton goes to the modern “ε - δ” form for the
definition of a limit (see the paper by mathematics historian Bruce Pourciau for a
full discussion). It is typical of Newton's writing that no simple example is given

to help the reader. He might have asked about
and, given a table of results showing what happens as x gets closer and closer to
2:
Thus we see “quantities decreasing without limit” while the “ratios converge”
to 7, in this case. Such discussions are readily found in modern calculus texts.
7.3.2. Areas
LEMMA II. If in any figure AacE, terminated by the right lines Aa, AE, and the curve acE, there be
inscribed any number of parallelograms Ab, Bc, Cd &c, comprehended under equal bases AB, BC,
CD, &c, and the sides Bb, Cc, Dd, &c, parallel to one side Aa of the figure; and the parallelograms
AKbl, bLcm, cMdn, &c, are completed: then if the breadth of those parallelograms be supposed to
be diminished, and their number to be augmented in infinitum, I say, that the ultimate ratios which
the inscribed figure AKbLcMdD, the circumscribed figure AalbmcndoE, and the curvilinear figure
AabcdE, will have to one another, are ratios of equality.
Figure 7.1. Newton's figure for Lemma II. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1995].)

The figure shows the area under the curve abcdE approximated by rectangles
(although Newton uses the general term parallelogram), which over-and
underestimate it. In the limit that the number of rectangles is increased “in
infinitum,” the area will be given exactly. Of course, this is the type of limiting
process found in many calculus textbooks to introduce the concept of the integral
as a way to find the area under curves. Lemmas III through V specify various
properties of areas under curves, or integrals, as we might now say. Thus
Lemmas II through V give a version of what today we call integral calculus.
Newton here does not describe curves using a formula with y given as some
function of x, so he does not give the conventional integral y(x)dx. However, he
did know how to evaluate such integrals when required; an example is given in
section 7.4.
7.3.3. Tangents to Curves
LEMMA VI. If any arc ACB, given in position, is subtended by its chord AB, and in any point A, in
the middle of the continued curvature, is touched by a right line AD, produced both ways; then if the
points A and B approach one another and meet, I say, the angle BAD, contained between the chord
and the tangent, will be diminished in infinitum, and ultimately will vanish. [See figure 7.2.]
This is the usual limit process by which tangents are found; in calculus
textbooks, such a process may be used to find the derivative dy/dx for a curve y
= y(x). The other Lemmas introduce similar differential-calculus results (see in
the summary given below).
Figure 7.2. Newton's figure for Lemma VI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1995].)
7.3.4. Modern Forms for Newton's Lemmas
After a detailed analysis, Bruce Pourciau suggests that Newton's Lemmas
expressed in their geometric form may be related to modern calculus as follows:

Calculus
Lemmas
Definition of limit
I
Limit of a difference
 
Definition of the integral
II, III
Existence of the integral
 
Vertical expansion property
IV
Horizontal expansion property
V
Translation invariance property
 
Definition of the first derivative
VI, IX
Derivative of sine
VII, VIII
Definition of the second derivative
XI, X
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
IX
The interested reader is referred to Pourciau's very readable paper.
7.3.5. Ratios and Equations
There are two discussions or Scholiums in Section I. In the second, longer one,
from which I quoted earlier in section 7.3.1, Newton explains more about limits
and how they are to be conceived. The first, much shorter Scholium makes clear
what Newton means by ratios, and after reading it, we can see the step (which he
did not take in most cases) to the equations we are used to today.
SCHOLIUM
If in comparing indetermined quantities of different sorts one with the other, any one is said to be as
any other directly or inversely, the meaning is, that the former is augmented or diminished in the
same ratio with the latter, or with its reciprocal. And if any one is said to be as any other two or
more, directly or inversely, the meaning is, that the first is augmented or diminished in the ratio
compounded of the ratios in which the others, or the reciprocals of the others, are augmented or
diminished.
And to make matters clear, this time Newton does go on to give an example:
As, if A is said to be as B directly, and C directly, and D inversely, the meaning is, that A is
augmented or diminished in the same ratio as B × C × 
, that is to say that A and 
 are to each
other in a given ratio. [Or they are proportional, as we might say.]

Notice that Newton mentions “quantities of different sorts,” and this may hark
back to earlier mathematicians who worried about equations containing different
types of things. For example, in the quadratic expression x2 + x + 6, the x would
be taken as a length and the x2 as an area, so that they would worry about what it
means to combine a length and an area in that way. Today we introduce
appropriate constants. For example, Boyle's law may be taken in Newton's terms
as saying that the pressure P in a gas changes in the same ratio as the
temperature T directly and the volume V inversely; whereas we would write the
equation
Now K is a constant with dimensions chosen so that the whole equation is
dimensionally correct.
Many of the results in the Principia are given in terms of ratios, which we
now routinely convert into equations. In fact, in the modern presentation, we
come directly to that form, as we derive results by manipulating equations to
produce them in equation form.
7.4. OBSERVING NEWTON AT WORK
I will now give a reasonably simple example of Newton's working, with a
modern formulation alongside for comparison. This one example will give you
an idea of the difficulties faced by readers of the Principia, both at publication
time and now. For further examples, see section 10.8 in the Cohen and Whitman
translation of the Principia; Densmore devotes her book to taking readers
through Newton's working; the books by Guicciardini and Brackenridge are
exemplary studies of Newton at work in the Principia and in the papers leading
up to it.
7.4.1. The Example of Proposition XC, Problem XLIV
This is a relatively easy problem to come to grips with, and it lets us appreciate
the combination of methods Newton uses. I will give all the details (for this
particular example), so you can use it as a complete case for comparative study
(if you wish to do so!).

(i–a) Newton Poses the Problem
PROPOSITION XC. PROBLEM XLIV.
If to the several points of any circle [actually a circular disk] there tend equal centripetal forces,
increasing or decreasing in any ratio of the distances; it is required to find the force with which a
corpuscle is attracted, that is, situated anywhere in a right line which stands at right angles to the
plane of the circle at its centre.
(i–b) A Modern Setting
A circular disk of radius R lies in the x–y plane with center at the origin (see
figure 7.3). A particle P is at a height h above the disk on the z axis. If each part
of the disk exerts an attractive central force F(s) per unit area on the particle,
where s is the distance from the disk to the particle, what is the total force
exerted on it by the whole disk?
Figure 7.3. A diagram in the Principia (left) and a diagram for the modern formulation (right). (Left image
from The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
(ii–a) Newton's Solution
Suppose a circle to be described about the centre A with any interval [radius]
AD in a plane to which the right line AP is perpendicular; and let it be required
to find the force which a corpuscle P is attracted towards the same. From any

point E of the circle, to the attracted corpuscle P, let there be drawn the right
line PE. In the right line PA take PF equal to PE and make a perpendicular FK,
erected at F, to be as the force with which the point E attracts the corpuscle P.
And let the curved line IKL be the locus of the point K. Let that curve meet the
plane of the circle in L. In PA take PH equal to PD, and erect the perpendicular
HI meeting that curve in I; and the attraction of the corpuscle P towards the
circle [disk] will be as the area AHIL multiplied by the altitude AP. Q.E.I. [Quod
erat inveniendum—what was to be found.]
(ii–b) Modern Solution
The total force Ftot exerted on particle P is directed toward the origin and has
magnitude
It should be clear that Newton too has given the solution in terms of this
integral, but in his case, it is expressed in the equivalent form of an area under a
curve. We next see how Newton obtains this solution.
(iii–a) Newton's Proof
For let there be taken in AE a very small line Ee. Join Pe, and in PE, PA take [both] PC, Pf equal to
Pe. And because the force, with which any point E of the annulus described about the centre A with
interval [radius] AE in the aforesaid plane attracts to itself the body P, is supposed to be as FK; and,
therefore, the force with which that point attracts the body P towards A is as 
; and the force
with which the whole annulus attracts the body P towards A is as the annulus and 
 conjunctly;
and that annulus also is as the rectangle under the radius AE and the breadth Ee, and this rectangle
(because PE and AE, Ee and CE are proportional) is equal to the rectangle PE × CE or PE × Pf; the
force with which that annulus attracts the body P towards A will be as PE × Ff and 
conjunctly; that is, as the content under Ff × FK × AP or as the area FKkf multiplied by AP. And
therefore the sum of the forces with which all the annuli, in the circle [disk] described about the
centre A with radius AD, attract the body P towards A, is as the whole area AHIKL multiplied by
AP. Q.E.D. [Quod erat demonstrandum—which was to be demonstrated]
(iii–b) The Modern Proof
If we use polar coordinates (r,θ) in the plane of the disk, then a ring in the disk

has radius r and infinitesimal thickness dr as shown in figure 7.3. An
infinitesimal element in the ring has area r × dr × dθ and is at a distance s from
the particle P as shown in figure 7.3. That element exerts a force F(s) × r × dr ×
dθ where F(s) is the magnitude of F(s). The component of that force on P in the
direction of the origin is cos(ø)× F(s) × r × dr × dθ, where ø is the angle shown
in the figure and its cosine is h/s. All elements in that ring have the same angle ø
and so contribute the same to the force on the particle directed toward the origin.
The components of the forces perpendicular to the z axis balance out or cancel
by symmetry.
The total force is given by adding up or integrating over all the rings that form
the disk, and so
The integral over θ is simply done because ø and s do not depend on it, so
neither does the whole integrand. If we now note that
the formula becomes
which is the required answer.
Newton is basically doing the same thing but in his own geometric style.
(iv–a) Example: Power Law Forces—Newton's Working
Newton now gives the answer for some special cases, those where the force
depends inversely on some power of the distance between interacting particles
so that F(s) is inversely proportional to sn. Again I give details so you can
compare old and new approaches.
Cor. 1. Hence if the forces of the points decrease as the square of the distances, that is, if FK be as 
, and therefore the area AHIKL as 
; the attraction of the corpuscle P towards the circle

will be as
Cor. 2. And universally if the forces of the points at the distance D be reciprocally [inversely] as any
power Dn of the distances; that is, if FK be as 
 and therefore the area AHIKL as 
, the
attraction of the corpuscle P towards the centre of the circle will be as 
Notice that Newton gives no details about how he moves from his general
result to this specific example; he never tells us how he evaluates the integral
involved.
(iv–b) Example: Power Law Forces—Modern Working
Let F(s) = g/sn, where g is a constant. Substituting into the formula gives
For the special case n = 2,
(v–a) Newton's Limiting Case
The answer takes on a simple form when the disk becomes very large. Here is
Newton's version:
Cor. 3. And if the diameter of the circle [disk] be increased ad infinitum, and the number n be greater
than unity; the attraction of the corpuscle P towards the whole infinite plane will be reciprocally
[inversely] as PAn−2, because the other term 
 vanishes.
(v–b) Newton's Limiting Case in Modern Form

As the disk becomes very large, R → ∞ and 
. To avoid an
infinity, we take n >1 and obtain the result
7.4.2. What Do We Learn from the Example?
You will draw your own conclusions, but I find four points worthy of note. First,
to our eyes, Newton's methods are unfamiliar and ponderous. We need to
continually and carefully refer to the diagram, much as we do when reading
Euclid's Elements. However, we see the same underlying approach in both
Newton's form and the modern form: set up the problem using infinitesimal
areas and then sum, or integrate, to get the required answer. Newton tends to
present his answers using ratios, whereas today we use equations with
appropriate constants, like the g used in the above equations.
Second, Newton tackles the problem with full generality. No details of the
force are initially needed, and a general integral is produced (in terms of an area
to be found). Then a general power-law force is assumed and a special case (n =
2) is evaluated as an example, one obviously related to gravity.
Third, we see that Newton leaves out the details of vital steps (especially
calculus steps, like evaluating an integral), and this made life even more difficult
for his contemporary readers.
Fourth, we see Newton the sophisticated mathematician squeezing everything
he can out of the general answer by taking the limiting case of an infinitely large
disk. The use of such special cases is perhaps second nature for a modern
theorist, but this was a man writing three hundred years ago.
7.5. CONTROVERSIES
If you read about Newton's personality traits in chapter 1, you will not be
surprised to learn that various confusions and controversies surround the topic of
mathematics and the Principia. We can be sure about the earlier influences on
Newton, as set out in 1728 by Henry Pemberton (who was involved in the
editing of the third edition of the Principia):
Sir Isaac Newton has several times particularly recommended to me Huygens style and manner. He

thought him the most elegant of any mathematical writer of modern times, and the most just imitator
of the ancients. Of their taste and form of demonstration Sir Isaac always professed himself a great
admirer: I have heard him even censure himself for not following them yet more closely than he did;
and speak with regret of his mistake at the beginning of his mathematical studies, in applying himself
to the works of Des Cartes and other algebraic writers before he had considered the elements of
Euclide with that attention, which so excellent a writer deserves.4
This supports Newton's own statements and shows his respect for ancient
geometry and Huygens's use of it. But despite that, Newton did need more than
classical geometry, and the Principia has elements of the calculus blended into
the geometry. We saw that in the example given above and authoritative writers
past (Marquis de l'Hôpital in 1696: “Principia is almost wholly of this
calculus”5) and more recent (Clifford Truesdell in 1968: “a book dense with the
theory and application of infinitesimal calculus”6) are examples of a general
opinion (see also chapter 17).
That all seems clear, but in later life, Newton claimed that he also used the
method of analysis (methods related to Descartes's work and algebra). Here is
Newton himself writing in 1715:
By the help of the new Analysis Mr. Newton found out most of the Propositions in his Principia
Philosophia: but because the Ancients for making things certain admitted nothing into Geometry
before it was demonstrated synthetically, he demonstrated the Propositions synthetically, that the
System of the Heavens might be founded upon good Geometry. And this makes it now difficult for
unskilled men to see the Analysis by which those Propositions were found out.7
Expert opinion (Cohen and Whiteside, for example) suggests that this is not
correct, and not a single piece among the voluminous papers he left behind
supports Newton's contention. However, as Guicciardini has stressed, Newton
used a variety of mathematical methods, sometimes obviously so in the
Principia and sometimes not. Historian Herman Erlichson presents evidence of
Newton's use of calculus. We know that Newton was a complex and devious
man, but why this claim? The answer, at least in part, has to do with his battle
with Leibnitz over the discovery of calculus. Newton kept his early work on
calculus secret. One of several examples is his work on infinite series, calculus,
and integration, which was recorded in De analysi per aequationes numero
terminorum infinitas, a document known to close colleagues by 1669 but not
published until 1711. The Methodis fluxionum was written around 1670 but not
published until 1736, after Newton had died! Leibnitz, on the other hand, had
published his mathematical discoveries and could point to those documents in
support of his priority claims.
So it was that Newton wished to show that his claims were supported by his

use of calculus in the Principia, which was not easy, given the way his new
methods were woven together with his geometric approach. He is often far from
explicit about the use of calculus, as we saw in the example in section 7.4 where
he slips in the result of an integration without giving any details. It seems that
Newton's secretive and suspicious nature had finally caught up with him; he was
left struggling to use his great Principia as a priority-claim weapon instead of
being able to point to a string of regular papers on mathematics.
There is also the question of Newton's ego problems and his hatred of
challenges and disputes. We already saw in chapter 3 that, later in life, there was
his claim that “to avoid being baited by little Smatteres in Mathematics…he
designedly made his Principia abstruse.” Was the Principia deliberately made
difficult to read? The introduction to Book III, “System of the World,” contains a
revealing statement:
Upon this subject I had, indeed, composed the third book in a popular method that it might be read
by many; but afterwards, considering that such as had not sufficiently entered into the principles
could not easily discern the strength of the consequences, nor lay aside the prejudices to which they
had been many years accustomed, therefore, to prevent the disputes which might be raised upon such
accounts, I chose to reduce the substance of the book into the form of Propositions (in the
mathematical way), which should be read by those only who had made themselves masters of the
principles established in the preceding books.
Three points need comment. First, Newton did write such a book “in a
popular method” (called “System of the World”), but it was not published (in
Latin and English) until 1728. (More on that in the part 7 of this book.) Second,
it is a legitimate point that without a strong mathematical underpinning the
“strength of the consequences” might not be apparent and could be doubted.
Third, the mathematical difficulty of the Principia did deter many readers and
possibly avoided some disputes for Newton, although there were plenty of those,
as we will see in later chapters.
It is amusing (and maybe just a little kinder to Newton) to note that Descartes
had similar priority and readership troubles when he published La Géométrie. In
a letter to mathematician Marin Mersenne, he wrote:
I have omitted a number of things that might have made it [La Géométrie] clearer, but I did this
intentionally, and would not have it otherwise. The only suggestions that have been made concerning
changes in it are in regard to rendering it clearer to readers, but most of these are so malicious that I
am completely disgusted with them.8
7.6. CONCLUSIONS

The theory of mechanics presented in the Principia did require new
mathematical techniques, and Newton invented many of them. It was partly the
lack of those mathematical skills that held back Hooke and allowed Newton to
overshadow him. There is no doubt that dressing up ideas from calculus in
geometrical form made it virtually impossible for many to read the Principia.
Perhaps the best and most graphic summary was given by William Whewell in
his 1837 History of the Inductive Sciences:
The ponderous instrument of synthesis, so effective in Newton's hands, has never since been grasped
by one who could use it for such purposes; and we gaze at it with admiring curiosity, as on some
gigantic implement of war, which stands idle among the memorials of ancient days, and makes us
wonder what manner of man he was who could wield as a weapon what we can hardly lift as a
burden.9
We shall find that, while conceptually on the right track, Newton reached the
limits of his technical ability in several problems. It was the use of analytical
methods that allowed those scientists who followed Newton to extend the theory
of dynamics into the form we use today, as I discuss in chapter 28.
7.7. FURTHER READING
A great deal has been written on this topic. Here are some references I found
particularly useful.
 
Densmore, Dana. Newton's Principia: The Central Argument. Santa Fe, NM:
Green Lion Press, 2003.
Erlichson, H. “Evidence That Newton Used the Calculus to Discover Some
Propositions in His Principia.” Centaurus 39 (1996): 253–66.
Gjertsen, Derek. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986.
Guicciardini, Niccolo. “Analysis and Synthesis in Newton's Mathematical
Work.” In The Cambridge Companion to Newton. Edited by I. Bernard Cohen
and George E. Smith. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
———. “‘Gigantic Implements of War’: Images of Newton as a
Mathematician.” In The Oxford Handbook of the History of Mathematics.
Edited by Eleanor Robson and Jacqueline Stedall. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2009.
———. Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2011.

———. Reading the Principia: The Debate on Newton's Mathematical Methods
for Natural Philosophy from 1687 to 1736. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
Newton, Isaac. Isaac Newton: The Principia. Translated by I. Bernard Cohen and
Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Pourciau, Bruce. “Newton and the Notion of Limit.” Historia Mathematica 28
(2001): 18–30.
———. “The Preliminary Mathematical Lemmas of Newton's Principia.”
Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 52 (1998): 279–95.
Whiteside, D. T. The Mathematical Principles Underlying Newton's Principia
Mathematica. 9th lecture in the Gibson Lectureship in the History of
Mathematics. Glasgow, UK: University of Glasgow, 1970.
 
For the dispute about calculus between Newton and Leibnitz, see Isaac
Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method by Guicciardini. Books on the
subject (a recent popular-style one and a standard reference) are:
 
Bardi, Jason. The Calculus Wars. London: High Stakes Publishing, 2006.
Hall, A. Rupert. Philosophers at War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1980.
 
Readers wishing to see a comprehensive, detailed account of the development
of mathematics around Newton's time may consult:
 
Whiteside, D. T. “Patterns of Mathematical Thought in the Later Seventeenth
Century.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 1 (1961): 179–388.

Newton is now ready to begin developing his theory of dynamics. His first basic
problem is how to describe the motion of a single body when acted upon by a
centripetal (central) force. In these chapters, he gives a complete solution for that
problem, giving general results for a variety of forces, but also emphasizing
many specific results for the inverse-square-law case.
 
Chapter   8. DOWN TO BUSINESS
Chapter   9. WHAT ISAAC DID NEXT: FINDING FORCES
Chapter 10. THE INVERSE-SQUARE LAW: TRIUMPH AND
CONTROVERSY
Chapter 11. INTERLUDE: THE MODERN FORMULATION
Chapter 12. TIME AND A MATHEMATICAL GEM
Chapter 13. COMPLETING THE SINGLE-BODY FORMALISM
Chapter 14. ROTATING ORBITS
 
Reading plans: This is where Newton develops the vital results to be used in his
theory of the solar system and other things in Book III. If you are keen to get on
to those things, you can probably manage by reading chapters 8, 9, and 10, plus
the summarizing chapter 18 in part 4, before moving on to part 6. That fits in
with advice Newton himself gave. Of course, for a full understanding, you should
try to appreciate what is in all these chapters. The results in chapters 12, 13, and
14 will show you Newton at his brilliant best.

Recall that after some preliminary material, Newton divided the Principia into
three books: Book I develops the basic theory of mechanics; Book II extends that
theory to resisted motion and continuous systems; Book III has the great
applications to the Earth and the solar system. We are now into Book I.
Newton has dealt with the preliminaries—methodological matters in the
Preface, definitions, the laws of motion, and useful mathematical methods (as
discussed in the previous four chapters). He now begins to set out the theory for
dynamics, gradually increasing the level of complexity over the next thirteen
sections of Book I (having used Section I for describing his mathematical
methods). There are ninety-eight Propositions, each also labeled as a Theorem or
a Problem, usually accompanied by Corollaries giving examples or extensions
of the work just covered. Interspersed among the Propositions are twenty-nine
Lemmas giving required extra mathematical background details. There are also
Scholiums discussing the Propositions and their applications.
Please do not panic at this point! I do not intend to go through all that material
and the relevant mathematical details as Newton gives them. If I did, then you
would soon give up, just as many readers of the original Principia gave up. My
approach is to
 
(1) pick out the most important Propositions and accompanying results,
(2) explain the significance of those Propositions for the development of
mechanics, and
(3) show how this material appears in a modern formulation of mechanics.
 
Occasionally I will give a few details or comments on Newton's mathematical
proofs, but you may skip over those details as you wish. (In fact, Newton
himself suggested readers might just cover the first seventeen Propositions and
return to others as they felt the need when reading Book III.)
In this chapter, I will briefly outline the whole plan for Book I and then discuss
the first two Propositions, which are among the most celebrated in the whole
Principia. As an example of Newton at work, in section 8.2.1, I gently guide you
through his proof for the first Proposition. I will also set out the modern
approach to those Propositions, and we will be able to compare Newton's style

of thinking with our own.
8.1. THE PLAN FOR BOOK I
So that you can see where we are going, I will briefly outline the contents of
Book I in figure 8.1 (and no doubt many of Newton's readers wished he had done
the same!).
8.2. THE FIRST STEP
Newton begins by finding a general property of the motion of a moving body
acted on by a centripetal force. This is one of the great fundamental steps in
mechanics (as I will explain), and this first Proposition is quite rightly one of the
most celebrated and analyzed in the whole Principia. It will also allow us to see
a reasonably simple example of Newton's way of working.
PROPOSITION I. THEOREM I.
The areas which revolving bodies describe by radii drawn to an immovable centre of force do lie in
the same immovable planes, and are proportional to the times in which they are described.

Figure 8.1. An outline of the contents of Book I.
No doubt you will immediately be reminded of Kepler's second law: in any
equal time intervals, a line from the planet to the sun will sweep out equal areas.
Of course, in linking Proposition I with Kepler's law, we must assume that the
Sun is providing the centripetal force. I will return to this (as Newton does)
when we get to Book III.
8.2.1. The Proof

Figure 8.2 is Newton's diagram that shows the motion broken down into steps
made when we “suppose the time to be divided into equal parts.” The center of
force is S. Newton's strategy is to consider those steps and then to take the limit
as the time intervals tend to zero and a continuous curve for the motion is
produced. For each step, the motion is a combination of straight line or inertial
motion and a change imposed by the centripetal force; the two are combined
using the parallelogram rule introduced along with the Laws (and discussed in
section 6.2).
Figure 8.2. Newton's diagram for discussing Proposition I. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
This proof is a good introduction to Newton's methods because it uses only
the simple geometry of triangles (reviewed in figure 8.3 in case your Euclidean
geometry is a little rusty). The particular triangles involved are extracted from
Newton's figure, figure 8.2, and shown separately in figure 8.4.

Figure 8.3. Triangle area properties. Column (a) accompanies the diagram on the left; column (b)
accompanies the diagram on the right.
Here then is Newton's proof of Proposition I, based on figure 8.2, mostly in
his own words but sometimes in my words and with extra detail inserted to help
you keep track of the geometry.
 
(1) “For suppose the time to be divided into equal parts, and in the first part
of that time let the body by its innate force [inertia] describe the right line
AB. In the second part of that time the same would (by Law I), if not
hindered, proceed directly to c, along the line Bc equal to AB.”
(2) Using triangle area property (a) as in figure 8.3, we observe that ΔSAB and
ΔSBc have equal area, ΔSAB = ΔSBc, because they have equal bases (from
step [1]) and the same height p, as shown in equation (a) in figure 8.4.
(3) Newton now introduces the effect of the centripetal force: “But when the
body is arrived at B, suppose that the centripetal force acts at once with a
great impulse, and, turning aside the body from the right line Bc compels it
afterwards to continue its motion along the right line BC.
    “Draw cC parallel to BS meeting BC in C; and at the end of the second
part of the time, the body (by Cor. I of the Laws [parallelogram law]) will
be found in C, in the same plane with the triangle ASB.”
 

Figure 8.4. The lower part of Newton's figure extended to show triangles of interest. Equation (a)
accompanies the diagram on the left; equation (b) accompanies the diagram on the right. (Originally from
The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995]; modified by Annabelle
Boag.)
(4) Join C to the force center, that is, draw in SC. We now consider ΔSBC and
ΔSBc. Note that by construction of the parallelogram in step (3), the lines
SB and Cc are parallel. We can now use triangle area property (b) as in
figure 8.3; ΔSBC and ΔSBc are on the same base, SB, and between the
parallel lines SB and Cc as shown in triangle area property (b) as in figure
8.4. Thus we have ΔSBC = ΔSBc.
(5) From steps (2) and (4), we have
 
ΔSAB = ΔSBc and ΔSBC = ΔSBc, so we conclude that ΔSAB = ΔSBC.
With that result, Newton has shown that, in the two motions A to B and
B to C, the same area is swept out.
(6) It remains to point out that the same thing happens in the following steps
in the motion, and then we can take a limit to move to the continuous case.
Here is how Newton puts it:
By the like argument, if the centripetal force acts successively in C, D, E &c., and makes the body, in
each single particle of time, to describe the right lines CD, DE, EF, &c., they will all lie in the same
plane; and the triangle SCD will be equal to the triangle SBC, and SDE to SCD, and SEF to SDE.
And therefore, in equal times, equal areas are described in one immovable plane: and, by
composition, any sums SADS, SAFS, of those areas, are one to other as the times in which they are
described.
    Now let the number of those triangles be augmented, and their breadth diminished in infinitum;
and (by Cor. 4, Lem. III) their ultimate perimeter ADF will be a curve line: and therefore, the
centripetal force, by which the body is perpetually drawn back from the tangent of this curve, will act
continually; and any described areas SADS, SAFS, which are always proportional to the times of

description, will, in this case also, be proportional to those times. Q.E.D.
What a clever, simple, elegant and powerful proof! The steps are all simple,
but of course, it takes the genius of Newton to build them together to reach the
desired result. (However, I should warn you that the rigor and style of Newton's
work has come in for extensive discussion—see the “Further Reading” section at
the end of the chapter.) This proof provides a good demonstration of how
Newton deals with a continuously acting force through his limit approach.
8.2.2. The Corollaries
Newton follows the proof of Proposition I with six Corollaries. Corollaries 2 to
5 concern geometrical results related to the force, and Newton uses them when
he comes to Proposition VI about finding forces (see chapter 9). Of great interest
is Corollary 1, which translates the area result into one about how the velocity of
the body in motion varies with distance from the force center. (Note that
although Newton says “velocity” it is really just the magnitude of the velocity, or
the speed, that is involved.)
COR. 1. The velocity of a body attracted towards an immovable centre, in spaces void of resistance,
is inversely as the perpendicular let fall from that centre on the right line that touches the orbit.
The proof follows directly from the triangles result in the main proof:
For the velocities in those places A, B, C, D, E, are as the bases AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, of equal
triangles; and these bases are inversely as the perpendiculars let fall upon them.
The situation using a more modern notation is illustrated in figure 8.5. Two
sections of the path, A1A2 and B1B2, are covered in the same time so that the
shaded areas are equal. Obviously the speed along the path is greater for the first,
longer section. The above Corollary tells us how to find the speed: the velocity
vector v is tangent to the curve and the magnitude v of v, that is the speed,
remains always inversely proportional to the perpendicular distance p from the
force center S to the tangent, as shown in figure 8.5. Today we write this in the
form of an equation:
This is a version of the modern conservation of angular-momentum law, as we
will see in section 8.5.2.
In the final Corollary, Newton shows his thoroughness and emphasizes the

generality of his results by pointing out that they hold in any inertial frame of
reference:
COR. 6. And the same things do all hold good (by COR. 5. of the Laws) when the planes in which the
bodies are moved, together with the centres of force which are placed in those planes, are not at rest,
but move uniformly forward in right lines.
8.3. AND CONVERSELY: PROPOSITION II
PROPOSITION II. THEOREM II.
Every body that moves in any curve line described in a plane, and by a radius, drawn to a point
either immovable, or moving forwards with an uniform rectilinear motion, describes about that point
areas proportional to the times, is urged by a centripetal force directed to that point.
Figure 8.5. A body at point P on its orbit has velocity vector v and the perpendicular distance from v to the

force center S is p. The polar coordinates are r and θ with the origin at the force center. According to
Corollary 1, the magnitude of v, the speed, is inversely proportional to p.
Thus Proposition I tells us that a centripetal force implies the equal-areas-
swept-out-in-equal-times law, and now Proposition II tells us that the converse is
also true: if we find evidence for that equal-areas law, then a centripetal force is
acting on the body in motion. We are seeing the sophistication and high level of
Newton's mathematical working, the impetus for which I will come to in a
moment.
8.4. DISCUSSION: APPRECIATING THIS FIRST
STEP
Newton extends the theory in Proposition III to the case where two bodies are
interacting. That seems a little out of place here, and I will return to it later when
discussing how we move beyond the one-body problem.
There are (at least) five important points that should be made about this first,
monumental development in orbital mechanics embodied in those first two
Propositions.
 
(1) Newton has now discovered a general property of motion under the
influence of a centripetal force, any centripetal force; the result is quite
general. The speed of a body so moving will vary with its position on its
path, but area swept out in a given time period will always be the same, no
matter where on the path the body is located. Corollary 1 tells us how to
translate this property into a formula for the body's speed if that is required.
This is one of the great conservation laws of physics, and I discuss its
modern form in section 8.5.3.
(2) This is one of the first (if not the first) great examples of how modern
science proceeds by combining physical knowledge and laws with a
mathematical formalism to deduce new results. This is so standard today
that we rarely stop to appreciate what a wonderful and powerful method
we are using.
(3) Because Newton has so carefully presented this as an if-and-only-if result
(Propositions I and II together say that equal areas are swept out in equal
times if and only if the force is centripetal), it may be used to explore the
nature of a force under investigation. And remember, we are in Section II,
which is called “The Invention of Centripetal Forces”—more on that point

in the next chapter. Newton makes this clear in two ways. The first way is
as a Corollary to Proposition II outlining what happens if the area law is
not found to be valid:
In nonresisting spaces or mediums, if the areas are not proportional to the times, the forces are not
directed to the point in which the radii meet, but deviate therefrom in consequentia, or towards the
parts to which the motion is directed, if the description of the areas is accelerated; but in antecedia
[i.e., away from the parts], if retarded.
The second way is in a short Scholium where he suggests how we may
use the area law:
Because the equable description of areas indicates that a centre is respected by that force with which
the body is most affected, and by which it is drawn back from its rectilinear motion, and retained in
its orbit, why may we not be allowed, in the following discourse, to use the equable description of
areas as an indication of a centre, about which all circular motion is performed in free spaces?
(4) We begin to see the care taken in, and the comprehensive nature of,
Newton's work. He stresses that these results hold in any inertial frame of
reference and that there is to be no air or other resistance influencing the
motion (and in Corollary 2 to Proposition II, he even comments on what
happens when that is not the case). Perhaps even more remarkable is his
little Scholium following Proposition II, in which he states that if the
centripetal force acts in a given plane, then another force acting
perpendicular to that plane will not destroy the area property. Today this is
dealt with in terms of separable forces or potentials, and equations of
motion are independently solved for the relevant coordinates.
 
The fifth important point for discussion is so significant for the theory of
mechanics that it should be highlighted in its own subsection.
8.4.1. A Major Advance in the Theory of Orbital Motion
The position of a body on its path in a plane is given by specifying the Cartesian
coordinates (x,y) or the polar coordinates (r,θ) (as shown in figure 8.5). For
motion under centripetal forces, the polar coordinates are more suitable. Thus, at
time t, the body is at point (r[t],θ[t]). We could say that the orbit curve is given
in terms of the parameter t.
The equal-areas law given above allows us to replace time with area swept
out, and essentially we may find how r varies as the angle θ changes. (The
mathematical details will be given in the next chapter.) This means that we find

the result for r = r(θ), which is the equation of the body's path. For example, we
may find that
r = 3θ,
which is the equation of a spiral. (We shall see later that Newton gives an
example of motion on a different type of spiral path.) It is also possible to use the
equal-areas law to move from angle θ to time and, hence, then calculate where
on the orbit the body may be found at a given time.
This may be a little hard to grasp at this point, but basically the equal-areas
law allows us to split the difficult, full dynamical problem into two simpler
parts:
 
(1) first, find the equation for the body's path or orbit,
(2) then find the time at which the body reaches a given point on that
orbit.
 
Newton too understood how to use the equal-areas result in this way and its
importance for the theory of mechanics. I will show this more explicitly in the
next chapter.
8.5. COMPARING APPROACHES, OLD AND NEW
This is a good point to examine the way Newton has tackled this first step and to
compare it with the way we proceed today.
8.5.1. Reviewing Newton's Approach
Newton considers a small step in the motion of a body, and he uses the idea that
the total movement can be resolved into an inertial part along the tangent to the
path and a part directed toward the force center. The two parts are combined
using the parallelogram law. It is then a matter of straightforward geometry to
see that a series of such steps maintains the equal-areas-swept-out-in-equal-times
law. A remarkable fact is involved here: the only property of the force used in
the proof is that it is a centripetal (central) force, that is, one always directed
toward (or away from) a fixed force center (S in figure 8.2).
Newton analyzes what happens at points along the path and finally uses a
limiting process to argue for the continuous case.

8.5.2. The Modern Approach
In the modern theory, our ideal ultimate objective is to find a formula for the
position vector r(t), which specifies where the body is on its path at time t. To
that end, we use the given force and Newton's second law to produce a
differential equation—the equation of motion—that we can then solve to find
r(t). I return to this in the next chapter. However, we also need to do the
equivalent of Newton's first step, and doing so highlights three differences in the
approaches. (Further discussion of this point and the modern approach is given
in chapter 11, particularly in section 11.3.3.)
First, we are looking for a way to establish a property of the motion at every
point on the body's path, and this is done in different ways. In the modern
approach, we manipulate the equation of motion to discover, or use it to prove,
the validity of the sought-after property. We use a mathematical analysis (and, in
fact, one way of formulating classical mechanics is called analytical mechanics).
This is extremely powerful, but it can hide the physics. Newton shows the
physics very explicitly in his geometrical proof.
Second, Newton's limiting process leading to a continuous path has already
been done in the modern approach since it uses the continuous path and
derivatives from the differential calculus. Thus we use
the velocity vector 
 and its derivative, the acceleration 
.
 
Newton's second Law ma = F then tells us about the variation of v:
The force has center at the origin and magnitude F(r). This is the modern form
for relating the change in velocity to the force and is thus the equivalent of step
(3) in Newton's proof as given above. Equation (8.2) is the modern analytical
form, but it still retains the obvious interpretation that the change is made only in
the direction of the force as it acts at that particular point on the body's path. I
suspect that in retrospect, many people will feel that in his step (3), Newton
exhibited the physics of the motion better than we see it through equation (8.2).
Third, where Newton finds something that is always the same throughout the
body's motion, we phrase this as establishing a constant of motion. We saw that
for momentum in chapter 6. In the present case, if we call the constant h, then it

is given by Newton's first Corollary expressed through equation (8.1),
If h is a constant of motion, it does not change with time, implying that its
derivative with respect to t must be zero. Thus we must have
In the modern formalism, Newton's geometry is replaced by an analytical
proof that equation (8.4) is correct. The proof uses the mathematical
definitions and dynamics fed in via equation (8.2). The proof is set out in section
8.5.3, if you would like to see how it works.
The constant h multiplied by the body's mass m is called the magnitude of the
angular momentum. We also show that the direction of the angular-momentum
vector mh is fixed throughout the motion, and that is equivalent to Newton's
statement that “radii drawn to an immovable centre of force do lie in the same
immovable planes.” Motion under the influence of a centripetal force is
confined to a plane.
8.5.3. Details of the Modern Proof
The modern proof uses the vector h defined by the vector cross product of the
position and velocity vectors:
Here × denotes the vector cross product, which, for us, has the following two
important properties:
Property 1: the magnitude of a × b is the magnitude of a times the magnitude
of b times the sine of the angle between them;
Property 2: the direction of a × b is given by a unit vector perpendicular to
both a and b, that is, by a unit vector perpendicular to the plane containing
a and b.
If two vectors are parallel, then the angle between them is zero, the sine of
which is zero, and so their cross product is also zero, according to property 1.
Referring to figure 8.5, we can see that r sin (ø) = p, and so property 1 tells us

that the magnitude h of h is rv sin (ø) = vp, which agrees with equation (8.3).
Next, to satisfy the requirement of equation (8.4), we must show that
The proof follows a set of straightforward steps:
Thus h, the magnitude of h, is a constant, and the direction of h must also be
constant. According to property 2 of the cross product, this tells us that r and v
must always lie in the same plane. This completes the modern approach to
Newton's result.
8.6. CONCLUSIONS
Newton has shown how to obtain a general property of motion under the
influence of a centripetal (central) force by analyzing that combination of inertial
motion and pull of a centripetal force responsible for orbital motion. To do that,
he introduces some highly original, clever, and innovative mathematics. This is
where Hooke failed; he understood the mechanism for orbital motion (and he
may even have been correct in his claims that he told Newton about that
mechanism), but he could not translate that into a mathematical formalism and
manipulate it to get the required general results. For example, Hooke believed
the speed was inversely proportional to the distance from the force center rather
than the perpendicular distance p, as in equation (8.1). (Hooke's result is correct
for the special case of circular motion, of course.)
Although Newton found a law that is essentially equivalent to our modern
conservation of angular momentum, he did not recognize that there is a quantity,

called angular momentum, in the way that he dealt with linear momentum (or
quantity of motion), as discussed in chapters 5 and 6. I will return to this point
when discussing the rotation of the Earth and other matters in the chapters
discussing Book III.
The modern formulation easily produces the conservation of angular
momentum for central forces (equivalent to the equal-areas law) by simply using
the calculus form of Newton's second law. However, I cannot help but think that
many students would easily follow the mathematics in section 8.5.3 but yet
struggle to explain physically why it is that a force directed toward a center
produces orbital motion rather than one that sweeps the body around. (Put an
object in a hollow tube, rotate the tube so that the object moves around—is
swept around—and we find that, instead of the body being confined to a circular
path, it shoots out the end of the tube.)
We are now ready to move on in the theory with a new tool that allows us to
tackle cases other than uniform motion in a circle by “substituting the equable
description of areas in place of equable motion,” as Newton puts it. As we have
seen in section 8.4.1, that allows a crucial step to be made in the modern
formulation of mechanics; the next chapter sets out the details.
8.7. FURTHER READING
See the references in section 6.9.1. Further commentary and analysis for this
chapter may be found in:
 
Densmore, Dana. Newton's Principia: The Central Argument. Santa Fe, NM:
Green Lion Press, 2003.
Nauenberg, M. “Hooke, Orbital Motion, and Newton's Principia.” American
Journal of Physics 62 (1994): 331–50.
———. “Kepler's Area Law in the Principia: Filling in Some Details in
Newton's Proof of Proposition I.” Historia Mathematica 20 (2003): 441–56.
Whiteside, D. T. The Mathematical Principles Underlying Newton's Principia
Mathematica. 9th lecture in the Gibson Lectureship in the History of
Mathematics. Glasgow, UK: University of Glasgow, 1970.

Recall that the main program for this book is to ask at each stage: What did
Newton do? How did he do it? How does it fit into the scheme of mechanics and
its applications? And how do we carry out such things today? We are now at the
point in the Principia where Newton must decide how to go beyond the
fundamentals and show how his mechanics works and is applied. As planned, I
will describe his approach, the results he produces, and the modern response.
However, I will put a little less emphasis on the details of how he worked, since
we have already seen representative examples of his methods, and to continue
with great detail would not gain too much beyond boring many readers. (Those
wanting greater depth should consult, as always, the recommendations in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.)
9.1. PLAN OF ATTACK
If this were a modern mechanics textbook, the next step would be to take a
selection of forces (some chosen for their mathematical convenience and
simplicity; others, for their physical relevance) and show how to derive the
resulting trajectories for bodies moving under their influence. Newton does do
that (setting the pattern for that modern work), but that is not his first step. To
understand this, we must recall the great driving force for the Principia: the
paths of the planets are known (the details given in Kepler's laws), but which
force will produce those particular paths? Newton set out his approach in his
Preface:
For all the difficulty of philosophy seems to consist in this—from the phenomena of motions to
investigate the forces of nature, and then from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena.
For Newton, the next step must be to show how to go from a given path to the
underlying forces, and that is the subject of this chapter. We shall see that
Newton first used the case of motion in a circle to demonstrate his methods and
to give some important results; then he goes on to the general case, giving a
general formula and a set of examples.

9.1.1. Terminology: Direct and Inverse Problems
Many physical problems can be viewed in two opposite ways, called the direct
problems and the inverse problems. Inverse problems are often of great practical
importance. For example:
Direct problem: calculate the trajectory of a shell shot from a particular
cannon.
Inverse problem: a shell has landed nearby; where did it come from!?
Direct problem: calculate the way in which radio waves scatter off an object
like an airplane.
Inverse problem: use RADAR to plot aircraft positions by interpreting
scattered waves.
Direct problem: calculate how far a liquid expands up this tube as it gets
hotter.
Inverse problem: the liquid has moved to this level; what is the temperature?
For Newton, the direct problem was to find the force leading to a particular
orbit, so the inverse problem is to find the orbit given the force. Today we would
tend to reverse that nomenclature, and the modern inverse problem (go from
orbits to forces) is barely mentioned in most modern mechanics textbooks. (See
this chapter's “Further Reading” section.)
9.2. FORCES AND UNIFORM CIRCULAR
MOTION
This is the simplest case, and Newton considers it first. For uniform motion in a
circle of radius R and with angular velocity ω, the acceleration away from the
center—the centrifugal acceleration, as Huygens called it—is given by Rω2 (a
simple fact from dynamics and known in Newton's time). To keep a body of
mass m in a circular orbit, the centripetal force F must attract that body toward
the circle center with a balance according to
If the period (time for one complete circle) is T, then T = 2π/ω (so ω = 2π/T),

and the force-balance equation becomes
Thus, balancing the centrifugal acceleration and the force tells us that, for the
body to travel with period T in a circular orbit of radius R, the force must be
proportional to the radius divided by the square of the period. Then, if we
know how the period varies as the orbit size changes, how T depends on R, we
will know how the force depends on the distance R from the force center.
This is the result Newton obtained using his previous Propositions and the one
he expressed in Proposition IV, Theorem IV:
The centripetal forces of bodies, which by equable motions describe different circles, tend to the
centres of the same circles; and are one to the other as the squares of the arcs described in equal
times applied to [divided by] the radii of the circles.
He sets out further results and consequences in the Corollaries.
9.2.1. Examples
If we know how the period T changes as the radius of the orbit changes, we can
deduce how the force varies with distance R from the force center. In the
Corollaries, Newton gives the following examples:
COR. 3
if the period T is constant
the force F is proportional to 
COR. 4
if the period T is proportional to
the force F is constant, that is
independent of R
COR. 5
if the period T is proportional to R
the force F is proportional to 
COR. 6
if the period T is proportional to
R3/2
the force F is proportional to 
COR. 7
if the period T is proportional to Rn the force F is proportional to
Typically Newton has concluded with an impressive general result. He also
suggests another generalization: if the concentric circles are replaced by some
other shape, then the equal-areas result will allow that situation to be tackled in a
similar way (Corollary 8).

9.2.2. Discussion
Equation (9.2) has solved Newton's direct problem of finding the force when
given circular orbit details. Of course, it also solves the inverse problem: if you
know the force at a distance R from the force center, then equation (9.2) lets you
calculate the period T of the resulting circular motion.
These are obviously important results, and Newton follows it with a
discussion section or Scholium. One result stands out, and in Newton's own
words:
The case of the 6th Corollary obtains in the celestial bodies (as Sir Christopher Wren, Dr. Hooke and
Dr. Halley have severally observed); and therefore in what follows, I intend to treat more at large of
those things which relate to centripetal forces decreasing in a square ratio of the distances from the
centres.
The case where the period T is proportional to R3/2 is Kepler's third law (here
assuming circular orbits), and this argument suggesting an inverse-square law for
gravitation was well known. Newton recognizes the work of others—even
Hooke! Of course, while suggestive, this does not establish that gravity acts
through such a law, as that requires reference to interacting bodies and
noncircular orbits, the major task of Book III. In the meantime, Newton says, he
will be giving lots of results for inverse-square-law forces ready for future use.
Newton also mentions that his results (in Corollary 9) agree with the ideas
that Christiaan Huygens used in order to measure the local acceleration due to
gravity (what today we would call the gravitational constant g), referring to “his
excellent book De horologio oscillatorio.”
9.3. THE GENERAL PROBLEM
Newton now turns to the general problem, so Proposition VI begins
In a space void of resistance, if a body revolves in any orbit about an immoveable centre…
Newton is reminding us that there is no air resistance and we are to deal with
“any orbit,” not just a circular one. He is now using all his ingenuity and
technical brilliance to show how the earlier Propositions and their Corollaries
(such as those for Proposition I) can be used to produce an expression for the
force. Newton's diagram reproduced in figure 9.1 is one of the most famous in
the Principia, but very few people wish to go through, in detail, the arguments
based on it—I will follow suit here, but see the “Further Reading” section at the

end of this chapter if you wish to do so. However, I will indicate how the
argument appears in modern terms.
Figure 9.1. Newton's figure accompanying Proposition VI. Note that SY is perpendicular to the tangent
ZPRY, and QT is constructed to be perpendicular to SP. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
The diagram shows a particle moving from point P to point Q with the usual
inertial (PR) and force-related (RQ) contributions. The center of force is S. The
line ZPRY is tangent to the orbit at P, and the line SY is perpendicular to that
tangent, so we know from Proposition I, Corollary 1 that the body's speed at P is
inversely proportional to the length SY. Using that and other arguments, Newton
proves that “the centripetal force will be reciprocally [inversely] as the solid
[that is, the product] 
, if the solid be taken as that magnitude which it
ultimately acquires when the points P and Q coincide.” That is, we are to take
the limit as the point Q approaches P.
Newton says in Corollary 2 that we may use 
 in the same way. He
mentions other geometrical results based on figure 9.1 that may be applied.
Newton has now shown how to calculate the force producing a given
orbit, the solution to his direct problem.
The limit will have to be worked out using the geometrical properties of the
particular orbit under consideration, and Newton gives some examples that I will
come to shortly. However, before that, it might help some readers and remove
some of the mystery if I sketch the derivation of Newton's result in more modern
terms. I will also indicate what you will find if you consult a modern textbook on
this matter.
Some readers may wish to skim lightly over these next two subsections or
skip them altogether; but they are relatively simple and we are talking
about one of science's greatest results!
9.3.1. Derivation of Newton's Solution

The complicated diagram and the geometrical jargon tend to hide the simplicity
of Newton's approach: consider the inertial and forced components of the motion
at a point on the orbit to find an expression for the force, and then use the result
in Proposition I (what we call the conservation of angular momentum) to
eliminate time and leave a totally geometric result. This gives an expression for
the force depending on only the geometric properties of the given orbit.
Suppose the particle moves from P to Q (as in figure 9.1) with inertial
component PR and force-related component RQ, or QR, as Newton writes it. If it
does so in time ∆t, then
In equations (9.3), v0 is the speed at P, F0 is the force acting at P (directed
toward the force center S, of course), and m is the mass of the particle. The first
equation is simply the old “distance traveled = speed multiplied by time”
formula. The second equation is the old formula (essentially Galileo's result) for
distance traveled under the effect of a constant force acting over a given time.
We now have an expression for the required force:
It remains to replace the time factor ∆t with a geometric factor. We can do that
in two ways, both of which use Proposition I, as discussed in the previous
chapter (note particularly section 8.4.1). The first method uses the first form in
equation (9.3) to write ∆t as
where the result from Proposition I (the angular-momentum form) expressed in
equation (8.3) has been used to replace the speed v0 with the perpendicular
distance SY, as shown in figure 9.1. Recall that h is a constant (in modern terms,
the magnitude of the angular momentum). Using the above expression for ∆t in
equation (9.4) produces

Remember that Newton uses proportions, so the constant term 2mh2 does not
appear in his results.
The second approach is to directly use the concept of equal areas swept out in
equal times to replace time with geometrical area, as discussed in section 8.4.1.
Here, the area in question is the sector SPQ (see figure 9.1) which, as we must
take the Q-approaching-P limit, may be replaced by the area of ∆SPQ, which has
area 
. Using that way of thinking in equation (9.4) leads to
where k is a composite constant. Equations (9.5) contain geometric results as
Newton found them (but be careful because, for some reason, he insisted on
giving things inversely proportional to the force).
9.3.2 Modern Results
The results presented so far are typical in the way they express things in
geometric terms, and, in applications, they call for geometric manipulations that
are quite unfamiliar to modern scientists, such as Whewell's “gigantic
implements of war” discussed in section 7.6. Today we tend to look for results
given in explicit calculus form (rather than in terms of limits, as Newton does for
this Proposition VI).
Some older textbooks (for example, in 1914, Lamb's section 85, “The Inverse
Problem”) give results that seem close to Newton's. The force can be expressed
in terms of the radial distance r to the orbit and the perpendicular distance p to
the tangent or velocity vector (see figure 8.4):
Of course, to use that formula, the orbit must be defined in terms of p and r,
which is something not at all familiar to modern scientists. The interested reader
will find examples in Lamb's book (see the “Further Reading” section at the end
of this chapter).

More-recent textbooks, if they mention the modern inverse problem at all—
perhaps as a problem as in Fowles's text—resort to the standard equation of
motion for the orbit, derived from Newton's second law. That equation, to be
discussed in more detail in chapter 11, relates the equation for the orbit in polar
coordinates, r = r(θ), to the controlling central force F(r):
While this equation may look formidable to some readers, the only point to
note here is that for the modern direct problem, we use a given force F(r) in it
and then solve to find the orbit r = r(θ); whereas for the modern inverse
problem, we substitute the given form for an orbit r = r(θ) and, hence, find the
responsible force F(r). (Readers wishing to relate this procedure and equation
[9.7] to Newton's results given above may consult the Whiteside reference in this
chapter's “Further Reading” section. The book by Moulton is also good on this
topic.)
9.4. EXAMPLES
Newton gives four examples showing how to use his formulas. The first one
involves motion in a circle where the force center is not necessarily at the center
of the circle. The second example deals with motion in a semicircle when the
force center is very far away. The other examples are of more interest, so I will
briefly explain them.
The third example deals with the force required to produce motion in a spiral:
PROPOSITION IX. PROBLEM IV.
If a body revolves in a spiral PQS, cutting all the radii SP, SQ, &c., in a given angle; it is proposed
to find the law of the centripetal force tending to the centre of that spiral.
Newton's diagram is shown in figure 9.2, with the spiral path extended beyond
his original section. Newton's statement that the spiral is “cutting all the radii SP,
SQ, &c., in a given angle” means that he is dealing with the so-called
equiangular spiral, which, in polar coordinates, is given by
where a and b are constants. In figure 9.2, r is the distance from the origin S to

the orbit point Q and θ is the angle between SP and SQ. (The spiral always cuts a
radial line to make an angle whose cotangent is b.)
Figure 9.2. Newton's diagram for motion along an equiangular spiral. The spiral is extended beyond the
section Newton gave. (Originally from The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 1995]; modified by Annabelle Boag.)
Newton shows that for motion along this spiral, the centripetal (central) force
directed toward the origin S must follow an inverse cube law,
where c is a constant. It is easy to give a modern derivation of this result by
substituting equation (9.8) into equation (9.7).
It should be noted that even now, more than three hundred years since Newton
was working, there is still controversy over and analysis of the methods he used
for Proposition IX—see the reference in this chapter's “Further Reading” section.
The fourth and final example concerns motion on an ellipse:
PROPOSITION X. PROBLEM V.
If a body revolves in an ellipse; it is proposed to find the law of the centripetal force tending to the
centre of the ellipse.
Note that the center of force is at the center of the ellipse and not at a focus, as
in the familiar planetary-motion case. Newton's diagram is shown in figure 9.3.
If we let the distance CP be r and the angle between CA and CP be θ, then we
have polar coordinates (r,θ), and the equation of the ellipse may be written as
where a and R are constants.

Figure 9.3. Newton's diagram for motion along an ellipse. For a particle at point P, the force is directed
toward the ellipse center C. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books,
1995].)
Newton shows that the force is “directly as the distance PC,” or, in modern
terms, F(r) = a constant × r. That result is also given by substituting equation
(9.10) into equation (9.7). This linear force will be used often in the Principia, as
it is in modern textbooks. (See section 11.2.2 for the modern theory.)
9.4.1. A Hidden Gem
The Corollaries 2 and 3 attached to Proposition VII (about forces giving circular
orbits) contain one of those amazing results that Newton seems to just casually
add in on the side. If the centripetal force leading to a given orbit is found for
one specified force center, then, Newton explains, that result can be used to write
down the appropriate force if a different force center is chosen instead. (The
interested reader will find that Newton gives some examples of how to use this
result; a modern exposition and evaluation is given by Chandrasekhar. I return to
this matter in section 10.4.1.)
9.4.2. Newton's Discussion
Newton notes that using his results from here and previous Propositions, he can
deduce that all such elliptical motions will have the same period. That is one of
the nice properties of linear-force motion. He also uses the ellipse result in a
clever way to derive Galileo's result that a body moves on a parabolic path when

acted upon by a constant gravitational force. Here is Newton's own version,
taken from his Scholium:
If the ellipse, by having its centre removed to an infinite distance, degenerates into a parabola; and
the force, now tending to a centre infinitely remote, will become equable [constant]. Which is
Galileo's theorem.
Newton is saying that over a relatively small vertical distance, the top part of
the ellipse is like a parabola and the force is a constant, thus mimicking the
dynamical problem studied by Galileo.
9.5. CONCLUSIONS
Once again we see the mathematical genius at work as Newton solves his direct
problem and gives us the way to find the centripetal force required to produce
motion along a given orbit. The work builds on Proposition I or, for us, the
conservation of angular momentum, demonstrating the importance of that basic
result, as alluded to in the previous chapter. Just as in a modern textbook,
Newton attaches some simple (but important) examples so the reader can see
how it all works. Finally, there is a little touch of mathematical extravagance as
he shows how to think in terms of a limiting process to obtain one of Galileo's
major results.
The orbit-to-forces problem, the modern inverse problem, is not as important
today as it was in Newton's time in classical mechanics. But for some decades of
the twentieth century, it was a major research problem when cast in terms of
quantum mechanics and the nuclear force through which protons and neutrons
interact.
Newton now has the tools to tackle one of the key problems driving the
Principia, and I turn to that in the next chapter.
9.6. FURTHER READING
As usual, the references listed in section 6.9.1 may be consulted. The details of
Fowles's book are given there. I. Bernard Cohen's guide (this time, particularly
section 10.8) is always worth reading.
Other classical-mechanics references:
 
Lamb, H. Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1914. [there are

many later editions]
Whittaker, E. T. A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid
Bodies. New York: Dover, 1944. [this classic was originally published by
Cambridge University Press in 1904; the inverse problem is discussed in sec.
47]
 
A good discussion by one of the experts is given in Whiteside's lecture:
 
Whiteside, D. T. The Mathematical Principles Underlying Newton's Principia
Mathematica. 9th lecture in the Gibson Lectureship in the History of
Mathematics. Glasgow, UK: University of Glasgow, 1970.
 
For Huygens's work on measuring the gravitational constant (or the equivalent
thereof), see:
 
Huygens, Christiaan. The Pendulum Clock; or, Geometrical Demonstrations
concerning the Motion of Pendula as Applied to Clocks. Translated by
Richard J. Blackwell. Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1986. [see sec. 6 of
the introduction by H. J. M. Bos]
 
For a discussion of the geometric details of Proposition IX, see the following
and the references therein:
 
Wilson, Curtis. “Newton on the Equiangular Spiral: An Addendum to
Erlichson's Account.” Historia Mathematica 21 (1994): 196–203.

Newton is now ready to tackle the great driving problem for the Principia: What
is the force that produces elliptical orbits? It was generally believed that the
force followed an inverse-square law, and now Newton can change that belief
into a fact. Thus we find Section III: “Of the Motion of Bodies in Eccentric
Conic Sections.”
Notice that Newton is (as ever) generalizing and going beyond ellipses to
include all conic sections. For some readers, a brief review of conic sections may
be useful before going on to section 10.2, where we see how Newton tackles the
full dynamical problem for inverse-square-law forces. We will see Newton at his
dazzling best, but also at his most mysterious and irritating.
10.1. CONIC SECTIONS: A BRIEF REVIEW
Early mathematicians defined conic sections as those curves revealed when a
double cone is sliced through by a plane, as in figure 10.1. Depending on the
angle of the plane to the cone axis, a circle, an ellipse, a parabola or a hyperbola
is revealed (and a pair of straight lines, in a very special case). Hence the name
conic sections.
They also found a logical definition for constructing these curves using a
given line, called the directrix, and a point, called the focus (see figure 10.2).
The points P, whose distance from the focus is a constant multiple ε of its
distance from the directrix, form a conic section. The value of ε, the
eccentricity, determines which curve is obtained: ε < 1 gives an ellipse, ε = 1
gives a parabola, and ε >1 gives a hyperbola. An ellipse has two focal points and
a line at each end, which can serve as a directrix. The directrix is a distance D
from the focus. The line through the focus and parallel to the directrix cuts the
curve a distance p from the focus and p = εD. (The line of length 2p through the
focus and joining the upper and lower parts of the curve is called the latus
rectum; it is important in classical geometry and prominent in details in the
Principia.)

Figure 10.1. Slices through a cone produce the conic sections—lines, circle, ellipse, parabola, and
hyperbola.
Figure 10.2. Left: The focus-directrix approach to conic sections. For a point P, the distance r from the
focus and the distance L from the directrix are related by r = εL, where ε is the eccentricity. For the ellipse (ε
< 1), there are two focal points, F and F′, each with its own directrix. Right: Coordinates for the ellipse with
focal points F1 and F2. The polar coordinates (r,θ) use an origin at F1.
We can also describe conic sections using coordinate geometry. If we use the
center of the ellipse as the origin and the line through the focal points as the x
axis (see figure 10.2), the equation of the ellipse is
I have taken the major axis to have length 2a, and the focal points are at x = εa
and x = −εa. The minor axis has length 2b, and the eccentricity is given by

The latus rectum length 2p has p = a(1 – ε2).
If we use polar coordinates r and θ, with the origin now taken at the right-
hand focus (see figure 10.2), the equation of the ellipse is
The ellipse is characterized by the length p (or a) and the eccentricity ε. (The
special case of the circle has ε = 0 and p = a, the radius.) If the left-hand focus is
taken as origin for polar coordinates, the ε in equation (10.2) must be changed to
–ε.
10.2. FORCES RESPONSIBLE FOR CONIC
SECTION ORBITS
Newton can now use the formulas given in Section II of the Principia, as
discussed in the previous chapter, section 9.3. Newton's work is based on those
formulas and, as always, the consideration of the inertial contribution and force-
related contribution to path development at a point, as illustrated in figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3. Newton's diagram for explaining Proposition XI. A body moves from P to Q on its orbit
through a combination of the inertial contribution PR and the force-related contribution RQ. An inverse-
square-law centripetal force has force center S, so when acting at P, its magnitude is inversely proportional
to SP2. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
I will concentrate on Newton's results rather than the usual geometrical

argument that he develops—just looking at figure 10.3 will tell you that it is
somewhat involved. (We have already seen samples of Newton's geometric
approach, and I refer you to the books listed in section 6.9.1, especially those by
Chandrasekhar and Densmore, for an explanation of the details of the present
case.) Newton begins with the following:
PROPOSITION XI. PROBLEM VI.
If a body revolves in an ellipse; it is required to find the law of the centripetal force tending to the
focus of the ellipse.
After some considerable geometric manipulations, he reaches that famous
conclusion: “the centripetal force is inversely as L × SP2, that is, inversely as the
square of the distance SP. Q.E.I.” At last, the question that plagued Hooke,
Halley, and Wren had been answered.
Following that result comes a little part of the Principia reminding us about
some of Newton's attributes and intentions. He tells us, in the section titled “The
Same Otherwise,” how to get that result in a different, shorter way by using
some previous results. Hidden away here is one of Newton's flashes of genius.
But rather than detour here, I will consider it separately in section 10.2.1.
Newton then goes on:
With the same brevity with which we reduced the fifth Problem [Proposition X] to the parabola, and
hyperbola, we might do the like here; but because of the dignity of the Problem and its use in what
follows, I shall confirm the other cases by particular demonstrations.
Newton is recognizing the importance of this work for the development of his
whole book, and so, rather than give further clever methods, he intends to deal
with each case from first principles (as we would say now).Yes, I can be clever,
but it is important to give the complete conic-sections result, starting from my
basic theorems. Thus we find:
PROPOSITION XII. PROBLEM VII.
Suppose a body to move in an hyperbola; it is required to find the law of the centripetal force tending
to the focus of that figure.
PROPOSITION XIII. PROBLEM VIII.
If a body moves in the perimeter of a parabola; it is required to find the law of the centripetal force
tending to the focus of that figure.
Of course, in each case, he comes to the conclusion that the force varies

“inversely as the square of the distance SP. Q.E.I.”
The whole problem of finding the forces giving motion on conic-section orbits
with the force center at a focus is now solved!
10.2.1. “The Same Otherwise”
This is one of those sections showing Newton's supreme cleverness. It
may appeal more to mathematically inclined readers, but all are
encouraged to read it.
In Section II, when Newton is developing his formula for finding the force
required to generate a given orbit, there is one of those stunning theoretical
asides. It is almost hidden away by being given in the Corollaries to one of his
examples, Proposition VII. For the case of motion in a circle (see figure 10.4), he
writes:
COR.2 The force by which a body in the circle APTV revolves about the centre of force S is to the
force by which the same body P may revolve in the same circle, and in the same periodic time, about
any other force centre R…
Figure 10.4. Newton's diagram for Proposition VII, Corollary 2. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton gives a formula for relating the two forces and extends the result in
Corollary 3 to other orbits. Thus, knowing the force in one case, he can say what
it should be in a different case without resolving the whole problem. Brilliant!
(See the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter for more details.)
One of Newton's examples in Proposition XI concerns motion in an ellipse
with the force center at the ellipse center. He can now use that relatively easy
result in the method just outlined to find the force when its center is changed (to
the ellipse focus!). That is what he means when he says “The same otherwise”
when dealing with conic-section orbits, as discussed previously. He states the
general result in a little Scholium at the end of Section III.
This is very clever mathematical stuff and, while illustrating Newton's
ingenuity, it is probably a good example of dazzling intricacies that befuddled so

many readers—that is to say, those who got even this far!
10.2.2. The Modern Solution
The modern approach was discussed in section 9.3.2. Using equation (9.7), we
can say that the central force giving an elliptical orbit with focus at the force
center is found by
 
Simple differentiations lead to the result
The minus sign indicates an attractive force; the required force strength is
related to the body's mass, its angular momentum h, and the orbit size parameter
p; the strength of the force varies inversely as the square of the distance r from
the force center.
A similar process gives an inverse-square-law result for parabolic and
hyperbolic orbits.
10.3. ORBIT PROPERTIES FOR INVERSE-
SQUARE-LAW FORCES
Newton has now established that motion along an ellipse generated by a force
centered on a focus requires that force to follow an inverse-square law. The
equal-areas-swept-out-in-equal-times property (the modern conservation of
angular momentum) must apply, and, in fact, is used by Newton in all his
working. Newton now derives two more properties of this motion. The first is
geometrical and relates to that equal-areas property, but the second (which
actually builds on the first) concerns the orbital period. (Notice that these are
new results rather than examples or solutions to given problems, so they are also
labeled as theorems.)
PROPOSITION XIV. THEOREM VI.
If several bodies revolve about one common centre, and the centripetal force is inversely as the

square of the distance of places from the centre: I say, that the principal latera recta of their orbits
are as the squares of the areas, which the bodies by radii drawn to the centre describe in the same
time.
The latus rectum is defined in section 10.1.
PROPOSITION XV. THEOREM VI.
The same things being supposed, I say, that the periodic times in ellipses are as the 3/2th power of
their greater axes.
In modern form, the greater axis has length 2a (section 10.1), so if the period
is T, then Proposition XV tells us that
We can also write this as
where κ is a constant that depends on the body and force parameters. Some
readers will immediately recall Kepler's third law, but Newton does not make
such connections until Book III. He does realize that this result—relating
periodic time and orbit size—does not depend on the eccentricity of the elliptic
orbit and so gives the following:
COR. Therefore the periodic times in ellipses are the same as in circles whose diameters are equal to
the greater axes of the ellipses (2a).
In Proposition XVII and its nine Corollaries, Newton gives an array (perhaps I
should say, a bewildering array) of results linking geometric and dynamical
properties of conic-section orbits. One of the simplest results is about the points
on the orbit where the body's speed is an extreme: “the velocities of bodies, in
their greatest and least distances from the common focus, are inversely as the
distance.” The body is moving fastest when it is at its closest point to the force
center at the focus, slowest when farthest away.
10.4. USING THE INITIAL CONDITIONS
Newton has now proved that if a body moves in a conic section under the
influence of a force centered at the focus, then that force must have an inverse-
square-law dependence on the distance from the center. He has also set out many

geometrical and dynamical properties of such orbits. One obvious question
remains: How do we tell which particular conic section will be followed, and
how are its defining geometrical properties decided? (In modern form, we
need the eccentricity ε and the size parameter p to be given in equation [10.2].)
Mathematically, we ask how the initial conditions or the launching conditions
pick out the correct orbit. Newton answers in his next Proposition and its
accompanying diagram:
PROPOSITION XVII. PROBLEM IX.
Supposing the centripetal force to be inversely proportional to the squares of the distances of places
from the centre, and that the absolute quantity of that force is known; it is required to determine the
line which a body will describe that is let go from a given place with a given velocity in the direction
of a given straight line.
The force center is at S, and the body is projected along the line PR (which
must, therefore, be tangent to the orbit at P). Newton shows how to fix the orbit
and identifies the conditions leading to an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola.
Naturally, his working is geometrical and presented in prose form with no
equations, and it rests heavily on results like those given in Proposition XVI.
Both modern and contemporary readers would struggle with the details, so again
I refer you to the “Further Reading” section if you wish to see Newton's working
explained in detail.
Figure 10.5. Newton's diagram for Proposition XVII. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
However, there is one important point that should be noted. In stating the
Proposition, Newton uses the words “it is required to determine the line which a
body will describe.” This sounds quite general (“the line”), but in his working,
Newton assumes that the orbit is a conic section. To be fair, Newton should
have replaced “the line” with “the particular conic section.” You may feel that I

am being excessively picky here, but this will become relevant when we delve
into a controversy in section 10.5.
10.4.1. Futuristic Theoretical Ideas
Attached to Proposition XVII are two Corollaries that point to theoretical
developments that have become of great importance. It is worth quoting them in
full:
COR. 3 Hence also if a body move in any conic section, and is forced out of its orbit by any impulse,
you may discover the orbit in which it will afterwards pursue its course. For by compounding the
proper motion of the body with that motion, which the impulse alone would generate, you will have
the motion with which the body will go off from a given place of impulse in the direction of a right
line given in position.
This is just the situation used when positioning a satellite in orbit around Earth
(or indeed in space exploration, around other planets). Small booster rockets
may be fired to push the satellite out of its orbit and into the new required orbit
—just as Newton explains (see figure 10.6).
Figure 10.6. Moving a satellite into a new orbit using an impulse from a booster rocket.
The second Corollary extends this thinking to a continuous force acting on an
orbiting body. Newton obviously has in mind things like the minor influence of

planets like Saturn and Jupiter on Earth's orbit, although that does not get
mentioned until Book III. Newton's ideas are those that underlie perturbation
theory, a branch of mathematics that has been used and refined ever since.
COR. 4. And if that body is continually disturbed by the action of some foreign force, we may nearly
know its course, by collecting the changes which that force introduces in some points, and estimating
the continual changes it will undergo in the intermediate places, from the analogy that appears in the
progress of the series.
10.5. DIRECT AND INVERSE PROBLEMS: THE
GREAT CONTROVERSY
I cannot leave this review of Section III, “Of the Motion of Bodies in Eccentric
Conic Sections,” without discussing one of the strangest and most contentious
parts of the Principia. Recall from chapter 9 how I explained that Newton set
himself the following direct problem: Given that a body moves in a conic section
with the force center at the focus, what is the nature of the force involved? The
inverse problem is then: given an inverse-square-law force, what is the nature of
the resulting orbits? Newton gave a formula for solving the direct problem (see
section 9.3), and, in this chapter, we have seen the application to conic-section
orbits.
However, after dealing with each conic section in turn in Propositions XI, XII,
and XIII, we find:
COR. 1. From the last three Propositions it follows, that if any body P goes from the place P with any
velocity in the direction of any right line PR, and at the same time is urged by the action of a
centripetal force that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the places from the
centre, the body will move in one of the conic sections, having its focus in the centre of force; and
conversely.
If you read that carefully, you will see that Newton is stating that both the
direct problem and the inverse problem have been solved—conic section
orbits imply inverse-square-law forces, and now, according to Corollary 1,
inverse-square-law forces produce conic-section orbits. Thus we have one of the
great results in the Principia.
10.5.1. What Is Wrong?
Nothing—except for the fact that it is not proven! Newton has not shown that
when the force is inverse-square law, there are no other orbits than those

described as conic sections. Because this is such a pinnacle in the Principia,
there should be a proof. Not to give a proof suggests an error of logic: it is just
not true that the solution of a problem implies the solution of its converse.
An example from number theory will make the point. Squaring any odd
number and then subtracting 1 produces a number that is a multiple of 8 (e.g., 32
– 1 = 8; 52 – 1 = 3 × 8; 72 – 1 = 6 × 8; and so on). However, it is not true that
every multiple of 8 can be written as the square of some odd number minus 1;
for example, try 4 × 8 = 32.
This is an old question in logic, and an early mathematical recognition of its
importance is given by Euclid in his Elements. Euclid's famous proposition 1.47
is Pythagoras's theorem, but then in proposition 1.48 he proves the converse. If a
triangle contains a right angle, then the square on the hypotenuse is equal to the
sum of the squares on the other two sides; however, you cannot assume that
finding that side's property in a triangle implies that there must be a right angle
without giving an independent proof. Someone of Newton's mathematical stature
was obviously aware of such things. Furthermore, if you recall, his very first
Proposition (Proposition I about sweeping out equal areas) was followed by its
converse and its proof in Proposition II.
10.5.2. Newton's Response
Even people like Halley, Hooke, and Huygens did not spot this deficiency in
Newton's work, but eventually there were rumblings and Johann Bernoulli
recognized the problem. Newton became aware of the defect and made an
addition for the second edition. By the time of the third edition (the one
discussed in this book), Corollary 1 as quoted above had been extended:
…For the focus, the point of contact, and the position of the tangent, being given, a conic section
may be described, which at that point shall have a given curvature. But the curvature is given from
the centripetal force and velocity of the body being given; and two orbits, mutually touching one the
other, cannot be described by the same centripetal force with the same velocity.
I will not go into details (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section), but
Newton is constructing a uniqueness argument—for the given conditions, a
conic section orbit can be constructed and there cannot be any other solution.
Although debate continued, apparently Johann Bernoulli accepted Newton's
argument:
Gladly I believe what you say about the Addition to Corollary 1, Proposition 13, Book I of your
incomparable work the Principia, that this was certainly done before these disputes began, nor have I
any doubts that the demonstration of the inverse proposition, which you have merely stated in the

first edition, is yours.1
But it is interesting to read on:
I only said something against the form of that assertion, and wished that someone would give an
analysis that led a priori to the truth of the inverse and without supposing the direct proposition to be
already known. This indeed, which I would not have aid to your displeasure, I think was first put
forward by me, at least as far as I know at present.2
The interested reader may also go to chapter 11 on the modern formulation to
find this problem set out in section 11.3.5.
10.5.3. Relevant Parts Elsewhere in the Principia
It is interesting to look back at the two examples of the use of the general
formula discussed in section 9.4. First, for a spiral orbit, Newton showed that an
inverse-cube force is responsible. However, he did not then say that inverse-cube
forces always lead to such spirals in a general way because he knew that was not
correct. Secondly, for the case of motion in an ellipse with the force center at the
ellipse center, he found the force to be directly proportional to the distance, and
he gives:
COR. 1. And therefore the force is as the distance from the centre of the ellipse; and, vice versa, if the
force is as the distance, the body will move in an ellipse whose centre coincides with the centre of
force, or perhaps a circle into which the ellipse may degenerate.
Again he has gone from the direct to the inverse problem, apparently without
any resulting controversy. In this case, Newton is correct (and I will return to this
in modern form in the next chapter).
Clearly Newton appreciated what was going on, but he did not clarify things
as he might have done. You might think that he successfully tackled the inverse
problem for inverse-square-law forces in Proposition XVI, as discussed in
section 10.4. However, as I pointed out, in the working, he actually assumed the
answer: the orbit takes the form of a conic section.
In chapter 13, I will describe how Newton solved the general problem of how
to find the orbit for any given force (the famous Proposition XLI). It would be
natural to illustrate the use of that result for the vitally important case of an
inverse-square-law force. But no, Newton uses an inverse-cube-law force as an
example!
It has been suggested that Newton was unable to carry out the mathematical
manipulations for the inverse-square-law case, but that is clearly not correct, as

the required mathematical steps were given by him elsewhere. So what are we to
make of all of this? Newton as perverse, arrogant, playful, weird, teasing,
flippant, ignorant, enigmatic…? Take your pick!
10.5.4. Yet Again!
It might seem astounding, but the whole controversy has been replayed some
three hundred years after the Principia first appeared. It all began with Robert
Weinstock's 1982 paper, “Dismantling a Centuries-Old Myth: Newton's
Principia and Inverse-Square Orbits.” There were more papers by Weinstock as
well as papers in response by a whole array of historians and mathematicians.
Even the eminent Russian mathematician V. I. Arnol'd became involved, and he
certainly accepted Newton's version: “Thus, there is no doubt about the
uniqueness and Newton correctly proved Kepler's first law.”3 Weinstock has now
died, so perhaps there is peace again. See the “Further Reading” section at the
end of this chapter to follow up on the details.
10.6. CONCLUSION
We have now learned about one of the great sections in the Principia. Newton's
major triumph was to show quite generally how conic-section orbits and inverse-
square-law forces are linked. This was the kind of sweeping, powerful, and high-
level mathematical generalization that people like Hooke were incapable of
making. See figure 10.7 for a map of Newton's work.
It is amazing that amid this mathematical brilliance, there lurks a controversial
step that, at its worst, would suggest a defect in Newton's logic and mathematical
working. However, for Newton, it all seems to be so obvious and his critics “are
deluded,”4 as he wrote in the late 1710s when explaining his approach to and use
of the orbit-uniqueness property.
It is also interesting to observe the level of mathematical development and
sophistication that are evident in the subject matter of that controversy. It is a
world away from anything to be found in Galileo's writings or in Descartes's
Principia Philosophiae; it is already approaching our modern treatments of the
subject. (And maybe Newton is being judged a little unfairly using modern
levels of rigor and completeness.)
Thinking about progress so far in the development of classical mechanics, as
outlined in figure 10.7, we can identify two holes that Newton should next fill in
(and he does!). First, if you compare the two flows in figure 10.7, it becomes

apparent that on the left (Newton's inverse problem, or the forces-to-orbits
problem), there is no box talking about the general solution. Filling this gap will
produce some of the outstanding results in the theory of classical mechanics.
Second, there is no mention of time—how do we know where on its orbit a
body will be at a specified time? This problem has a general formulation and
specific results for inverse-square-law orbits.
Before seeing how Newton meets those challenges (in chapters 12 and 13), I
think it will be useful to revisit the modern formulation and see how Newton's
results translate into the form we use today.
Figure 10.7. A flowchart for the developments in Principia Sections II and III.

10.7. FURTHER READING
The standard references given in section 6.9.1 should be consulted.
Perturbation methods are discussed by Goldstein and Moulton and are well
covered in the following source:
 
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
 
For the controversy over conics and inverse-square laws, see the books by
Brackenridge, Cohen (section 6.4), and Guicciardini, as well as references
therein. Also see:
 
Arnol'd, V. I. Huygens and Barrow, Newton and Hooke. Basel: Birkhauser
Verlag, 1990.
Guicciardini, N. “Johann Bernoulli, John Keill and the Inverse Problem of
Central Forces.” Annals of Science 52 (1995): 537–75.
Nauenberg, M. “The Early Application of the Calculus to the Inverse Square
Force Problem.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 64 (2010): 269–
300.
Pourciau, Bruce H. “On Newton's Proof That Inverse-Square Orbits Must Be
Conics.” Annals of Science 48 (1991): 159–72.
Weinstock, R. “Dismantling a Centuries-Old Myth: Newton's Principia and
Inverse Square Orbits.” American Journal of Physics 50 (1982): 610–17.
———. “Inverse Square Orbits in Newton's Principia and Twentieth-Century
Commentary Thereon.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 55
(2000): 137–62.
 
For a range of opinions on Newton's work and Weinstock's criticisms, see the
May 1994 issue of the College Mathematics Journal, which has responses by
scientists, historians, and Newton's major biographer, Richard Westfall.

Some readers may feel uneasy starting this chapter because it
introduces the modern theory of classical mechanics in its algebraic or
symbolic form and uses the tools of calculus. I hope that you will still
read on, because it is not absolutely essential to appreciate all the
details. I believe you can follow the nature of the development and see
the form of the equations—which variables are involved and the level
of complication. In summary, I believe that even without extensive
mathematical skills, you can still get a feel for the modern form of
classical mechanics, its triumphs, and its challenges.
Elements of the modern formulation have been given in sections 5.6, 6.6, and
8.5. Recall that we began with kinematics: a particle with mass m is assumed
small so that its position is specified by the position vector r (see figure 5.4),
which may depend on the time t, so we write r(t). A changing position leads to
the velocity vector v = dr/dt, and, in turn, a varying velocity leads to the
acceleration vector a = dv/dt. Dynamical matters are introduced when the
particle is characterized by its mass m and the force F that acts on it.
11.1. LAWS OF MOTION AND CONSEQUENCES
Newton's second law is written as
and we assume that an inertial frame of reference is being used (see section
6.6.3).
To make contact with Newton's procedures, we may note that a particle at
position r(t0) = r0 with velocity v0 may be tracked to a new position a short time
Δt later by substituting equation (11.1) into the first terms in a Taylor series for
r(t0 + Δt):

The first term gives the original position, the second term gives the inertial
motion change in the time Δt, and the third term is the effect of the force acting
for a time Δt. This is just what we have seen in Newton's working—see figure
9.1, for example.
If we use equation (11.1) together with Newton's third law, we can establish
the conservation of momentum law and solve for the motion of the center of
mass (see sections 6.6.1 and 6.6.2). If we assume a single particle and specify
that the force acting on it is a centripetal (central) force, then we can establish
the conservation of angular-momentum law (see section 8.5), equivalent to
Newton's result of equal areas swept out in equal times.
Those are general results in dynamics. We must now turn to the more specific
problem: given a force F, find the trajectory or orbit that a particle follows if at
time t = 0, say, it is launched from a given position with a given velocity. The
values for position and velocity at t = 0 are called the initial conditions.
11.2. THE EQUATION OF MOTION
The third form in equation (11.1) is called the equation of motion for the
particle. We assume that F depends on the position r, so F = F(r) and we have a
second-order differential equation for r(t). (It is second order because it
involves the second derivative d2r/dt2.) Because we are using vectors, the
equation contains details of the components of motion in all directions. If we use
(x,y,z) as the components of r and resolve (as Newton tells us how to do—see
section 6.2) in each direction, we find that there are really three equations:
Now the force F = (Fx, Fy, Fz), so the component of the force F in the x
direction is Fx, and so on.
Note that each component may still depend on all position coordinates; we
may have Fx = Fx(x, y, z), and only in special cases will we have just Fx = Fx(x).

In that way, the three equations in (11.3) are really coupled together, and that is
often what makes classical mechanics create such a tough problem.
A second-order differential equation, like those in equation (11.3) has a
solution that contains two arbitrary constants; they may be chosen so that the
initial conditions are satisfied. Said a different way, the initial position and
velocity are used to fix or pick out the particular path that the particle will
follow. Newton did that in his geometrical way in Proposition XVII, which I
discussed in section 10.4.
The best way to appreciate all of this is to look at relatively simple examples. I
will begin with Galileo's projectile problem (surely the simplest of all
meaningful problems) and then use the problem introduced by Newton as an
example for finding force laws (see section 9.4).
11.2.1. Projectile Motion
The motion of a projectile in a vertical plane, Galileo's famous problem,
provides a simple example. In this case, I take the x and y axes as shown in
figure 11.1. The only force operating is downward in the negative y direction
with constant magnitude mg, where g is the usual local gravitational constant.
Resolving the equation of motion (11.1) in the x and y directions gives
Figure 11.1. A projectile is launched from the origin at angle α to the x axis. There is a constant force mg
acting in the negative y direction.
This is a case where the equations are not coupled; the equation for x(t) does
not depend on y, and similarly for y(t). These equations of motion are easily
solved to give

As anticipated, we have four constants, A, B, C, and D, in the solution. If we
take the projectile to be launched at t = 0 from the origin with speed V and at an
angle α to the horizontal, as shown in figure 11.1, then those four constants are
determined, and
This is a case where we have the complete solution to the dynamical problem,
with both x and y known as functions of the time t. It is also easy to eliminate
time using the fact that
This is the parabolic path Galileo discovered, and we can find that the range
(the second point where y = 0) is a maximum when α is forty-five degrees, as he
predicted.
Notice in the y equation in (11.4) that the same m occurs on both sides. This is
because I have already assumed that the inertial mass and the gravitational mass
are equal, as discussed in section 5.1. I return to this point in a later chapter.
11.2.2. Linear Force Example
We assume an attractive central force (or centripetal force, as Newton would call
it) with a magnitude proportional to the distance from the force center (Newton's
example as discussed in section 9.4). This is called a linear force. Choosing the
center of force as the origin of coordinates gives the force and its resolved
components as
Here, k is a positive constant giving the force strength, and the minus sign makes
it into an attractive force. Assume motion is in the x–y plane, as shown in figure
11.2.

Figure 11.2. Motion under a linear force. The particle is initially at x = R and traveling in the y direction
with speed V.
This is a case where the equations in (11.3) are not coupled, and we simply get
These are relatively simple differential equations—they are linear, so only x
occurs in the first one, not x2 or other powers or more complicated functions of
x. Their solutions are
As expected for two second-order differential equations, there are four
constants in these general solutions, and they may be used to fit any given initial
conditions. For example, if at t = 0, the particle is crossing the x axis at x = R and
traveling in the y direction with speed V, as shown in figure 11.2, we must set
Thus, the solution is

The last expression—which follows by using the trigonometric identity
cos2(ωt) + sin2(ωt) = 1—tells us that the orbit is an ellipse, as shown in figure
11.2. Notice that the time dependence of all possible motions is exactly the same.
If the initial conditions are varied, the orbit will change:
if V = Rω, then the orbit will be a circle with radius R;
if V = 0, then y = 0 and the orbit is part of a straight line—the particle
oscillates along the x axis between x = R and x = –R.
Notice that, in this case, we have again completely solved the dynamical
problem. We have found the time dependence of the motion, the dependence
on the initial conditions, and we have also exhibited the form of the orbit.
That is the ideal solution, but it is rarely found as easily as it is in this case!
11.3. THE GENERAL-CENTRAL-FORCE CASE
I will assume that motion takes place in the x–y plane and take the origin as the
center of force. Thus the general force has the form 
, where  is the unit
vector in the r direction and r is the magnitude, so that 
 (see figure 11.3).
Because the force takes this form, the natural coordinates to use are the polar
coordinates (r,θ) rather than the Cartesian coordinates x and y.
11.3.1. Kinematics
We also need the unit vector , which is perpendicular to , as shown in figure
11.3. Then standard manipulations (see the texts listed in “Further Reading” for
section 6.9.1) give
The formula for the acceleration is a little more complicated because the
polar-coordinate unit vectors also change along the orbit. The result of
differentiating equation (11.13) is

Figure 11.3. A particle P has polar coordinates (r,θ).
11.3.2. Equations of Motion
We now take the equation of motion ma = F, with 
, and resolve in the 
and  directions using equation (11.14) for a:
These are two coupled, second-order differential equations. Solving them will
give r(t) and θ(t), and, hence, the body's position on its orbit at any time t.
However, even a casual glance at those equations suggests that is not usually a
very simple procedure to follow, and so some further theoretical development is
called for.

11.3.3. A Constant of Motion: Angular Momentum
If we multiply equation (11.16) by r, we obtain
We now recognize that this can be written as a total derivative,
A zero derivative means there is no variation with time, and this tells us that
This is exactly the conservation law that we discussed in chapter 8 and
embodied in equation (8.4). Thus the angular-momentum constant of motion
may also be found by examining the equation of motion resolved in the 
direction, that is, in the direction perpendicular to the force.
To complete the link, we can note that in polar coordinates, an element of area
dA (see figure 11.3) is given by (½)r2dθ, and we are led to
This says that the area is traced out at a constant rate, which is just the equal-
areas-swept-out-in-equal-times result, the geometric equivalent of the
conservation of angular momentum mh.
11.3.4. Simplifying the Equations of Motion
Recall that in section 8.4.1, I explained how the conservation of angular-
momentum law leads to a major advance in the theory, and now I can show that
in detail. The fact that h is a constant allows us to take two key steps:
 
first, replace the θ time derivative using

second, change time t derivatives to θ derivatives by the calculus chain rule

so that we have
Using those steps, we can convert equation (11.15) into the orbit shape
equation
Solving that equation will give us r as a function of θ, which is a formula
for the shape of the orbit. We no longer ask where the particle is at any given
time, but we find instead the complete orbit or trajectory.
Equation (11.21) involves only r and θ, but it is still a formidable-looking
equation. It takes a much simpler form if a variable change is made: instead of r,
I introduce the variable u, which is the reciprocal of r (as in, u = 1/r). The orbit-
shape equation then becomes an equation for u(θ):
This is a much friendlier-looking equation, although how easy it is to solve
will depend on the form of the force law.
11.3.5. An Important Example
If we consider an attractive inverse-square-law force with strength constant c, we
must set
Substituting into equation (11.22) gives

which can be written as
Equation (11.23) is a simple linear second-order equation with solution
where, as expected, there are two constants A and B that may be replaced by
constants A′ and β. Converting back to r, we get
Referring back to section 10.1, we can see that the solution in equation (11.24)
is a conic section, and if ε < 1, it is the ellipse-bound orbit. (The extra constant β
just sets the orientation of the ellipse relative to the x axis, or θ = 0 axis.) In
effect, Newton discusses how to fix the orbit constants in his Proposition XVII,
as we have seen in section 10.4.
Notice that equation (11.24) gives the complete solution for equation (11.23),
and, hence, for the equation of the possible orbits for an inverse-square-law
force. By appropriately choosing the constants A and B, all cases are covered.
This is the mathematical answer to Newton's inverse problem: if the force is
inverse square, then all possible particle trajectories are conic sections. This
is the missing explicit proof that caused the controversy discussed in section
10.5.
11.3.6. Time and Energy
If we use only the first simplification (equation [11.19]) in the equation of
motion (11.15), we get
which is the differential equation for r(t). However, writing

and integrating with respect to r changes equation (11.25) into
I have introduced the potential V(r) and the constant of integration E. This is
usually written as
This is simply kinetic energy plus potential energy equals the total energy E,
and we may show that E is truly a constant (independent of time), so that
equation (11.26) is a statement of the conservation of energy. Equation (11.26) is
now a first-order differential equation, so only one integration is required to find
r(t).
11.4. CONCLUSION
The above theory and examples illustrate the modern approach to classical
mechanics. For some examples, the complete time solution for particle motion
has been given. However, as in the case of Newton's development of the subject
outlined in the previous chapter, we are missing the method for finding the time
dependence for motion on central-force orbits and a way to give the general
solution. Those two problems will be addressed in the next two chapters, where
both Newton's and the modern approaches will be given.
Because you may have already thought of them, I mention here two
extensions to the above theory that Newton made, and which I will cover in later
chapters. The theory presented so far assumes small bodies, the classic “point
particle,” so we will have to find out how larger, composite bodies may be
included. It will also be necessary to go beyond this single-particle case and
consider several interacting bodies.
As we move to evermore complex situations, Newton's formulation of
classical mechanics becomes cumbersome and, at times, inadequate; therefore,

toward the end of the book, in chapter 28, I will briefly discuss other approaches
to the theory that were gradually developed over the centuries after Newton.
11.5. FURTHER READING
The textbooks listed in section 6.9.1 may be consulted. The book by Fowles is
recommended.

As Newton put it: “So far concerning the finding of orbits. It remains that we
determine the motions of bodies in the orbits so found.”
We know the orbits, but what about motion along them? Where on the orbit
will a body be at a given time? Thus in the Principia we come to Section VI:
“How the Motions Are to Be Found in Given Orbits.”
The orbits to be dealt with are the conic sections produced by inverse-square-
law forces.
This Section sees Newton at his mathematical best, producing results that we
still marvel at and use today. We also have Newton at his most difficult to read,
with more-intricate geometrical arguments presented in prose form and with
little thought about guidance for the reader. I am sure many people find this
Section impenetrable, and I will describe its contents largely in a modern setting.
This work is too important for it to be lost in obscurities (but see the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter for comment on that).
12.1. THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
We know that, generally, a body does not move at a uniform speed along its orbit
around a centripetal force center, the exception being motion in a circle.
However, we can be sure that the line from the force center to the body sweeps
out area at a constant rate (see figure 12.1). If a body moves from Q to P and in
so doing sweeps out an area AQP at the constant rate s, then the time τ taken to
move from Q to P is given by AQP = τs. If the total orbit encloses the area Atot
and the period is T, then s = Atot/T, so
Thus, if a body is at point Q on its orbit and we wish to know the point P,
which it will reach after a time τ, we first calculate the value of AQP according to
equation (12.1) and then use geometry to find the point P, which gives that area.

That is conceptually simple, but it is not so easy to implement practically, as we
shall see.
Figure 12.1. A square-law force has center O, and a body moves along its orbit from Q to P, sweeping out
an area AQP. When using polar coordinates (r,θ), the body at Q has the initial angle θ0.
In the modern formulation, the equal-areas-swept-out-in-equal-times law is
known as the conservation of angular momentum, as discussed in the previous
chapter, section 11.3.3. If we use polar coordinates (r,θ), as in figure 12.1, we
know that
The constant h gives the area-sweeping constant s in equation (12.1) as s =
(1/2)h (see section 11.3.3). We can integrate equation (12.2) to relate time and
orbit position if the orbit is known in the form r = r(θ). Let the body be at Q, θ =
θ0 at time t = 0. A time τ later, it is at P, as shown in figure 12.1. Then,
If we carry out the θ integration, we will have an equation involving time τ
and angle θ for the point P; for a given τ, we can therefore solve to find where on
the orbit the body will be. Of course, this is just the same as using equation
(12.1), but we are employing an algebraic description of the orbit.

12.2. MOTION ALONG A PARABOLA
This is not such an important case, but it is one where the time behavior can be
found quite easily.
Proposition XXX tells us how “to find at any assigned time the place of a body
moving in a given parabolic trajectory.” Newton's diagram is reproduced in
figure 12.2. The body starts at the vertex A and moves to the point P, sweeping
out the area ASP.
Figure 12.2. Newton's diagram for motion along a parabola from the vertex A to a point P. S is the focus,
and G is midway between A and S. The line GH is perpendicular to AGS. The area swept out in the motion
is ASP. The circle with center H and radius HS cuts the parabolic path at P. (From The Principia, trans.
Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton explains how to find the required area and solve the time problem.
Finding areas bounded by parabolas and straight lines was a problem solved by
ancient geometers. In its modern form, finding the time taken to reach a point on
the parabolic trajectory involves the solution of a cubic equation, and Newton
effectively does the same thing using a geometrical method. Interested readers
should consult the book by Chandrasekhar listed in the “Further Reading”
section at the end of the chapter.
12.3. MOTION ALONG AN ELLIPSE
This is one of the great problems of celestial mechanics and applied
mathematics, and it is fascinating to see Newton's approach to it.
We are now ready for Proposition XXXI, Problem XXIII: “To find the place of
a body moving in a given elliptic trajectory at any assigned time.” The situation
is shown in figure 12.3. The force center is at the ellipse focus F. In time τ the
body moves from Q to P, sweeping out the area AQP = FQPF. Using equation
(12.1) allows us to solve the given problem.
A difficulty arises when we try to calculate the area FQP; in contrast to the
parabolic case, there are no simple formulas for that area in the ellipse or for the

integral giving it in a modern formulation. The problem may be tackled using the
auxiliary circle, which is a circle of radius a just fitting around the ellipse, as
shown in figure 12.4. Points P on the ellipse are related to those on the auxiliary
circle P′ in a simple way: their y values are in the ratio b/a or, using figure 12.4,
NP = (b/a)NP′.
Figure 12.3. Motion on an ellipse with a major axis of length 2a, a minor axis of length 2b. The eccentricity
is 
 and the focus F is distance εa from the ellipse center O. The shaded area FQPF is swept
out as the body travels from Q to P.

Figure 12.4. The ellipse and its auxiliary circle. The perpendicular at N cuts the ellipse at P and the circle at
P′. There is a scaling property: NP = (b/a)NP′. Using O as the coordinate center, the point P′ has polar
coordinates (a,E), where E is the angle shown at O.
Areas of sectors of circles are easily obtained, and the area OQP′ is simply
(1/2)a2E, where E is the enclosed angle at O, as shown in figure 12.4. The area
of triangles is also easily calculated. Using that information and the properties of
the auxiliary circle leads to
(Brief details of how to prove this are given in section 12.4.1.) Substituting that
into equation (12.1) and using the fact that the ellipse has a total area of Atot =
πab gives
Historically, the angle E is known as the eccentric anomaly, and the angle θ at
F (see figure 12.4) is the true anomaly. We also define the mean anomaly M =
(2πτ/T). We finally arrive at the famous

Thus, given the time τ and the period T, we calculate M and then solve
Kepler's equation to find E, which gives point P′ on the auxiliary circle and,
hence, the required point P on the ellipse.
However, the difficulty of calculating areas of parts of ellipses has been
replaced by the need to solve Kepler's equation. That equation involves a sine,
and is therefore a transcendental equation, not something we immediately
recognize, as happened in the parabolic-motion case where we had to solve a
relatively simple cubic equation. After the subsection (for the mathematically
inclined reader) on the derivation of Kepler's equation, I will discuss approaches
to equation solving and how Newton used a range of them to tackle Kepler's
equation.
12.4.1. Deriving Kepler's Equation
The difficulty came in finding AQP = FQP. Looking at figure 12.4, we see that
FQP = ΔFNP + NQP.
It is the area NQP, with its curved boundary, that gives us trouble. However,
the scaling property of the auxiliary circle tells us that the troublesome area can
be related to the curved-boundary area in the circle:
NQP = (b/a)NQP′.
But NQP′ is just the difference between the sector area OQP′ and the triangle
area ΔONP′. Finally, then we have
FQP = ΔFNP + (b/a){OQP′ − ΔONP′}.
All of those areas can be evaluated in terms of the ellipse-length parameters a
and b and the eccentric anomaly, the angle E. Equation (12.4) follows after a
little algebra.
12.5. NEWTON'S APPROACHES TO KEPLER'S
EQUATION
We are now ready to discuss Newton's approach to Kepler's equation. It includes

some of the most remarkable mathematical results in the whole Principia.
Unfortunately, it is also one of the more opaque parts, and you must look
elsewhere (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section) if you want to battle
with Newton's own details! Of course, Kepler had already had his battles with
this problem long before Newton, and philosopher Alexandre Koyré gives some
relevant excerpts from Kepler's work with enlightening commentaries.
The problem, then, is to solve equation (12.6) to find E for a given M. It might
be useful to step back and ask what strategies we usually adopt when confronted
by such an equation-solving problem. There are three common possibilities:
Approach 1: Try to find a formula. For example, many people know the
formula for the roots of a quadratic, that is, for the values of x that make x2
+ bx + c = 0 for given constants b and c. There is also a formula for solving
cubics, and that is why the parabolic-motion problem is easily solved.
Approach 2: Tackle the problem visually. For example, to find the roots of the
quadratic, plot the function y = x2 + bx + c and observe where it crosses the
y axis to get the x values making y = 0. This is a very useful method for
complicated functions if a computer can be used. By drawing the graph on
a larger and larger scale, we can get the axis crossing points with greater
and greater accuracy.
Approach 3: Generate an approximate answer. This could involve producing a
formula giving an approximation to the exact answer. Or it could be a
method that produces a sequence of evermore accurate answers; such
iterative methods are of great importance and allow a crude first estimate
(perhaps obtained graphically) to be refined until an answer of the required
accuracy is obtained.
Kepler's equation is famous, and there is an extensive literature, including one
whole book about it giving many examples of all three approaches (see the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter). Perhaps we should not be
surprised that a master mathematician like Newton pioneered those approaches
and used them in the Principia.
12.5.1. Is There a Formula for Solving Kepler's Equation?
No doubt Newton looked for a formula, but when he could not find one, he set
himself a new task: prove that no such formula exists. This question of the
existence of solutions or methods is one of the great parts of mathematics, and
Newton gave us one of the earliest substantial examples.

Some readers may be reminded of the problem of solving polynomial
equations. By 1600, there were available the old formula for solving quadratic
equations and rather similar formulas for dealing with cubics and quartics—they
can be readily found today in mathematics handbooks. However, the extension
to quintics and beyond turned out to be difficult. Early in the nineteenth century,
mathematicians Niels Henrik Abel and Évariste Galois turned this problem
around, questioned the existence of the sought-after formulas, and finally proved
that they did not exist. Newton was doing a similar thing at the end of the
seventeenth century.
Newton gives:
LEMMA XXVIII.
There is no oval figure whose area, cut off by right lines at pleasure, can be universally found by
means of equations of any number of finite terms and dimensions.
It is necessary to read more of Newton's comments and proof to see more
clearly what is involved (see figure 12.5). For example, the oval is to be
algebraic, that is, it is the graph of P(x,y), where P represents some sort of finite
polynomial expression, such as that in equation (10.1) for the ellipse. The
Lemma states that any area A cut off by a line ax + by = c, where a, b, and c are
arbitrary constants, cannot be expressed in a finite polynomial form involving
those constants. In particular, Newton's Corollary states:
COR. Hence the area of an ellipse, described by a radius drawn from the focus to a moving body, is
not to be found from the time given by a finite equation.
Said another way, there is no finite polynomial formula that can be used to
give a solution of Kepler's equation.

Figure 12.5. The shaded areas in the oval described by P(x,y) cannot be evaluated using a finite polynomial
expression in terms of their defining constants, such as the line parameters a, b, and c for the area A.
It is amazing that Newton actually tackled the problem by generalizing and
enlarging it from ellipses to all ovals in a certain class. Equally amazing is
Newton's proof, which uses ideas about polynomials and topology that are well
in advance of what might be expected in the seventeenth century. Naturally, such
a stunning result raised questions about its validity, and certainly more must be
added, about levels of smoothness for example, to qualify the types of ovals that
may be used.
The wonder of Newton's Lemma XXVIII has continued to excite admiration
and questioning right up to the present day. (See this chapter's “Further Reading”
section for references for the proof and discussions of validity.) Here is the
eminent Russian mathematician V. I. Arnol'd writing in 1990:
In the Principia there are two purely mathematical pages containing an astonishingly modern
topological proof of a remarkable theorem on the transcendence of Abelian integrals.1
The magnitude of Newton's achievement is suggested by Arnol'd's claim that
“Newton's topological arguments outstripped the level of the science of his time
by two hundred years.”2 Arnol'd and colleagues have gone on to generalize
Newton's result, into higher dimensions, for example.
Thus, by an inspired piece of mathematics, Newton has shown that approach 1
is not useful for solving Kepler's equation.
12.5.2. The Visual, Geometric Approach

In the Corollary, Newton says the area of the ellipse cannot be found using a
polynomial equation, and he goes on to restate that in geometric terms:
And therefore [areas cutoff in ellipses] cannot be determined by the description of curves
geometrically rational. Those curves I call geometrically rational, all the points whereof may be
determined by lengths that are definable by equations; that is by the complicated ratios of lengths.
Other curves (such as spirals, quadratrixes and cycloids) I call geometrically irrational.
In fact, it is a kind of cycloid (a curve not defined by a polynomial equation)
that may be used to study Kepler's equation, as Newton himself explains. It is
probable that this approach goes back to Sir Christopher Wren, but (of course)
Newton gives no attribution!
A cycloid is the curve traced out by a point on the rim of a rolling circle;
however, in the present case, we need a curtate cycloid, which has the tracing
point displaced from the rim. An example is shown in the top diagram of figure
12.6. To present this approach to Kepler's equation in a modern form, we take
the curtate cycloid with the generating circle having radius 1, and the tracing
point a distance ε along a radius away from the rolling-circle center. If we set
that in the x–y plane, as in the bottom diagram in figure 12.6, the curve is given
in algebraic form by a pair of equations that specify a point (x,y) on the curve in
terms of a parameter E:
The curve is generated by varying the parameter E and plotting the resulting
pairs of x and y values.
Now we can see how to solve Kepler's equation (12.6). For a given M, we
locate x = M on the x axis, which, according to equation (12.7), just corresponds
to Kepler's equation. But now the required E can be read off because we have the
y value from the point on the curve corresponding to x = M. The path from x to y
is shown in the bottom diagram in figure 12.6. If the value of y is yM, as
indicated, then we can go to equation (12.7) and get
Thus, the appropriate cycloid allows us to go from M to yM and then to the
required eccentric anomaly E.

Figure 12.6. Top: A curtate cycloid generated by a point radial distance a from the center of a rolling circle.
Bottom: Setting this cycloid in the x–y plane, using a unit radius circle and displacement a = ε, the point x =
M leads to the y value yM.
This geometric or visual procedure, required for approach 2, gives us a way to
solve Kepler's equation. But in Newton's day without computers, it would have
been difficult and tedious to use, especially if considerable accuracy was
required and several values for ε were to be used. As Newton himself puts it,
“But since the description of this curve is difficult, a solution by approximation
will be preferable.” So, on to approach 3.
12.5.3. Approximation Methods
Newton used approximation techniques in his other writings on mathematics
dealing with polynomial equations, and his name is attached to numerical-
analysis methods still used today to solve nonlinear equations. (The recent book
by Guicciardini, listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter,
is a good reference.) It is unfortunate then that this part of the Principia is very
poorly expressed—at least that is my experience, and I suspect Newton's
contemporaries found it virtually unreadable, as I did. Clarification came in 1882
in a paper by J. C. Adams (who we will meet again when discussing Book III).
Here is the way Adams sees it.
To solve Kepler's equation for E when the time τ and, hence, the mean
anomaly M is given, assume that we have found an approximate answer E0

(perhaps using the graphical technique or some other estimation method). Then
E0 – ε sin(E0) = M0,
so the approximation E0 has led to M0 instead of M. An improved answer E1 is
then given by
This value E1 will lead to M1, and a next approximation is given by
If necessary, we can generate further approximations E3, E4,…until we have
the required accuracy. We expect the sequence of answers E0, E1, E2, E3, E4,…to
converge to the required exact answer E, which produces the given M when
substituted into Kepler's equation.
This is an application of what today is sometimes called the Newton-Raphson
method:
To solve the equation f(x) = 0, start with an initial estimate x0 and generate a sequence of
approximations x1, x2, x3, x4,…using the iteration scheme
We may find it difficult to follow how Newton carried it out, but he did use
approach 3 and showed how to find solutions, noting that “it converges so very
fast, that it will be scarcely ever needful to proceed beyond the second term.”
12.6. CONCLUSIONS
That wonderful result about equal areas being swept out in equal times (or the
conservation of angular momentum, in modern terms) allows us to calculate the
form of orbits and trajectories, as explained in the previous chapters. However,
when we ask where a body will be at a given time, we must use it in a different

way, as set out in section 12.1. The result is a scheme that is conceptually simple
but that can be difficult to implement in practice. For motion governed by
inverse-square-law forces, the required calculation is relatively simple for
motion on a parabola, but it throws up a most challenging problem for the vitally
important case of motion on an ellipse. Newton takes on the challenge and, in a
virtuoso performance, demonstrates his abilities as both pure mathematician
(taking on fundamental existence questions) and applied mathematician (giving
practical schemes for generating solutions to any required accuracy).
It is quite startling to come across Lemma XXVIII when reading the Principia.
The result is so unexpected and powerful that one can only wonder how Newton
ever got to it. Kepler had beautifully set out the ellipse problem and asked for
help with it; it took a Newton to see that the way forward involved an
enlargement of the problem and a radically new approach to a mathematical
existence proof.
12.7. FURTHER READING
See the classical-mechanics books listed in section 6.9.1 and the many books on
celestial mechanics, such as:
 
Baittin, R. H. An Introduction to the Mathematics and Methods of
Astrodynamics. New York: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 1987.
Grossman, N. The Sheer Joy of Celestial Mechanics. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1996.
[an almost whimsical book, but yes, a joy to read]
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Sterne, T. E. An Introduction to Celestial Mechanics. New York: Interscience
Publishers, 1960.
 
For more about Kepler and his related work, see chapter 6 in Linton and:
 
Gingerich, O. Dictionary of Scientific Biography. Edited by Charles C. Gillespie.
New York: Scribner, 1973, s.v. “Kepler.”
———. The General History of Astronomy. Vol. 2. Edited by R. Taton and C.
Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989, s.v. “Johannes
Kepler.”
Koyré, A. The Astronomical Revolution. 3rd ed. London: Routledge, 2009.

[especially ch. 9, “Astronomy with the Ellipse”]
 
For details and explanations of Newton's mathematics as discussed in this
chapter, see:
 
Guicciardini, N. Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2009. [in particular, see sec. 10.2.6, ch. 11, and
sec. 13.3]
 
For more on Lemma XXVIII and the areas of ovals, see:
 
Arnol'd, V. I. Huygens and Barrow, Newton and Hooke. Basel: Birkhauser
Verlag, 1990.
Arnol'd, V. I., and V. A. Vasil'ev. “Newton's Principia Read 300 Years Later.”
Current Science 61 (1991): 89–95.
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995. [detailed discussion in sec. 37]
Pesic, P. “The Validity of Newton's Lemma 28.” Historia Mathematica 28
(2001): 215–19.
Pourciau, Bruce. “The Integrability of Ovals: Newton's Lemma 28 and Its
Counterexamples.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 55 (2001):
479–99. [highly recommended]
 
There is a considerable literature on Kepler's equation and methods of
solution. Baittin devotes his forty-six-page chapter 5 to the subject. There is
debate about the numerical analysis methods used. The book-length study by
Colwell contains 432 references for further study.
 
Adams, J. C. “On Newton's Solution of Kepler's Problem.” Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 43 (1882): 43–49.
Chabert, J.-L. A History of Algorithms. Berlin: Springer, 1994.
Colwell, Peter. Solving Kepler's Equation over Three Centuries. Richmond, VA:
Willmann-Bell, 1993.
Dutka, J. “A Note on Kepler's Equation.” Archive for the History of the Exact
Sciences 51 (1997): 59–65.
Goldstine, H. H. A History of Numerical Analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1997.
Kollerstrom, N. “Thomas Simpson and ‘Newton's Method of Approximation’:
An Enduring Myth.” British Journal for the History of Science 25 (1992):

347–54.

We have now seen how Newton established the conceptual basis of classical
mechanics, set out the laws of motion, showed how to deduce general properties
(such as the conservation of both momentum and angular momentum), and
explained the link between forces, inertial motion, and a body moving on an
orbit. He gave a general theory for finding the centripetal or central force
responsible for any particular given orbit or trajectory (his direct problem). The
details were given for inverse-square-law forces. What remains to be done?
Newton has yet to give a general formalism for deducing the motion that results
when a body is launched onto a trajectory governed by an arbitrary centripetal
force. That is Newton's inverse problem, but today it is the main thrust in
the presentation of classical mechanics. He fills in this gap in Sections VII and
VIII, which I discuss in this chapter. This work must rank as one of the great
pinnacles in the Principia.
A good, very detailed explanation of Newton's work in these sections is given
by Chandrasekhar (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter).
I will give enough mathematical details to link Newton's work with the modern
formalism, and I urge all readers to follow the conceptual flow, even if they are
not overfamiliar with the precise manipulations involved. As is my intention
with the whole book, the main goal is to appreciate the overall scheme.
13.1. MOTION IN ONE DIMENSION
A modern textbook will use the one-dimensional case as the easiest vehicle for
demonstrating how the theory works. Newton has not followed that strategy in
the Principia until now, when we find Section VII: “Concerning the Rectilinear
Ascent and Descent of Bodies.”
Propositions XXXII to XXXVIII solve problems of bodies moving, falling, or
rising along a line and with various forces acting on them. As we now expect
from Newton, a clever approach is involved: take the motions already described
(like motion along an ellipse) and consider the limiting case when the orbit
shrinks to a line (the width of the ellipse minor axis shrinks to zero). Using the

array of results given in earlier Propositions and their Corollaries allows Newton
to solve several specific cases of motion in one dimension.
However, things change when we reach Proposition XXXIX, which tells us
how to deal with motion in one dimension in general. Before coming to that,
readers may like to stop and check what is meant by a general solution and what
will be involved.
13.1.1. What Is Required?
For motion along the x axis, say, we will need to use the second law:
Can we give advice about how to find the resulting motion x(t) other than
“solve the differential equation when given the force F”? It may be useful to step
back and ask what is actually involved.
Given a function x = x(t), a chain of derivatives may be created
The chain is reversed when we use integration to reduce the order of the
derivative:
Thus, to solve the second-order differential equation (13.1), two
integrations will be involved. For example, for the simplest case of a constant
force (Galileo's problem), we find
The “constants of integration,” A and B, are used to fit initial conditions, as
explained in chapter 11. In this case of a constant force, the integrations are
almost trivially simple, but that will not be the case in general. Is there any help
that can be given? Is there a formula that says, “Plug your given F(x) in here,
and these integrals will lead to the required answer”?

13.1.2. Newton's Response
PROPOSITION XXXIX. PROBLEM XXVII.
Supposing a centripetal force of any kind, and granting the quadratures of curvilinear figures; it is
required to find the velocity of a body, ascending or descending in a right line, in the several places
through which it passes, as also the time in which it will arrive at any place; and vice versa.
Note that the force is now “of any kind,” and “granting the quadratures of
curvilinear figures” means assuming we can do any required integrations.
Newton's figure is reproduced in the left diagram of figure 13.1. The body starts
at A and moves toward the force center C; we wish to know the velocity and
time associated with some point E. You can see that Newton will be using the
small (infinitesimal) motion from D to E in his derivation. I will briefly go
through Newton's instructions here and then put them into a modern (and, I
suspect, more understandable) form later.
Figure 13.1. Left: Newton's figure for motion from A toward the force center at C. Middle: The shaded area
is proportional to the square of the velocity at E. Right: The shaded area leads to the time taken to reach E.
(Originally from The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995]; modified
by Annabelle Boag.)
Newton tells us to construct the curve BFGg so that the distance of each point
on that curve from the line of motion APDEC is equal to the force acting; for
example, AB will be equal to the magnitude of the force acting at A, DF will be
the magnitude of the force acting at D. Then:
the velocity of the body in any place E will be as a right line whose square is equal to the curvilinear
area ABGE. Q.E.I.

Thus we can get the velocity by knowing the area shown shaded in the
middle diagram in figure 12.1, and that is essentially the first integral to be
done. Now we can construct the curve VLMm: for the point M on that curve, the
length EM is inversely proportional to the square root of the area just considered,
which is ABGE, in this case. Then:
the time in which the body in falling describes the line AE will be as the curvilinear area ABTVME.
Q.E.I.
The required shaded area is shown in the right diagram in figure 13.1,
and that is the second integral in the solving process.
13.1.3. In Modern Terms
A little calculus converts equation (13.1) into
Now one integration is easily done to get
This is exactly Newton's prescription for finding the velocity, expressed here
in terms of equations, whereas Newton uses proportions. Since the right-hand
side of equation (13.2) is a function of x alone, the equation is easily integrated
to get
This is Newton's second integral. When the two integrals are evaluated, there
will be the usual constants of integration for fitting the initial conditions: the
value of x and the initial speed at Newton's starting point A in the left diagram in
figure 13.1.
Newton has clearly understood the two-step integration process described in
section 13.1.1, and he has given the required integrals expressed as areas under

curves rather than in analytic form, as in equations (13.2) and (13.3).
13.2. SOME GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Some readers may recognize that Newton is doing indirectly (as we illustrated in
section 13.1.3) what today we do more directly using energy concepts. Today we
talk about
Then the conservation of energy, K + V = E, a constant, leads directly to
equation (13.2) and Newton's equivalent, geometrically expressed result.
However, it is important to note that Newton did not introduce the idea of
potential energy or the conservation of energy in the Principia. Those ideas
were developed much later, as I will outline in chapter 28. Nevertheless, as
we have seen in the equations above, he was manipulating terms like K and V in
his own version of a type of energy argument. In section 13.3, we will see how
he makes that explicit for the general centripetal case.
13.2.1. A Historical Aside
Some ideas about energy were lurking in the early work of people like Galileo
and Huygens. Their main result was very clearly set out by Huygens (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section):
Huygens's Proposition VIII
If, from the same height, a body descends by a continuous motion through any number of contiguous
planes having any inclinations whatsoever, it will always acquire, at the end, the same velocity;
namely, a velocity equal to that which would be acquired by falling perpendicularly from the same
height.
Huygens's Proposition IX
If, after falling, a body converts its motion upward, it will rise to the same height from which it came,

no matter how many contiguous plane surfaces it may have crossed, and no matter what their
inclinations are.1
We would say that the initial potential energy is converted into the same
amount of kinetic energy no matter what path is taken to the new lower level.
Equally, that kinetic energy is converted back into potential energy as the
particle rises, again no matter which path is taken.
This idea of path independence is the key to the definition of work done and
conservative forces, as well as the definition of a potential from which forces
may be calculated by differentiation, as in equation (13.5). The discovery of that
idea and its use by Galileo, Huygens, and Newton was vital for the progress of
classical mechanics, even though the step to potential theory was not explicitly
taken and a statement of the conservation of energy was still some way off (see
chapter 28).
In fact, even the notion of kinetic energy was not well established in Newton's
day. Leibnitz championed the importance of vis viva, or “living force” (mv2), and
its conservation in collisions. Of course, we now know that both linear
momentum and kinetic energy are conserved in elastic collisions. Leibnitz also
introduced vis mortua, or “dead force,” which has connections with what today
we would call potential energy, but he did not have the concept of general
conservation laws.
13.3. GENERALIZING THE PATH-FREE RESULT
Newton is now ready to move on to the more complex case in Section VIII: “Of
the Invention of Orbits Wherein Bodies Will Revolve, Being Acted upon by Any
Sort of Centripetal Force.”
There are three Propositions in this section, and the first extends the Galileo-
Huygens result given above.
PROPOSITION XL. THEOREM XIII.
If a body, acted upon by any centripetal force, is any how moved, and another body ascends or
descends in a right line, and their velocities be equal in any one case of equal altitudes, their
velocities will be also equal at all altitudes.
Notice that we now have any “centripetal force,” not just the gravitational
force of Galileo and Huygens, and we have a clear statement linking position
and velocities. Newton's diagram is reproduced in figure 13.2. Although it is not
emphasized, the motion takes place in a plane—something we know right back

from Proposition I.
Essentially, Newton is saying that if a body moves from a given point to
another point nearer to the force center, its new velocity does not depend on the
path taken to that second point. The proof involves the motion from the circle ID
to KNE, and Newton uses the fact that the influence of the force is only in the
direction toward the force center. (Again we note that Newton has the key
concept—path independence—that leads on to work done and potential energy,
although he himself does not explicitly make that step.)
The same result holds for motion away from the force center:
By the same reasoning, bodies of equal velocities and equal distances from the centre will be equally
retarded in their ascent to equal distances.
Figure 13.2. Newton's diagram showing a body starting at A and moving toward a force center C. ID and
KNE are parts of circles centered on C. The body may move from V to E along the line AVDEC, or to K
along the curve VITK so that it is still the same distance from the force center C. Proposition XL says that
the velocities at E and K are equal. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 1995].)
13.3.1. Application to Constrained Motion
Newton now tells us that the theory holds in a more complicated situation, one
we consider in greater detail in chapter 15.
When a body is constrained, as by the string in a pendulum or by a smooth
surface on which it slides, the forces responsible for the constraint (the tension in
the string or the reaction force of the surface) do no work on the body and so do
not affect its speed. Newton beautifully sets out this in a Corollary that is worth
quoting in full:
COR. 1. Therefore if a body oscillates by hanging to a string, or by any polished and perfectly
smooth impediment is forced to move in a curved line; and another body ascends or descends in a

right line, and their velocities be equal at any one equal altitude, their velocities will be also equal at
all other altitudes. For by the string of the pendulous body, or by the impediment of a vessel perfectly
smooth, the same thing will be effected as by the transverse force NT [see figure 13.2]. The body is
neither accelerated nor retarded by it, but only obliged to leave its rectilinear course.
(Note that Newton should probably say “speed” rather than “velocity,” as
velocity usually implies a direction as well as a speed.) In essence, this is very
close to the conservation-of-energy law that we use to solve such problems, but
the potential energy subtly enters via the speed, known through Galileo's work
for simple vertical motion through a given height.
13.3.2 A Mathematical Example
As an example, Newton takes a power-law attractive force, so that in our terms
F(r) = −krn−1, where k is the force-strength constant. Again it might be apt to
quote Newton's own words:
COR. 2. Suppose the quantity P to be the greatest distance from the centre to which a body can
ascend, whether it be oscillating, or revolving in a trajectory [so the speed at P will be zero]…. Let
the quantity A be the distance of the body from the centre in any other point of the orbit; and let the
centripetal force be always as the power An−1, of the quantity A, the index of which power n−1 is
any number n diminished by unity. Then the velocity in every altitude A will be as 
, and
therefore will be given. For by Prop. XXXIX, the velocity of a body ascending or descending in a
right [straight] line is in that very ratio.
In modern terms, we say that
 
the force F(r) = – krn–1 corresponds to the potential V(r) = (k/n)rn,
 
and the conservation of energy for the points r = A and r = P leads to
I have set vP to zero, as required, and then we can solve to get the speed at A
as
which is just Newton's result. As we know from earlier discussions, Newton is
actually doing something very similar when he uses his Proposition XXXIX.

13.4. THE GENERAL FORCE-TO-ORBIT RESULT
Everything is now in place for Newton to tell us how to find the orbit
corresponding to any given central force. Here is one of the Principia’s most
famous Propositions:
PROPOSITION XLI. PROBLEM XXVIII.
Supposing a centripetal force of any kind, and granting the quadratures of curvilinear figures; it is
required to find as well the trajectories in which bodies will move, as the times of their motion in the
trajectories found.
Newton gives a diagram (here, figure 13.3) and begins:
Let any centripetal force tend to the centre C, and let it be required to find the curve VIKk.
I will make no attempt to explain Newton's working, but refer the interested
reader to Chandrasekhar's book. However, I will point out that the circles drawn
with center C to give the points Y and X, and points K and N, indicate that
Newton is, in effect, using polar coordinates. The change from I to K involves
what we would call infinitesimal radial (dr) and infinitesimal angular (dθ)
changes. The results involve the various areas arising in the figure—you might
recognize the area VIC as the area swept out as the body moves from V to I and,
hence, proportional to the time, as Newton states.
Figure 13.3. Newton's diagram to support Proposition XLI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
In modern terms, using the theory presented in chapter 11, we can derive the
following equations:

Chandrasekhar's book should be consulted to see how that is equivalent to
Newton's work. Thus, as long as we can do the integrations (“granting the
quadratures of curvilinear figures”), we can find the orbit equation and the time
taken to move along it by substituting the given force F(r) into those formulas.
In Corollaries 1 and 2, Newton explains how we can find the apsides of the
orbits, that is, the places where the body is nearest or farthest away from the
force center. I will return to this in the next chapter.
13.4.1. The Famous (or Infamous) Corollary 3
Of course, we expect Newton to give an example of the use of such an important
result, and he does so. However, it is not the one many people expect to read.
Recall that in chapter 10 we saw how Newton caused great controversy by not
giving an explicit proof of the fact that the trajectories produced by an inverse-
square-law force are just the conic sections. Now, this Corollary seems to
provide the perfect opportunity for him to supply the required proof; simply set
F(r) = −k/r2 and use the defined procedure to spit out the conic sections. But he
does not do that! Some people have claimed that Newton could not do the
required integrations, but that is not correct, as he tabulated such integrals
elsewhere. Or, he may have genuinely thought his working (as described in
chapter 10) was sufficient, so why labor the point?
Newton chose the inverse-cube-law force, F(r) = −k/r3, as his example.
Chandrasekhar gives the details of Newton's work, and the old book by Horace
Lamb gives a complete treatment of the inverse-cube-law case. Newton ended
his Corollary with words that must have exasperated any reader:
All these things follow from the foregoing Proposition, by the quadrature of a certain curve, the
invention of which, as being easy enough, for brevity's sake I omit.
Little wonder that Newton managed to aggravate so many people! One person
who asked Newton for help was David Gregory, and in 1694, Newton wrote to
him explaining how it works out. Amazingly the letter survives, and you can see

(in figure 13.4) that Newton is using a form of calculus that is quite familiar to
us today to carry out the integrations. For more on the whole story, I refer you to
the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
Figure 13.4. Part of Newton's letter written to David Gregory in 1694 explaining how to deal with the
inverse-cube case used in Corollary 3. (Image reproduced by permission of the Royal Society.)
The inverse-power-law forces F(r) = −k/rn for which the integral in equation
(13.6) can be evaluated in terms of readily available functions (such as elliptic
functions) have been identified; details are in the classic texts by Goldstein and
Whittaker.

13.5. INITIAL CONDITIONS
Section VIII concludes with
PROPOSITION XLII. PROBLEM XXIX.
The law of centripetal force being given, it is required to find the motion of a body setting out from a
given place, with a given velocity, in the direction of a given right line.
Newton is now saying that, having found the possible paths for a body with
the “law of centripetal force being given,” this is how to use the initial conditions
(that is, the launching position and velocity) to pick out the particular path taken.
Of course—as always—his result is couched in geometric terms.
In modern terms, we use the initial conditions to fit the integration constants,
as explained in section 13.1.1. Because we began with two second-order
differential equations, there will be four constants to cover all the initial
conditions. (That could be the starting values of the polar coordinates r and θ and
the two components of the initial velocity vector, perhaps the speeds in the radial
and angular directions.) Using equations (13.6), there are three integrations to be
carried out, each one with an associated constant of integration. The angular-
momentum constant h is also involved, making the fourth constant for dealing
with those initial conditions.
It might seem that this is a rather mundane final step in the whole process, but
Nobel laureate Eugene Wigner has a different opinion: “The surprising discovery
of Newton's age is just the clear separation of laws of nature on the one hand and
initial conditions on the other.”2
He explains the importance of this discovery as follows:
The world is very complicated and it is clearly impossible for the human mind to understand it
completely. Man has therefore devised an artifice which permits the complicated nature of the world
to be blamed on something which is called accidental and thus permits him to abstract a domain in
which simple laws can be found. The complications are called initial conditions; the domain of
regularities, laws of nature. Unnatural as such a division of the world's structure may appear from a
very detached point of view, and probable though it is that the possibility of such a division has its
own limits, the underlying abstraction is probably one of the most fruitful ones the human mind has
made. It has made the natural sciences possible.3
Newton certainly understood and used this division. For example, he
discovered that an inverse-square-law force gives rise to paths that may be
ellipses, parabolas, or hyperbolas, and, in Proposition XVII, he explained how
varying the initial conditions could lead to a body following each of them.
Whether he realized that such a division “has made the natural sciences

possible” seems unlikely, but from what we know of the man, he would have
happily taken the attached credit and kudos!
13.6. DISCUSSION
Section VIII of the Principia is surely one of the most momentous in the whole
book. Newton has reached a pinnacle: he has drawn together all previous results
to present a complete prescription for the solution of the problem of a body
moving under the influence of an arbitrary centripetal force. Proposition XLI
surely represents one of science's greatest achievements. Proposition XLII then
tells us how to use that result in any particular circumstance.
One can only wonder at the leap from the working of Galileo, Descartes, and
even Huygens to the mathematically advanced and generalized theory described
in the Principia.
Newton does use what today we call the conservation of angular momentum,
but he does not have the concept of mechanical energy and its conservation,
which is a key element in the modern approach and solution of dynamical
problems. However, in the fully general Proposition XL, he does exhibit the vital
property that lies behind the energy method, and he masterfully uses that
property to produce his route to that general solution of dynamical problems.
What Newton achieves in Section VIII is equivalent to our modern
formulation of classical mechanics for the one-body case with central
(centripetal) forces. Of course, Newton's mathematical language is completely
different and bewildering; we are reminded of Whewell's analogy to some
ancient “gigantic implement of war” that “makes us wonder what manner of man
he was who could wield as a weapon what we can hardly lift as a burden” (see
section 7.6).4 This may be a good time to ask why Newton did not help readers a
little more and include more of the mathematical notation and formalism that
was being developed at that time. It is fascinating to read Newton's own view of
the situation written in the late 1710s:
To the mathematicians of the present century, however, versed almost wholly in algebra as they are,
this [the Principia’s] synthetic style of writing is less pleasing, whether because it may seem too
prolix and too akin to the method of the ancients, or because it is less revealing of the manner of
discovery. And certainly I could have written analytically what I had found out analytically with less
effort than it took me to compose it. I was writing for Philosophers steeped in the elements of
geometry, and putting down geometrically demonstrated bases for physical science. And the
geometrical findings which did not regard astronomy and physics I either completely passed by or
merely touched lightly upon.5

Some of this must be read in the context of the controversies discussed in
section 7.5. Whether or not Newton “had found out analytically” as much as he
claimed is possibly still debatable, but he is certainly correct in saying that we
later readers would have been happier with less geometry and more analysis!
Section VIII also contains the celebrated Corollary 3, with its mysterious
choice of inverse-cube-force law as an example. In some ways, it is sad to find
that the magnificence of Proposition XLI is almost ignored, or perhaps nowadays
taken for granted, but it is also testament to the enduring curiosity about Newton
the man and the controversies in which he became embroiled.
13.7. FURTHER READING
As always, the reader may consult the books recommended in section 6.9.1. The
book by Chandrasekhar is very useful for unpicking Newton's arguments in
Section VIII. The books by Goldstein (particularly sec. 3.5) and Whittaker (sec.
48) give details of the integrable-power-law cases.
Huygens's propositions are given in:
 
Huygens, Christiaan. The Pendulum Clock; or, Demonstrations concerning the
Motion of Pendula as Applied to Clocks. Translated from the original 1673
Horologium Oscillatorium by Richard J. Blackwell. Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1986. [see part 2, in particular]
 
For details about work done by forces and path independence, see any of the
dynamics texts, such as Whittaker (specifically, sec. 22) and Goldstein (ch. 1),
and, for deeper discussion and historical details, see:
 
Lindsay, R. B., and H. Margenau. Foundations of Physics. New York: Dover,
1957.
 
For vis viva and Leibnitz's contributions, see:
 
McDonough, Jeff. Leibnitz's Philosophy of Physics. In Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. 
Stanford 
University Metaphysics 
Research 
Lab. 2007.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/Leibnitz-physics/.
Smith, George E. “The Vis Viva Dispute: A Controversy at the Dawn of
Dynamics.” Physics Today 59 (October 2006): 31–36.
 

For greater discussion of Corollary 3, see Guicciardini as cited in section
6.9.1; also see:
 
Brackenridge, J. B. “Newton's Easy Quadratures ‘Omitted for the Sake of
Brevity.’” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 57 (2003): 313–36.
Erlichson, H. “The Visualization of Quadratures in the Mystery of Corollary 3 to
Proposition 41 of Newton's Principia.” Historia Mathematica 21 (1994): 148–
61.
Guicciardini, N. Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2011. [see sec. 12.2.1]
Lamb, Horace. Dynamics. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1945. [sec. 91 gives a full analysis of motion under the influence of an
inverse-cube force]

With a theory in place for finding orbits corresponding to any given centripetal
force, it seems natural to ask whether there are any general properties of such
orbits that may now be deduced. For the inverse-square-law case, the orbit is an
ellipse and the body continually traces out the same, fixed path with exactly the
same apsides (points where the distance from the force center is greatest or
least). Knowing about such “motions of bodies in immovable orbits,” Newton
says, “it remains now to add something concerning their motions in orbits which
revolve around the centres of force.” Thus we get to Section IX: “The Motion of
Bodies in Movable Orbits; and the Motion of the Apsides.”
This might sound like the theorist at play, and in some ways it is, but there is
more to it than that. To appreciate what Newton is doing, we need to go back to
his Preface and recall the following statement:
I offer this work as the mathematical principles of philosophy, for all the difficulty of philosophy
[what we today might call natural philosophy or science] seems to consist in this—from the
phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature, and then from these forces to demonstrate
the other phenomena; and to this end the general propositions in the first and second books are
directed.
Newton is seeking results that will help with that task of “from the phenomena
of motions to investigate the forces of nature.” In particular, as we shall see when
we get to Book III, the results Newton presents in this chapter play a vital role
when he applies his theory to gravity, the solar system, and the motion of the
Moon.
Section IX also shows us some wonderfully inventive mathematical arguments
and emphasizes yet again the sophistication of Newton's work. He presents
general results, gives useful examples, and comes close to giving us one of the
classic theorems in dynamics—one not proven until almost two hundred years
after the Principia first appeared.
14.1. BOUNDED ORBITS
Much of our thinking is colored by the inverse-square-law case: we have
unbounded parabolic and hyperbolic motion, as well as bounded motion on an

ellipse, a special case of which is the circle. When discussing his definitions,
Newton recognized that a body “might never fall to earth but go forward into the
celestial spaces, and proceed in its motion in infinitum,” if it has a suitable
velocity, which we call the escape velocity (see section 5.4.1). Thus the
boundary between the two types of motion is clear, but what can we say about
the nature of bounded motion?
At the apsides, where r takes on its maximum and minimum values, dr/dt will
be zero. In the modern formulation, this can be investigated using the energy
equation, equation (11.26), which at the apsides becomes
For the types of potentials V(r) of interest (for example, see section 13.3.2),
this equation has two solutions r = rmin and r = rmax. We may conclude that the
bounded motion in the r–θ plane is confined between two circles with radii rmin
and rmax, as shown in figure 14.1.
For motion on an ellipse, the apsides are fixed and the body repeatedly
touches the limiting circles at the same points, as shown in figure 14.1(a).
However, for some types of motion, the body's trajectory may wander around in
the space between the two circles, as shown in figure 14.1(b).
Thus the apsides may move around, they may rotate around the limiting
circles, and that is basically what Newton is concerned with in Section IX. When
do we get rotation? And how fast will it be?
Figure 14.1. The diagram in (a) shows a fixed elliptical orbit as given by an attractive force proportional to

distance (see section 11.2.2); the diagram in (b) shows a rotating orbit from a different type of force.
14.2. ROTATING ORBITS
Newton begins his investigation by introducing an ingenious problem in two
propositions:
PROPOSITION XLIII. PROBLEM XXX
It is required to make a body move in a trajectory that revolves about the centre of force in the same
manner as another body in the same trajectory at rest.
Figure 14.2. Newton's diagram for Proposition XLIII. The center of force is at C, and the orbit VPK is fixed
while the dotted orbit is rotating. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 1995].)
Both bodies start at V, and one follows the fixed orbit VPK. The second body
follows the same orbit, but that orbit now has a rotation around the center of
force C. Thus the initial orbit point V has moved to u, and when the first body is
at P on the fixed orbit, the second is at p on the rotating orbit (see figure 14.2).
Newton shows that, for the second motion, we still have equal area swept out
in equal time by the line Cp. This tells us (according to Proposition II) that there
is a centripetal force that can produce the second motion on the rotating orbit.
However, we know how to find the force when the orbit is given (as reviewed in
chapter 9), and that leads Newton to the following:
PROPOSITION XLIV. THEOREM XIV
The difference of the forces, by which two bodies may be made to move equally, one in a quiescent
[fixed], the other in the same orbit revolving, varies inversely as the cube of their common altitude.
This result may be appreciated more easily if I translate it into modern terms.
Suppose the first body under the influence of a centripetal (central) force has a
fixed orbit given by r1 = g1(θ1), and the second body on the rotating orbit has r2

= g2(θ2). When the first body is at θ1, the second body is at θ2 = λθ1, where λ
characterizes the rotation rate for the orbit. Because the r values are the same, we
must have
g2(θ2) = g2(λθ1) = g1(θ1).
The angular momentum or equal-areas-law constants are also linked by λ, the
rotation rate, h2 = λh. There is orbit rotation when λ differs from 1. Now we can
show that, if the first body is moving under the influence of an attractive force
F(r) = −f(r), then the second body is moving on an orbit corresponding to an
attractive force
That result follows by using the theory in chapter 9 (refer to the books by
Lamb and Whittaker for details). Thus the second body moves under the
influence of a force that is the original attractive force with an added component
varying as an inverse cube of the distance from the force center. Its apsides
move around according to the rotation parameter λ; we can go from the force
law, equation (14.2), to the apsides rotation.
What a brilliant yet simple result is encapsulated in equation (14.2)! It
immediately greatly enlarges the set of problems we can study. As Newton puts
it, “and thence new fixed orbits may be found in which bodies may revolve with
new centripetal forces.”
In Corollary V, Newton (showing off!?) demonstrates how this theory can be
used to solve again the problem of motion under an inverse-cube force: set f(r) =
0, and the original, now force-free motion, is in a straight line; the rotated form
of that will give the spirals as discussed earlier in the Principia. How ingenious
is that?
14.3. MOTION OF THE APSIDES
Now Newton is ready to do something really clever. In effect, he wants to
reverse the argument spelled out above. If a force gives rise to an orbit that
gradually rotates so that its apsides move around, how can we relate that
movement to the force-law details? Newton's strategy is to begin with a general

form containing adjustable parameters for that force, then use the above theory
to find formulas for the rotation; as those formulas must involve the force
parameters, he will be able to deduce their relevant values for any given rotation.
In essence: we know the force-to-rotation link, now we want the rotation-to-
force step.
In this case, the fixed orbit will be generated by an attractive inverse-square-
law force, so f(r) in equation (14.2) will be k2/r2, where k2 is the force-strength
constant and the orbit will be as in the left diagram in figure 14.3. Newton is
interested in deviations from the inverse-square law and the rotations they
produce (see the right diagram in figure 14.3).
Figure 14.3. Left: A fixed elliptical orbit as given by an attractive inverse-square-law force (see section
11.3.5). Right: A rotating orbit when the force varies a little from that giving the fixed elliptical orbit seen in
the left diagram.
Newton works as follows: Suppose the given force is fG(r), then we try to
approximate it so that we can use equation (14.2). This is possible if we consider
nearly circular orbits, which is actually the case for the solar system planetary
orbits. (In figure 14.3, for illustrative purposes, the orbits are far from circular.)
Then we can put r = R + x, where R is the radius of the approximating circle and
x measures the small variations around that circle. Thus, we write
If we can do that, then by comparing with equation (14.2), we can see how k3

tells us what λ and, hence, the orbit rotation must be. We thus have the required
rotation-force link.
In the next subsection, I will give a few mathematical details. They reveal
another branch of mathematics that Newton uses in the Principia, but less
mathematically inclined readers may gloss over this until the results in section
14.3.2.
14.3.1. Mathematical Details
For the interested reader, I present brief details in modern form for the power-
law example where fG(r) = k/rp is to be used in equation (14.3). According to
equation (14.3), we then require
For orbits that are nearly a circle of radius R, we put r = R + x, where x
measures the small deviations from the circle. This is where Newton uses his
algebra to write
Ignoring the higher-order terms in x/R and substituting into equation (14.4)
gives
We now equate the powers of x (or, as Newton says: “collating together the
homologous terms”) to get
These two equations may be solved to get the force strengths k2 and k3 in
terms of the original given force parameters k and p. The orbit rotation is then
calculated as explained above.

14.3.2. Results
Let α be the angle through which the body moves as it goes from its upper apse
(farthest from the force center) to its lower apse (nearest to the force center). For
the closed inverse-square-law elliptical orbit α = 180° (or π radians), see the
diagram on the left in figure 14.3. Newton replaces the inverse-square-law
exponent 2 by 3−n (so n = 1 corresponds exactly to the inverse-square law).
Using the theory outlined above, he then finds that the line-of-apsides rotation
angle is fixed according to
Thus, if an observed rotation is not 180°, we can fit the answer to find the
force parameter n.
Newton mentions some special cases. If n = 4, we get the force directly
proportional to the distance r, and α = 180°/√4 = 90°, which is just what we
observe in the diagram on the left in figure 14.1 (which is a good check on the
method). If the force is inversely proportional to the distance, we take n = 2 and
then α = 180°/√2 = 127° 16′ 45″.
An extreme case is given by n = 1/4 when the force varies inversely like r11/4
and α = 360°: “therefore the body parting from the upper apse, and from thence
continually descending, will arrive at the lower apse when it has completed one
entire revolution; and thence ascending perpetually, when it has completed
another entire revolution, it will arrive at the upper apse; and so alternately
forever.”
Newton gives another example for a more elaborate fG(r), perhaps to slip in
more of his mathematical “method of converging series.” Here is another case of
a type of mathematics other than geometry occurring in the Principia. He then
comes to his major point, summarized in a Corollary:
COR. 1. Hence if the centripetal force be as any power of the altitude, that power may be found from
the motion of the apsides; and so contrariwise [conversely]. That is, if the whole angular motion,
with which the body returns to the same apse, be to the angular motion of one revolution, or 360°, as
any number m as to another number n, and the altitude be called A, the force will be as the power
Ann/mm−3 of the altitude A; the index of which power is nn/mm – 3.
In our notation,

14.3.3. Stability
If you look at topics like this in a modern textbook, you will most likely be led to
a section on the stability of orbits. Any attractive force can give rise to a circular
orbit (just balance centrifugal acceleration and force to find the suitable radius
and speed). However, if the body is given a slight push, it may settle down into a
nearby similar orbit, or it may radically change its motion and totally move away
from the orbiting situation. This is the stability question, and it is important for
things like satellite positioning. If we assume a power-law force, the standard
analysis shows that the orbit is stable as long as the exponent is greater than −3.
Thus the important square-law force (exponent −2) has stable circular (and
elliptical) orbits, but the inverse-cube law does not. Newton basically deduces
this property, although he never uses the word stability when he analyzes
equation (14.6); as the cubic case is approached, he shows that the body may
spiral into the center of force or away from it. As Newton explains, orbits
corresponding to force-law exponents less than −3 will be unstable.
14.3.4. Motion of the Moon
As we shall see later, the Moon has a complicated orbital motion that is not at all
easy to come to grips with. It is orbiting the Earth, but the Sun provides an extra
disturbing force. Newton struggled greatly with the theory of the Moon's motion
This is the first mention of it in the Principia, and Newton uses his theory
assuming a disturbing force to first estimate that the Moon's “upper apse in each
revolution will go forward 1° 31′ 28″.” An ominous admission follows: “The
apse of the moon is about twice as swift.”
14.4. FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
The topics in Section IX—orbit properties, rotations, and stability—have
continued to stimulate research and applications ever since Newton introduced
them. Two examples are particularly interesting.

14.4.1. Closed Orbits and Bertrand's Theorem
Newton knew that the orbit is a closed ellipse in two important cases: the force is
directly proportional to the distance from the force center (the linear force), or it
is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. These are the cases for
which I gave the full modern analysis in sections 11.2.2 and 11.3.5. He has now
demonstrated how changes or additions to those forces cause the orbits to rotate
and so no longer close back on the starting point. The question arises whether
the linear-law force and inverse-square-law force are unique in that way. Newton
does not appear to have explicitly asked that question—or, if he did, he could not
provide an answer and so did not mention it in the Principia.
The above analysis still allows orbits to close back exactly on themselves after
a certain number of loops (basically because, according to equation [14.5], for
some forces, the rotation is a rational multiple of 2π, and so it can join up exactly
after the requisite number of loops). We must remember that this whole analysis
is based on near-circular orbits and approximations made in the theory on that
basis. If the analysis is carefully taken further, we arrive at a theorem first proved
by J. Bertrand in 1873:
The only central (centripetal) forces that result in closed orbits for all bound
particles are the inverse-square-law forces and the linear-law force. If we also
impose the physical requirement that the force tends to zero as the distance
becomes very large (approaches infinity), then only the inverse-square-law force
can be used to get all closed, bounded orbits.
See the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter for follow-up
references. I believe the subtle, careful analysis would have greatly appealed to
Newton, as he was obviously keen to show his skills in that area in this section
of the Principia. I guess he would have also greatly enjoyed hearing about the
following work.
14.4.2. Einstein and Rotating Orbits
In Book III, we will find Newton using the results in this chapter as he examines
the orbits of the planets. By the end of the nineteenth century, most of the details
of the solar system were reasonably well understood except for an anomalous
rotation of the orbit of the planet Mercury. This famous small rotation (just forty-
three seconds of arc per century) was finally explained by Einstein's general
theory of relativity. To a first approximation, we can still use Newtonian
mechanics, but the gravitational force on a planet must have a correction term

added in:
The second term depends inversely on r4, rather than r2 as in the standard
force formula, but because c is the speed of light, it represents a very small
relativistic correction term (see, for example, the book by Thornton and Marion
for further details).
Newton's approach lets us find the orbit rotation caused by that correction
term. First, use the near-circular orbit approximation, as in section 14.3.1, to
write the force correction term as a sum of an inverse-square-law force and an
inverse-cube-law force; the first of those terms gives a very small (and
ignorable) change to the main inverse-square-law force in equation (14.7).
Second, use that inverse-cube-law force, as in equation (14.2), so that the
rotation constant λ is determined. Finally, calculate the orbit rotation generated
by the relativistic correction to get
Substituting the right data for Mercury gives the missing forty-three seconds
of rotation.
Surely Newton would have been delighted by this extension of his theory and
the paying of homage to his mathematical techniques.
14.4. CONCLUSION
Section IX of the Principia does not receive a great deal of attention. That is a
pity because it contains a brilliant and subtle analysis of orbit properties, and it is
a wonderful example of the theoretical physicist at work. Today we take the
inverse-square law for gravity so much for granted that we forget how important
it was for Newton to discover methods for fixing on that law, rather than on one
with a different distance dependence.
This section is a good example of Newton's command of mathematical
techniques and how to apply them. His ingenious approach of studying near-
circular orbits has remained of significance ever since.

14.5. FURTHER READING
The textbooks listed in section 6.9.1 should be consulted. I particularly
recommend the book by Fowles, as well as the book by Thornton and Marion.
Newton's orbit-rotation theorem is covered by Whittaker and thoroughly by:
 
Lamb, Horace. Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1945. First
published 1914. [sections 89–90, especially example 2 in sec. 90; in the
example at the end of sec. 91, Lamb explicitly shows how a rotating ellipse
orbit corresponds to a combination of inverse-square and inverse-cube forces]
 
See also:
 
Valluri, S. R., C. Wilson, and W. Harper. “Newton's Apsidal Precession Theorem
and Eccentric Orbits.” Journal for the History of Astronomy 28 (1997): 13–27.
Waff, C. B. “Isaac Newton, the Motion of the Lunar Apogee, and the
Establishment of the Inverse Square Law.” Vistas in Astronomy 20 (1976): 99–
103.
 
For more on Bertrand's theorem, see Goldstein (see specifically sec. 3.6) and:
 
Arnol'd, V. I. Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics. 2nd ed. New York:
Springer Verlag, 1989. [sec. 8D gives a proof via a series of problems]
Grandati, Y., and A. Bernard. “Inverse Problems and Bertrand's Theorem.”
American Journal of Physics 76 (2008): 782–87.
Grossman, N. The Sheer Joy of Celestial Mechanics. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1996.
[see ch. 5]
 
For more on the rotation of Mercury's orbit, see Thornton and Marion (see
specifically sec. 8.9), Fowles (specifically sec. 6.14), and relativity texts such as:
 
Lambourne, R. J. A. Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Weinberg, Steven. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: John Wiley, 1972.
Will, Clifford. Was Einstein Right? 2nd ed. New York: Basic Books, 1993.

Newton has given the complete solution for the one-body problem—the motion
of a single particle acted upon by a given centripetal (central) force. But the real
world is not like that, and now Newton must show how to deal with constraints
on motion, interacting particles, and composite bodies in order to produce a
physically applicable theory.
 
Chapter 15. CONSTRAINED MOTION
Chapter 16. MANY BODIES: TRIUMPHS AND CHALLENGES
Chapter 17. BIG BODIES AND SUPERB THEOREMS
Chapter 18. HERE ENDETH BOOK I
 
Reading plans: If you want to see all the theory that Newton developed, and in
particular some of his most impressive, sophisticated results, then do not miss
chapters 15 to 17. Whether or not you read chapters 15 to 17, you should read
chapter 18 to get a summary of everything that has been achieved in Book I.

In part 3 we have seen how, in Sections II to IX of the Principia, Newton gave a
complete theory for the motion of a single body moving under the influence of a
centripetal force. His next job is to elaborate that theory so that it will better
match what we find in the real world.
Newton's first step is to deal with constrained motion, that is, bodies held on
strings (pendulums) or sliding on rigid surfaces. This is not a step on the way to
the grand prize—a theory of the solar system—but it does cover those
experimental arrangements first used to explore the principles of mechanics. It
was with pendulums and bodies moving on inclined planes that people like
Galileo, Riccioli, Mersenne, and Huygens investigated dynamical problems;
Newton followed suit, as we saw in chapter 6, for example. Newton sets out his
intentions at the end of Section IX:
So much for the motions of bodies in orbits whose planes pass through the centre of force. It now
remains to determine those motions in eccentrical planes. For those authors who treat of the motion
of heavy bodies used to consider the ascent and descent of such bodies, not only in a perpendicular
direction, but at all degrees of obliquity upon given planes [the inclined-plane problem]; and for the
same reason we are to consider in this place the motion of bodies tending to centres by means of any
forces whatsoever, when those bodies move in eccentrical planes.
Newton is generalizing the Galilean inclined-plane situation so that any force
may be acting, not just an assumed uniform gravity. Newton goes on to specify
other theoretical assumptions:
These planes are supposed to be perfectly smooth and polished, so as not to retard the motion of the
bodies in the least [modern frictionless motion]. Moreover, in these demonstrations, instead of the
planes on which those bodies roll or slide, and which are therefore tangent planes to the bodies, I
shall use planes parallel to them, in which the centres of the bodies move, and by that motion
describe orbits [meaning the point of contact is on the constraining plane and the center of a body
moves in a plane parallel to that]. And by that same method I afterwards determine the motions of
bodies performed in curved superficies [surfaces].
Notice that Newton mentions “bodies roll or slide,” but Galileo was not clear
on that point (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter); when
discussing Book III, I will comment on why Newton too did not properly deal
with rolling bodies.
So we are to expect a general theory for bodies moving on smooth (not

necessarily plane) surfaces and acted on by any type of centripetal force with a
force center not in the surface of motion. Of course, a body suspended on the
end of a string can be thought of as moving on a smooth surface given by the
extent and angle of the string. Newton is saying, “I can do it all in complete
generality!” Thus we are led to Section X: “Of the Motion of Bodies in Given
Surfaces; and the Oscillating Motion of Pendulous Bodies.”
Newton begins with some basic dynamics.
15.1. FORCES AND MOTION ON SURFACES
Newton again considers motion under the influence of a centripetal force, but
now that motion is confined to a surface not containing the center of force. The
surface thus impedes the full effect of the force upon the particle. He poses the
problem in:
PROPOSITION XLVI. PROBLEM XXXII.
Any kind of centripetal force being supposed, and the centre of force, and any plane whatsoever in
which the body revolves, being given, and the quadratures of curvilinear figures being allowed [we
can do any necessary integrations]; it is required to determine the motion of a body going off from a
given place with a given velocity, in the direction of a given right line in that place.
The full action of the force is not effective; we need the component acting
parallel to the surface, as this is the force that actually moves the body on that
surface. Once we have specified the force component, we can use all the
machinery built up in earlier sections to determine the trajectory. In this case,
Newton's description is quite easy to follow, so this is a good chance to read the
words of the Master—and even understand them! He begins with a figure and
then talks us through the argument.
Figure 15.1. Newton's diagram in support of Proposition XLVI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte

[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Describing the physical situation: “Let S be the centre of force, SC the least
distance of that centre from the given plane, P a body issuing from the place P in
the direction of the right [straight] line PZ, Q the same body revolving in its
trajectory, and PQR the trajectory itself which is required to be found, described
in that given plane.”
Now to find the effective force acting at Q by resolving: “Join CQ, QS, and if
in QS we take SV proportional to the centripetal force with which the body is
attracted towards the centre S, and draw VT parallel to CQ, and meeting SC in
T; then will the force SV be resolved into two (by Cor. 2 of the Laws of Motion),
the force ST and the force TV; of which ST attracting the body in the direction of
a line perpendicular to that plane, does not at all change its motion in that
plane.”
Thus only the component TV affects the motion, so we must use that: “But the
action of the other force TV, coinciding with the position of the plane itself,
attracts the body directly towards the given point C in that plane; and therefore
causes the body to move in the plane in the same manner as if the force ST were
taken away, and the body were to revolve in free space about the centre C by
means of the force TV alone.”
We have obtained an equivalent centripetal-force motion and we know how to
solve for that: “But there being given the centripetal force TV with which the
body Q revolves in free space about the centre C, there is given (by Prop. XLII
[the method for finding orbits for any given force] the curve PQR which the
body describes; the place Q, in which the body will be found at any given time;
and, lastly the velocity of the body in that place Q. And conversely. Q.E.I.”
That is a beautiful example of the power of the theoretical structure Newton
has been slowly building. So that we can test it all out, he gives an example:
PROPOSITION XLVII. THEOREM XV.
Supposing the centripetal force to be proportional to the distance of the body from the centre; all
bodies revolving in any planes whatsoever will describe ellipses, and complete their revolutions in
equal times; and those which move in right lines, running backwards and forwards alternately, will
complete their several periods of going and returning in the same times.
This is the old example of the linear force or F(r) = −kr, which Newton has
considered several times before and for which I have given the modern
discussion in section 11.2.2.
In this case, the resolved component VT in the plane of motion (PQR in
Newton's diagram) is also a linear force proportional to the distance QC from the

effective force center C. Thus the motion is just that for this linear force and we
can refer to the previous results for details.
In a short Scholium, Newton (somewhat cryptically) explains that the same
ideas can be used when the constraining plane becomes a curved surface.
Note that the key step was resolving the force to find the component
controlling the body's motion. For a pendulum, the force component along the
line of the string only concerns the tension in the string, which is providing the
constraint on motion, and we need the component perpendicular to that to
evaluate the motion of the swinging body.
15.2. THE PENDULUM
The pendulum played a vital role in the development of science, and it features
extensively in the writings of Galileo. He believed that the pendulum was
isochronous (period independent of the amplitude of the swing), but this was
soon corrected by Mersenne and Huygens. Huygens made the revolutionary step
of asking how the pendulum must swing so that it actually is isochronous. His
answer (see figure 15.2) was that the pendulum bob must follow the arc of a
cycloid rather than that of the circle, as in the simple pendulum. (I have
previously introduced the cycloid in section 12.5.2.) He brilliantly also showed
that if the string was constrained in its swing by suitable cycloid “cheeks,” as
shown in figure 15.2, then the bob travels along a cycloid as required.

Figure 15.2. Huygens's diagram showing how a cycloid MKI is used to make a pendulum bob P swing
along a cycloid. The string wraps around the top cycloid and, in the situation as shown, it is leaving the
cycloid KM branch as a tangent at N.
In another significant advance, Huygens solved the old problem of measuring
the rate of fall under gravity. He showed that if a pendulum of length L has a
period of 1 second, then the distance D fallen under gravity in 1 second will be
2π2L. Thus the whole experiment is reduced to constructing a “seconds”
pendulum and measuring its length. Huygens got the answer as 15 Rhenish feet
7.5 inches, which corresponds closely to our value of 981 cm × s−2 for the
gravitational constant g. This result will be of importance when we discuss Book
III.
To see the basis for Huygens's result in modern terms, note that for a small-
amplitude simple pendulum,
 
period 
 and the distance fallen in that time is 
Putting in the L corresponding to T = 1 second then gives the required fall
distance D.
So, much was known about the pendulum when Newton came on the scene.
Now to some of Newton's results in Section X (and we will find more when we
come to both Books II and III).
15.3. NEWTON'S RESULTS FOR THE PENDULUM
Newton begins by defining the cycloids obtained when a circle revolves around
the circumference of a larger circle, which could be a great circle on a sphere.
The original or ordinary cycloid is generated by a circle rolling on a plane
surface. A point on the edge of the revolving circle traces out a cycloid, as
shown in Newton's diagram in figure 15.3. He gives some properties of those
cycloids and also repeats Huygens's method for causing a body to oscillate along
the path of a cycloid, as in figure 15.2. (See the paper by Gauld, listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter, for a discussion.)

Figure 15.3. Newton's diagram showing how cycloids are generated by a point on a circle that is revolving
outside (top) or inside (bottom) a larger circle. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Next comes a remarkable result:
PROPOSITION LI. THEOREM XVIII.
If a centripetal force tending to all sides to the centre C of a globe, be in all places as the distance of
the place from the centre; and, by this force alone acting on it, the body T oscillate (in the manner
above described) in the perimeter of the cycloid QRS: I say, that all the oscillations, howsoever
unequal in themselves, will be performed in equal times.
We are back to the linear force again, but this time the force center C is at the
center of a globe, and forming a cycloid on the inside of that globe allows the
generation of isochronous pendulum oscillations (see figure 15.4). Newton gives
various results for this pendulum motion.

Figure 15.4. Newton's diagram showing pendulum motion along the cycloid STRQ formed on the inside of
the circle or globe SVQ with center C, which is also the center for a linear centripetal force acting on the
pendulum bob. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton then deals with a limiting case: “if the diameter of the globe be
infinitely increased, its spherical surface will be changed into a plane, and the
centripetal force will act uniformly in the direction of lines perpendicular to that
plane, and this cycloid of ours will become the same with the common cycloid.”
Thus he makes contact with results given by Sir Christopher Wren and
Christiaan Huygens for the “common cycloid.”
It may seem that Newton has gone through some flashy exercise with his
elaborate cycloids as in figure 15.3. However, it turns out (as I will discuss in
chapter 17 and when we examine Book III) that the linear-force case does have a
practical importance:
The Propositions here demonstrated are adapted to the true constitution of the earth,…and
pendulums in mines and deep caverns of the earth, must oscillate in cycloids within the globe, that
those oscillations may be performed in equal times. For gravity (as will be shown in the third book)
decreases in its progress from the surface of the earth…downwards in a simple ratio of these
distances [that is, like a linear force].
Thus the linear-force case, as in Proposition LI, turns out to be important
when we analyze gravitational forces inside the Earth.
15.4. COMPLETING THE STORY
To round off this section, Newton, as usual, demonstrates his mathematical skills
by going to some general cases. In Proposition LIII, he considers the inverse
problem: Given the curve along which a body performs oscillations, what force
must be acting if they are to be isochronous? He briefly comments on the design

of clocks.
In Propositions LIV to LVI, Newton gives the general theory for calculating
motion on surfaces, partly by using his general formalism in Section VIII. He
finds some equal-areas- swept-out-in-equal-times results, which inspired a recent
paper by James Casey (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter).
15.5. CONCLUSION
In Section X, Newton has extended the work of Galileo, Huygens, and others on
the constrained motion of bodies along curves and surfaces. The major change is
that now the theory is developed using forces and the laws of motion. The key
step is to resolve the forces into components, one of which has no effect because
of the constraint, while the other controls a body's motion along the constraining
surface. In this way, Newton can consider a variety of surfaces (beyond Galileo's
inclined planes) and explore the effects of forces other than an assumed uniform
gravitational force.
15.6. FURTHER READING
The motion of a pendulum is a standard topic in books on classical mechanics,
such as those listed in section 6.9.1. Sommerfeld, in his section 17, gives a
lovely analysis of the cycloidal pendulum. A large collection of papers covering
many aspects of the pendulum and its history is in:
 
Matthews, M. R., C. F. Gauld and A. Stinner, eds. The Pendulum: Scientific,
Historical, Philosophical and Educational Perspectives. New York: Springer,
2005. In that book, see especially: Gauld, C. The Treatment of Cycloidal
Pendulum Motion in Newton's Principia.
 
The work of Huygens is covered in:
 
Huygens, Christiaan. The Pendulum Clock; or, Demonstrations concerning the
Motion of Pendula as Applied to Clocks. Translated from the original 1673
Horologium Oscillatorium by Richard J. Blackwell. Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1986.
Yoder, J. G. Unrolling Time: Christiaan Huygens and the Mathematization of

Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. [this takes the reader
through many examples of Huygens's working]
 
A highly recommended article on the pendulum and its early use in
measurements is:
 
Koyré, Alexandre. “An Experiment in Measurement.” Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 97 (1953): 222–37. Reprinted in Metaphysics
and Measurement. London: Chapman and Hall, 1968.
 
The literature on Galileo is vast; here are two relevant papers:
 
Ariotti, P. “Galileo on the Isochrony of the Pendulum.” Isis 59 (1968): 414–26.
Crawford, F. S. “Rolling and Slipping down Galileo's Inclined Plane: Rhythms
of the Spheres.” American Journal of Physics 64 (1996): 541–46.
 
A recent paper discussing swept-out areas for particles moving on curved
surfaces is:
 
Casey, James. “Areal Velocity and Angular Momentum for Non-planar Problems
in Particle Mechanics.” American Journal of Physics 75 (2007): 677–85.

This chapter covers one of the monumental, vital steps in mechanics,
though that does make for a longer chapter. So far, Newton has told us
how to solve the problem of a body moving under the influence of a
centripetal force—the “single-body problem.” Now he explains how to
deal with two (and more) interacting bodies, which could be the Earth
and the Sun, for example. We know, from right back when the laws of
motion were introduced, that the motion of the center of mass of a
system of bodies is easily determined (see sections 6.3 and 6.6.2).
Newton now tells us how to calculate the motion of the bodies relative
to that center of mass. Further, for two interacting bodies, that
calculation only requires the solution of an equivalent single-body
problem. Thus the complete solution for the problem of two interacting
bodies is known. Amazing!
Sections 16.1 and 16.2 are of particular importance. The other
sections give more details, present the modern formulation, and
discuss the extension to many-body systems, especially the famous
three-body problem.
16.1. INTRODUCTION
This chapter deals with the Principia Section XI: “Of the Motion of Bodies
Tending to Each Other with Centripetal Forces.”
This is one of the most significant sections in the whole book, as Newton
simply but brilliantly shows us how his theory may be extended to make it more
applicable to real-life problems. There are struggles too; typically it is Newton
who discovers possibly the most famous of all difficult problems in dynamics!
Newton begins this section with a clear and careful introduction:
I have hitherto been treating of the attraction of bodies towards an immovable centre; though very
probably there is no such thing existent in nature. For attractions are made towards bodies, and the
actions of the bodies attracted and attracting are always reciprocal and equal, by Law III; so that if
there are two bodies, neither the attracted nor the attracting body is truly at rest, but both (by Cor. 4

of the Laws of Motion), being as it were mutually attracted, revolve about a common centre of gravity
[or center of mass]. And if there be more bodies, which either are attracted by one single one, which
is attracted by them again, or which all of them attract each other mutually, these bodies will be so
moved among themselves, as that their common centre of gravity will either be at rest, or move
uniformly forwards in a right line. I shall therefore at present go on to treat of the motion of bodies
mutually attracting each other; considering the centripetal forces as attractions.
The introduction continues with comments that take us back to Newton's wish
to set up a mathematical formalism, which is later to be applied to physical
situations, rather than to become embroiled in debate about the mechanisms
responsible for the forces he uses (for example, see section 5.4.2):
though perhaps in a physical strictness they may more truly be called impulses. But these
Propositions are to be considered as purely mathematical; and therefore, laying aside all physical
considerations, I make use of a familiar way of speaking, to make myself the more easily understood
by a mathematical reader.
Newton begins with the simplest case, two interacting bodies, the two-body
problem.
16.2. MOTION AROUND THE CENTER OF MASS
In his introduction, Newton tells us that the bodies must move around the center
of mass, which will be at rest or moving uniformly in a straight line if there are
no external forces acting on the bodies (see section 6.6.2). For simplicity, we can
imagine using a reference frame in which the center of mass is at rest. He
formalizes that result and explains what it implies for orbits in:
PROPOSITION LVII. THEOREM XX.
Two bodies attracting each other mutually describe similar figures about their common centre of
gravity [or center of mass], and about each other mutually.
Recall that if two masses m1 and m2 are a distance L apart, the center of mass
is that point directly between them, which is a distance (m2/M)L from mass 1 and
a distance (m1/M)L from mass 2, where M is the total mass m1 + m2 (see figure
16.1[a]). (When no external forces are present or in a uniform gravitational field,
the centers of gravity and mass are identical.)
Newton is saying that the interacting bodies revolve around the center of
mass, as shown for assumed circular motion in figure 16.1(b) (for m1 > m2) and
16.1(c) (for m1 = m2). Also, viewed from one mass, the second mass appears to

travel around it in a circle of radius L, as shown in figure 16.1(d).
For the circular-motion case, both bodies are at constant distances from the
center of mass at all times. This is not the case for motion on ellipses, as shown
in figures 16.1(e) and 16.1(f). In this case, L varies but, of course, the bodies
remain at proportionally the same distances from the center of mass; if the
bodies at some time are a distance L' apart, then body 1 is a distance (m2/M)L'
from the center of mass, with a similar distance (m1/M)L' for body 2.
After a little thought, this probably seems obvious to you; I will give the
modern algebraic form in section 16.3. For those who would like to read the
original, here is Newton's somewhat wordy explanation:
For the distance of bodies from their common centre of gravity are inversely as the bodies; and
therefore in a given ratio to each other; and thence, by composition of ratios, in a given ratio to the
whole distance between the bodies. Now these distances revolve about their common term
[extremity] with an equable angular motion, because lying in the same right line they never change
their inclination to each other mutually. But right lines that are in a given ratio to each other, and
revolve about their terms [extremities] with an equable angular motion, describe upon planes, which
either rest with those terms, or move with any motion not angular, figures entirely similar round those
terms. Therefore the figures described by the revolution of these distances are similar. Q.E.D.
The obvious question is what are those “similar figures about their common
centre of gravity”? Furthermore, how do we find them using the force describing
the interaction of the bodies? I will deal with this in section 16.3, but first, a few
comments about the importance of Proposition LVII.
16.2.1. Implications Old and New
Proposition LVII seems like an almost trivially simple result, but its
consequences are really quite profound. It tells us that when two bodies interact,
they will both move; only in the unphysical case, when one is infinitely larger
than the other, will we find it not moving. Furthermore, it tells us something
quite general about how they move, as shown in figure 16.1.
The Earth and the Moon may be taken as an interacting pair, and the motion of
their center of mass may be studied. Of course, the effect of the Sun is important,
and I will come to that later in this chapter. When we come to study Newton's
treatment of the solar system in Book III, we shall find arguments based on
necessary motions about the center of mass of great importance for settling old
controversies about just what points might be at rest and considered a center for
the whole system.
Two examples will illustrate the importance of Proposition LVII in
astrophysics. Sirius is the brightest star in the sky and, as such, has garnered the

attention of astronomers through the ages. Studying its motion in 1834, F. W.
Bessel observed oscillations and eventually concluded that it was part of a binary
system with an orbital period of about fifty years. It was not until 1862 that
Alvan Clark observed the faint “companion” that we now know to be a white
dwarf and that causes Sirius to oscillate. Figure 16.2 shows the orbits of Sirius
and its companion with more recently dated positions.
Figure 16.1. (a) The definition of the center of mass, shown as *. (b) and (c) The motion of two masses in
circles around their center of mass, masses assumed equal in (c). (d) The circular motion of body 2 as seen
from body 1. (e) and (f) The motion of two bodies on ellipses around their center of mass.
In 1600, just forty-two years before Newton was born, the monk and
philosopher Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake for suggesting (among
other things) that there could be other “earths” orbiting other “suns.” There has
been speculation about “other worlds” orbiting their own suns for centuries; in
1698, Huygens published Cosmotheoros; or, Conjectures concerning the
Planetary Worlds and Their Inhabitants. But it was not until 1995 that, with
great excitement, astronomers Michel Mayor and Pierre-Yves Queloz finally

announced that a planet around another star had been discovered. Now, many
hundreds of “exoplanets” have been found. How can it be done? The clue comes
from an application of Proposition LVII: if a star is known to “wobble around,”
then it may have a companion planet heavy enough to give it an extra motion, as
explained in figure 16.1. Mayor and Queloz discovered that the star 51 Peg has a
companion that causes it to wobble around with a period of about four days.
Because 51 Peg will sometimes be moving toward us and sometimes away, its
emitted light suffers different Doppler shifts, and the subsequent wavelength
variations may be used to deduce orbital characteristics (see the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter). One of the most exciting and
significant events of twentieth-century astronomy depended on an application of
Newton's Proposition LVII some three hundred years after he first wrote it down!
Figure 16.2. Orbits of the star Sirius and its companion, relative to their center of mass. (Drawn from data
found in Essentials of Astronomy, by L. Motz and A. Duveen [London: Blackie and Sons, 1977].)
16.3. THE WONDERFUL STEP: FINDING ORBIT
DETAILS
In the next part of Section XI, in one of the greatest triumphs of classical
mechanics, Newton tells us how to calculate those “similar figures” or orbits, as
shown in figure 16.1. We know how the center of mass behaves, and if we can
find those orbits around it, we will have completely solved the two-body

problem; that is, we will know how to calculate the details of the motion of two
interacting bodies.
Newton shows that the required orbits may be found using a particular single-
body problem, the problem of one body moving under the influence of a
centripetal force. Since the first sections of the Principia have explained how to
do just that, everything will be in place for solving the two-body problem.
The single-body problem to be solved uses the given force of interaction to
solve for the size and orientation of the vector joining the two bodies. That will
allow us to write down the positions of the bodies relative to the center of mass.
We can also calculate the period of this orbital motion and see how to correct
what seems like a more obvious result.
I think this may be easier to appreciate as it is set out in the modern
formulation, and I will do that in section 16.4.2. I will summarize the whole
result in section 16.4.3. But first, here is the way Newton does things, and I leave
it to you, if you so wish, to follow his steps and to consult the Principia for
details of his proofs.
16.3.1. Newton's Propositions Solving the Two-Body Problem
PROPOSITION LVIII. THEOREM XXI.
If two bodies attract each other mutually with forces of any kind, and in the mean time revolve about
the common centre of gravity [mass]; I say, that, by the same forces, there may be described round
either body unmoved a figure similar and equal to the figures which the bodies so moving describe
around each other mutually.
Newton stresses again that the center of gravity (mass) may be at rest or
moving uniformly in a straight line, which is the way the plane containing the
bodies must move. In the Corollaries, he points out that the figures will be
ellipses for the cases of linear-law forces and inverse-square-law forces. He also
notes that an equal-areas-swept-out-in-equal-times law will hold in all the cases:
COR. 3. Any two bodies revolving round their common centre of gravity describe areas proportional
to the times, by radii drawn both to that centre and to each other mutually.
Now he moves on to the period of revolution:
PROPOSITION LIX. THEOREM XXII
The periodic times of two bodies S and P revolving round their common centre of gravity C, is to the
periodic time of one of those bodies P revolving round the other S remaining unmoved, and
describing a figure similar and equal to those which the bodies describe about each other mutually,

as 
 is to 
).
What Newton is saying here is that, if you were to take one body as fixed and
solve for the motion of the second one around it (hence, a single-body problem),
you will get the period wrong and must correct it as stated. Said another way, if
you do not use the proper center-of-mass argument (but assume instead that one
body is fixed), you will make an error in finding the period. Now comes a result
about the various orbit sizes:
PROPOSITION LX. THEOREM XXIII
If two bodies S and P, attracting each other with forces inversely proportional to the square of their
distance, revolve about their common centre of gravity; I say, that the principal axis of the ellipse
which either of the bodies, as P, describes by this motion about the other S, will be to the principle
axis of the ellipse, which the same body P may describe in the same periodic time about the other
body S quiescent [fixed], as the sum of the two bodies S + P to the first of two mean proportionals
between that sum and the other body S.
Finally, the motion of the bodies can be thought of as generated by forces
centered on the center of gravity:
PROPOSITION LXI. THEOREM XXIII.
If two bodies attracting each other with any kind of forces, and not otherwise agitated or obstructed,
are moved in any manner whatsoever, those motions will be that same as if they did not at all attract
each other mutually, but were both attracted with the same forces by a third body placed in their
common centre of gravity; and the law of the attracting forces will be the same in respect of the
distance of the bodies from the common centre, as in respect of the distance between the two bodies.
Newton gives the example of two bodies at released at rest, saying that they
will gradually move toward each other along the line through their (at rest)
shared center of mass. He also points out that the general one-body formalism
presented earlier can be used generally to solve the two-body problem for any
given initial conditions.
16.4. THE TWO-BODY PROBLEM: MODERN
FORMULATION
A key to understanding the theory is the specification of the positions of the two
bodies in space, and then classical mechanics will tell us how those positions
vary as forces act.

16.4.1. Defining Position Vectors
For a given origin O, we specify the position vectors r1 and r2 as shown in figure
16.3(a). The vector r12 joins the two bodies and tells us how to move from body
2 to body 1:
The dynamical problem is to find r1(t) and r2(t) for all times t for given initial
conditions.
Figure 16.3. Different ways of specifying the positions of two bodies.
The situation may also be described using other vectors related to the center of
mass. I will use capital letters for these vectors to emphasize that they are a
different and alternative specification, and they are shown in the right diagram of
figure 16.3. The vector from the origin to the center of mass, indicated by *, is
where m1 and m2 are the masses of the bodies and M is the total mass m1 + m2.
The right diagram in figure 16.3 shows the position of the bodies relative to the
center of mass, as given by the vectors R1 and R2.
Thus we may choose to work with either set of vectors (r1, r2 and r12, or Rcm,
R1, and R2) and move between them using equation (16.2) and

16.4.2. Dynamics
If we assume there are no external forces, so we are dealing with an isolated
two-body system, the equations of motion are
where F12 is the force exerted by particle 2 on particle 1, and F21 is the force
exerted by particle 1 on particle 2 (see figure 6.4). Now, by Newton's third law,
those two forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction, so F21 = −F12
and equations (16.4) can be written as
As explained in section 6.6.2, adding the equations in (16.4) leads to the
center-of-mass theorem and the result that
where v0 is a constant velocity and Rcm0 is the initial position of the center of
mass. If the center of mass is initially at rest, v0 = 0, then it remains at rest for all
future times. Thus Rcm is completely determined.
There is another way to combine the equations in (16.4a). Multiply the first
one by m2 and from that subtract the second equation after multiplying it by m1
to get
That can be tidied up to reveal
The rules of calculus and equation (16.1) allow us to write this as

where the “reduced mass” μ is defined by
Now we have it! Equation (16.6) is the equation of motion that we must solve
to find r12. Then we know R1 and R2 from equation (16.3a), and we already
know Rcm from equation (16.5); thus, the whole problem is solved, as we know
where the two bodies’ center of mass is and their positions relative to that.
16.4.3. Orbits and Periods
The various ways to look at the orbits are shown in figure 16.4. The orbit given
by r12(t) is shown in the left diagram of figure 16.4, and this is the one
calculated using equation (16.6). It is the orbit of body 1 relative to body 2. If we
assumed body 2 was extremely massive, m2 >> m1, we would use exactly that
equation to solve the whole problem, except that we would use m1 instead of μ,
and, of course, the center of mass would coincide with body 2.
Figure 16.4. Left: This orbit is given by r12. Center and right: These are orbits of the two bodies around the
center of mass *, assuming body 2 is more massive than body 1.
(Obviously I am thinking about body 2 as the Sun and body 1 as one of the
planets in our solar system. Newton is carefully not saying that because he is
building up his general formalism; then, in Book III, he will use it for describing
the solar system.)
What would be the effect of that assumption or approximation—using an
infinitely massive body 2 instead of the proper center of mass formulation with a
finite if very large m2? Notice that the mass comes before the time derivatives in
equation (16.6), and we can think of a scaled time to go from one case to

another. We find that, if T is the period, the correct and approximate results are
connected by
For the solar system, these corrections are small; however, for some of the
exoplanets or double star systems mentioned in section 6.1.1, the effect could be
quite large. (Actually, we are getting a sneak preview of the fact that Kepler's
third law of planetary motion linking orbit sizes and periods is not exactly
correct. More on that when we get to Book III.)
The diagrams in the center and at the right of figure 16.4 show the orbits of
the two bodies around the center of mass. Their scales follow from equation
(16.3a). If we substituted those equations into equation (16.6), we would get
equations of motion that looked like each body moving according to a force
center at the center of mass, which is exactly what Newton says in Proposition
LXI, quoted above in section 16.2.1.
Notice that in each case, because we are dealing with centripetal forces, the
orbit is such that the position vector sweeps out equal areas in equal times, as
Newton points out in Corollary 3 to Proposition LVIII.
16.5. WHAT HAS BEEN DONE AND WHY IT
WORKS
This is such an important step that it is worthwhile making a few general
comments. The general two-body problem has been broken up into two
separate problems: (1) the motion of their center of mass and (2) an
equivalent single-body problem that tells us about their motion around that
center.
The result for the center-of-mass motion, equation (16.5), is related to the fact
that there are no external forces acting and a resulting conservation of linear
momentum law, as explained in sections 6.6.1 and 6.6.2.
The single-body problem is relatively easily solved because the swept-out-
area law, the conservation of angular momentum, and the conservation of energy
allow us to integrate the differential equations of motion, as discussed in
chapters 11 and 13.
In summary, to put it in modern terms, it is the fact that the theory for the

types of centripetal forces being used leads to conservation laws for linear
momentum, angular momentum, and energy that allows us to completely solve
the equations of motion in the one-and two-body cases; the necessary
integrations, as explained in section 13.1.1, are greatly simplified. Newton does
not speak in those terms, but he too essentially uses that approach, if not
explicitly.
16.5.1. What If There Are External Forces?
Newton actually considered this case in a Corollary to the laws of motion (see
section 6.4.1). He asks us to consider the case where equal accelerative forces
are acting, and the force on each body is proportional to its mass. Thus we
modify the equations of motion (16.4b) to get
where E gives us the details of the external force. Equation (16.6) for the
relative motion of the two bodies is unchanged because, in the process of
deriving it, the external-force terms will cancel out. However, the center-of-mass
equation of motion now becomes
The center of mass will no longer move uniformly in a straight line or be at
rest, and its motion now depends on the nature of E. However, it is important to
note that the relative motion of the two particles is unchanged by this
external force, and the two-body problem is still broken up into those two
separate problems, the center-of-mass motion and the bodies’ relative motion.
16.6. THE MANY-BODY PROBLEM
Newton has solved the two-body problem, and perhaps he initially thought he
could find a similar procedure for the case of more than two interacting bodies.
That he could not do, but he does discuss cases involving linear forces (force
directly proportional to distance) and inverse-square-law forces. Of course, the
result for the center of mass remains valid no matter how many bodies are

involved; it is determining the relative motions of those bodies that causes the
problem.
16.6.1. Why Those Forces—Again?
By now, you will realize that those two types of forces (linear and inverse
square) come up in the Principia over and over again. But look in a modern
textbook on classical mechanics and you will find it is the same. There are two
reasons for this. First, both types of force lead to linear differential equations
(see sections 11.2.2 and 11.3.4) for the one-and two-body situations, and that
means we can handle the mathematics without too much trouble.
Second, luckily for us, that mathematical tractability goes along with two
forces that are of enormous practical importance. The linear force gives rise to
oscillatory motion. The classical harmonic oscillator is ubiquitous in physics
from pendulum motion onward. The force due to a stretched spring is a linear
force, investigated by Hooke and sometimes named for him. The inverse-square-
law force enters the theory of gravity and the Coulomb interaction between
electric charges. Hence, a large fraction of physics can be studied using those
two forces.
16.6.2. Examples
Newton begins with the linear force case in the following:
PROPOSITION LXIV. PROBLEM XL.
Supposing forces with which bodies mutually attract each other to increase in a simple ratio of their
distances from the centres; it is required to find the motions of several bodies among themselves.
Remarkably, Newton has homed in on the only many-body problem that can
be readily solved. You can find the details in almost any advanced textbook on
classical mechanics, usually under a heading such as “Multiple or Coupled
oscillators.” In modern terms, we get a set of coupled linear equations for the
equations of motion, but, because of that linearity property, they can be solved
using some simple calculus and results from linear algebra (see the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter). Newton does not use that approach.
He develops an iterative method that allows him to go from the two-body case to
the three-body case, and then to continue adding more bodies as required
(Chandrasekhar gives a full explanation—see this chapter's “Further Reading”
section).

Newton's second example comes in here:
PROPOSITION LXV. THEOREM XXV.
Bodies, whose forces decrease as the square of their distances from their centres, may move among
themselves in ellipses; and by radii drawn to the foci may describe areas proportional to the times
very nearly.
Notice that Newton says “very nearly.” He cannot solve this problem exactly,
but he does understand that good approximations can be made. This may seem
almost trivially obvious to us, with all our modern experience, but we should
remember that for Newton and his readers this is classical mechanics set out for
the very first time.
In Case I, Newton says, “imagine several lesser bodies to revolve about some
very great one at different distances from it.” He notes that we still know about
the center-of-mass motion, and that “the lesser will revolve about the great one
in ellipses, and by radii drawn thereto will describe areas proportional to times.”
Of course, we must “except the errors” of “the mutual actions of the lesser
bodies upon each other.” Obviously Newton is preparing the way for his
treatment of the solar system in Book III.
Case II concerns two bodies revolving around each other with another larger
body a great distance away. Newton explains that this can be dealt with using the
external-force theory discussed above in section 16.3.1. If the distance is great
enough, the force exerted by the massive body is essentially parallel for the
bodies, so equations (16.9) may be used. He then points out that the argument
may be extended from two to any number of bodies revolving around each other.
It may not be as obvious, but this is also something Newton will need when he
comes to Book III.
Naturally Newton thinks about turning the argument around so that something
may be deduced about an observed physical situation:
COR 3. Hence if the parts of this system move in ellipses or circles without any remarkable
perturbation, it is manifest that, if they are all impelled by accelerative forces tending to any other
bodies, the impulse is very weak, or else is impressed very nearly equally and in parallel directions
upon all of them.
16.7. THE THREE-BODY PROBLEM
Another system of vital importance to Newton is that of the Earth, the Moon,
and the Sun. In Newton's time, the need for navigational aids was becoming ever

greater, and naval disasters gave added urgency to the problem of finding
positions at sea, especially longitude. Newton hoped that his lunar theory would
be of help. Notice that Newton is now looking for a causal theory to explain the
Moon's motion, rather than data fitting and the construction of lunar tables.
Today we know that the theory of three interacting bodies also has applications
in astrophysics with such things as star triplets and several exoplanets.
We can be clear at the outset: Newton cannot solve the three-body problem.
He gives three propositions for the problem, the first accompanied by twenty-
two Corollaries that have become famous for their thoroughness and
inventiveness. They are the beginning of perturbation theory. The Moon's orbit
has intricate small variations in it; the question is how the Earth and the Moon
together orbit around the Sun, and how the Sun perturbs the Earth-Moon orbiting
system.
I will return to the problem of the Moon's motion when discussing Book III,
but to show how much it dominated Newton's thinking about the three-body
problem, here is the start of that great first Proposition and the diagram that
accompanies it. The labels T (for Terra) and S (for Sun) are obvious.
PROPOSITION LXVI. THEOREM XXVI.
If three bodies, whose forces decrease as the square of the distances, attract each other mutually; and
the accelerative attractions of any two towards the third be between themselves inversely as the
squares of the distances; and the two least revolve around the greatest….
Figure 16.5. Newton's diagram for the motion of three bodies. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
16.7.1. The Most Famous Problem
In his classic text (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter),
The eminent mathematician Sir Edmund Whittaker says, “the most celebrated of
all dynamical problems is known as the Problem of Three Bodies.”1 From
Newton onward, the problem has attracted the greatest mathematicians and
scientists, intense efforts were made to solve it, prizes were offered, and a vast
literature was produced—and is still being added to today.

We might expect to find solutions under very special restrictions. Newton
hinted at such cases in his discussion of Proposition LXV when he wrote:
neither is it possible that bodies attracting each other according to the law supposed in this
Proposition should move exactly in ellipses, unless by keeping a certain proportion of distances from
each other.
I do not know whether those superb theorists Leonard Euler (1707–1783) and
Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736–1813) took that hint, but they did find exact
solutions for the three-body problem. In Euler's case, the three bodies are always
in a line, and the ratio of their distances apart remains constant. For Lagrange,
the bodies are always at the corners of an equilateral triangle. The resulting
orbits are shown in figure 16.6.
Figure 16.6. The motion of three bodies in the solutions given by Euler (left) and Lagrange (right). (Diacu,
Florin; Celestial Encounters. © 1996 Florin Diacu and Philip Holmes, published by Princeton University
Press. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press.)
16.7.2. An Intractable Problem
Recall that a full solution for a dynamical problem will give the position r(t) (or
x[t], y[t], and z[t]) and the velocity v(t) (or its x, y, and z components) for all
times t for every particle involved in the motion. To find that solution, we must
solve or integrate the relevant equations of motion, which are second-order
differential equations, and build in the initial conditions by appropriately setting
the constants of integration (see section 13.1.1 for a simple example). As
explained in chapter 13, the conservation laws for momentum, angular
momentum, and energy help us to immediately do some of the required
integrations. That is why we can readily deal with the one-and two-body
problems.
For the three-body problem, there are three coupled equations of motion to be
solved to give positions and velocities for all three particles. However, there are
no extra conservation laws and expressions that we can use to carry out the
required integrations. In fact, in 1887 mathematician and astronomer Ernst

Heinrich Bruns proved that there are no further algebraic integrals or
conservation laws to help us. Of course, there is a vast amount mathematically
known about the three-body problem, and a solution in terms of an infinite series
was given by Sundman in 1912. That solution is not of great practical value.
Today, high-speed computers can be used to track three-body motions (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section).
16.8. A REMINDER FOR THE DOUBTERS
No doubt Newton would have felt pleased with what he achieved in Section XI
of the Principia, but he would also be well aware of the fact that it involves
forces acting over distances and without any specific mechanisms given for how
those forces actually physically act. This has been a theme throughout the
Principia (and, in fact, it continues right to the very last page). Newton
obviously felt in was necessary yet again to set out his working approach and to
answer possible criticisms. This he does in a final Scholium.
After a little lead into the next section, Newton states:
I here use the word attraction in general for any endeavor of what kind soever, made by bodies to
approach each other, whether that endeavor arise from the action of the bodies themselves, as
tending mutually to or agitating each other by spirits emitted; or whether it arises from the action of
the aether or of the air, or of any medium whatsoever, whether corporeal or incorporeal, any how
impelling bodies placed therein towards each other. In the same general sense I use the word
impulse, not defining in this treatise the species or physical qualities of forces, but investigating the
quantities and mathematical proportions of them.
I am not giving the origin of forces or the mechanisms behind them, Newton
is saying, but rather a way of tackling the mathematical problems and then their
applications. He very clearly sets out his plan:
In mathematics we are to investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions consequent upon
any conditions supposed; then, when we enter upon physics, we compare those proportions with the
phenomena of Nature, that we may know what conditions of those forces answer to the several kinds
of attractive bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue more safely concerning the physical
species, causes, and proportions of forces.
Newton is insisting the following: first I do the mathematics, then the physics.
16.9. CONCLUSION
It would be hard to overestimate the significance of Section XI of the Principia.

An enormous part of the formalism of classical mechanics has now been drawn
together to show how to solve the most important problems for the motion and
interaction of bodies. The results are even more astounding when we remember
back to the work of Galileo and even Huygens. Newton now has a general
formalism for classical mechanics and a mathematical framework for using it to
solve the great problems of physics and astronomy. Not only did Newton do all
that, but he also set the traditions and the path for future researchers, right
through to the present time (see chapter 28).
16.10. FURTHER READING
As always, the books listed in section 6.9.1 should be consulted. The book by
Chandrasekhar carefully explains what Newton is doing and how he works in his
own mathematical way. All the books on classical mechanics are good on this
topic; I like the treatment of Barger and Olsson as well as that of Thornton and
Marion. For readable accounts of the history and later modern developments,
see:
 
Diacu, F., and P. Holmes. Celestial Encounters. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1996.
Grossman, N. The Sheer Joy of Celestial Mechanics. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1996.
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Peterson, I. Newton's Clock. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1993.
 
A classic reference for the three-body problem is the book by Whittaker. Also
see Goldstein and the books just cited. The literature is vast, but here are a few
more suggestions if you wish to go further:
 
Baittin, R. H. An Introduction to the Mathematics and Methods of
Astrodynamics. New York: American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 1987. [see chs. 2 and 8]
Barrow-Green, June. Poincaré and the Three Body Problem. Providence, RI:
American Mathematical Society, 1997. [a good introduction to the problem
and the groundbreaking work by Poincaré and others]
Diacu, F. “The Solution of the n-body Problem.” The Mathematical Intelligencer
18 (1996): 66–70.
Saari, D. G. “Orbits of All Sorts.” Nature 395 (1998): 19–20.

Styer, D. F. “Simple Derivation of Lagrange's Three-Body Equilibrium.”
American Journal of Physics 58 (1990): 917–19.
Valtonen, M., and S. Mikkola. “The Few-Body Problem in Astrophysics.”
Annual Reviews in Astronomy and Astrophysics 29 (1991): 9–29.
Whittaker, E. T. A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid
Bodies. 4th ed. New York: Dover, 1944. First published 1904 by Cambridge
University Press.
 
The literature on exoplanets is rapidly expanding as new discoveries flood in.
Here are some references for those wishing to explore further:
 
Boss, A. P. “Extrasolar Planets.” Physics Today (September 1996): 32–38.
Lunine, J. I., B. Macintosh, and S. Peale. “The Detection and Characterization of
Exoplanets.” Physics Today (May 2009): 46–51.
Jones, H. R. A. “Exoplanets and Their Properties.” In Astrophysics Update.
Edited by John W. Mason. Berlin: Springer, 2004.
Mayor, M., and P.-Y. Frei. New Worlds in the Cosmos: The Discovery of
Exoplanets. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. [the history and
discovery story told by one of the discoverers of the first-known exoplanet]
Seager, S., ed. Exoplanets. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2010.
[everything you want to know about the subject!]
Southworth, J. “Research News and Views: A New Class of Planet.” Nature 481
(2012): 448.
 
Material on binary stars and other star systems can be found in most
astronomy textbooks, for example:
 
Freedman, R. A., and W. J. Kaufmann III. Universe. 7th ed. New York: W. H.
Freeman, 2005.
Karttunen, H., et al. Fundamental Astronomy. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
Motz, L., and A. Duveen. Essentials of Astronomy. London: Blackie and Sons,
1977.

We now come to Sections XII and XIII in the Principia, in which Newton adds
the final steps to the formalism he will use when discussing gravity and the solar
system. This is how Newton motivates and introduces these sections in the
Scholium at the end of the previous Section:
It is reasonable to suppose that forces which are directed to bodies should depend upon the nature
and quantity of those bodies…we are to compute the attractions of the bodies by assigning to each of
their particles its proper force, and then collecting the sum of them all…. Let us see, then, with what
forces spherical bodies consisting of particles endued with attractive powers in the manner above
spoken of must act mutually upon one another.
Newton is recognizing that, so far, he has been dealing with what today we
call a point particle—a body so small that we can ignore its size effects and
specify its position using a single set of coordinates. It is now time to go beyond
that notion. Interestingly, over two hundred years later, Einstein came to
emphasize the importance of this very point:
One remark, however, appears indispensable. The notion “material point” is fundamental for
mechanics. If now we seek the mechanics of a bodily object which itself cannot be treated as a
material point—and strictly speaking every object “perceptible to our senses” is of this category—
then the question arises: How shall we imagine the object to be built up out of material points, and
what forces must we assume as acting between them? The formulation of this question is
indispensable, if mechanics is to pretend to describe the objects completely.1
So Newton is about to take one of the great steps in mechanics, and it will
require all his ingenuity and mathematical skills to tackle it. We know that the
question of how to deal with large bodies worried Newton, and it probably held
up the writing of parts of the Principia (although the delay was nothing like the
twenty-five years sometimes claimed). In a letter written to Edmond Halley in
1686 (mostly concerning his arguments with Hooke), Newton wrote:
I never extended the duplicate proportion lower than superficies of the earth & before a certain
demonstration I found the last year have suspected it did not reach accurately enough down so
low…. There is so strong an objection against the accurateness of this proportion, yet without my
Demonstrations…it cannot be believed by a judicious Philosopher to be any where accurate.2
Newton returns to these difficulties in Book III. Incidentally, the day on which

Newton wrote that letter, June 20, was obviously not a good day for him because
he fired off a second letter to Halley again raging about Hooke's claims. Hooke
purported to have first put forward various ideas, but, as we know, he lacked the
mathematical skills to develop them as Newton did. Thus we find in the second
letter Newton's famous broadside:
For ’tis plain, by his words he knew not how to go about it. Now is not this very fine?
Mathematicians, that find out, settle, and do all the business, must content themselves with being
nothing but dry calculators and drudges; and another, that does nothing but pretend and grasp at all
things, must carry away all the invention, as well as those that were to follow him, as of those that
went before.3
Certainly none of Newton's peers were capable of producing the outstanding
results discussed in this chapter.
17.1. PROBLEMS, PLANS, AND METHODS
Newton has said that we must sum up over all the small particles forming a
larger body, and both he and we do that by using a continuous distribution of
matter and integrating. However, as usual, for some cases he uses a variety of
geometrical and limiting techniques. I will reflect on the mathematics in these
sections in this chapter's discussion section (17.7). We should also note that in
summing over all the particles, Newton is using a fundamental property of
forces: if two or more forces are acting at the same time, they may be simply
added together. This is the linearity or superposition property, which Newton
recognized, as I discussed in section 6.2.
Newton has often been criticized for poor organization and lapses in logic, but
in this case, he does follow a reasonably obvious path. He begins with a particle
attracted by a spherical shell, moves on to the solid-sphere case, and concludes
with interacting spheres, including the nonuniform density case. Nonspherical
bodies are treated in Section XIII.
As far as forces are concerned, Newton concentrates on the inverse-square-
law force, as that is the vital case needed when presenting the theory of gravity.
He does, as usual, give some neat results for the linear force and gives a truly
remarkable discussion of the general-force case, with power-law forces given as
specific examples.
17.2. FORCE DUE TO A SPHERICAL SHELL

Newton begins by finding the effect of a spherical shell on a particle, or
corpuscle, to use his word. You might be surprised to learn that his first case has
the corpuscle inside the shell:
PROPOSITION LXX. THEOREM XXX.
If to every point of a spherical surface there tend equal centripetal forces decreasing as the square of
the distance from those points, I say, that a corpuscle placed within that surface will not be attracted
by those forces any way.
This is a case where no integration is required. Newton considers all the
paired solid angles or cones, as shown in figure 17.1. Now if the area on the
shell is distance d from the corpuscle P, its area on the shell is proportional to d2.
However, the force exerted on P by that little piece of the shell will be
proportional to 1/d2. The dependence on d cancels out, and then you can see that
the two areas at KL and IH, being directly opposite, will exert equal but opposite
forces on P, that is, no net force at all. (Newton fills in the geometrical details.)
The whole shell can be split up in that way and, thus, we get the (perhaps strange
at first sight) result that no force is exerted at any point inside the shell, not just
at the center, where symmetry gives the obvious result.
Figure 17.1. Newton's diagram for Proposition LXX. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Now moving outside:
PROPOSITION LXXI. THEOREM XXXI.
The same things supposed as above, I say, that a corpuscle placed without the spherical surface is
attracted towards the centre of the sphere with a force inversely proportional to the square of its
distance from the centre.

Figure 17.2. Newton's diagram for Proposition LXXI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
The diagram shows us that Newton is using one of his ingenious comparison
techniques for a “geometrical proof which must have left its readers in helpless
wonder,” as the eminent mathematician J. E. Littlewood put it in 1948.4 You can
see the calculus proof and Newton's working compared in Littlewood's paper
“Newton and the Attraction of a Sphere” (see the “Further Reading” section at
the end of this chapter).
While these results are theoretically interesting, their main value is their use
when discussing the more practically important configurations.
17.3. FORCE DUE TO A SPHERE
With the results for a spherical shell in hand, it is comparatively easy to move on
to solid spheres. The modern reader immediately thinks in calculus terms
(“integrating over the shells”), and Newton gives us a similar little calculus hint
in a Scholium:
By the surfaces of which I here imagine the solids composed, I do not mean surfaces purely
mathematical, but orbs so extremely thin, that their thickness is as nothing; that is, the evanescent
orbs of which the sphere will at last consist, when the number of the orbs is increased, and their
thickness diminished without end.
This takes us to:
PROPOSITION LXXIII. THEOREM XXXIII.
If to the several points of a given sphere there tend equal centripetal forces decreasing as the square
of the distance from the points, I say, that a corpuscle placed within the sphere is attracted by a force
proportional to its distance from the centre.

Figure 17.3. Newton's diagram for Proposition LXXIII. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
If you have not previously seen this result, you may find it very strange, but
first remember as Newton explains:
It is plain (by Prop. LXX) that the concentric spherical surfaces of which the difference AEBF of the
spheres is composed [see figure 17.3], have no effect at all upon the body P.
So as we move inside the sphere, only the inner part EQF of radius r, say, has
any effect, and that reduces as r decreases, as it depends on the volume (4/3)πr3
of the material acting on P; this balances out the rise in strength due to the
inverse-square law at small distances, giving a final force acting on P, which is
directly proportional to r. Thus, inside the sphere, it is a linear force directed
toward the center, which results when the summations or integrations are
completed. Now we can understand why Newton chose that seemingly
overcomplicated cycloidal pendulum inside a sphere (see section 15.3).
Newton covers the case of a particle outside a solid sphere in the following:
PROPOSITION LXXIV. THEOREM XXXIV.
The same things supposed, I say, that a corpuscle situate without the sphere is attracted with a force
inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the centre.
The proof, of course, follows directly from Proposition LXXII, and today we
naturally begin as Newton does by saying “For suppose the sphere to be divided
into innumerable concentric spherical surfaces…”
17.3.1. Time for a Pause
It is easy to be blasé about the results given above, but they are monumentally
important. Newton has shown how to go from small bodies, the idealized “point
particles,” to large bodies built up from many particles, as is the Earth, the
planets, and the Sun. The theory can now be applied not just to those small

experimental systems, like bodies moving down planes, projectiles, pendulums,
and colliding bodies (as in Newton's double pendulums), but also to bodies on
the astronomical scale. Future workers, as we will see in chapter 28, developed
Newton's theory so that it could be applied to large everyday bodies and their
rotations, as for spinning tops.
However, it is the amazing simplicity of the results that impresses. For that
most important case, the inverse-square-law force, the balances and summations
tell us that the effect is a force acting as if from the center of the sphere; it
follows an inverse-square law if we are outside the sphere, and a linear law if we
are inside the sphere. Beautiful!
For some situations, we know that Newton's mechanics must be replaced by
Einstein's relativistic mechanics. However, there is still a theorem relating
influences of matter inside and outside spherically symmetric regions. It is called
Birkhoff's theorem (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter).
We should also be careful to distinguish between what Newton actually says
and what he does not say. Note that in Proposition LXXIV he talks about “a force
inversely proportional to the square of its distance from the centre.” As usual,
Newton deals with proportions, and nowhere does he give the magnitude or
strength of the total force. He does use all sorts of phrases, like “the particles are
as the spheres, that is, as the cubes of the diameters,” but the final step is never
made. Thus it may be a little unfair (and certainly Robert Weinstock, the old
controversy stirrer, thought so—see this chapter's “Further Reading” section)
when we read statements like physicists Vernon Barger and Martin Olsson's:
Newton's theorem follows: the gravitational force of any spherically symmetric distribution of matter
at a distance R from the center is the same as if all the mass within the sphere of radius R were
concentrated at the center.5
Newton did not explicitly make that final step, which sums to get the total
magnitude to go along with the spatial behavior of the force. In some ways, it
seems so obvious that it is hard to think that he was not aware of the
comprehensive total result.
17.4. TWO OR MORE SPHERES
Newton can now move to the practical case of two spheres, and, at the same
time, he allows for radial density variations (as occur in the Earth and other
planets):

PROPOSITION LXXVI. THEOREM XXXVI.
If spheres be however dissimilar (as to density of matter and attractive force) in the same ratio
onward from the centre to the circumference; but everywhere similar, at every given distance from the
centre, on all sides and round about; and the attractive force of every point decreases as the square
of the distance of the body attracted: I say, that the whole force with which one of these spheres
attracts the other will be inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the centres.
The variations in density must depend on only the distance from the sphere
center, and it must be “the same on all sides and round about,” as Newton
somewhat strangely puts it (see figure 17.4).
Figure 17.4. Newton's diagram for Proposition LXXVI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton has now produced a result of great generality. Along with the
propositions in this section, there are numerous Corollaries about the forces in
certain circumstances and other deductions that may be made. For example, for
this Proposition:
COR. 1. Hence if many spheres of this kind, similar in all respects, attract
each other mutually, the accelerative attractions of each to each, at any
equal distances of the centres, will be as the attracting spheres.
…
COR. 8. All those truths above demonstrated, relating to the motion of bodies
about the foci of conic sections will take place when an attracting sphere,
of any form and condition like that above described is placed in the focus.
As Newton tells us here and elsewhere, all the results about bodies moving
under inverse-square-law forces can still be used when the small bodies are
replaced by finite spheres.

17.5. OTHER FORCES
Of course, the inverse-square-law force is the most important (and we know that
Newton will introduce it into his theory of gravity in Book III), but by now we
know that Newton is always thorough and keen to add as much generality as
possible into his results. In the next two Propositions, LXXVII and LXXVIII, he
extends the result in the previous Proposition to the linear-law force (force
directly proportional to the distance). Basically he shows that if the spheres are
made up of particles attracting a corpuscle with a force directly proportional to
the distance between them, then whole spheres attract each other with a force
depending directly on the distance between their centers.
In a Scholium, Newton gives us his plan:
It would be tedious to run over the other cases, whose conclusions are less elegant and important, so
particularly as I have done these [previous cases]. I choose rather to comprehend and determine
them all by one general method as follows.
So the reader is led to the truly remarkable eightieth Proposition. I will quote
it in full and give you the diagram, so you can see how carefully Newton sets up
the problem and how he presents his solution. (And I expect many of you at first
will be as bewildered as were Newton's contemporaries!)
PROPOSITION LXXX. THEOREM XL.
If to the several equal parts of a sphere ABE described about the centre S there tend equal
centripetal forces; and from the several points D in the axis of the sphere AB in which a corpuscle,
as P, is placed, there be erected the perpendiculars DE meeting the sphere in E, and if in those
perpendiculars the lengths DN be taken as the quantity DE2 × PS/PE, and as the force which a
particle of the sphere situate in the axis exerts at the distance PE upon the corpuscle P conjunctly: I
say, that the whole force with which the corpuscle P is attracted towards the sphere is as the area
ANB, comprehended under the axis of the sphere AB, and the curved line ANB, the locus of the
point N.
Figure 17.5. Newton's diagram for Proposition LXXX. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,

NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton is telling us how to construct the area bounded by the line AB and the
curve ANB in terms of the geometric quantities DE, PS, and PE, together with
“the force which a particle of the sphere situated in the axis exerts at the
distance PE upon the corpuscle P.” Find that area, and you have the total force
exerted by the sphere on the corpuscle at P. Clearly Newton is telling us to find
the value of a certain integral, and that will give us the total force. I will return to
the mathematical contortions in section 17.7. If you wish to follow Newton's
mathematical manipulations in detail, I suggest Chandrasekhar as your guide
(see his work listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter).
Let the corpuscle in figure 17.5 be a distance R from the sphere center, so PS
= R, and let the sphere have radius a. Then in modern terms, if we say that the
attractive force exerted on a corpuscle at distance y from particles in the sphere
is f(y) per unit volume of material forming the sphere, Newton's prescription
agrees with this formula for the total force F(R) exerted by the sphere on the
corpuscle:
To discuss Newton's power-law examples, I will write
So the total force exerted by the sphere is written in terms of the original force
multiplied by the volume of the sphere and a factor C, which we might expect to
depend on R. For the inverse-square-law force, n = 2, Newton discovered the
amazing result that C is a constant, C = 1. As his examples of using Proposition
LXXX, Newton took inverse-power-law forces with n = 1, 3, and 4. Here are his
results, with C expressed for neatness in terms of the corpuscle distance
measured in terms of the sphere radius, so C = C(ρ) where ρ = R/a:

Of course, if you look in the Principia, you will not find those formulas but
rather a description of them in geometric terms. For example, instead of the
logarithm function, you will find the term hyperbolic area. The formulas do
emphasize just how special the result is for the inverse-square-law force, n = 2;
for other force laws, the total force given by integrating over the sphere becomes
a complicated function of R.
17.5.1. A Mathematical Gem for inside the Sphere
Newton writes:
By the same method one may determine the attraction of a corpuscle situated within the sphere, but
more expeditiously by the following Theorem.
He then proceeds to show (in Proposition LXXXII. Theorem XLI) that, if the
corpuscle outside the sphere is at a distance R1 from the sphere center, and the
one inside is a distance R2 from the center, and R1R2 = a2 where a is the sphere
radius, then for forces proportional to the mth power of the distance,
For the inverse-square-law force, m = −2, and the formula can be used to
check the result given in section 17.3.
This amazing result is related to the method of images, used later in
electrostatics problems, as shown by Chandrasekhar (see this chapter's “Further
Reading” section).
17.6. NONSPHERICAL BODIES

Newton deals with segments of spheres and then concludes: “The attractions of
spherical bodies being now explained, it comes next in order to treat of the laws
of attraction in other bodies consisting in like manner of attractive particles.”
Thus, we come to Section XIII: “Of the Attractive Forces of Bodies That Are Not
of a Spherical Figure.”
Newton gives some general results, and neat results for the linear-force case—
basically, the composite bodies in question attract with a total linear force
directed toward the center of gravity or mass (Propositions LXXXVIII and
LXXXIX).
He then turns to the case of a thin disk composed of particles attracting a
corpuscle outside the disk. I have already discussed this problem in section 7.4,
where I used it to illustrate Newton's way of working. Armed with this result, he
can now deal with bodies that may be broken up into a stack of such disks, and
an integration process can be used as in the earlier work. So we find:
PROPOSITION XCI. PROBLEM XLV.
To find the attraction of a corpuscle situated in the axis of a round solid, to whose several points
there tend equal centripetal forces decreasing in any ratio of the distances whatsoever.
Figure 17.6 shows two of Newton's diagrams, and the spheroid case is
obviously of importance when we get to considerations of the shape of the earth
in Book III.
Figure 17.6. Newton's diagrams for Proposition XCI. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Finally, Newton considers some limiting cases that take us to planar
geometries. He generalizes the uniform, constant force that Galileo effectively
assumes and shows how Galileo's parabola will be replaced with other curves.
(He can do that because he generalized Galileo's falling-body result to one-
dimensional motion under any force in Section VII.)

17.7. DISCUSSION
Sections XII and XIII of the Principia are, without doubt, a mathematical tour de
force. Newton demonstrates his skill in formulating and solving mathematical
problems and in producing results of great physical significance. It would appear
that he was (justifiably) proud of this work. In the Scholium where he
summarizes the results, he writes, “which is very remarkable”—this is the sort of
statement found rarely in the book. There is also the evidence of his letter to
Halley, quoted earlier. We can also turn to his portrait painted when he was an
old man of eighty-three (see figure 1.3). It appears that he is holding the
Principia open at pages dealing with Proposition LXXXI, where he discusses the
evaluation of the area or integral needed for the general-force case. Surely that
must have been the deliberate choice of a man reflecting on his greatest
achievements. We would all agree; these are truly superb results.
The adjective superb to describe Newton's work comes from the
mathematician J. W. L. Glaisher (1848–1928). Glaisher gave an address to mark
the bicentenary of the publication of the Principia, and it is still worth quoting as
a summary of this work and its relevance:
No sooner had Newton proved this superb theorem [they are all superb, but perhaps he is picking out
Theorem XXXI]—and we know from his own words that he had no expectation of so beautiful a
result till it emerged from his mathematical investigation—than all the mechanism of the universe at
once lay spread before him. When he discovered the theorems that form the first three sections of
Book I, when he gave them in his lectures of 1684, he was unaware that the sun and earth exerted
their attractions as if they were but points. How different must these propositions have seemed to
Newton's eyes when he realised that these results, which he had believed to be only approximately
true when applied to the solar system, were really exact!6
17.7.1. Mathematical Considerations
Newton is at his most penetrating and mathematically creative best in these
sections. Few, if any, of his contemporaries would have been able to cope with
that level of mathematics, and it remains challenging to this very day. This area
of mechanics is now tackled using potentials rather than forces (see chapter 28),
and potential theory is a major subject in applied mathematics.
We also have the old problem of geometric working and presentation. There is
doubt about Newton's claims for using analytical methods, as I have discussed
earlier in sections 7.5 and 13.6. However, in this case, it is beyond belief that the
results discussed above could have been generated without using certain calculus
techniques. I refer you to the recent book by Niccolò Guicciardini (see the

“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter) for extensive analysis of
Newton's mathematical approaches. In terms of the material covered in this
chapter, it is worth quoting Guicciardini's authoritative summary:
I wrote at length about these two corollaries to present some examples of how quadratures occurring
in the Principia were discussed by Newton and his acolytes. These are not a reconstruction of what
Newton might have been able to do but exactly how he analytically resolved certain problems in the
Principia. There are, indeed, a number of problems in the Principia that are resolved “granting the
quadrature of curvilinear figures”. Newton tackled these problems by squaring the curves but gave no
details in the printed text about how such quadratures could be performed. Newton's contemporaries
were aware of the fact that Newton was hiding the analysis of these problems. As Fontenelle stated
Furthermore, it is a justice due to the learned M. Newton, and that M. Leibnitz himself
accorded to him: That he has also found out something similar to the differential calculus, as it
appears in his excellent book entitled [sic] Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica,
published in 1687, which is almost entirely about calculus.
In some cases, as with Corollary 3, Proposition 41, Book 1, and Corollary 2, Proposition 91, Book
1, it is possible to recover Newton's analysis on its own terms.
The analysis that Newton was “hiding” in Sections XII and XIII is brilliant,
and whenever I look at the results, I am always amazed at what he achieved,
especially after slogging through some of the integrations to check for myself!
17.8. FURTHER READING
Almost all the classical-mechanics books listed in section 6.9.1 introduce the
material in this chapter and the basics of modern potential theory. A detailed
guide to Newton's methods and results is given by:
 
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995.
 
For expert analysis of Newton's mathematical workings, see:
 
Guicciardini, N. Isaac Newton: On Mathematical Certainty and Method.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011.
 
For the general-relativity equivalent result, Birkhoff's theorem, see the
following:
 
Weinberg, Steven. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: John Wiley, 1972.

———. The First Three Minutes. Glasgow, UK: Fontana/Collins, 1981. [see pp.
44–46]
 
Other references:
 
Littlewood, J. E. “Newton and the Attraction of a Sphere.” Mathematical
Gazette 32 (1948). Reprinted in Littlewood's Miscellany. Edited by B.
Bollobas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982, pp. 179–81.
Schmid, C. “Newton's Superb Theorem: An Elementary Proof.” American
Journal of Physics 79 (2011): 536–39.
Stein, S. K. “Inverse Problems for Central Forces.” Mathematics Magazine 69
(1996): 83–93.
Weinstock, R. “Newton's Principia and the External Gravitational Field of a
Spherically Symmetric Mass Distribution.” American Journal of Physics 52
(1984): 883–90.

We are now at the end of Book I, and it is time to summarize and evaluate.
However, before I do that, there is one final piece of work to comment on.
18.1. MECHANICS FOR OPTICS
The final section in Book I is something of an oddity as its title reveals:
SECTION XIV: “The Motion of Very Small Bodies When Agitated by Centripetal
Forces Tending to the Several Parts of Any Very Great Body.”
Newton studies the motion of these small bodies in planar regions with
specified forces. The selection of Principia diagrams shown in figure 18.1
quickly tells what sort of problems are involved as the paths bend and change as
they move through various regions.
Figure 18.1. Diagrams taken from Section XIV of the Principia. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte
[Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton explains why he has carried out this investigation:
These attractions bear a great resemblance to the reflections and refractions of light made in a given
ratio of secants, as was discovered by Snell; and consequently in a given ratio of the sines, as was
exhibited by Descartes. For it is now certain from the phenomena of Jupiter's satellites, confirmed by

the observations of different astronomers, that light is propagated in succession, and requires about
seven or eight minutes to travel from the sun to the earth.
    Therefore because of the analogy there is between the propagation of the rays of light and the
motion of bodies, I thought it not amiss to add the following propositions for optical use; not at all
considering the nature of the rays of light, or inquiring whether they are bodies or not; but only
determining the trajectories of bodies which are extremely like the trajectories of rays.
Newton favored a description of light as a stream of corpuscles, and in this
section he shows how a mechanical picture can be created that reveals light
paths as seen in reflection, refraction, total internal reflection, diffraction, and the
bending of light at curved surfaces, as used in lens design. He is again being
careful to state that he is thinking of an analogy, rather than buying into any
discussion of the true nature of light.
18.2. NEWTON'S DEVELOPMENT OF CLASSICAL
MECHANICS
By the end of Book I, Newton has given us a whole scheme for classical
mechanics. Figure 18.2 lets us see how it develops and fits together, and it is
worthwhile standing back and reviewing some of the major steps.
Newton begins with conceptual matters and the basic quantities that are used
in mechanics and that he builds into his three laws of motion. It is a central
feature of Newton's mechanics that it is set out in general; no longer are we
looking at specific problems, as Galileo and Huygens mostly did, but we have
the basics given for dealing with any mechanical system. To emphasize this
generality, we find Newton deducing things that will apply in any system:
momentum is conserved, and the motion of the center of mass is specified. This
move to general laws and the deduction of general properties, like the
conservation of momentum, are features that Newton introduced into the theory,
and they have provided the model for the scientific method ever since.
Newton then defines the force that dominates mechanics: the centripetal or
central force. In modern terms, if the force center is chosen as the origin, then
the force on a particle at position r is given by F(r) = F(r) , so F(r) gives the
strength of the force (which will be negative for an attractive force), and the unit
vector tells us that the force acts directly along the line from the force center to
the particle. This produces the most basic one-body problem: find the motion of
a particle moving under the influence of a given centripetal force.
Once again, he discovers generality: in this case, the line from force center to
the particle sweeps out equal areas in equal times, or, in modern terms, angular

momentum is conserved. That property depends on only the direction of the
force and not F(r). The form of the force leads in modern terms to the
conservation of energy, which is a general property that Newton does not
discover. However, his results about the path independence of speed changes
(Proposition XL) do take him to general results that today we most simply obtain
using the energy-conservation law.
Using the angular-momentum property, Newton now shows how to divide the
orbital-motion problem into two parts: first find the orbit shape, then find the
position on the given orbit for any specified time. He also shows how to use the
initial conditions to fix the orbit details—for example, will the orbit be an
ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola when an attractive inverse-square law is
specified? Newton gives examples for a variety of forces and also discusses
some general properties of orbits, such as the degree to which they close back on
themselves.
Finally, Newton prepares for applications to real-world situations. He shows
that the formalism he has developed can be used for the problem of two
interacting bodies; that problem splits into a one-body problem plus a center-of-
mass motion problem, both of which are already solved. He also shows that real-
world large bodies composed of many particles may be brought into his scheme
by summing over the forces. For spherical bodies, he can replace the large body
by one force with its center at the large body's center.
The layout in figure 18.2 serves as a guide to the development of mechanics,
and it is essentially what is found in mechanics textbooks from the Principia
right up to those modern texts listed in section 6.9.1.

Figure 18.2. Newton's development of the basics of classical mechanics.
18.3. EXAMPLES AND THE INVERSE-SQUARE-
LAW FORCE
Newton gives examples to show how his general theory is used, most often with
F(r) = constant × rn or with the power-law forces. The simplest case has n = 1 to
give the linear force, which corresponds to the ubiquitous harmonic oscillator.
This force is used for localized systems, like pendulums, but is obviously not

useful for very large systems, as the force increases without bound as the
distances involved increase. It is a force for confinement, and interestingly such
forces have recently been used to describe the confinement of quarks within
protons and other elementary particles.
The inverse-square-law force with n = −2 is physically meaningful for large
distances, and, as Newton will show in Book III, it is the appropriate force law
for gravity. So it is that Newton uses this force law in a great many of his
examples, ready for future applications.
Newton discovers many important properties of motion under an attractive
inverse-square law, and a summary is given in figure 18.3. I find it quite
incredible that he already came to two of the most amazing of those properties.
First, of all the force laws that give diminishing force as distance increases, only
the inverse-square law leads to bounded orbits that are all closed (a result now
known as Bertrand's theorem—see section 14.4.1). Second, a large spherical
body formed from particles each exerting an inverse-square-law force on an
external body may be replaced by one force acting at its center, and that force
too follows an inverse-square law. Even Newton had to comment “which is very
remarkable.”
18.4. CONCLUSION
An outline of Newton's development of classical mechanics can be gained by
looking at the tables and flowcharts in figures 5.5, 6.5, 10.7, 18.2, and 18.3.
I will conclude this chapter by making four points. First, Newton has now
given us the basic theory for classical mechanics that has stood the test of time
and retains its validity today, needing only extensions or replacements when
extremes of scale or time are involved, as when we enter the domains of
relativity and quantum theory. It is true that some people detect wooly thinking
and difficulties as Newton struggles with the underlying conceptual matters and
some mathematical niceties, but we should remember that he created this
formalism; there is nothing approaching it in the writings of Galileo, Descartes,
or even the brilliant Huygens. It is also true that much needed to be added to
Newton's mechanics to increase the range of physical situations that can be
covered (Newton began that in Book II, and others followed, as I will outline in
chapter 28), but the basics are now in place.
Second, Newton has set out a methodology for us to follow. He has developed
a theory showing how to state general laws and deduce general properties of
dynamical systems. By introducing a range of forces, like the power-law forces,

he has shown us how to mathematically explore that formalism and exhibit its
possible outcomes.
Third, Newton has taken us to a new level of thoroughness and sophistication.
Right from his insistence on separately considering not just a result but also its
converse (in Section II, Propositions I and II), through to his proof that the
Kepler equation has no algebraic solution (in Section VI), and on to his stunning
results for rotating orbits (Section IX) and composite bodies (Sections XII and
XIII), we see work of the greatest inventiveness that only a genius like Newton
can produce.
Fourth, we must remember that Newton was also inventing a whole new
mathematical approach for mechanics. It is true that he couched much of it in
geometrical terms that are almost incomprehensible to most of us today and that
we need to translate it into a more modern form. Nevertheless, he showed that
the subject was amenable to a mathematical treatment, the power of which has
evoked a sense of wonder ever since.

Figure 18.3. Mechanics with the inverse-square-law centripetal force.

Book II of the Principia is often ignored, and that is something of a tragedy
because it shows Newton at his diverse best. Here we have the great
mathematical physicist, the experimentalist, and the theoretical physicist
displaying his powers of invention and analysis. The material concerns resisted
motion, such as air resistance on projectiles, and the specification, measurement,
and inquiry into the origins of the forces involved. This leads him to ideas about
fluids and the propagation of disturbances through fluids, such as sound waves.
Newton has reached the limits of his mathematical and physical background, but
he still manages to initiate whole areas of mathematics, physics, and engineering
with a remarkable display of clever techniques and analogies.
 
Chapter 19. STARTING ON BOOK II
Chapter 20. NEWTON THE EXPERIMENTALIST
Chapter 21. WHAT LIES BENEATH
 
Reading plans: It would be a shame to miss out on Book II, but if you are
anxious to see how Newton develops the theory of gravitation and how he
applies it to the solar system, then do move ahead to part 6. As an alternative,
just read the introductory remarks and conclusion for each chapter, plus section
19.1. That will give you some idea about Book II and perhaps inspire you to
make a mental note to return here later.

In some ways, Book II of the Principia is an enigma. In Book I, Newton has
presented the theory of dynamics and is now all ready for Book III and claiming
the great prize: the theory of the solar system. Very little of Book II is even
mentioned in Book III, so why should we bother with it? The simple answer is
that, if you are only interested in astronomical phenomena and large-scale
terrestrial properties, then you may well ignore Book II. However, you might
change your mind after reading this famous evaluation by the highly respected
mathematician and historian Clifford Truesdell:
For ingenuity and insight, and, above all, for sense of problem, Book II is the most brilliant and
fertile work ever written in mechanics; it was so received at once by the dozen men who could
understand it; and so it remains. For over one hundred years the finest geometers devoted themselves
to criticism, development, and correction of the ideas and arguments sketched in it, to solution of the
problems it attacked unsuccessfully, to exploration and conquest of the ranges of mechanics it
opened.1
Here is a short introduction to this “most brilliant and fertile work ever written
in mechanics.”
19.1. QUESTIONS ABOUT BOOK II
19.1.1. What Is Book II About?
Book II is concerned with the motion of bodies in cases where the medium in
which they are situated retards that motion, as in the well-known example of air
resistance. Newton is at his thorough best, dealing with all the classic problems
of dynamics: force-free motion and falling bodies; projectiles; pendulums; and
central-force motion. He sets out the dynamical theory, reports on an
experimental program, and begins a theory of fluids and gases in order to
understand their basic properties and how they create resistance forces. There are
nine sections; the full contents details are given in figure 19.1.

Figure 19.1. The contents of the Principia Book II.
Scattered throughout Book II are sections giving ideas and results about such
things as the definition of mass (one of the high points in the Principia—see
section 19.7) , the calculus, new analytical techniques that have become standard
in applied mathematics, new physical concepts, and so on in a breathtaking
display of inventiveness.
Book II gives us a fine example of the extent and versatility of Newton's
genius. We see the mathematical physicist at work as he demonstrates how to
use his formalism for dynamics. We see the innovative experimentalist in action
as he matches theory and data to check force parameters. We see the theoretical
physicist probing the underlying physical world to gain an understanding of the
origin of the forces controlling macroscopic phenomena.
19.1.2. Why Did Newton Write Book II?
The first answer that comes to mind is Newton's desire to destroy Descartes's
rival philosophy of nature. In part III of Descartes's Principia Philosophiae, we
find:
 

24. That the heavens are fluid.
 
Descartes goes on to present his vortex theory of planetary motion (discussed in
section 2.6.2 of this book), and in Book II Newton aims to discredit that theory.
Even if the moving-fluid-and-vortex theory is dismissed, it still leaves the
possibility of planets having to move through a fluid, and this is another topic
Newton considers (and also effectively deals with in Book III).
Second, how to understand the effects of air resistance on falling bodies and
projectiles, like cannonballs, was already an old problem going back to Aristotle
and questions about vacuums. It was natural for Newton to show that his theory
of dynamics could tackle this complex area, perhaps particularly so, since
Galileo had written of it that “it is not possible to give any exact description” and
suggested the way out was “to discover and demonstrate the theorems in the case
of no impediments,”2 and so look at only those cases where it could be argued
that air resistance could be ignored. Descartes in his Principia Philosophiae
stated that “it is obvious, moreover, that they [projectiles] are gradually slowed
down, either by the air itself or by some other fluid bodies through which they
are moving,”3 but he gave no idea about how such effects were to be more
exactly described or explained. The effect of air resistance on falling bodies still
intrigues us today—who can forget those images of the Apollo 15 astronauts
dropping a hammer and a feather together on the Moon? Robert Boyle carried
out similar experiments (observed by Newton) in a vacuum created by his air
pump.
Third, it also seems likely that as Newton became involved in this work, he
saw it as an opportunity to demonstrate the power of those methodological ideas
he put forward in his Preface and his hope for the future: “I wish we could derive
the rest of the phenomena of nature by the same kind of reasoning from
mechanical principles.”
19.1.3. What Is Successful about Book II?
Newton had the thing Galileo lacked: the concept of force and a law telling how
forces change a body's motion. Thus he could theoretically explore the effects of
various types of resistance forces. What Newton began can be found in virtually
every modern textbook, such as those listed in section 6.9.1. He also devised a
series of experiments to link his theory to physical situations (see chapter 20).
Finally, he introduced many of the basic ideas of hydrodynamics and showed
how wave motion and other phenomena might be explained (see chapter 21). In

short, he gave what Truesdell called “the most brilliant and fertile work ever
written in mechanics.”
19.1.4. Where Does Newton Fail and Why?
Recall what Newton wrote in the Scholium at the end of Book I, Section XI:
In mathematics we are to investigate the quantities of forces with their proportions consequent on
any conditions supposed; then, when we enter upon physics, we compare those proportions with the
phenomena of Nature, that we may know what conditions of those forces answer to the several kinds
of attractive bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue more safely concerning the physical
species, causes, and proportions of the forces.
That is Newton's standard approach in the Principia, and now he applies it
with forces describing “attractive bodies” replaced by those describing a
medium's resistance to motion.
The problem is that Newton has now moved into a more difficult area of
science: the mathematics is more difficult (see section 19.2); the experiments
and the fitting of theory to applications is more difficult; and, finally, the search
for the underlying “species, causes, and proportions of the forces” takes him into
a completely new and complex part of physics. Newton has reached the limits of
what he can achieve with his level of mathematics and physics. It is, then,
remarkable just how far he was able to go with a stunning array of arguments,
analogies, and innovations.
19.1.5. Following Newton's Approach
I will cover the three strands of Newton's approach in the rest of this chapter
(specifying model forces and developing the theory), in chapter 20 (observing
Newton's experimental work), and in chapter 21 (discussing Newton's attempts
to link the previous work to properties of fluids and to develop some of the
theory of those fluids as it is required elsewhere in physics). As always, I wish to
communicate my admiration for the concepts and results that Newton develops
in Book II rather than struggle through the mathematical details as he provided
them. Naturally there must be a little mathematics in these chapters, but readers
should understand that it is mostly in the modern form of equations and results
that are important and that can be appreciated without becoming mired in the
details. (In summary, read on and do not be put off by the sight of a few
equations!)

19.2. DYNAMICS IN GENERAL
It is probably simplest if I use the modern formulation (see section 6.6) in which
Newton's second law tells us that a body of mass m has velocity v governed by
the equation
Here F is the force (if any) driving the motion and FR is the resistance force,
the assumed form of which is given in equation (19.2). The strength of the force
depends on the speed v, and the direction is given by the unit vector in the
direction of the velocity, meaning that f(v) must be negative to give a force
opposing the motion. Newton chooses to use
Newton's approach requires him to solve for possible motions in terms of the
force parameters a and b, then to use observational or experimental data to find
their practically relevant values. In chapter 21, we shall see how he tries to
understand the force parameters using the theory of fluids.
One general point must be made at the outset. Resistance forces model the
interaction of the moving body with the medium in which the motion takes
place, and energy is transferred from the moving body to that medium.
Therefore, we no longer have the conservation of energy law and, hence, a key
tool in solving dynamical problems (see sections 11.3.6 and 13.2) is lost.
19.2.1. The Simplest Case
Newton recognizes (and all textbooks follow suit) that the simplest case is when
the resistance force is proportional to the velocity, so b = 0 in equation (19.3).
For motion in one dimension, we must solve
which is a linear in the speed v. In two dimensions, this linear force property

translates into the two equations
We have a separate equation like equation (19.4) for each component.
Since vx = dx/dt, a second integration will then give the position x(t).
If F depends on position F = F(x) in equation (19.4), and we will need to go to
the differential equation
For the important case of a harmonic oscillator or pendulum, F depends only
on x, and so we still have a linear differential equation that is relatively easy to
solve.
19.2.2. How the Difficulties Enter
Physically important cases do not have b = 0, in which case, if we set a = 0,
equations (19.4) and (19.5) become
Two things have changed. Equation (19.7) is no longer linear in v, so we must
use nonlinear differential equations, although the constant F case is still simple.
Second, for motion in two (or three) dimensions, we now have coupled
differential equations (the equation for vy involves vx)—compare this to
equations (19.8) and (19.5).
Recall that Galileo pointed out that, for projectiles, we can combine motions

in the horizontal and vertical directions after considering them separately. The
modern version is given in section 11.2.1. That separability property is lost if we
have resistance forces other than those depending linearly on the velocity, and so
even projectile motion becomes a challenging problem.
With that background in place, we can move to Newton's results for the first
major problems in dynamics with resistance forces.
19.3. FREE MOTION AND FALLING BODIES
These are the simplest cases, with either no force or a constant one driving the
motion. The equations of motion can be integrated—for more on this, see the
textbooks listed in section 6.9.1 (the one by Fowles is commonly used). I will
give a few details for the linear case (b = 0) so we can see how Newton presents
his results in Section I: “Of the Motion of Bodies That Are Resisted in the Ratio
of the Velocity.”
19.3.1. Linear Resistance Force and Free Motion
For free motion, we set F = 0 in equation (19.4). Assuming motion starts at x = 0
with initial speed v0, integration of the equation of motion gives
The first of the equations in (19.9) tells us how the resistance force slows
down the body (exponentially, in this case), and the second one shows how the
force reduces the momentum as the body travels a distance x, with the force
constant a controlling the magnitude of the reduction. This physical emphasis is
not so prevalent in modern textbooks, but it was beautifully stated by Newton in:
PROPOSITION I. THEOREM I.
If a body is resisted in the ratio of its velocity, the motion [momentum] lost by resistance is as the
space gone over in its motion.
In Proposition II, Newton gives us the result for the first equation in (19.9),
but he gives it in terms of what happens to the speed in succeeding equal time
intervals. The result is

We tend to look for a complete formula (as in equation [19.9]) rather than
interpretative results like those just given (which are perhaps reminiscent of
Galileo's approach). Newton could calculate the complete details, as he explains
in a Corollary to the second Proposition. If you read Newton's result, you will
find not exponentials but mention of areas under a hyperbola. The link is in the
mathematical relationships as follows:
Newton was a great calculator, and it is amusing to see that, strangely, he once
calculated the area under a hyperbola, a logarithm, to fifty-five decimal places
(see Fauvel's Let Newton Be! referenced in the “Further Reading” section at the
end of this chapter).
19.3.2. Linear Resistance Force and Falling Bodies
Assume a vertical x axis and a body released from rest at a height x = h. The
force is now F = mg, and equation (19.4) gives
The speed v increases until it reaches vT, the “greatest speed that the body can
acquire by falling” (as Newton puts it), and known today as the terminal speed.
The fall time t and the fall height h are related by
Thus we can calculate all details for a falling body, and so can Newton,
although in the Principia he has no formulas like ours, but he gives results
expressed as in the example in section 19.3.1.
The above results are neat and easy to interpret, so you might wonder why we
do not stop here. Newton supplies the answer.

19.3.3. Choice of Force Laws
Newton explains in a Scholium why we must go further:
But, yet, that the resistance of bodies is in the ratio of the velocity, is more a mathematical hypothesis
than a physical one. In mediums void of all tenacity, the resistances made to bodies are in the
duplicate [squared] ratio of the velocities. For by the action of a swifter body, a greater motion in
proportion to a greater velocity is communicated to the same quantity of the medium in a less time;
and in an equal time, by reason of greater quantity of the disturbed medium, a motion is
communicated in the duplicate ratio greater; and the resistance (by Law II and III) is as the motion
communicated. Let us, therefore, see what motions arise from this law of resistance.
Newton is giving physical reasons for the form of the resistance force. This is
a complicated topic, and I return to it in the next chapter.
19.3.4. Further Results
So, following that Scholium, Newton repeats the above analysis but now with a
= 0 in equation (19.3). He presents Section II: “Of the Motion of Bodies That Are
Resisted in the Duplicate [Squared] Ratio of Their Velocities.”
He then gives the general case so that he will have the two free parameters a
and b at his disposal when he turns to fitting experimental data, that is, Section
III: “Of the Motion of Bodies That Are Resisted Partly in the Ratio of the
Velocities, and Partly in the Duplicate of the Same Ratio.”
The modern details are given by Fowles and in other textbooks cited in
section 6.9.1.
19.3.5. Summary
Newton has shown that he can solve for free and falling bodies for a variety of
resistance forces. His results are often expressed in forms giving more emphasis
to the physical outcomes than a “cold” formula. However, it is clear that he can
reduce the results to integrals (as we do), although he talks about areas under
curves rather than integrals. He has identified the important concept of terminal
speed for a falling body—modern discussions often use raindrops as examples.
The groundwork has now been done: describe the motion for given force
parameters a and b. Newton is ready for the reverse process: use observed
motions to find the practical values of those force parameters, and that I will
cover in chapter 20.

19.4. A STRANGE INTERLUDE
In the middle of Section II, we find:
LEMMA II. The moment of any genitum is equal to the moments of each of the generating sides
drawn into the indices of the powers of those sides, and into their co-efficients continually.
The language is totally opaque to a modern reader, but in this Lemma, Newton
presents rules for calculus that he needs for the topics being considered. Today
we would expect to see results like
They are there in Newton's Lemma but expressed rather differently.
A reader might well ask why the Lemma comes here and not in Section I of
Book I, where Newton sets out his mathematical methods. Or why even
introduce it at all rather than give some relevant reference? Part of the answer
comes back to his dispute with Leibnitz (see section 7.5). Here is Newton's
Scholium that comes after the Lemma:
In a letter of mine to Mr J. Collins, dated December 10, 1672, having described a method of
tangents, which I suspected to be the same with Slusius’ method, which at that time was not made
public, I subjoined these words: This is one particular, or rather a Corollary, of a general method,
which extends itself, without any troublesome calculation, not only to the drawing of tangents to any
curve lines, whether geometrical or mechanical, or any how respecting right lines or other curves,
but also to the resolving other abstruser kinds of problems about the crookedness, areas, lengths,
centres of gravity of curves, &c.…. This method I have interwoven with that other of working in
equations, by reducing them to infinite series. So far that letter. And these last words relate to a
treatise I composed on that subject in the year 1671. The foundation of that general method is
contained in the proceeding lemma.
Quite clearly, Newton is using this opportunity to reinforce his claims as the
discoverer of calculus. Recall that we are reading the 1726 third edition of
Principia. If we go back to the earlier editions, the Scholium is quite different
and talks about “in correspondence which I carried on ten years ago with the
very able geometer G. W. Leibnitz,” going on to how they both had the same
methods in calculus. The battle has progressed! (See this chapter's “Further
Reading” section to follow the whole story.)
19.5. PROJECTILES

This is another topic with a long history and with much debate about the exact
nature of a projectile's trajectory (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of
this chapter). Galileo finally showed that if air resistance is ignored, then the
trajectory is a parabola; the derivation of that result using Newton's laws was
given in section 11.2.1. Naturally, Newton reworked the problem including
resistance forces.
For the linear case (b = 0), the equations to be solved are as in equation (19.5)
with Fx = 0 and Fy = −mg. The equations again separate, and each can be solved
to replace the resistance-free solution in equation (11.6) with
The projectile is launched from the origin at an angle α to the horizontal x axis
and with speed V. These results are considerably more complicated than those
for the resistance-free case, equation (11.6), and it is immediately clear that
experimental work based on projectiles is not a good way to investigate
resistance forces. Newton does give a diagram (see figure 19.2) so the reader can
see the effect on trajectory shape and projectile range when the launch angle is
changed. The non-parabolic nature of the trajectories is clear.
Figure 19.2. Projectile paths for the same launch speed but different launch angles. (From The Principia,
trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
As an illustration of the complication introduced even in the linear-resistance
case, we can no longer find a simple exact formula for the range, and of course
Galileo's optimum range condition, α = 45°, will now change to something

depending on γ. Newton went on to consider the speed-squared case (a = 0 in
equation [19.3]), and, in Proposition X, he also introduced the density as a
variable in the resistance-force strength. That proposition has become famous
because Newton made a mistake in his original version. This was reported to
Newton by Niklaus Bernoulli, whose uncle, Johann Bernoulli, had detected it.
Newton scrambled to find the error and managed to make a very-last-minute
correction as the Principia’s second edition was going to press. In typical style,
Newton failed to give any credit to the Bernoullis; this is yet another example of
Newton's ego at work and his propensity to alienate people by his lack of
generosity.
19.6. DECAYING ORBITS
Given Newton's hostility toward Descartes's ideas (see section 19.1.2), it is no
surprise to find him laying the groundwork for combating some of them in
Section IV: “Of the Circular Motion of Bodies in Resisting Media.”
This is not an easy problem, and Newton also realizes that for astronomical
applications he must allow for the density of the medium decreasing as the
distance from the attracting body increases. His major result is given here:
PROPOSITION XV. THEOREM XII.
If the density of a medium in each place thereof be reciprocally as the distance of the places from an
immovable centre, and the centripetal force be in the duplicate ratio of the density [giving the usual
inverse-square-law force]; I say that a body may revolve in a spiral which cuts all the radii drawn
from that centre in a given angle.
Newton is saying that the resistance force will cause the orbit to decay, and in
certain cases it may take the form of a particular spiral (see figure 19.3).
Figure 19.3. Newton's diagram for Proposition XV. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,

NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
The orbit PQR is such that the radii SP (and the like) from the force center S all
cut the spiral at the same angle.
The proof is involved, and it has been suggested—both in Newton's time and
recently—that there are errors to be fixed. Notice that the Proposition uses the
word may; it does not say all orbits are of that particular form. References to
discussion papers are given in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter; Chandrasekhar gives a modern version of Newton's proof. In this case,
the resistance force is proportional to the density and the speed squared.
However, the important point is that Newton has recognized that resistance
forces will cause orbits to change from circles or ellipses to some sort of spiral
motion, and that the density of the medium is an important variable. He gives
three further Propositions exploring various aspects of the problem.
This topic became important again when artificial satellites were launched to
orbit the Earth. One approach to the problem is to use perturbation theory, so the
orbit is assumed fixed for one cycle and its form is used to calculate how the
resistance force changes the orbit parameters over that cycle. That gives a new
orbit, and the process repeats. The interesting physics involved is discussed by
Blitzer, for example. Over time, the orbit reduces in size and changes shape. The
density variation in the Earth's atmosphere is more like an exponential than
Newton's form, and suitable parameters are now available (see references to
King-Hele). Modern satellites tend to have very high orbits, so the resistance
forces have only minor effects.
19.7. THE PENDULUM AND THE DEFINITION OF
MASS
In Proposition XXIV, Newton returns to a question that he raised in the very first
page of the Principia: How to define mass? He recognizes that mass (“the
quantity of matter”) is used in two different ways: first, when considering inertia;
second, when considering weight or the effect of gravitation on a body. To
explore further, he must use the second law of motion, and he chooses to do that
now. (This seems like a strange place to insert this work, as it has nothing to do
with resistance forces and surely belongs in Book I. There will be more on this
topic in Book III, so Newton is not making life too easy for his readers!)
In modern terms, we consider a simple pendulum consisting of a “light string”

of length l supporting a bob of mass m. If oscillations are through small angles θ,
Newton's second law gives
You will find that in virtually every textbook you care to consult. However, it
was the genius of Newton that he recognized how the masses in equation (19.13)
are not necessarily the same, and their cancellation should not be made without
justification. On the left-hand side, we should write mI to indicate that this mass
describes the inertia of the pendulum bob. On the right, we have the force or
weight of the bob and we should use the gravitational mass mG. Thus, for the
equation of motion and the resulting period T, we should write
If we square the period formula, we get the results for one pendulum and for
two of the same length:
Newton sets out these results, obtained using an incremental form of the
second law, in Corollaries 1 to 4, where he uses weights instead of gravitational
mass ratios. Here is the stunning summary expressed as:
PROPOSITION XXIV. THEOREM XIX.
The quantities of matter in funependulous bodies [those forming the bob in a pendulum] whose
centres of oscillation are equally distant from the centre of suspension, are in a ratio compounded of
the ratio of the weights and the duplicate ratio of the times of oscillation in vacuo.
(Incidentally, Newton is not assuming a point particle here and is referring to
Huygens's work on composite pendulums and their “centre of oscillation.”
Nothing if not thorough!)
Newton sums up the vital importance of these results in:
Cor. 7. And hence appears a method of comparing bodies one among another, as to the quantity of
matter in each; and of comparing the weights of the same body in different places, to know the
variation of its gravity [g varies at different places on the Earth, as we will see in Book III]. And by
experiments made with greatest accuracy [to be reported when discussing Proposition VI in Book III]
I have always found the quantity of matter in bodies to be proportional to their weight.

This must be taken as one of the high points in the Principia. As mentioned in
chapter 5, this was the profound result that made such an impact on Albert
Einstein and was a key to his general theory of relativity.
19.8. DAMPED PENDULUMS
In Section VI, “Of the Motion and Resistance of Funependulous Bodies
[Pendulums],” Propositions XXV to XXXI deal with pendulums when various
resistance forces are present to damp down their oscillations. For the cycloidal
pendulum (see chapter 15), Newton shows that the oscillations remain
isochronous (independent of the amplitude of the swings) even when a resistance
force proportional to the velocity is present. An important motivation for this
work is to provide the theoretical basis for analyzing experiments that Newton
made to measure the parameters specifying the resistance forces in various
mediums (see the next chapter). In particular, Propositions XXX and XXXI show
how the fractional decrease in the amplitude of the swings may be related to the
resistance force at the bottom of the swing. These are technical and intricate
calculations, but Newton does produce some straightforward relationships that
may be applied, as explained in the next chapter.
19.9. CONCLUSION
It is a measure of Newton's vision and thoroughness that the work described in
this chapter still forms the basis for an introduction to the effects of resistance
forces as presented in modern textbooks. In fact, in some cases, Newton goes
much further. He has tackled the four great problems of dynamics (free fall,
projectiles, pendulums, and inverse-square-law-force orbits), producing
significant results in all cases, often eloquently expressed in physically
meaningful ways. Furthermore, he has now established the background for
experimental work and investigations of the fundamental origins of resistance
forces.
As ever, we have also seen Newton's quirky side, with sections on the
methods of calculus and on the fundamental properties of mass slipped in to
bewilder the unwary reader!
19.10. FURTHER READING

The reader is referred to the books listed in section 6.9.1. For dynamics, the book
by Fowles, as well as the one by Thornton and Marion, is recommended.
Sommerfeld nicely treats the cycloidal pendulum. Chandrasekhar explains
Newton's working for a few of the most important propositions, and Cohen's
Guide is a good place to start for historical details.
 
Fauvel, J., ed. Let Newton Be! Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988. [articles
on the Principia; Jon Pepper shows examples of Newton's calculations]
Hall, A. R. Ballistics in the Seventeenth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1952.
 
On orbits and spiral motion:
 
Blitzer, L. “Satellite Orbit Paradox: A General View.” American Journal of
Physics 39 (1971): 882–86.
Chandrasekhar, S. “The Effects of Air-Drag on the Descent of Bodies.” Newton's
Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.
Erlichson, H. “Newton's Solution to the Equiangular Spiral Problem.” Historia
Mathematica 19 (1992): 402–13.
King-Hele, D. Theory of Satellite Orbits in an Atmosphere. London:
Butterworths, 1964.
King-Hele, D., and D. M. C. Walker. “The Effects of Drag on Satellite Orbits:
Advances in 1687 and 1987.” Vistas in Astronomy 30 (1987): 269–89.
Weinstock, R. “Newton's Principia and Inverse Square Orbits in a Resisting
Medium: A Spiral of Twisted Logic.” Historia Mathematica 25 (1998): 281–
89.
Wilson, C. “Newton on the Equiangular Spiral: An Addendum to Erlichson's
Account.” Historia Mathematica 21 (1994): 196–203.

For those people thinking of Newton as a mathematician and the Principia as an
impenetrable mathematical treatise, it will come as a shock to know that over
twenty pages in Book II are devoted to reports of experiments. However, we
must remember that Newton was in the vanguard of the Scientific Revolution,
and, as explained in chapter 2, one of its central tenets was the necessity of
finding out about nature by doing experiments (see section 2.5). As a young
man, Newton met the pioneering experimentalist Robert Boyle, and during their
friendship, Newton was greatly influenced by him (see the “Further Reading”
section at the end of this chapter).
It is also obvious that even in his boyhood, Newton took a great delight in
practical matters. This delightful excerpt from Stukeley's memoir tells us about
his strange inventions, uncommon skill & industry in mechanical works. They tell us that instead of
playing among the other boys, when from school, he always busied himself at home, in making
knickknacks of diverse sorts, & models in wood, of whatever his fancy lead him to. For which
purpose he furnished himself with little saws, hatchets, hammers, chisels, & a whole shop of tools
which he used with much dexterity.1
We must also again refer to his Preface, where Newton states his aim: “from
the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature.” He has done the
theory and is ready to do the experiments. We are reminded of Einstein's
comment that “it is the theory which decides what we can observe.”2
Newton's objective is to find parameters for the resistance forces, the values of
a and b in equation (19.3). He carried out a large number of experiments using
pendulums and observations of falling bodies. The forces involved are now
usually called drag, and before going to Newton's experimental details, it is
worth looking at modern information on this topic.
20.1. DRAG: DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENTS
The term drag is now used for the resistance force D, and it is usual to define it
in terms of a nondimensional drag coefficient CD according to

A is the relevant area for the body moving through the fluid (πa2 for a sphere
of radius a), ρ is the fluid density, and v is the body's speed through the fluid.
The drag coefficient depends on the dimensionless Reynolds number Re,
Here l is a characteristic length—a sphere's diameter, say—and μ is the fluid
viscosity. The Reynolds number is sometimes interpreted as giving a measure of
different contributions to the drag expressed as a ratio of inertial to viscous
effects. Notice that if CD is a constant, then we have the resistance force
proportional to the speed squared, as Newton suggested.
Graphs of CD versus Re are given in many books, such as that by Binder, as
well as the resource by Daugherty and Franzini, and in the papers by Achenbach,
Frohlich, and George E. Smith (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of
this chapter). Figure 20.1 shows the form of the drag versus the Reynolds-
number curve for a sphere.
Figure 20.1. A sketch of the drag coefficient versus the Reynolds number for a sphere. Note the logarithmic
scales.
It is immediately obvious that drag is a complex phenomenon with an intricate
dependence on fluid-flow properties in the wake of the sphere. For a small

Reynolds number, the logarithmic curve is linear with a negative slope, and
equations (20.1) and (20.2) combine to give the result that drag depends linearly
on the speed, which was the first case investigated by Newton in Section I of
Book II. In his discussion Scholium, he said this was “more a mathematical
hypothesis that a physical one,” but we see that it is actually appropriate in a
limited regime. This linear-drag law is now called Stokes's law.
The CD-versus-Re curve soon changes as the Reynolds number increases and,
for a region of Reynolds numbers between 1,000 and 100,000, is very roughly
flat, indicating a drag depending roughly on speed squared. Beyond that, there is
a rapid major decline in the drag coefficient as more complex fluid-motion
effects kick in. (See, for example, the discussion in Binder's section 5-29 and the
wonderful photographs in Van Dyke's Album). The paper by Frohlich and the
book by de Mestre give interesting examples taken from sport, where Reynolds
numbers around 100,000 are commonly involved. Newton's experiments
involved Reynolds numbers all the way up to around 80,000.
It is clear that Newton has moved into a difficult area of science. In fact, this
topic has become very significant in engineering, where a vast amount of
empirical and experimental work has been done in such fields as aeronautics.
20.2. EXPERIMENTS WITH PENDULUMS
The pendulum is an interesting dynamical system and also one that can be used
as an experimental tool. We saw Newton using it to test predictions of his laws
(see section 6.5) and noted that he empirically corrected his measurements for
the effect of air resistance. Now Newton uses the pendulum to find the
resistance-force parameters, as in equation (19.3). He has established the
required theory in Propositions XXX and XXXI, and now comes the General
Scholium, which begins:
From these propositions may be found the resistance of mediums by pendulums operating therein. I
found the resistance of the air by the following experiments. I suspended a wooden globe or ball
weighing 57.7/22 ounces troy, its diameter 6.7/8 London inches by a fine thread on a firm hook, and
the centre of the oscillation of the globe was 10.1/2 feet. I marked on the thread a point 10 feet and 1
inch distant from the centre of suspension; and even with that point I placed a ruler divided into
inches, by the help whereof I observed the lengths of the arcs described by the pendulum. (See figure
20.2.)
Notice that Newton is using a very long pendulum so that for small enough
swings, it is isochronal, like a cycloidal pendulum, a point he discusses in detail.
(See the source by I. Bernard Cohen listed in the “Further Reading” section at

the end of this chapter for a detailed discussion of what Newton implied by the
word pendulum.) As ever with Newton, there is a cleverly conceived underlying
concept and some brilliant analysis to make use of it.
20.2.1. The Basic Idea
The Scholium continues: “Then I numbered the oscillations in which the globe
would lose 1/8 part of its motion.” Newton goes on to find the reduction in
amplitude per swing and shows how that may be used to find resistance-force
parameters.
To explain, consider the simplest case with a resistance force proportional to
the velocity, so in equation (19.3), b = 0 and a is to be found. In this case, the
pendulum equation of motion can be solved exactly (see any modern textbook,
such as Fowles's section 3.4) and
The pendulum bob has mass m and has been released from rest with θ = θ0 as
in figure 20.2. The angular frequency ω is close to the unperturbed value 
.
After one swing or half a period, the pendulum fails to reach amplitude θ0 by an
amount
If we use the approximation 22/7 for π, we can write this in Newton's form as
This is the result Newton gives in Proposition XXX. If we measure the reduction
in swing Δθ, we can find the force parameter a.

Figure 20.2. Notation for Newton's pendulum experiment (not to scale). The pendulum is released from P1
and would swing to P4 if there were no resistance force. When resistance is present, it swings to P3 falling
short by the angular amount Δθ.
20.2.2. The Full Method
Newton uses a resistance force with magnitude
where he has introduced (without any justification) an extra term proportional to
the speed to the power 3/2, presumably to model the complex drag phenomena
that we saw in section 20.1. He thus needs to determine the three force
parameters a, d, and b, and it is here that we see the Newton genius in action.

Newton sets
where V is the maximum speed for the particular release condition (occurring at
or very close to the bottom of the swing), so V is known and depends on the
release angle: V = V(θ0). Of course V gives the maximum resistance force, and
from Proposition XXX, Newton has results like equation (20.5), which he uses to
produce a total result that we can express as
Comparing equations (20.7) and (20.8), we see that our force parameters a, d,
and b may be obtained from A, B, and C, and the resistance force is given in
terms of the weight mg.
In this case, Newton must measure Δθ for three values of θ0 and thus find
three equations like (20.7), which he can solve as simultaneous equations for A,
B, and C.
20.2.3. Implementation
Newton displaced the pendulum by 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 inches and counted the
oscillations for the amplitude to have diminished by an eighth in each case.
(Incidentally, those larger displacements were surely pushing the simple, linear-
pendulum approximation.) This gave him six sets of data (given in the
Principia), and, hence, more than the requisite three simultaneous equations for
finding A, B, and C. He chose to use the second, fourth, and sixth cases, and after
doing the mathematics, he concluded that:
The resistance of the globe will be to its weight as 0.0000583V + 0.00007593V3/2 + 0.0022169V2 to
the length of the pendulum between the centre of suspension and the ruler, that is, 121 inches.
Given the nature of the method, it is amusing to see the number of figures
Newton uses in his result—surely 0.0022169 should be 0.0022, at best. In fact,
choosing other data sets will not give consistent results, and Newton realized
that there were difficulties with this method.
The first edition of the Principia contained different results; the full story of

this work is described by George E. Smith (see the “Further Reading” section at
the end of this chapter).
20.2.4. Further Work
Newton did a great deal of research using his pendulum method and, after giving
more data, says, “I leave the calculation to such as are disposed to make it”! He
became aware of the difficulties, for example the resistance from the motion of
the suspending thread. Using some choices of data sets will produce negative
values for the force parameters. He tried different bobs and tried to conclude that
the resistance force was proportional to the square of the diameter of the bob.
(He noted a worry that one of the bobs was not exactly spherical.)
In a fascinating series of experiments, Newton measured pendulum
oscillations in water and quicksilver (mercury). Comparing oscillations in air
and water, he concluded that:
the resistance of the pendulum oscillating in water, that is, that part that is proportional to the square
of the velocity, and which only needs to be considered in swift bodies, is to the resistance of the whole
same pendulum, oscillating in air with the same velocity, as about 850 to 1, that is as, the density of
water to the density of air, nearly.
That result agrees with the modern form in equation (20.1).
Newton's work in this area covers nine pages in the Principia, and I leave it to
interested readers to read them and marvel again at his industry and
inventiveness, even if the final results are none too satisfactory. One final topic is
worthy of note.
20.2.5. Detecting the Aether
It is typical of Newton's respect for the importance of experiments that he
investigates the possibility of an aether existing by devising a pendulum
experiment. It is interesting to read his own words,
since it is the opinion of some that there is a certain aethereal medium extremely rare and subtile,
which freely pervades the pores of all bodies; and from such a medium, so pervading the pores of
bodies, some resistance must needs arise; in order to try whether the resistance, which we experience
in bodies in motion, be made upon their outward superficies [surfaces] only, or whether their internal
parts meet with any considerable resistance upon their superficies, I thought of the following
experiment.
Basically, he uses a box as the pendulum bob, experimenting with it empty
and filled with lead as comparison cases. (It is a measure of Newton's care that

he notes that the lead case will stretch the supporting thread and he must correct
for that.) He detects no great difference (citing a ratio of 78:77), and notes that
“this experiment is related from memory, the paper being lost,” so he does not
have all details. Even so, the experiment was carefully and intricately designed,
and about one and a half pages are devoted to the subject, so he must have
thought his no-aether-detected result to be of significance.
20.2.6. Modern Experiments
Some beautiful modern experiments by Bolster, Hershberger, and Donnelley
allow us to see the change in fluid behavior around a pendulum as it changes
from the low Reynolds number, Stokes flow regime, to a critical-change region
with a Reynolds number around 700. The oscillations are made in water with
dissolved Thymol blue, allowing fluid motions to be observed. In the first case,
there is laminar flow, and then we can see the shedding of vortex rings. No doubt
Newton would have delighted in these experiments, which clearly show how
resistance-force changes are correlated with fluid-flow properties. The interested
reader is encouraged to look at the figures in the references given in the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
20.3. FALLING BODIES
The observation of falling bodies must surely be the oldest of all experiments
and also the one causing the most speculation. I. Bernard Cohen (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section) gives a good history, including a discussion
of Galileo's exploits. The fact that different masses fall at the same rate is always
clouded by the influence of air resistance, and now Newton uses that variability
to investigate the resistance force itself. Based on his previous theoretical work,
he concludes that the principal relevant resistance force is proportional to speed
squared, so we have a = 0 in equation (19.3), and b is the parameter controlling
the force magnitude. Newton suggests that, for a sphere of diameter d moving in
a fluid with density ρ,
His results for this study are given in PROPOSITION XL. PROBLEM IX: “To
Find by Phenomena the Resistance of a Globe [Sphere] Moving through a
Perfectly Fluid Compressed Medium.”

The necessary theory is given, then fourteen experiments are described and
discussed in a following Scholium.
20.3.1. The Modern Theory
Taking the x axis as vertically downward, the equation of motion
must be solved with the starting condition x = 0 and speed v = 0 at t = 0. The
solution may be found in textbooks such as Dynamics by Horace Lamb, and
Thus x, the distance fallen, is known in terms of the elapsed time t or the
speed v at that point in the fall. These results were known to Newton (although
they are not given in that form), as shown by checking the figures he gives with
eight-figure accuracy for theoretical fall results in his table.
20.3.2. Experiments in Water
Newton's Scholium begins:
In order to investigate the resistances of fluids from experiments, I procured a square wooden vessel,
whose length and breadth on the inside was 9 inches English measure, and its depth 9 feet ½; this I
filled with rainwater; and having provided globes made up of wax and lead included therein, I noted
the time of the descents of these globes, the height through which they descended being 112 inches.
He had “seconds” and “half-seconds” pendulums available for timing. He
reports on three experiments like that, and then for experiments four to twelve,
he used a tank about fifteen feet deep. For experiments one, two, and four, he
measured the time of fall, calculated the theoretical fall distance for that time,
and compared it with the actual distance fallen. In each case, the theory agreed
with experiment to better than 1 percent.
For the other experiments, he recorded the distance fallen, calculated the

theoretical time for falling that distance, and compared it with the measured
times. He did several measurements for each case, and the calculated times
generally fitted with the spread of measured times. For the heavier bodies, his
times tended to be a little low, suggesting his theory overestimated the resistance
in these cases.
Newton recognizes that there are problems with these experiments, such as
interaction of the fluid motion with the tank sides. He also notes that, for some
releases, the globes oscillated a little, and that would complicate the motion. The
discussion is very detailed, and Newton comes over as a careful and perceptive
experimenter.
20.3.3. Free Fall
Experiments thirteen and fourteen investigate the fall of bodies in air using the
newly restored St. Paul's Cathedral. Experiment thirteen was carried out in June
1710 and used a number of glass globes variously filled with air, water, or
quicksilver (mercury). Newton describes a release mechanism by which the
globe was released from a hinged table and, at the same moment, a “seconds”
pendulum was set oscillating so the time of fall could be measured. (Later he
discusses this mechanism and errors it may introduce.) The theory and
experiment appear to agree with about 2 to 5 percent accuracy according to the
table of results.
Experiment fourteen was carried out in July 1719 by John Desaguliers, who
was one of Newton's confidants and Curator and Operator of Experiments in
1714 for the Royal Society. This time, bladders shaped into spheres and balls of
lead “were let fall from the lantern on top of the cupola of the same church,
namely from a height of 272 feet.” Thus a good distance of fall was obtained, and
Newton describes the complicated release and timing schemes, the latter using
“a pendulum vibrating four times in a second.”
The bladders could be filled with liquids, and the whole experiment was
clearly very carefully carried out. Newton even comments about the manner in
which “the fifth bladder was wrinkled, and by its wrinkles was a little retarded.”
It is interesting to look through his table of results, reproduced here in figure
20.3.

Figure 20.3. Newton's table of results from experiment fourteen.
These results are very good, partly because the larger fall would leave the
experiment just a little less sensitive to timing errors.
20.3.4. How Good Are These Results?
I can do no better than to quote the summary of George E. Smith, the expert on
this topic:
How good were these vertical fall data? The best way to determine this is to ignore Newton's theory
and instead determine the values of the drag coefficient CD implied by the results. [Smith then refers
to a figure much like figure 19.1.] The two results in air, with a Reynolds number of 40,000 and CD
ranging from 0.499 to 0.518 for Desaguliers's and a Reynolds number of 78,000 and CD ranging
from 0.504 to 0.538 for Newton's, show remarkably good agreement with modern values. The results
in water are a little on the high side, perhaps due to sidewall effects from the fairly narrow troughs or
from free-surface effects at the beginning of the descent. Regardless, the CD values range between
0.462 and 0.519. Even more significant, the lowest value, 0.462, occurs at a Reynolds number where
the modern measured value reaches a minimum. The experiments themselves were therefore of high
quality. One can make a case that no better data for resistance of spheres over this range of Reynolds
numbers were published before the twentieth century.
That is quite a compliment for Newton the experimentalist!
20.4. CONCLUSION
Newton's experimental work typifies what we find in Book II: ingenious
methods and a care and thoroughness that were surely a model for his times. His
pendulum experiments were a clever attempt to evaluate the different
components in the resistance force, but the method was beset by difficulties,
which Newton, to his credit, clearly recognized. The vertical-fall experiments
show us Newton at his best, even if his underlying theoretical basis is
problematical, as we will see in the next chapter.

20.5. FURTHER READING
For more on experiments and Boyle's part in the Scientific Revolution, see, for
example:
 
Dear, Peter. Revolutionizing the Sciences: European Knowledge and Its
Ambitions, 1500–1700. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave, 2001.
Hunter, M. Boyle: Between God and Science. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2009.
Shapin, Steven. The Scientific Revolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1996. [includes an extended, comprehensive bibliographic essay]
 
For detailed discussion of Newton's experiments and connected matter, see:
 
Bertoloni Meli, Domenico. Thinking with Objects: The Transformation of
Mechanics in the Seventeenth Century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2006.
Cohen, I. Bernard. The Birth of a New Physics. New York: Norton, 1985.
———. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The Principia, by I.
Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1999.
Gauld, C. F. “Newton's Investigation of the Resistance to Moving Bodies in
Continuous Fluids and the Nature of ‘Frontier Science.’” Science and
Education 19 (2010): 939–61.
———. “Newton's Use of the Pendulum to Investigate Fluid Resistance: A Case
Study and Some Implications for Teaching about the Nature of Science.”
Science and Education 18 (2009): 383–400.
Fowles, G. R. Analytical Mechanics. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders College
Publishing, 1986.
Lamb, Horace. Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1945.
Smith, George E. “The Newtonian Style in Book II of the Principia.” In Isaac
Newton's Natural Philosophy. Edited by J. Z. Buchwald and I. Bernard
Cohen. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
———. “Newton's Study of Fluid Mechanics.” International Journal of
Engineering Science 36 (1998): 1377–90.
 
For information on modern pendulum experiments, see:
 

Bolster, D., R. E. Hershberger, and R. J. Donnelly. “Dynamic Similarity, the
Dimensionless Science.” Physics Today (September 2011): 42–47.
———. “Oscillating Pendulum Decay by Emission of Vortex Rings.” Physical
Review E 81 (2010): 046317-1-046317-6.
 
For fluid mechanics and drag:
 
Achenbach, E. “Experiments on the Flow Past Spheres at Very High Reynolds
Numbers.” Journal of Fluid Mechanics 54 (1972): 565–75.
Binder, R. C. Fluid Mechanics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1943.
Daughterty, R. L., and J. B. Franzini. Fluid Mechanics with Engineering
Applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.
De Mestre, N. The Mathematics of Projectiles in Sport. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
Frohlich, C. “Aerodynamic Drag Crisis and Its Possible Effect on the Flight of
Baseballs.” American Journal of Physics 52 (1984): 325–34.
Rouse, Hunter. Elementary Mechanics of Fluids. New York: John Wiley, 1946.
Van Dyke, Milton. An Album of Fluid Motion. Stanford, CA: Parabolic Press,
1982.

Recall that Book II of the Principia concerns motion when there is resistance
from the medium in which that motion takes place. In the previous two chapters,
we have seen how Newton describes this situation using his theory of dynamics
and then explores the form of the assumed resistance forces using experiments
with pendulums and falling bodies. In this chapter, I will discuss Newton's third
approach to this motion in which he asks: How do resistance forces arise? What
form do they take? And how do they depend on the properties of the medium?
This takes him into the theory of fluids (liquids and gases) and naturally extends
beyond resistance forces to motions in the fluids themselves.
For me, this is one of the most remarkable parts of the Principia. While it is
clear that he has reached the limits of his theoretical formalism, nevertheless,
Newton still manages to introduce concepts and methods that remain of
importance for any mathematical scientist. He manages to produce results using
a stunning variety of innovative approaches and analogies. This is Newton at his
best!
To deal with a fluid, one needs a theory or equations extending dynamics from
the realm of particles to small elements of the fluid and how they move and
interact with each other. Alternatively, one may consider the fluid as a collection
of particles and try to use their motions to describe how the whole collection, the
fluid, behaves. These are vast areas of scholarship and research, and Newton
produces pioneering work in both approaches. I will discuss some of his most
significant steps to give you a flavor of this part of Book II. To go further,
consult the references in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
21.1. HYDROSTATICS
We have reached Section V: “Of the Density and Compression of Fluids; and of
Hydrostatics.”
Newton begins by defining his terms and immediately identifying a
consequence:
THE DEFINITION OF A FLUID.

A fluid is any body whose parts yield to any force impressed on it, and by yielding, are easily moved
among themselves.
PROPOSITION XIX. THEOREM XIV.
All the parts of a homogeneous and unmoved fluid included in any unmoved vessel, and compressed
on every side (setting aside the consideration of condensation, gravity and all centripetal forces), will
be equally pressed on every side, and remain in their places without any motion arising from that
pressure.
That sums up our basic concept of a fluid. Newton goes on later to recognize
what today we call Boyle's law when he routinely considers fluids with the
“density of a fluid proportional to the compression.” Today we express the
relationship between pressure P, volume V, and density ρ as
Newton then shows how gravity will change the pressure in a column of fluid
and comments on the pressure in the Earth's atmosphere. As always, he covers a
range of force and geometry examples.
Thus Newton has introduced some continuum ideas that he can use in the
static case.
21.2. SCALING AND BOYLE'S LAW
The application of Boyle's law is crucial in much of Newton's work, so it is not
surprising that he delved into its origins. Furthermore, he has here the chance to
demonstrate what he had in mind when he wrote in his Preface:
I wish we could derive the rest of the phenomena of nature by the same kind or reasoning from
mechanical principles [as he has used for gravity and the solar system]; for I am induced by many
reasons to suspect that they may all depend upon certain forces by which the particles of bodies by
some causes hitherto unknown, are either mutually impelled towards each other, and cohere in
regular figures, or are repelled and recede from each other.
So it is here that we find the impressive
PROPOSITION XXIII. THEOREM XVIII.
If a fluid be composed of particles mutually flying [about] each other, and the density be as the
compression [that is, Boyle's law applies], the centrifugal forces of the particles will be reciprocally
proportional to the distances of their centres. And, vice versa, particles flying [about] each other,
with forces that are reciprocally proportional to the distances of their centre, compose an elastic
fluid, whose density is as the compression.

Newton is claiming (within the limits of his proof and its assumptions, it must
be noted) that Boyle's law holds if and only if the fluid comprises particles with
repulsive forces depending inversely on the distance between them. That is a
remarkable achievement, and equally remarkable is the technique Newton
introduces into applied mathematics to make the proof. He gives a scaling
argument based on the cubes of fluid, as in figure 21.1. The ratio of the sides AB
and ab, which today we might use in terms of the parameter x, with ab = xAB,
can be used to scale the areas, volumes, and densities (for example, the area of
side abcd = x2ABCD). Newton is then able to argue that if Boyle's law holds, the
pressures lead to interparticle repulsive forces varying inversely on the distance.
He also shows how to start with those forces and come to Boyle's law. This is an
extremely original analysis, and the interested reader will find Newton's
description of it quite easy to follow, if a little lengthy. Scaling arguments are
now routinely used in science and have led to important relationships in biology
(see the book by Schmidt-Nielsen listed in this chapter's “Further Reading”
section). The later growth of the molecular theory of gases, the kinetic theory, is
covered in chapter 28.
Newton gives a Scholium in which he enumerates other possible laws and
their forces and concludes with his standard methodological warning:
But whether elastic fluids do really consist of particles so repelling each other, is a physical question.
We have here demonstrated mathematically the property of fluids consisting of particles of this kind,
that hence philosophers [scientists] may take occasion to discuss that question.
Figure 21.1. Newton's diagram in support of Proposition XXIII. The small cube is a scaled version of the
larger one. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton's particle approach to gases is not correct, but the basic idea of
understanding a macroscopic law by considering microscopic effects is valid and
gave rise to the kinetic theory of gases (see chapter 28).

21.3. FLUID MOTION AND RESISTANCE FORCES
From the hydrostatics case, we now move to Section VII: “Of the Motion of
Fluids, and the Resistance Made to Projected Bodies.”
As mentioned earlier, Newton does not have a mathematical theory for fluid
motion, so he must use various fluid models and comparisons of different flow
situations. He begins with the idea of comparing similar systems, and this idea,
now known as the principle of similitude, has proved to be of great value in
science and engineering. Here is Newton's own formulation:
PROPOSITION XXXII. THEOREM XXVI.
Suppose two systems of bodies consisting of an equal number of particles, and let the correspondent
particles be similar and proportional, each in one system to each in the other, and have a like
situation among themselves, and the same given ratio of density to each other;…I say, that the
particles of those systems will continue to move among themselves with like motions in proportional
times.
E. T. Whittaker, in his classic Treatise, summed it up: “If any system of
connected particles and rigid bodies is given, it is possible to construct another
system exactly similar to it but on a different scale.”1 These ideas are behind the
use of the Reynolds number, as discussed in section 20.1; two systems may seem
quite different but have parameters scaling to give the same Reynolds number.
(Readers might be surprised to learn that pendulum motions of 100 micron
spheres in liquid helium and one-inch steel spheres in water have similar
behavior, as shown in the paper by Bolster, Hershberger, and Donnelly.)
Newton uses models of fluids to conclude that “the resistance of the globe
[sphere] is in a ratio compounded of the duplicate [square] ratio of the velocity,
and the duplicate ratio of the diameter, and the ratio of the density of the
medium.” We would write
Newton considers the constant k for an incompressible rarefied medium (with
a dependence on whether or not the particle collisions are elastic) and for an
incompressible continuous medium. He also compares the sphere and cylinder,
finding resistance doubled for the cylinder of same diameter.
During these calculations, Newton introduces yet another idea that has proved
to be of lasting value. He writes (when discussing Proposition XXXIV,
comparing sphere and cylinder motions):

For since the action of the medium upon the body is the same (by Cor. 5 of the Laws) whether the
body move in a quiescent medium, or whether the particles of the medium impinge with the same
velocity upon the quiescent body…
As a consequence of the laws of motion, we may think of the body moving in
a stationary fluid, or a fluid flowing onto a fixed body. This is a conceptually
useful device for theorizing, but it is also of enormous practical importance for
things like wind tunnels and the testing of airplane and car shapes.
There is one more problem that Newton considers in this section that reminds
us that we are reading the work of a master theorist.
21.3.1. The Shape of Least Resistance
In a Scholium following Proposition XXXIV, Newton writes:
By the same method other figures may be compared together as to their resistance; and those may be
found that are most apt to continue their motions in resisting mediums.
Newton is finding the optimum shapes for moving through a fluid (on the
particle-collision model) so that the effects of resistance are minimized.
He first considers a cone (see figure 21.2) with a circular base CEBH, a center
O, and a height OD. Surprisingly, the optimum shape is not a cone with a vertex
at D; it is a frustum obtained by slicing through at D a cone with vertex S given
by the construction QS = QC, where Q is the point midway between O and D.
Newton now produces a breathtaking result: he gives the general optimum
shape (see figure 21.2). I will not give details (it is far too complicated), but the
solution is in the form of a curve to be rotated around an axis to create the
required optimum shape. Interested readers should consult the resources by
Goldstine and Chandrasekhar (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of
this chapter) for a complete exposition.
Figure 21.2. Newton's diagrams for least-resistance shapes. Left: The optimum cone with axis OD and
moving to the left. Right: The general shape for a body moving to the right and with an axis along the line

AMBR. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
This is a problem in the calculus of variations (see the book by Lemons listed
in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter for a simple
introduction to the subject). Classic problems in this branch of mathematics are:
Given a closed curve of fixed length, what shape should it take to enclose the
maximum area? (Answer: A circle.) What shape should a smooth curve joining
two fixed points in a vertical plane take if a particle slides down it in the least
time? (Answer: A cycloid.) According to Goldstine, “the first genuine
problem”—that is, the least-resistance-shape problem considered here—“of the
calculus of variations was formulated and solved by Newton in late 1685.”2 A
look at Goldstine's discussion will convince you that this is a stunning piece of
work by Newton. Chandrasekhar calls it “the most sophisticated mathematical
problem treated in the Principia.”3
There is no proof in the Principia, and I. Bernard Cohen may be consulted for
historical commentary on that matter as well as references to Whiteside's
definitive study. Newton states “which Proposition may be of use in the building
of ships,” and, according to Cohen, it may be that one John Craig suggested the
problem to Newton in that form. As it turns out, the conditions assumed by
Newton have no relevance to shipbuilding but may be of interest for very high
speed flight, as Newton himself indicates in Corollaries 2 and 3 to Proposition
XXXIII. For more on this topic, see the book edited by Miele listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
21.5. PROPAGATION OF DISTURBANCES IN
FLUIDS
Although not immediately part of Newton's investigation into the motion of
bodies through fluids, we can surmise that he discovered that motion of the fluid
itself was physically relevant and something he could investigate. Thus we come
to Section VIII: “Of Motion Propagated through Fluids.”
Newton again uses his discrete particle model to discuss how a pressure
disturbance is propagated in a fluid. He gives the following:
PROPOSITION XLI. THEOREM XXXII.
A pressure is not propagated through a fluid in rectilinear directions unless where the particles of a
fluid lie in a right line.

PROPOSITION XLII. THEOREM XXXIII.
All motion propagated through a fluid diverges from a rectilinear progress into the unmoved spaces.
These Propositions are supported by the diagrams in figure 21.3, which show
the spreading and diffraction of disturbances in fluids. Newton then explains
how a “tremulous body” will transmit a series of compressions and impulses
through an elastic medium.
Figure 21.3. Newton's diagrams in support of Propositions XLI and XLII. (From The Principia, trans.
Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
In a later Scholium, Newton makes an important comment revealing his ideas
about sound and light:
The last Propositions respect the motions of light and sounds; for since light is propagated in right
lines it is certain that it cannot consist in action alone (by Prop. XLI and XLII).
Newton is ruling out a wave theory for light. Of course, later experiments
revealing the diffraction and interference effects explained by wave theory
would prove him wrong.
21.5.1. Oscillations and Waves: Water Waves
Newton does not have the equations for continuum mechanics and derivations of
wave equations, so he relies on ingenious (as ever) physical constructions and
analogies. His investigative tool is set out in a Proposition and its supporting
diagram:
PROPOSITION XLIV. THEOREM XXXV.

If water ascend and descend alternately in the erected legs KL, MN, of a canal or pipe; and a
pendulum be constructed whose length between the point of suspension and the centre of oscillation
is equal to half the length of the water in the canal; I say, that the water will ascend and descend in
the same times in which the pendulum oscillates.
Figure 21.4. Newton's diagrams supporting Propositions XLIV and XLVI. (From The Principia, trans.
Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton discusses how the change in water level AB to EF and the pendulum
arc PQ are related. Although he talks about a cycloidal pendulum, he draws a
simple pendulum. We must assume small oscillations, as in a Corollary he talks
about the oscillations of the water “all performed in equal times, whether the
motion be more or less intense.” We have the notion of isochronal oscillations
and the transfer of that concept to waves, thus giving the modern idea of simple
linear harmonic waves.
He goes on to define the “breadth of the waves,” what today we call their
wavelength λ in terms of the distance between hollows or between “tops of the
ridges” (FD or EC in figure 21.4). He is then able to use his pendulum model to
show that “the velocity of waves is in the subduplicate ratio [square root] of the
breadths.” The equivalent modern formula for water-wave speed c is
In an interesting aside, the ever-thorough Newton shows that he has thought
about the motion of water under waves and the trajectories followed:
These things are true upon the supposition that parts of water ascend or descend in a right line [see
his model in figure 21.4]; but, in truth, that ascent and descent is rather performed in a circle; and
therefore I propose the time defined by this proposition as only near the truth.

21.5.2. Oscillations and Waves: Sound Waves
Propositions XLVII to L deal with waves in compressible fluids, and sound
waves in gases are the obvious model. Newton deals with the propagation of
oscillations or “pulses” and links the detailed dynamics to the equivalent motion
around a circle. (I leave it to the interested reader to follow up on the details—
the arguments given in prose are, as always, rather long and tedious. See this
chapter's “Further Reading” section.)
Newton discovers the basic relationship for wave motion: the speed is equal to
the wavelength multiplied by the frequency. He also relates the speed of sound
waves to properties of the medium in which they propagate:
PROPOSITION XLVIII. THEOREM XXXVIII.
The velocities of pulses propagated in an elastic fluid are in a ratio compounded of the subduplicate
ratio of the elastic force directly, and the subduplicate ratio of the density inversely [the square root
of elastic force divided by the density]; supposing the elastic force of the fluid proportional to its
condensation.
Newton had the properties of this elastic fluid summed up in Boyle's law,
equation (21.1). Using that formula, he could evaluate the square root of P
divided by density ρ and come up with his value for c, the speed of sound.
Newton calculated that c = 979 feet per second. This was a problem for Newton
because a variety of experiments (some of which he made himself) gave larger
values, around 1,140 feet per second. However, rather than admit his theory was
lacking in some way, he tried to come up with arguments to correct his result,
things we might today call fudge factors (see the paper by Westfall listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter). Again the ego of the man is
evident, and such unworthy episodes detract from his reputation.
The problem remained for about a hundred years, until Pierre-Simon Laplace
corrected Newton's theory in 1816. The problem lies in the use of Boyle's law
and Newton's assumption that there was no heat exchange in the rapid changes
of pressure in a sound wave. Instead of P/ρ in Boyle's law, we should use P/ργ,
where γ is the specific-heat constant. Correcting Newton's work in this way gives
a satisfactory result for the speed of sound.
21.6. CIRCULAR MOTION AND VORTEX
THEORY

Finally we come to what many people see as the rationale for the whole of Book
II, that is, SECTION IX: “Of the Circular Motion of Fluids.”
It is here that Newton attacks Descartes's vortex theory of planetary motion
(see section 2.6.2). Descartes gave no explanation for how his vortex theory
could lead to Kepler's laws for planetary motion. Newton took up the challenge
—with the aim, of course, of discrediting Descartes's theory.
This is a difficult area of fluid dynamics, and Newton was well beyond his
capabilities to discuss the problem in mathematical detail. It is interesting to note
that here, for the first time, he makes some assumptions about the way viscosity
enters in order to transmit fluid motion from one region to another. He
introduces a Hypothesis:
The resistance arising from the want of lubricity in parts of a fluid, is, caeteris paribus [other things
being equal], proportional to the velocity with which parts of the fluid are separated from each other.
This has now become the standard way to relate shearing stress, viscosity, and
velocity gradient; fluids behaving this way are, in fact, known as Newtonian
fluids. Newton needs the idea here to see how a revolving cylinder or a
revolving sphere can spread out rotations across the fluid. (He never used this
idea when discussing resistance forces, and it was Stokes who showed how
viscous effects operate at very low Reynolds numbers.)
Proposition LI and LII consider the circular motion generated around rotating
cylinders and spheres. Newton claims that, as the distance from the center
increases, the periodic times for the fluid circles increase directly as the distance
or as the square of the distance, respectively; neither case will lead to Kepler's
third law. He also points out the dynamical difficulties associated with a body
moving around in a circle—its tendency to fly outward. While Newton (and his
readers) were satisfied that he had shown how Descartes's scheme is not viable,
there are difficulties with Newton's work, and the whole area is one of great
technical difficulty (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section).
21.7. CONCLUSION
There is a tendency to skip over Book II of the Principia, but just the parts
covered in this chapter show how much is lost by such a decision. While it is
true that Newton had reached the limit of his mathematical and physical
backgrounds and skills, he still manages a dazzling array of achievements. He
has begun the process of finding microscopic, or lower scale, explanations for
macroscopic phenomena, the development of which constitutes a large part of

modern physics. (In fact, Newton had already used this concept when
considering forces between large bodies, as discussed in chapter 18.) There are
the techniques: scaling theory, the principle of similitude, and the calculus of
variations. There is the pioneering physics: particle theory for the properties of
gases, the equivalence of a moving body in a quiescent fluid and a fluid flowing
past a fixed body, the idea of optimum minimum-resistance shapes, the
beginnings of wave theory, the calculation of the speed of sound from first
principles, and ideas about resistance forces and viscosity. We can now
understand why in chapter 19 we heard Clifford Truesdell call Book II “the most
brilliant and fertile work ever written in mechanics.”4 We shall find even more
examples of Newton's inventiveness and fluids theory in Book III, when he deals
with the theory of tides and the shape of the Earth.
We are now ready to move on to the final book of the Principia, as Newton
tells us at the very end of Book II:
The hypothesis of vortices is utterly irreconcilable with astronomical phenomena, and rather serves
to perplex than explain the heavenly motions. How these are performed in free spaces without
vortices, may be understood by the first book; and I shall now more fully treat of it in the following
book.
21.10. FURTHER READING
Boas, M., and R. Hall. “Newton's ‘Mechanical Principles.’” Journal of the
History of Ideas 20 (1959): 167–78. [discusses how Newton uses the
mechanical hypothesis and microscopic-particle theory]
Cohen, I. Bernard. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The
Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999.
Darrigol, O. Worlds of Flow: A History of Hydrodynamics from the Bernoullis to
Prandtl. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Rouse, Hunter, and Simon Ince. History of Hydraulics. New York: Dover, 1957.
Smith, George E. “The Newtonian Style in Book II of the Principia.” In Isaac
Newton's Natural Philosophy. Edited by J. Z. Buchwald and I. Bernard
Cohen. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
 
For more on the principle of similitude:
 
Binder, R. C. Fluid Mechanics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1943. [see
ch. 4]

Bolster, D., R. E. Hershberger, and R. J. Donnelly. “Dynamic Similarity, the
Dimensionless Science.” Physics Today (September 2011): 42–47.
Huntley, H. E. Dimensional Analysis. London: Macdonald, 1952.
Rayleigh, Lord. “The Principle of Similitude.” Nature 95 (1915): 66–68. [a
classic paper with examples given by one of the great scientists]
Schmidt-Nielsen, K. Scaling: Why Is Animal Size So Important? Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Whittaker, E. T. A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid
Bodies. New York: Dover, 1944. [this edition is the first American printing;
see sec. 33, “Similarity in Dynamical Systems”]
 
For shapes of least resistance:
 
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995. [see ch. 26]
Goldstine, Herman H. A History of the Calculus of Variations. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1980. [see sec. 1.2]
Lemons, D. S. Perfect Form: Variational Principles, Methods, and Applications
in Elementary Physics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
[lovely introduction]
Miele, A., ed. Theory of Optimum Aerodynamic Shapes. New York: Academic
Press, 1965. [see especially part 4, “Newtonian Hypersonic Flow”]
 
For wave theory and the speed of sound:
 
Cannon, J. T., and S. Dostrovsy. The Evolution of Dynamics: Vibration Theory
from 1687 to 1742. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1981.
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995. [see ch. 28]
Finn, B. S. “Laplace and the Speed of Sound.” Isis 55 (1964): 7–19.
Westfall, R. S. “Newton and the Fudge Factor.” Science 179 (1973): 751–58.
 
Viscosity and vortices:
 
Dobson, G. J. “Newton's Errors with the Rotational Motion of Fluids.” Archive
for the History of the Exact Sciences 54 (1999): 243–54.
Langlois, W. E. Slow Viscous Flow. New York: Macmillan, 1964.
Tritton, D. J. Physical Fluid Dynamics. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold,
1977.

At last Newton is ready to introduce his theory of universal gravity. He can then
explain a whole breathtaking variety of earthly and astronomical phenomena. In
the final General Scholium, he summarizes his main achievements, notes some
remaining difficulties, and tells us about the role of God in his worldview.
 
Chapter 22. BOOK III AND GRAVITY
Chapter 23. THEORY OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Chapter 24. EARTHLY PHENOMENA
Chapter 25. CHALLENGES: THE MOON AND COMETS
Chapter 26. THE CONCLUDING GENERAL SCHOLIUM
 
Reading plans: These chapters cover the final great triumphs of the Principia.
They are largely nonmathematical and should not be missed! You must read the
final chapter; it takes you through Newton's thought-provoking conclusions and
some of his most celebrated pronouncements.

Book III is about the force of gravity, how Newton argued for the form of the
force, and then how he lays out the consequences of that force in nature. He is
clearly following the approach set out in the Preface:
For all the difficulty of philosophy [what we might call natural philosophy or science] seems to
consist in this—from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature, and then from
these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena.
In his introduction to Book III, Newton reminds us that he has been
developing the mathematical formalism and principles, although “lest they
should have appeared of themselves dry and barren, I have illustrated them here
and there with some philosophical Scholiums.” Now for the big finale: “it
remains that, from the general principles, I now demonstrate the frame of the
System of the World.” He tells us that, for the presentation, he “chose to reduce
the substance of this book into the form of Propositions (in the mathematical
way).” (Refer back to section 7.5 for the story behind that decision.) Newton also
specifies the bare minimum requirement for reading Book III:
It is enough if one carefully reads the Definitions, the Laws of Motion, and the first three Sections of
the first book. He may then pass on to this book, and consult each of the remaining Propositions of
the first two books, as references in this, and his occasions, shall require.
That is the material discussed in chapters 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 of this book.
In this chapter, I will examine how Newton makes the step “from the
phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature” for gravity. In the
following chapters, I discuss how he goes “from these forces to demonstrate the
other phenomena.”
22.1. WHAT IS REQUIRED?
The force of gravity is usually defined in terms like this: any two bodies a
distance r apart and of mass m1 and m2 attract each other with a force acting
directly along the line joining them and with a magnitude of

Thus, Newton must establish four things: (1) gravity is an attractive
centripetal (central) force, (2) it depends inversely on the square of the distance
between the two bodies, (3) it depends on the product of the masses of the
bodies, and (4) it operates for any two bodies, implying that it is a universal
force.
We will not find an equation like (22.1) in the Principia, as we know Newton
uses proportions and comparisons in his working. He does not introduce the
constant G, about which I will make a few comments later.
As he has told us, the necessary mathematical formalism is in place, and now
he must make contact with the physical world and fit theory and observational
data together. That is no simple task, and to explain his approach and support his
arguments, he first sets out a basis for proceeding.
22.2. NEWTON'S “RULES OF REASONING IN PHILOSOPHY”
This is one of the most famous and dissected parts of the Principia. Newton sets
out four Rules that he can appeal to in support of his working.
RULE I. We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to
explain their appearances.
Some readers will be reminded of Ockham's razor. The idea here is that
“Nature does nothing in vain, and more is in vain when less will serve; for
Nature is pleased with simplicity.”
Notice that Newton mentions “simplicity,” a point I return to in section 22.7.2.
RULE II. Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as possible, assign the same causes.
It is worth checking Newton's examples: “As to respiration in man as in beast;
the descent of stones in Europe and America; the light of our culinary fire and of
the sun; the reflection of light in the earth, and in the planets.”
Although he is wrong about the mechanism for the Sun's output, he is correct
about reflection of light being the same everywhere, and a much deeper and far-
reaching assumption is involved here. Newton is saying, to put it in modern
terms, that the physical effects and laws of physics that we observe on Earth
should be taken as valid everywhere in the universe. This is a major change from
Aristotle and his theory of perfect heavens; it forms the basis for everything we

do in astronomy and astrophysics.
RULE III. The qualities of bodies, which admit neither intension nor remission of degrees, and which
are found to belong to all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be esteemed the
universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever.
This follows on from Rule II by saying that those constant properties of bodies
that we observe in our experiments, like their inertia, should be taken to be
present universally. So it is, for example, that our modern knowledge of atoms
and spectral lines developed here on Earth may be used to tell us about the
properties of stars everywhere in the universe.
RULE IV. In experimental philosophy we are to look upon propositions collected by general
induction from phenomena as accurately or very nearly true, notwithstanding any contrary
hypotheses that may be imagined, till such time as other phenomena occur, by which they may either
be made more accurate, or liable to exceptions.
We use induction to come up with our theories, and we should stick with them
until there is a clash with new experimental data. As Newton says, “this rule we
must follow, that the argument of induction may not be evaded by hypotheses.”
22.2.1. Discussion of the Rules
Newton's Rules have attracted much attention and questioning: How sound are
they, and do they stand up to a logical and philosophical analysis? How closely
does Newton actually follow his rules? The “problem of induction” is a
venerable philosophical topic. The interested reader should consult the
references listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
In some ways, this is a personal topic. Some modern scientists (possibly
Weinberg or Feynman) are alleged to have said that “the philosophy of science is
about as much use to scientists as ornithology is to birds.”1 I expect they, like
me, find the collection of Rules perceptive and a reasonable guide to some of the
assumptions we make and the methods we use in science. I believe it is also
useful to heed the words of Albert Einstein:
If you want to find out anything from the theoretical physicists about the methods they use, I advise
you to stick closely to one principle: don't listen to their words, fix your attention on their deeds.2
So, let us see how Newton uses (or attempts to use, depending on how
philosophical you wish to be) his Rules of Reasoning. I will go through his
working and reserve discussion until section 22.7.

22.3. DATA
Newton chooses to work with the following six pieces of information, or
Phenomena, as he calls them.
PHENOMENON I.
That the circumjovial planets [the moons of Jupiter] by radii drawn to Jupiter's centre describe areas
proportional to the times of description; and that their periodic times, the fixed stars being at rest,
are in the sesquiplicate [3/2 power] proportion of their distances from its centre.
Note the fixed stars as reference. You will probably say, “Yes, Jupiter's moons
obey Kepler's laws.”
PHENOMENON II.
That the circumsaturnal planets [the moons of Saturn] by radii drawn to Saturn's centre describe
areas proportional to the times of description; and that their periodic times, the fixed stars being at
rest, are in the sesquiplicate [3/2 power] proportion of their distances from its centre.
Saturn's moons behave like Jupiter's. Tables of numerical data are given for
these two phenomena.
PHENOMENON III.
That the five primary planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, with their several orbits,
encompass the sun.
Newton mentions that Mercury and Venus have phases (like Earth's Moon) so
it is clear that they do orbit the Sun. Also that for Jupiter and Saturn, “the
shadows of their satellites [moons] that appear sometimes upon their discs make
it plain that the light they shine with is not their own, but borrowed from the
sun.”
PHENOMENON IV.
That the fixed stars being at rest, the periodic times of the five primary planets, and (whether of the
sun about the earth, or) of the earth about the sun are in the sesquiplicate [3/2 power] proportion of
their mean distances from the sun.
Numerical data from Kepler and others is given.
PHENOMENON V.
Then the primary planets, by radii drawn to the earth, describe areas nowise proportional to the

times; but that the areas which they describe by radii drawn to the sun are proportional to the times
of description.
We must refer planetary orbits to the Sun, not the Earth, for Kepler's second
law to hold.
PHENOMENON VI.
That the moon, by a radius drawn to the earth's centre, describes an area proportional to the time of
description.
We are now ready for the Propositions that use those data to argue for the
nature of the forces involved.
22.4. THE FORM OF THE FORCES
Newton can now call upon Propositions from Book I, specifically Propositions I,
II, and IV, and their Corollaries to arrive at the following:
PROPOSITION I. THEOREM I.
That the forces by which the circumjovial planets are continually drawn off their rectilinear motions,
and retained in their proper orbits, tend to Jupiter's centre; and are reciprocally as the squares of the
distances of the places of those planets from the centre.
The same thing applies for Saturn's moons.
Notice that Newton treats these systems of planets around Jupiter and Saturn
as independent systems with no account taken of the action of the Sun on them.
He can do that because of the remarkable fourth Corollary to the laws of motion,
discussed in section 6.4.1. Surprisingly, even the thorough Newton fails to
remind the reader of that.
PROPOSITION II. THEOREM II.
That the forces by which the primary planets are continually drawn off their rectilinear motions, and
retained in their proper orbits, tend to the sun; and are reciprocally as the squares of the distances of
the places of those planets from the sun's centre.
As an extra piece of evidence in this case, Newton notes that there is no
detected motion of the line joining the apsides, and so his wonderful result in
Proposition XLV (see section 14.3 to review) indicates an inverse-square law in
operation. Any deviation from inverse square “would produce a motion of the
apsides sensible enough in every single revolution, and in many of them

enormously great.”
PROPOSITION III. THEOREM III.
That the force by which the moon is retained in its orbit tends to the earth; and is reciprocally as the
square of the distance of its place from the earth's centre.
The forces involved in these orbits are centripetal (central) and satisfy an
inverse-square law. Incidentally, we see now why Newton was so careful about
checking that the area law is an if-and-only-if law, as it is the test for a central
force (see section 8.3 for review).
22.5. BUT IS IT GRAVITY?
Newton has characterized the force maintaining moons and planets in their
orbits, but he has not yet identified it as the force of gravity that we know from
our experiences on Earth. This is one of the great discoveries in science, and
Newton takes the first step in the following:
PROPOSITION IV. THEOREM IV.
That the moon gravitates towards the earth, and by the force of gravity is continually drawn off from
its rectilinear motion, and retained in its orbit.
By his famous “Moon Test” Newton links the force keeping the Moon in its
orbit with the gravitational force responsible for falling bodies and pendulum
motions here on Earth. This must surely be one of Newton's most inspired pieces
of work.
Look at figure 22.1. The Moon is assumed to travel through the angle θ in one
minute, and in order to remain in its orbit, Newton says, it must “fall” toward the
Earth a distance D away from the straight-line motion it would follow if no force
is acting on it. Newton gives the following data:
Moon's orbit: period is 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes (= 39,343 minutes);
Moon's mean radius: approximately sixty times the Earth's radius;
Earth's circumference: 123,249,600 Paris feet.
Using those data, he finds D to be 15 1/12 Paris feet.
(I find 15.009 rather than 15.08, but I do not know what Newton used for p, for
example.) If you want to see how it works, you should note that θ is 2π/39,343

and D = Rθ2/2, where R is the radius of the Moon's orbit, which is sixty times the
Earth's radius, which in turn, when multiplied by 2π, gives the circumference of
123,249,600 Paris feet.)
If the same force is responsible for the Moon's “fall” and a body's fall on
Earth, because of the inverse-square law, it must be 602 stronger on the Earth's
surface than at the Moon's orbit. To compensate, we can reduce the fall time on
Earth by 60 (so it becomes one second instead of the one-minute fall he took for
the Moon); then the fall distances should be the same. (Remember the ½gt2
formula to understand why the time squared is involved.) Thus we get the
result: if the Moon in its orbit falls 15 1/12 Paris feet in one minute, a body
on Earth (maybe an apple!) should fall the same distance in one second.
Newton quotes Huygens's measurements to confirm that is actually the case.
Newton then concludes “and therefore (by Rule I and II) the force by which the
moon is retained in its orbit is the very same force which we commonly call
gravity.”
Much has been written about these calculations, and there is no doubt that
Newton shamefully fudged parts of them to get such good agreement (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section, especially the paper by Westfall.) The idea
was correct, and the figures are enough to make the correspondence between
gravity as observed here on Earth and the force acting on the Moon without any
fiddling in the calculations. Newton did not wish to leave open any grounds for
criticism (and more of the hated controversies), but a little more of his darker
character is revealed here.

Figure 22.1. A diagram showing the Moon traveling an angular distance θ and falling through distance D, as
calculated in Newton's Moon Test. The Earth has radius Re, and the radius R of the Moon's orbit is
approximately 60Re.
To back up this momentous conclusion, Newton attaches a Scholium in which
he gives a supporting thought experiment. He considers moons orbiting the Earth
at lower and lower orbits. Eventually, one is at the level of mountaintops and so
is subject to the force of gravity as we observe it on Earth. If the force
maintaining the orbit is not one and the same as that gravity, “it would descend
with twice the velocity, as being impelled by both these forces conspiring
together.” there is only one force acting, and it is Earth's gravity controlling both
moon orbits and the fall of bodies on Earth.
Incidentally, there is some debate about exactly when Newton invented his
Moon Test and whether observation of a falling apple played a part in his
musings on the subject of gravity. Consult the book by Cohen or look to
Westfall's biography to investigate further. We know that Newton apparently
embellished his past in his old age, but, just for fun, here is the famous Stukeley
recollection of this profound piece of thinking:
After dinner, the weather being warm, we went into the garden, & drank tea under the shade of some
appletrees, only he and myself. Amidst other discourse, he told me, he was in just the same situation,

as when formerly, the notion of gravitation came into his mind. “Why should that apple always
descend perpendicularly to the ground?” thought he to himself: occasioned by the fall of an apple as
he sat in a contemplative mood: “why should it not go sideways or upwards? But constantly to the
earth's centre? Assuredly the reason is that the earth draws it. There must be a drawing power in
matter and the sum of the drawing power in the matter of the earth must be in the earth's centre,” not
in any side of the earth.3
22.5.1. Gravity Everywhere
Newton is now ready to compare the Earth and its Moon with Jupiter and its
moons as similar systems, suggesting we invoke Rule II and say that gravity is
the common factor. He also mentions the use of the third law of motion to show
how gravity acts mutually—Jupiter attracts its moons, and they attract Jupiter,
both with the force of gravity. All of this is bound up in the following:
PROPOSITION V. THEOREM V.
That the circumjovial planets gravitate towards Jupiter; the circumsaturnal towards Saturn; the
circumsolar towards the sun; and by the forces of their gravity are drawn off from rectilinear
motions, and retained in curvilinear orbits.
In what must be one of the most important and powerful statements in the
Principia, Newton sums up and states what is to be done from now on in a
Scholium:
The force which retains the celestial bodies in their orbits has been hitherto called centripetal force;
but it being now made plain that it can be no other than a gravitating force, we shall hereafter call it
gravity. For the cause of the centripetal force which retains the moon in its orbit will extend itself to
all the planets, by Rule I, II, and IV.
22.6. GRAVITY AND MASS
Finally, Newton discusses how the strength of the gravitational inverse-square-
law force is given in terms of the masses of the bodies involved, expressed as the
product m1m2 in the modern form of equation (22.1). His conclusions are
summed up in two Propositions:
Proposition VI. Theorem VI.
That all bodies gravitate towards every planet; and that the weights of bodies towards any the same
planet, at equal distances from the centre of the planet, are proportional to the quantities of matter
which they severally contain.

Proposition VII. Theorem VII.
That there is a power of gravity tending to all bodies, proportional to the several quantities of matter
which they contain.
Newton gives two Propositions, VIII and IX, covering interacting composite
bodies and the linear behavior of the gravitational force inside a composite body
(using the results discussed in chapter 17).
22.6.1. Gravitational and Inertial Mass
Body 2 exerts a gravitational force (“a power of gravity”—Proposition VII)
proportional to its mass m2, and body 1 responds to that force (“weight of a body
towards”—Proposition VI) proportional to its mass m1. We can reverse the
situation to ask what force body 1 exerts on body 2, and we get the same
magnitude by the third law of motion. Thus we deduce that the same masses are
used in both situations, that is, for finding both the origin of the force and a
body's response to it.
Notice that in his Propositions, Newton talks about “quantities of matter,”
which is how he introduced mass at the very start of the Principia (see chapter
5). It was there that he first used mass when discussing inertia and added “the
same is known by the weight of each body; for it is proportional to the weight, as
I have found by experiments on pendulums, very accurately made, which shall be
shown hereafter.”
There are two masses: the inertial mass mI and the gravitational mass mG. The
motion of body 1 under the gravitational influence of body 2 is calculated using
If we assume that mI = mG, the mass of body 1 cancels out in equation (22.2),
and so it is that we get the result that free fall is the same for all bodies,
irrespective of their individual masses. The same sort of result holds for
pendulum motion, as discussed in section 19.7, where I gave the theory for
Newton's “experiments on pendulums.”
Newton shows that he clearly understood the situation when he introduces the
topic while discussing Proposition VI:
It has been, now for a long time, observed by others, that all sorts of heavy bodies (allowance being

made for the inequality of retardation which they suffer from a small power of resistance in the air)
descend to the earth from equal heights in equal times; and that equality of times we may distinguish
to a great accuracy, by the help of pendulums.
So now Newton is discussing this topic for the third time, and here he tells us
that with his two-identical-pendulums experiment (see section 19.5), he “tried
the thing in gold, silver, lead, glass, wood, water, and wheat.” He concludes that
the two masses, inertial and gravitational, are the same, and “I could manifestly
have discovered a difference of matter less than one thousandth part of the
whole, had any such been.”
This is one of the great results in physics, and by 1906 Baron Roland von
Eötvös had reduced the uncertainty to 5 parts in 108. The equality of the two
masses is now called the principle of equivalence, and the accuracy is now
around the 1 part in 1012 level (see the “Further Reading” section at the end of
this chapter).
Newton goes on to discuss properties of mass and how they relate to the
possibility of an aether, but there is no speculation about the origin of that vital
equality of the masses. That came some two hundred years later with Einstein:
The general theory of relativity owes its existence in the first place to the empirical fact of the
numerical equality of the inertial and gravitational mass of bodies, for which fundamental fact
classical mechanics provided no interpretation.4
Einstein was able to show that “our extension of the principle of relativity
[from the special to the general] implies the necessity of the law of the equality
of inertial and gravitational mass.”5
22.7. WHAT HAS BEEN DONE?
Newton's working in this part of the Principia can seem somewhat contorted,
and it has been much analyzed (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section,
especially the articles by Harper and Smith and the book by Crowe). There
appears to be an underlying methodology that Newton does not spell out in
detail. We need to follow Einstein's dictum and “fix our attention on his deeds.”
Newton presents data about planetary motions and moons. He then effectively
says that if you use his laws of motion and the results flowing from them, as
presented in Book I, you will see that the theory is matched to those data when
you use a centripetal inverse-square-law force with strength dependent on the
masses of the interacting bodies. Furthermore, on the basis of the Moon Test and

the Rules of Reasoning, we should call that force gravity and take the theory as
holding universally until conflicting experimental data are produced.
We can only admire the way in which those wonderful if-and-only-if results
given in Book I are now used in such a simple but powerful way. Newton has
followed his program and gone “from the phenomena of motions to investigate
the forces of nature.” However, there is a confusing problem: the data that
Newton uses are not exact. He created a simplified version of the known
observations about the motion of planets and moons. He was obviously aware of
that, and he even gave what we might take as warnings, such as the comment in
the third Corollary to Proposition V:
All the planets do mutually gravitate towards one another, by Cor. 1 and 2. And hence it is that
Jupiter and Saturn, when near their conjunction, by their mutual attractions sensibly disturb each
other's motion. So the sun disturbs the motions of the moon.
Thus the data he uses could not possibly be the exact, whole story.
It appears that Newton has used this work basically as a suggestive argument
to come up with a theory of universal gravity that may be used and continually
tested according to Rule of Reasoning III. So, as I discuss in the next chapter, he
now turns to a more genuine theory of the solar system and then on to other
gravitational effects. In fact, this process has continued and his theory has stood
the test of time.
It is true that there are contortions and confusions, but we are now learning
about one of the greatest pieces of scientific work ever produced. Already by
1837, Whewell was writing in his great History of the Inductive Sciences:
It is indisputably and incomparably the greatest scientific discovery ever made, whether we look at
the advance which it involved, the extent of the truth disclosed, or the fundamental and satisfactory
nature of this truth.6
Our modern acceptance of the theory might be amusingly summed up by
Apollo 8 astronaut William Anders's reply to a question about who was
controlling the capsule: “I think Isaac Newton is doing most of the driving
now.”7
Whatever methods he used, Newton did get to the correct theory of universal
gravity. On the way, he showed his usual amazing innovative powers with his
Moon Test and with his recognition and deep appreciation for the importance of
basic fundamental physical phenomena in his exploration of the equality of
inertial and gravitational masses. By the Moon Test and Rule of Reasoning II, he
linked terrestrial and extraterrestrial phenomena and set the course for

astrophysics as we know it today.
22.7.1. What Has Not Been Done?
Newton has established the features of the gravitational force that we express as
in equation (22.1), except for the overall strength constant G. His way of
working with proportions and ratios means that he avoids the need to give a
numerical value for G. The Moon Test provides a good example of that. In fact,
it is extremely difficult to measure G, and of all the fundamental constants, it is
one of the most poorly known.
The gravitational force is extremely weak, compared with the electric force,
for example. However, it is always positive and linearly additive, so it builds up
for composite, large bodies, as Newton showed with his “superb theorems” (see
chapter 17). Consequently, there is no way to screen out gravitational effects (as
can be done with a Faraday cage in the electromagnetic case), and that makes the
problem of isolating effects in the laboratory very difficult.
The gravitational interaction of two small bodies compared with their
attraction by the whole Earth is, according to Newton, “far less than to fall under
the observation of our senses.” Certainly, very refined experimental techniques
are required. The first recognized experiment seems to be that by British
scientist Henry Cavendish in 1798—but note that he framed his results in terms
of a determination of the Earth's density rather than a measurement of G. There
are now various fascinating modern experiments, some at the atomic level, and I
give a few examples in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.
22.7.2. Einstein, Newton, and Simplicity
This is how Richard Feynman opens his lecture on gravitation:
In this chapter we shall discuss one of the most far-reaching generalizations of the human mind.
While we are admiring the human mind we should take some time off to stand in awe of a nature that
could follow with such completeness and generality such an elegantly simple principle as the law of
gravitation.8
While paying homage to Newton, Feynman also introduces something new
here: an appreciation of the simplicity of the law of gravitation. One wonders
how much Newton appreciated that simplicity. Surely he did; certainly he
mentioned the word simplicity when discussing the Rules of Reasoning. He

clearly knew the very special properties of the inverse-square-law force as
shown by his brilliant results in Book I (see figure 18.3 for a summary). In fact,
he might well have used the simplicity of his results to argue for their validity, as
Einstein does:
Our experience hitherto justifies us in believing that nature is the realization of the simplest
conceivable mathematical ideas.9
Einstein used the simplicity argument when formulating his theory of general
relativity, and certainly he never used arguments from data as we have seen
Newton doing in this chapter. In fact, one of Einstein's constraints on his theory
pays a great compliment to Newton: he required his theory to reduce to Newton's
in cases of “weak gravitational” effects. The checking against experimental
observations seems to be almost an afterthought and actually demanded new
observations for comparisons. I have a feeling that Isaac Newton would have
greatly enjoyed Einstein's response to the question of what he would say if God
had not made the universe so that light was bent near the Sun as he predicted:
“Then I would have to pity the dear Lord. The theory is correct anyway.”10
22.8. FURTHER READING
Recommended discussion for this topic:
 
Aoki, S. “The Moon Test in Newton's Principia: Accuracy of the Inverse Square
Law of Universal Gravitation.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences
44 (1992): 147–90.
Cohen, I. Bernard. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The
Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999.
———. “Newton's Discovery of Gravity.” Scientific American (1981): 167–79.
[an expert's “popular” introduction]
———.“Newton's Third Law and Universal Gravity.” Journal of the History of
Ideas 48 (1987): 571–93.
Harper, W. “Newton's Argument for Universal Gravitation.” In The Cambridge
Companion to Newton, edited by I. Bernard Cohen and George E. Smith.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Smith, George E. Closing the Loop: Testing Newtonian Gravity, Then and Now.
Isaac Newton Lectures at the Suppes Center. Available for download at

http://www.stanford.edu/dept/cisst/visitors.html (accessed May 20, 2013).
Westfall, R. S. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1980.
———. “Newton and the Fudge Factor.” Science 179 (1973): 751–58.
 
On Newton's Rules of Reasoning and related matters:
 
Achinstein, P. “Newton's Inductivism and the Law of Gravity.” In Science Rules:
A Historical Introduction to Scientific Methods. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2004.
Crowe, M. J. Mechanics from Aristotle to Einstein. Santa Fe, NM: Green Lion
Press, 2007. [see pp. 209–20]
Davies, E. B. “The Newtonian Myth.” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science 34 (2003): 763–80. [disputes Popper's viewpoint and suggests he
actually read little of the Principia]
Harper, W., and G. E. Smith. “Newton's Way of Inquiry.” In The Creation of
Ideas in Physics, edited by J. Leplin. Dordrecht, Neth.: Kluwer, 1995.
Okasha, S. Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002. [simple introduction with sections on induction]
Rodriguez-Fernandez, J. L. “Ockham's Razor.” Endeavour 23 (1999): 121–25.
Spencer, Q. “Do Newton's Rules of Reasoning Guarantee Truth…Must They?”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 35 (2004): 759–82.
 
On the principle of equivalence, see the relativity books by Einstein,
Lambourne, Weinberg, and Will referenced in section 5.8. Also see chapters by
Cook and Will in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, ed. S. W. Hawking and
W. Israel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). Furthermore:
 
Will, C. M. “The Confrontation between General Relativity and Experiment on
the Living Relativity.” Living Reviews in Relativity 9 (2006). Available online
at 
http://relativity.livingreviews.org/Articles/lrr-2006-3/download/lrr-2006-
3Color.pdf (accessed May 20, 2013).
 
On the measurement of the gravitational constant G, see the cited chapter by
Cook and:
 
Cavendish, Henry. “Experiments to Determine the Density of the Earth.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 88 (1798): 469–526.
Clotfelter, B. E. “The Cavendish Experiment as Cavendish Knew It.” American

Journal of Physics 55 (1987): 210–13.
Ducheyne, S. “Testing Universal Gravitation in the Laboratory; or, the
Significance of Research on the Mean Density of the Earth and Big G, 1798–
1898.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 65 (2011): 181–227.
Fixler, J. B., et al. “Atom Interferometer Measurement of the Newtonian
Constant of Gravity.” Science 315 (2007): 74–77.
Gundlach, J. H., and S. M. Merkowitz. “Measurement of Newton's Constant
Using a Torsion Balance with Angular Acceleration Feedback.” Physical
Review Letters 85 (2000): 2869–72.
Saulnier, M. S., and D. Frisch. “Measurement of the Gravitational Constant
without Torsion.” American Journal of Physics 57 (1989): 417–20.
Schlamminger, St. “A Measurement of Newton's Gravitational Constant.”
Physical Review D. 74, 082001 (September 7, 2006).
Schwarz, J. P., et al. “A Free-Fall Determination of the Newtonian Constant of
Gravity.” Science 282 (1998): 2230–34.

In the previous chapter, we saw how, at the start of Book III, Newton followed
the first part of his program: “from the phenomena of motions to investigate the
forces of nature.” The rest of Book III is devoted to the second part: “and then
from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena.” These “other
phenomena” include the motion of the solar system, terrestrial phenomena, and
the motion of the Moon and comets. Some of the problems involved are
mathematically intricate and tough. Some of the effects are subtle and raise
questions about the exactness of gravitational theory and its power to deal with
them. There may be small effects, like tidal friction, changing the motion of the
Earth and the Moon. However, even though it has taken centuries, we now know
that Newton's gravitational theory has proved to be triumphant. In fact, each
battle won in the quest to describe all the second-and third-order effects in the
relevant phenomena has really been another step in confirming the validity of the
theory of universal gravity.
What we find in the rest of Book III is Newton giving a good first attempt at
applying his theory to “the other phenomena.” However, perhaps more
importantly, he is also defining problems and setting out challenges. For
example: How does the massive Jupiter disturb the orbits of other planets? (This
will be answered in this chapter.) What causes the tides and the precession of the
equinoxes? (Next chapter.) How can we account for the motion of the Moon and
comets? (Chapter 25.)
We know that Kepler's laws give a good first characterization of the solar
system. We also know that Newton's theory with suitable assumptions will
produce those laws. However, can that theory take us beyond that simplified
model? That is the subject of this chapter.
23.1. BACKGROUND
Newton begins by considering the medium through which the planets move. He
can call on his work in Book II and he concludes:
It is shown in the Scholium of Prop. XXII, Book II, that at the height of 200 miles above the Earth the
air is more rare than it is at the superficies of the Earth in the ratio of 30 to 0.0000000000003998, or

as 75000000000000 to 1 nearly. And hence the planet Jupiter, revolving in a medium with the same
density with that superior air, would not lose by the resistance of the medium the 1000000th part of
its motion in 1000000 years.
Whatever the absolute accuracy of those figures, Newton reached the
reasonable conclusion of Proposition X: “That the Motion of the Planets in the
Heavens May Subsist an Exceedingly Long Time.”
Thus the theory in Book I dealing with motion when no resistance forces are
present may be used. Newton also refers again to the experiments (presumably
Boyle's) showing that a piece of gold and a feather fall together in a vacuum.
Newton is now ready to reveal the motion of the planets using his derivation
of universal gravity, as discussed in the previous chapter:
We have discoursed above of these motions from the Phenomena. Now we know the principles on
which they depend, from those principles we deduce the motions of the heavens a priori.
Of course, this is where some people feel confused, or they worry about a
circular argument and question the use of “a priori.” However, as we shall see,
Newton goes beyond the simplified discussion given earlier. He has data from
Kepler and other sources, but there is one thing he needs to establish before he
can begin. Characteristically, he manages it with another stroke of genius.
23.2. MASSES OF THE PLANETS
The masses of the planets are important when considering their gravitational
interactions and for determining the center of mass of the whole system. Going
back to the Corollaries to Proposition VIII, we find that Newton has devised a
method to calculate the masses of planets that have a satellite or moon. Suppose
that the planet has mass mp and the mass of the Sun is msun. Let the planet orbit
around the Sun have period Tp and a semimajor axis ap and its moon have orbit
parameters Tm and am. Then the derivation of Kepler's third law tells us that

Combining these two equations gives
That elusive gravitational constant G has cancelled out, and we have a
remarkable formula giving the mass of the planet in terms of its orbital details
and its satellite's details. Newton can use these results for the Earth and its Moon
and for Jupiter and Saturn with their moons. The results are:
(The modern results are from the book by Blanco and McKuskey, listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.)
We see that Jupiter and Saturn are massive planets. Newton also argues that
the density of the planets decreases as their distance from the Sun increases. That
conclusion is supported by the modern density data for the first six planets: 6.03;
5.11; 5.517; 4.16; 1.34; and 0.68 in units of gm per cubic centimeter.
Who would have thought that we could determine the masses of the planets?
Here is another example of the genius Newton at work. Masses of other planets
are now found by using data on spacecraft trajectories as they fly past a planet.
23.3. CENTER OF GRAVITY
Newton is now ready for the first general results that follow from the laws of
motion (see section 6.3):
PROPOSITION XI.
That the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the sun, and all the planets, is immovable.
PROPOSITION XII.
That the sun is agitated by a perpetual motion, but never recedes far from the common centre of
gravity of all the planets.
The center of gravity is always close to the center of the Sun because it is so
massive when compared with all the planets. Newton points out that, for the

Sun-Jupiter system, the center of gravity is just a little outside the Sun; for the
Sun-Saturn system, it is a little inside. In the extreme case, if even all the planets
(that is, those known to Newton—see section 23.7) were placed together on one
side, “the distance of the common centre of gravity of all from the centre of the
sun would scarcely amount to one diameter of the sun.” The conclusion is that,
“since that centre of gravity is in perpetual rest, the sun, according to the various
positions of the planets, must perpetually be moved every way, but will never
recede far from that centre.”
At last, the ancient question about the center of the solar system—or of “the
world,” in old terminology—has been answered. Newton gives a famous
Corollary: “Hence the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun, and all
the planets, is to be esteemed the centre of the world.” Neither the Earth nor the
Sun should be taken as that center.
23.3.1. Being More Careful, and a Curious Hypothesis
The result that Newton is using (as discussed in chapter 6) tells us that, for a
system of interacting bodies with no external forces acting on them, the center of
mass (or gravity, here) is either at rest or moving uniformly relative to the
inertial frame of reference used to describe the motions. Newton has chosen to
take that center as at rest. To back up that, he has given the following:
HYPOTHESIS I. That the center of the system of the world is immovable.
There seems to be no reason for this hypothesis except that it had always been
debated what, exactly, was at rest (the Earth? the Sun?) in the various approaches
to the solar system. In fact, Newton finds that even in a heliocentric or
Copernican system, the Sun does not form some immovable center. Modern
astronomy has discovered motion of the solar system and rotations of our galaxy
in the universe in general. In 1783, William Herschel suggested that the solar
system was moving toward the constellation Hercules. What Newton might have
said is that, to a high degree of accuracy for some time periods, it is possible to
choose a local frame of reference in which the center of gravity of the solar
system is at rest. There is no reference back to the discussion of absolute space,
which came very early in the Principia.
23.4. THE MOTION OF THE PLANETS

Newton recognizes that the simple theory he gave in Book I and the resulting
Kepler's laws give a very good description of the motion of the planets, and “the
mutual actions of the planets one upon another are so very small, that they may
be neglected.” (Kepler's third law holds at the tenth-of-a-percent level, for
example. The period corrections given by equation [16.8] are at the one-
twentieth-of-a-percent level for Jupiter.) However, he does go on to say that the
case involving Jupiter and Saturn is significant; I will come to that in section
23.5 and to another important case in section 23.7.
Newton reminds us that the configuration of the orbits in space is basically
fixed (see chapter 14 on rotating orbits), although again he suggests planetary
interactions may cause the aphelions to move and he gives some estimates
concluding that “these motions are so inconsiderable, that we have neglected
them in this Proposition [Proposition XIV].” Of course, one of these
“inconsiderable” motions for the planet Mercury played a key role in
establishing Einstein's theory of general relativity (see section 14.4.2).
Newton then discusses how the orbital diameters and eccentricities may be
found, along with the nature of the diurnal motions. Included in the latter is a
discussion of the Moon and why we see only one face of it. Finally he discusses
the shape of the planets themselves, a topic to be considered in the next chapter.
23.5. JUPITER AND SATURN
Since he has found their masses and knows their geometric configuration,
Newton can evaluate the forces involved and feels compelled to state that “it is
true, that the action of Jupiter on Saturn is not to be neglected.” He was also
aware that long-term observations showed various deviations in their orbits away
from constant Kepler ellipses. How to reconcile all of this with his theory of
universal gravity must have worried Newton, as even in a manuscript predating
the Principia he had written:
But to consider simultaneously all these causes of motion and to define these motions by exact laws
allowing of convenient calculation exceeds, unless I am mistaken, the force of the entire human
intellect.1
In the discussion following Proposition XIII, Newton calculates that, at
conjunction, the gravitational effect of Jupiter on Saturn is about 1/211 times that
of the Sun, which is clearly not to be neglected. This maximum effect occurs
every 19.86 years. The force of Saturn on Jupiter is comparatively less, but it is
still important. The observations show that the variations for Saturn are indeed

larger than those for Jupiter (see figure 23.1). It is clear that there are intricate
mechanisms with variations revealing several periodic effects. This was known
as the great inequality of Jupiter and Saturn. (Deviations from expected uniform
motions were referred to as “inequalities.”)
Figure 23.1. Major perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn, 251 BCE–1800 CE. The scale is minutes, and the
graph records deviations from the mean positions. (From C. M. Linton, From Eudoxus to Einstein: A
History of Mathematical Astronomy [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004], reprinted with the
permission of Cambridge University Press.)
Newton has no way to tackle this problem, although he does suggest that an
elliptical orbit for Saturn might have its focus at the center of gravity of Jupiter
and the Sun. Showing how gravitational theory could account for these results
became one of the great problems of celestial mechanics and thus attracted
leading mathematicians. The problem was finally resolved in 1786 by Pierre-
Simon Laplace, who saw it as a triumph for Newton's theory:
We shall see that this great law of nature represents all the celestial phenomena, down to their
smallest details; there is not a single one of their inequalities that does not follow from it with
admirable precision.2
After correctly recognizing the problems for Jupiter and Saturn, Newton goes
on: “that perturbations of the other orbits are yet far less, except that the orbit of
the Earth is sensibly disturbed by the Moon.” However, that is a topic for chapter
25.
As an aside, I note that here, as throughout the Principia, when more than one
force is involved, Newton simply takes a linear superposition of the component
forces. Thus the theory of gravity is linear in the sources, making it simple to
apply.

23.6. THE FIXED STARS
There is not too much about the stars in the Principia. They are mentioned in
passing when discussing frames of reference (see section 5.5), and we shall
discuss other mentions in chapters 25 and 26. So it is interesting to pick up on
the two Corollaries to Proposition XIV (about the fixed aphelions and nodes of
planetary orbits).
COR. 1. The fixed stars are immovable, seeing they keep the same position to
the aphelions and nodes of the planets.
COR. 2. And since these stars are liable to no sensible parallax from the
annual motion of the Earth, they can have no force, because of their
immense distance, to produce any sensible effect in our system. Not to
mention that the fixed stars, every where promiscuously dispersed in the
heavens, by their contrary attractions destroy their mutual actions, by
Prop. LXX, Book I.
Newton knew that the brightness of stars could change, and there were records
of nova, but no motions had yet been detected. In fact, it was some time before
star catalogues could be compared to check for changing positions, and it was
not until 1837 that Bessel corrected Newton and reported parallax observations.
He is able to conclude that the stars are at such “immense distance” that their
gravitational effects on the solar system may be ignored.
Newton's final sentence is related to the stability of a system of fixed stars. He
references Proposition LXX in Book I, which allows him to conclude that at a
point inside a sphere surrounded by a spherically symmetric distribution of
matter, there will be no gravitational effect due to that matter. A particle on the
sphere will be influenced by the material inside the sphere, but not by that
outside. It is fascinating to see that a similar argument can be made in relativistic
cosmology where Newton's Proposition turns into Birkhoff's theorem (see the
Weinberg reference listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter).
23.7. SOLAR SYSTEM TRIUMPH: NEPTUNE
The six planets considered by Newton had been known since ancient times, and
it came as a surprise when, in 1781, William Herschel discovered the seventh
planet, Uranus. This triumph for observational astronomy provided a new test

for Newton's theory of the solar system, and it proved to be a difficult task. The
orbit of Uranus could not be obtained using Newton's theory, and there was
speculation about the need to modify the force law at very large distances.
Universal gravity and the simple inverse-square law were under attack.
Two people, Urbain Le Verrier in France and John Couch Adams in England,
considered a different possibility: gravitational theory is correct, but there is an
unknown eighth planet that is disturbing Uranus's orbit, just as Jupiter perturbs
Saturn's orbit. In one of science's great stories, they separately calculated the
possible orbit for such a planet, and on September 23, 1846, the German
astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle used Le Verrier's predictions to locate and
observe the new planet. It was eventually named Neptune. The story is
fascinating because English astronomers failed to act on Adams's predictions, so
the glory of finding Neptune passed to the French and the Germans. There was
much argument about who did what, and the priority debate became quite bitter.
(See this chapter's “Further Reading” section for the entertaining full story.)
This completed the main features of the solar system (as Pluto is no longer
classed as a planet) and provided a most dramatic vindication of Newton's
theory.
23.8. CONCLUSIONS
All the hard work of Book I has paid off; with a few Propositions, Newton has
established the theory of universal gravity and demonstrated how it accounts for
the solar system. As ever with Newton, there are some breathtaking steps
reported in this chapter: the ancient argument about “what is the center of the
world” has been settled, and the center of gravity is the appropriate answer; the
seemingly impossible has been achieved with the calculation of the masses of
Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, relative to the mass of the Sun; challenges were set for
future astronomers and mathematicians by the claim that all details of solar
system motions, including the great inequalities of Jupiter and Saturn, could be
explained by universal gravitation.
23.9. FURTHER READING
See the books recommended in section 6.9.1 and:
 
Blanco, V. M., and S. W. McCuskey. Basic Physics of the Solar System. Reading,

MA: Addison-Wesley, 1961.
Cohen, I. Bernard. “Newton's Determination of the Masses and Densities of the
Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Earth.” Archive for the History of the Exact
Sciences 53 (1998): 83–95.
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes: A Modern View of the Origin of the
Universe. Glasgow, UK: Fontana/Collins, 1981. [see p. 45]
 
The writings of Curtis Wilson on the topics of this chapter are highly
recommended:
 
Wilson, C. “The Great Inequality of Jupiter and Saturn: From Kepler to
Laplace.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 33 (1985): 15–290.
———. “Newton and Celestial Mechanics.” In The Cambridge Companion to
Newton. Edited by I. Bernard Cohen and George E. Smith. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002.
———. “The Newtonian Achievement in Astronomy.” In The General History
of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the
Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R. Taton and
C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 
On Neptune, see Linton (cited above), specifically chapter 10, and the
following:
 
Grosser, Morton. The Discovery of Neptune. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1962.
Hanson, N. R. “Le Verrier: The Zenith and Nadir of Newtonian Mechanics.” Isis
53 (1962): 359–78.
Smith, Robert W. “The Cambridge Network in Action: The Discovery of
Neptune.” Isis 80 (1989): 395–422.
Standage, T. The Neptune File. London: Allen Lane, Penguin Press, 2000.

Newton next turns to problems directly concerning the Earth and motion on it.
The Earth is spinning around a north–south axis. Now he can add gravitational
theory to that in order to tackle four interconnected problems: What is the shape
of the Earth? How does gravity vary over the surface of the Earth? What
mechanism explains the tides? Why does the direction of the spin axis vary with
time? These are old questions, but Newton has new methods in mechanics,
especially the concept of force, to employ in devising new answers.
As ever, Newton shows us his unrivaled inventiveness in finding physical and
mathematical models for attacking these problems. However, it becomes clear
that he is also at the limit of what can be achieved with his methods and,
although he does produce solutions, he is again defining the problems and
setting out the challenges for the next generation of researchers. So this chapter
is more about how the Principia introduces conceptual matters than how it
develops exact theories.
24.1. THE SHAPE OF THE EARTH
For many years, both before and after Newton, the question of the geometry of
the surface of the Earth was a topic of great interest with importance for
surveying and gravitation. (The paper by Chapin, listed in the “Further Reading”
section at the end of this chapter, gives a good, short introduction to the history
of the topic.) The fundamental questions are: What is the shape of the Earth?
and, Why is it that shape? Neither question was definitively answered when
Newton wrote the Principia, in which he considers them for planets in general,
before concentrating on the Earth. He demonstrates his understanding in the first
Proposition on this topic and in his discussion:
PROPOSITION XVIII.
That the axes of the planets [the lines about which they rotate] are less than the diameters drawn
perpendicular to the axes.
    The equal gravity of the parts on all sides would give a spherical figure to the planets, if it was not
for their diurnal revolution in a circle. By that circular motion it comes to pass that the parts
receding from the axis endeavour to ascend about the equator; and therefore if the matter is in a fluid

state, by its ascent towards the equator it will enlarge the diameters there, and by its descent towards
the poles it will shorten the axis. So the diameter of Jupiter (by the concurring observations of
astronomers [Flamsteed and Cassini]) is found shorter betwixt pole and pole than from east to west.
And, by the same argument, if our Earth was not higher about the equator than at the poles, the seas
would subside about the poles, and, rising towards the equator, would lay all things there under
water.
In short, Newton has explained how simple ideas about dynamics suggest that
the planets should flatten at the poles while bulging at the equator. This will be
the mechanism for a molten, cooling planet to assume its shape. Newton
considers how to quantify these physical effects in Proposition XIX. Problem III:
“To Find the Proportion of the Axis of a Planet to the Diameters Perpendicular
Thereto.”
In modern terms, we are looking for the “Shape of a Self-Gravitating Fluid” (a
chapter title in Grossman's book), and even assuming simple conditions about
density and so on, this is a technically difficult problem. Of course, Newton had
none of the mathematical formalism required, but in typical form, he came up
with a most ingenious device to tackle the problem. With reference to figure
24.1, Newton introduces a sort of thought experiment:
if APBQ represent the figure of the Earth, now no longer spherical, but generated by the rotation of
an ellipse about its lesser axis PQ; and ACQqca a canal full of water, reaching from the pole Qq to
the centre Cc, and thence rising to the equator Aa; the weight of water in the leg of the canal ACca
will be to the weight of water in the other leg QCcq.
Figure 24.1. Newton's diagram to explain his argument for Proposition XIX. (From The Principia, trans.
Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
Newton gives a long and detailed argument involving centrifugal and
gravitational effects in the composite spherical and nonspherical bodies that he
discussed in Sections XII and XII in Book I (see chapter 17). He has to make
various assumptions, about the density of the Earth, for example, and the
interested reader should consult the resource by Chandrasekhar and others listed
in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter for details. Newton's
conclusion was that:

the diameter of the Earth at the equator [DE] is to its diameter from pole to pole [DP] as 230 to 229.
Thus the polar flattening or oblateness, (DE − DP)/DE, is 1/230. The modern
value is 1/298, so Newton slightly overestimated the nonspherical effect. He also
used that result to give dimensions for the Earth:
And since the mean semi-diameter of the Earth, according to Picart's [Picard's] mensuration, is
19615800 Paris feet, or 3923.16 miles (reckoning 5000 feet to a mile) the Earth will be higher at the
equator than at the poles by 85472 feet or 17 1/10 miles.
(Modern values for the mean radius and bulge at the equator are 6,371.02 and
22.4 kilometers, respectively.) It is clear that Newton understood the underlying
physics so that he correctly predicted the shape of the Earth and found a
reasonably good value for the degree of flattening at the poles or bulging at the
equator. He also solved the problem of why centrifugal effects did not lead to
bodies flying off the moving Earth (although he did not say as much); he makes
the comparison for Paris where “the total force of gravity in that latitude will be
to the centrifugal force of bodies as 289 to 1.” The overwhelming force of
gravity keeps objects on the Earth's surface.
There was considerable debate about the shape of the Earth, and, in fact, the
French scientist Jacques Cassini (son of the astronomer) used measurements to
claim that the flattening was at the equator and the bulge was at the poles. It
required detailed, accurate, large-scale surveying to find the correct result; the
fascinating story can be found in the books listed in this chapter's “Further
Reading” section. The heroic work in Lapland by Pierre Louis Maupertuis reads
like an adventure story. There was also a similarly exciting expedition to Peru.
Finally, Newton was found to have correctly solved the puzzle of the shape of
the Earth, although the details were studied and debated intensely by a string of
mathematicians, including the great Pierre-Simon Laplace.
Newton gave values for the oblateness of Jupiter and the Moon (in
Proposition XXXVIII), which are very roughly correct.
24.2. THE VARIATION OF GRAVITY OVER THE
EARTH
If the Earth is not spherical, the force of gravity experienced on its surface must
vary from place to place. Those effects might be calculated (for example, using
the theory reviewed in chapter 17), but that is extremely difficult and relies on

assumptions about the Earth's constitution. The alternative is experimental
measurement, and Newton suggested the effects he predicted “will appear by the
experiments of pendulums related under the following Proposition.”
The pendulum had long been a vital experimental tool, perhaps most famously
linked to Galileo. Around Newton's time, the quest was for a “seconds”
pendulum, one that would swing back and forth in exactly one second. Huygens
discussed the matter at length in his Horologium Oscillatorium, and Riccioli's
heroic experiments involved counting over 20,000 swings of a pendulum.
Newton himself carried out pendulum experiments early in his career at
Cambridge (see the 1986 paper by Westfall listed in the “Further Reading”
section at the end of this chapter). This was the background in which Newton
came to Proposition XX: “To Find and Compare Together the Weights of Bodies
in the Different Regions of Our Earth.”
He uses his canals argument to evaluate the changes expected over the Earth,
so, as before, both gravitational-force effects and centrifugal-force effects are
included. He is finding the effective gravitation and gives the results that “the
increase in weight in passing from the equator to the poles is…as the square of
the right sine of the latitude.” (See section 24.2.1 for results in modern form.)
The theory gives numerical results, which Newton summarized in a table (see
figure 24.2). (Note that there are twelve inches in a foot, and a line is one-twelfth
of an inch.)

Figure 24.2. Newton's table showing the length of a “seconds” pendulum and the distance related to one
degree at a range of latitudes. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books,
1995].)
Newton reviews the evidence for “seconds” pendulum variations, beginning
with the report by Jean Richter of his 1672 visit to Cayenne to carry out
astronomical observations. Richter's need to fix times led to speculations about
the length of a “seconds” pendulum. Newton then covers the reports by Halley
(1677), Varin and des Hayes (1682), Couplet (1697), des Hayes (1699 and
1700), and Feuillé (1704). The evidence supports Newton's conclusions, but the
observed pendulum lengths “are a little greater than by the table.” He goes on to
wonder about the constitution of the Earth and the effects of moving to different
climates. Again we find Newton the thorough experimentalist as he analyses the
effects of temperature, concluding that “the total differences of the lengths of
isochronal pendulums in different climates cannot be ascribed to the difference
of heat.” He goes on: “nor indeed to the mistakes of the French astronomers. For
although there is not perfect agreement betwixt their observations, yet the errors
are so small that they may be neglected; and in this they all agree, that
isochronal pendulums are shorter under the equator that at the Royal
Observatory of Paris.” He praises Richter for his careful work and states that his

findings do support the idea that “the Earth is higher under the equator than at
the poles, and that by an excess of about 17 miles; as appeared above by the
theory.”
This work reminds us that Newton continually seeks to use data to validate his
theories and support them with experimental programs. The Principia is not just
a mathematical treatise, it is a work of science in all its approaches.
24.2.1. Some Modern Details
The modern calculation combines gravitational attraction and centrifugal effects,
as shown in figure 24.3. (See the books by Cook, Kibble, and Tsuboi, listed in
the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.) The angle deviation
between the attraction and gravity vectors is very small (maximum 0°6′) and the
variations with latitude  are given by
Figure 24.3. Gravity and rotational effects on the Earth at latitude .
Using equation (24.1) to calculate how Newton's table-pendulum length
should increase from equator to pole gives 3 feet 9.797 lines, whereas he gives 3
feet 9.387 lines. Note that the main dependence on latitude  is as Newton
predicted.
The shape of the Earth and the resulting nonspherical gravitational field
around the Earth gained importance when satellite orbits began to be planned.

24.3. THE TIDES
The tides are a fascinating and complex part of the behavior of Earth's oceans,
seas, and rivers. They are vitally important for the natural world and for man's
commercial and recreational enterprises. Interest in the tides and their origin
dates back a very long time (see the book by Cartwright listed in this chapter's
“Further Reading” section). A number of prominent people speculated on the
origin of tides. William Gilbert sought to use his magnetic theory to account for
interactions of the Moon with the Earth and its seas. Kepler too thought there
was some sort of responsible force. Descartes tried to use aspects of his vortex
theory to account for the tides. Galileo took a different tack; he was keen to find
evidence for the motion of the Earth, and he claimed that motion generated the
tides. He was very critical of Kepler:
I am more surprised about Kepler than anyone else;…he leant his ear and gave his assent to the
dominion of the Moon over water, to occult properties, and to similar childish ideas.1
That is an interesting quote because it takes us back to the charge that forces
are “occult” and, without suitable mechanisms (like Descartes's vortices), they
have no part in science. We have seen Newton aware of this point from his
Preface onward, and it will come up again in his final statements to be reviewed
in chapter 26.
In the Principia, Newton gives the basic concepts for explaining the tides as
we know them today. In Proposition LXVI in Book I, he used one of his special
tricks for going from discrete bodies to fluids, so that Corollaries 18 to 20 give
the theory ready for application in Book III. We find:
PROPOSITION XXIV
That the flux and reflux of the sea arise from the actions of the Sun and the Moon.
    By Cor. 19 and 20, Prop. LXVI, Book I, it appears that the waters of the sea ought twice to rise and
twice to fall every day, as well lunar as solar.
The forces exerted by the Sun and the Moon move the oceans, and by adding
their forces as they act on the water and by considering their relative positions,
we can understand the variation in the tides.
The two luminaries excite two motions, which will not appear distinctly, but between them will arise
one mixed motion compounded out of both. In the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries their
forces will be conjoined, and bring on the greatest flood and ebb. In the quadratures the Sun will

raise the waters which the Moon depresses, and depress the waters which the Moon raises, and from
the difference of their forces the smallest of all tides will follow.
Newton has explained the spring and neap tides, as shown schematically in
figure 24.4.
Figure 24.4. How the forces exerted by the Moon and the Sun give (a) the spring tides and (b) the neap
tides. (Reprinted from Endeavour 10/4, J. V. Jelley, “The Tides, Their Origins and Behavior,” 184–90, ©
1986, with permission of Elsevier.)
Of course, the whole story is made extremely complex when details of the
Earth's topography are factored in and the astronomical details are considered.

As an example, Newton notes:
But the effects of the luminaries depend upon their distances from the Earth…because the Sun is less
distant from the Earth in winter than in the summer, it comes to pass that the greatest and least tides
more frequently appear before than after the vernal equinox, and more frequently after than before
the autumnal.
There are long discussions about various tides in the Principia, but perhaps
most important is Newton's evaluation of the relative values of the forces
involved in:
PROPOSITION XXXVI
To find the force of the Sun to move the sea,
and
PROPOSITION XXXVII
To find the force of the Moon to move the sea.
Newton calculates that the force of the Sun to move the sea on the Earth's
surface is “to the force of gravity as 1 to 38604600.” According to Cartwright,
this is a good result when compared with the modern value of 1 to 39231000.
Using tidal data, Newton manages to estimate that the force contributed by the
Moon is 4.4815 times that of the Sun. The calculations are not too believable,
and the modern value is 2.12. Still, Newton has identified the fact that both the
Moon and the Sun must be included when calculating tidal movements. (The
Sun is much farther from the Earth than the Moon, but it compensates by being
much more massive. However, we must also take into account the results of
modern theory, which tell us that it is the variation or gradient of the force over
the Earth's surface that is important.)
Newton theories may be wrong in details (hardly surprising, given the great
complexity of the tidal phenomena), but he does correctly outline the essential
mechanism: the interplay of lunar and solar gravitational forces, along with the
rotation of the Earth, explains why tides occur and lets us understand a major
part of their daily and seasonal variations. People like Daniel Bernoulli and
Laplace gradually refined Newton's theory and developed a theoretical
formalism taking us through to present-day computer modeling (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section).

24.4. PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES
This is one of the highlights of the Principia. To appreciate this topic, we need to
combine two facts about the Earth's motion. First, the Earth's orbit lies in a
plane, the ecliptic plane, which also contains the Sun. Second, the Earth spins
around a south–north axis that makes an angle of 23½° with the normal to the
ecliptic plane, so the Earth's equator makes that same angle of 23½° with that
plane (see figure 24.5). This tilt of the Earth's axis of rotation controls how parts
of the Earth are angled toward or away from the Sun, and that determines how
effective the Sun is in those areas. For a given part of the Earth, that
effectiveness varies over the year, and, hence, we get the seasons. (The seasons
are due to the tilt of the Earth's axis, not the variation in the distance from the
Sun.)
At two points on the Earth's orbit around the Sun, the equinoctial points, the
tilt is such that the hours of daylight are the same as the hours of nighttime. We
get the spring (or vernal) equinox and the autumnal equinox, as shown in figure
24.5. It had been known from ancient times (by the Babylonians, for example—
see the Cajori paper in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter)
that the equinoxes do not remain fixed on the Earth's orbit, but that they slowly
move. Thus the “precession of the equinoxes” was an ancient puzzle. There was
seemingly no way to solve the puzzle until Newton came along. The magnitude
of the result was aptly summed up by the Astronomer Royal, Sir George Airy
(1801–1892):
Figure 24.5. The tilt of the Earth's axis as it orbits the Sun. Nomenclature is for the Northern Hemisphere.
(From C. M. Linton, From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy [Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 2004], reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.)
if at this time we might presume to select the part of the Principia which probably astonished and
delighted and satisfied its readers more than any other, we should fix, without hesitation, on the
explanation of the precession of the equinoxes.2
24.4.1. Newton's Solution
Newton knew that the Earth has a bulge at the equator. He reasoned that, as the
Sun and the Moon do not lie in the plane containing the Earth's equator, they act
differently at different parts of the bulge and so cause it to precess. We may
make the analogy with a spinning top where we readily observe that the axis of a
“sleeping” top slowly rotates about the vertical (see figure 24.6). (Many books
on astronomy give relevant diagrams; for example, see figure 2.24 in the book
by Baker and Frederick, or see figure 2.17 in the book by Freedman and
Kaufmann, both of which are listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end
of this chapter.) This explains why the tilt of the Earth's axis changes direction
and, hence, why the equinoxes move. The full rotation takes about twenty-six
thousand years, so the movement is about 50″ of arc per year. Projecting the
Earth's axis onto the celestial sphere shows that Polaris may be taken today as
the North Star, but not into the future (see figures in the cited astronomy books).
Figure 24.6. Comparing the spinning Earth with the motion of a top.

Newton's method to obtain a quantitative result is ingenious but complex. In
Proposition LXVI of Book I on three-body interactions, he gives Corollaries 18
through 21, considering how a particle, a fluid system of particles, and then a
solid ring have precessing nodal lines. Then in Book III, after three Lemmas and
Hypothesis II, he comes to Proposition XXXIX: “To Find the Precession of the
Equinoxes.”
Thus the bulge around the Earth's equator is modeled as a ring (and the
hypothesis suggests that whether it is taken as fluid or rigid is not important),
and the effect of the Sun and the Moon on that ring is found using the results
from Book I. He also discusses the question of what happens when the ring is
free or attached to the Earth. The whole business is most complicated (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section for details), but considering both solar and
lunar effects, he finds “the total annual precession from the united forces of both
will be 50” 00”’ 12iv the quantity of which motion agrees with the phenomena;
for the precession of the equinoxes, by astronomical observations, is about 50”
yearly.”
Given the many assumptions involved and the accuracy of some of the data he
uses, this result is just too good to be true. Newton was clearly fudging the
numbers; these rather demeaning actions are discussed in detail by Westfall.
24.4.2. Later Calculations
In modern terms, we say that the problem concerns the rotation of a rigid body,
the calculation of angular momentum using moments of inertia, and the action of
forces in providing torques to change that angular momentum. There is a whole
set of concepts that were unknown to Newton. He had considered the collision of
rigid bodies (see references to Herivel, listed in the “Further Reading” section at
the end of this chapter), and we saw in chapter 8 how the equal-areas-swept-out-
in-equal-times law is equivalent to the conservation of angular momentum, but
Newton had no consistent development of these aspects of dynamics. Instead he
used his boundless ingenuity to come up with ad hoc methods to estimate what
happens in complex rotational situations.
The correct theory for the precession of the equinoxes had to wait for
d'Alembert, Euler, and Laplace (see references discussing these men in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter and note the book by Blanco
and McCuskey as an introduction to modern calculations). However, it did grow
out of Newton's ideas, and I can summarize no better than by quoting that great
Newtonian scholar I. Bernard Cohen:

In retrospect, Newton's explanation of the precession of the equinoxes in relation to the shape of the
Earth may be reckoned as one of the greatest intellectual achievements of the Principia. At one
stroke, Newton gave compelling evidence of the power and validity of the law of universal gravity,
he provided supporting evidence for the shape of the Earth as an oblate spheroid, and he proposed a
simple reason founded in the principles of dynamics for a phenomenon known since the second
century BC but never before reduced to its physical cause. Before the Principia, there had never been
even a suggestion of a physical cause.3
24.5. CONCLUSION
Those readers who thought of the Principia in terms of Newton's laws of motion,
gravity, and a theory of the solar system were in for a great surprise when
reading this chapter. Newton shows how the local gravitational force combines
with the gravitational forces exerted by the distant Sun and Moon to let us
understand terrestrial phenomena. Universal gravity explains the shape of the
Earth, the tides, and the precession of the equinoxes. Conceptually, Newton is
successful, but technically, his theory is deficient. Nevertheless, he still
maintains his rule that theory must be tested against observational data; although
rather shamefully some of his outstanding matches seem to rely on some tricky
data selection and manipulation.
24.6. FURTHER READING
Chandrasekhar, S. Newton's Principia for the Common Reader. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995. [see ch. 20, 21, and 23]
Cook, A. H. Gravity and the Earth. London: Wykeham Publications, 1969.
Gamow, George. Gravity: Classic and Modern Views. London: Heinemann,
1962. [Gamow's useful and entertaining “popular” account of the subject]
Grossman, N. The Sheer Joy of Celestial Mechanics. Boston: Birkhauser, 1996.
Kibble, T. W. B. Classical Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Tsuboi, C. Gravity. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1983.
Wilson, C. “The Newtonian Achievement in Astronomy.” In The General
History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance
to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R.
Taton and C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 
On the shape of the Earth:

 
Chapin, S. L. “The Shape of the Earth.” In The General History of Astronomy:
Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise of
Astrophysics—Part B: The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. Edited by R.
Taton and C. Wilson Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Greenberg, J. L. “Isaac Newton and the Problem of the Earth's Shape.” Archive
for the History of Exact Sciences 49 (1995): 371–91.
———. The Problem of the Earth's Shape from Newton to Clairaut. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1995. [this is a major 780 page study and
includes twenty-three pages of biography]
Mignard, F. “The Theory of the Figure of the Earth According to Newton and
Huygens.” Vistas in Astronomy 30 (1987): 291–311.
Terrall, M. The Man Who Flattened the Earth. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2002.
 
Pendulum references:
 
Graney, C. M. “Anatomy of a Fall: Giovanni Battista Riccioli and the Story of
g.” Physics Today 65 (September 2012): 36–40.
Huygens, Christiaan. The Pendulum Clock; or, Demonstrations concerning the
Motion of Pendula as Applied to Clocks. Translated from the original 1673
Horologium Oscillatorium by Richard J. Blackwell. Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1986.
Koyré, Alexandre. “An Experiment in Measurement.” Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 97 (1953): 222–37. Reprinted in Metaphysics
and Measurement. London: Chapman and Hall, 1968.
Matthews, M. R., C. F. Gauld, and A. Stinner, eds. The Pendulum: Scientific,
Historical, Philosophical and Educational Perspectives. New York: Springer,
2005.
Olmstead, J. W. “The Scientific Expedition of Jean Richter to Cayenne (1672–
3).” Isis 34 (1942): 11–14.
Olmstead, J. W. “The Voyage of Jean Richter to Acadia in 1670.” Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 104 (1960): 612–34.
Westfall, R. S. “Newton and the Acceleration of Gravity.” Archive for the
History of Exact Sciences 35 (1986): 255–72.
 
For more details on tides:
 
Aiton, E. J. “The Contribution of Newton, Bernoulli and Euler to the Theory of

Tides.” Annals of Science 11 (1955): 206–23.
Barger, V. D., and M. G. Olsson. Classical Mechanics: A Modern Perspective.
2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. [section 8.2 is a good example of
mechanics-textbook presentation]
Burstyn, H. L. “Galileo's Attempt to Prove That the Earth Moves.” Isis 53
(1962): 161–85.
Cartwright, D. A. Tides: A Scientific History. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
Ekman, M. “A Concise History of the Theory of Tides, Precession-Nutation and
Polar Motion (from Antiquity to 1950).” Surveys in Geophysics 14 (1993):
585–617.
Jelley, J. V. “The Tides, Their Origins and Behavior.” Endeavour 10 (1986):
184–90.
 
References for the precession of the equinoxes:
 
Baker, R. H., and L. W. Fredrick. Astronomy. 9th edition. New York: Van
Nostrand, 1971.
Blanco, V. M., and S. W. McCuskey. Basic Physics of the Solar System Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1961. [see section 5.11 for details of modern
calculations]
Cajori, F. “Babylonian Discovery of the Precession of the Equinoxes.” Science
LXV (1927): 184.
Dobson, G. J. “Newton's Problems with Rigid Body Dynamics in the Light of
His Treatment of the Precession of the Equinoxes.” Archive for the History of
Exact Sciences 53 (1998): 125–45.
———. “On Lemmas 1 and 2 to Proposition 39 of Book 3 of Newton's
Principia.” Archive for the History of Exact Sciences 55 (2001): 345–63.
Freedman, R. A., and W. J. Kaufmann III. Universe. 7th edition. New York: W.
H. Freeman, 2005.
Goldstein, Herbert, C. Poole, and J. Safko. Classical Mechanics. 3rd ed. 1950.
Reprint, New York: Addison-Wesley, 2002. [see section 5.8]
Herivel, J. W. “Newton on Rotating Bodies.” Isis 53 (1962): 212–18.
———. The Background to Newton's Principia. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965.
Westfall, R. S. “Newton and the Fudge Factor.” Science 179 (1973): 751–58.
Wilson, C. “D'Alembert versus Euler on the Precession of the Equinoxes and the
Mechanics of Rigid Bodies.” Archive for the History of Exact Sciences 37
(1987): 233–73.
———. “The Precession of the Equinoxes from Newton to D'Alembert and

Euler.” In The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy
from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part B: The Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Centuries. Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.

This chapter describes Newton's treatment of two remaining problems: the
motion of the Moon and the orbits of comets. The significance of these problems
may be judged by the fact that together they occupy over 60 percent of Book III.
These topics have an enduring popular appeal; even today we are fascinated by
the Moon, and the appearance of a comet in our skies becomes a major news
item. They are also vitally important in the context of establishing the validity
and efficacy of the theory of universal gravitation. Can the theory account for the
complexity of the motion of the Earth-Moon-Sun system? Will the theory work
when it is applied to the vast distances comets travel in the solar system?
25.1. THE MOON
The light reflected from the Moon is a feature of our lives, and we cannot fail to
notice the regular changing of the phases of the Moon. However, the Moon does
not exhibit the same order of regularity as the Sun; few people would
immediately know where to look for it in the night sky, and it will be almost
nineteen years before it rises again at the same northernmost point. The
movement of the Moon has been recorded for over three thousand years, and
eclipse records are very detailed. In the early eighteenth century, it was hoped all
this knowledge could lead to a method for determining longitude. There had
been naval disasters because sailors failed to judge their position correctly, and
the British Longitude Act of 1714 offered a large reward to anyone who could
come up with a suitable, accurate method for finding longitude. Newton, among
many others, knew of this challenge and the importance of formulas and tables
for giving the position of the Moon.
25.1.1. The Moon's Orbit
The simplest guess would be that the Moon follows an elliptical orbit around the
Earth, with the Earth at one focus, and the joint Earth-Moon system follows a far
larger elliptical orbit around the Sun. However, the influence of the Sun causes

many deviations away from such an ideal, and early astronomers identified a
variety of “inequalities” and “variations.”
The Moon's orbit around the Earth is roughly elliptical, but the plane of that
orbit is not in the plane containing the Sun and the Earth's orbit, the ecliptic
plane (see figure 25.1). The angle between the planes is about 5°, but here comes
the first variation: that angle oscillates between 4° 58.5′ and 5° 17.5′. The points
where the Moon's orbit cuts the ecliptic plane are called the nodes, and the line
joining them is called the nodal line (see figure 25.1). That line and its direction
compared with the Earth and the Sun is important for determining eclipses.
However, the nodes are not constant and, as another inequality, the nodal line
rotates with a period of 18.61 years.
At its perigee, the Moon is nearest the Earth; at its apogee, it is farthest away;
the line joining those two points on the orbit is called the line of apsides, and it
too rotates, taking about 8.85 years to complete one full rotation.
Figure 25.1. The geometry of the Moon's orbit.
Those two rotations are the most famous inequalities, but there are many other
—often small but subtle—variations. For example, the speed of the Moon has
minor unexpected variations, and Tycho Brahe and Kepler discovered that it
speeds up a little in summer and slows down in winter (that is, according to the
seasons in the Northern Hemisphere). The fine details of the Moon's orbit were
gradually discovered and recorded by astronomers over the centuries leading up
to Newton's time.
25.1.2. Implications of Orbital Complexity
The complexity of the Moon's motion meant that even constructing formulas and
tables for predicting its position was a difficult business. Good tables were
developed, but they were not accurate enough to deal with the longitude
problem.

It is clear that the dynamics of this three-body system (Earth, Moon, and Sun)
is complicated. It is interesting to compare the two-body case, where Newton
had classified the possible motions for inverse-square-law gravitational forces as
conic sections; if orbits are bound, they can take the form only of an ellipse (see
chapter 11 and section 16.2). The fundamental properties of motion that lead to
those beautiful results do not extend far enough to dictate similar simplifications
for the gravitational interaction of three bodies. Exact solutions are very rare (see
section 16.5), and the predicted motion may be intricate and variable. Thus the
complexities of the Earth-Moon-Sun system should come as no surprise.
However, it was not a pleasant surprise for Newton. His mathematical battles
(not to mention his battles with the first Astronomer Royal, John Flamsteed, over
the availability of his accurate lunar observations) caused him great trouble.
Allegedly he told mathematician John Machin that “[my] head never ached but
with [my] studies of the Moon,” and he told Halley that the theory of the Moon
“has broke my rest so often I will think of it no more.”1 Even that master
mathematician Leonard Euler (1707–1783) struggled:
As often as I have tried these forty years to derive the theory and motion of the Moon from the
principles of gravitation, there always arose so many difficulties that I am compelled to break off my
work and latest researches.2
25.1.3. Newton's Approach
Newton continues the approach he adopted earlier in Book III: he has gone “from
the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature”; now he can use all
the mathematical formalism developed in Book I to use “these forces to
demonstrate the other phenomena,” in this case, the motion of the Moon. Thus
we come to PROPOSITION XXII: “That All the Motions of the Moon, and All
the Inequalities of Those Motions, Follow from the Principles Which We Have
Laid Down.”
This is a bold claim viewed in the light of the many inequalities and
complexities involved. Notice that Newton is now moving the science of the
Moon's motion in a new direction: he is not asking so much about how to
precisely describe the Moon's motion; he is saying that we know why the Moon
follows such a complicated motion. He is showing an enormous faith in his laws
of dynamics and the simple form taken by the theory of universal gravity, even
when faced by the vagaries of the Moon. About a hundred years later, Pierre-
Simon Laplace explicitly and beautifully expressed this very point:

Infinitely varied in its effects, nature is simple only in its causes, and its economy consists in
producing a great number of phenomena, often very complicated, by means of a small number of
general laws.3
Newton's discussion of Proposition XXII takes the form of a list of the Moon's
inequalities and a reference back to the appropriate Corollary of Proposition
LXVI, Book I, which is to be used to account for that inequality. He also suggests
that “there are yet other inequalities not observed by former astronomers,” again
giving the form of the inequality and a reference to the responsible Corollary.
Thus Newton could claim to answer the “why” part of the question about the
Moon's motion.
Proposition LXVI, Book I is Newton's perturbation theory for the three-body
system. He had previously introduced the idea of perturbing influences when
discussing Proposition XVII; Corollaries 3 and 4 mention the effect on a body
moving in a given orbit of an impulse and a continuous force (see section
10.4.1). In Section IX of Book I, he considered how changes to an inverse-
square-law force could produce rotating orbits, and there he used perturbations
around a circular orbit to develop his theory (see chapter 14). Newton was well
aware of the unavoidable need for approximations:
In this demonstration I have supposed the angle BEG, representing the double distance of the nodes
from the quadratures, increaseth uniformly; for I cannot descend to every minute circumstance of
inequality. (From the discussion of Proposition XXXV.)
An aside for readers not familiar with perturbation theory: when faced with a
complex problem, one strategy is to assume that the solution is close to that of a
similar but tractable problem. The difference in the two problems is then the
perturbation, and methods are developed to assess the effects of that difference.
That may take the form of an adjustment of the parameters in the simpler
solution or the addition of correction terms to it. Often the theory yields a series
of corrections of (hopefully) diminishing importance, and it is expected that the
first-order terms will give an accurate enough answer. For example, suppose we
want the square root of a number nearly equal to 1, for which we obviously
know the answer is again 1. Let the number in question be 1 + x, so now x is the
perturbation on the problem. We can find the formula (the Taylor series) 
 – higher-order terms in x4, x5, and so on. If x is small
enough, just keeping the first two terms (1 + ½x) will often give an accurate
enough answer. Sometimes more terms must be included. If x gets too large,
many terms may be needed to get the required accuracy; and if it becomes larger

than 1, no sensible answer will be found at all. Such are the perils of perturbation
theory.
Newton has explained why we should expect various inequalities when we
study the Moon's orbit, but of course the validity of his explanations can be
assessed only by comparing the numerical predictions with the actual data.
Newton must follow his by-now standard approach.
Before looking at the results, I should comment on the extent of Newton's
work on the Moon. Recall that, for this book, I take the third edition of the
Principia as Newton's final word and discuss that edition, only occasionally
mentioning earlier editions or other of his writings. Newton made extensive
researches into the motion of the Moon, and there are major variations between
the first and third editions of the Principia. He also wrote a separate Theory of
the Moon's Motion, first published in 1702 as part of a book by David Gregory.
To add further to the mix, there are documents in the “Portsmouth Papers”
showing that he had produced other and quite successful calculations. I do not
know why Newton chose not to include some of this in the third edition of the
Principia—perhaps he was just too old, too tired, or too depressed by the whole
subject. This is a fascinating part of the Newton story, and I refer you to the
references in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter, especially
to the work of Cohen and Smith, Nauenberg, and Wilson.
25.1.4. Results
To apply his methods, Newton must first determine the perturbing forces, and
that he does in Proposition XXV: “To Find the Forces with Which the Sun
Disturbs the Motion of the Moon.”
Figure 25.2. Newton's diagram for Proposition XXV. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
In his diagram, figure 25.2, Newton makes a construction so that “SL will
represent the accelerated force of gravity of the Moon towards the Sun.” He can
now break down that force into components using his theory of force resolution

to find which parts of it keep the Earth-Moon system in orbit around the Sun and
which parts may be taken as perturbing forces for the Moon's orbit around the
Earth. The force SL of the Sun on the Moon resolves into the components SM
and ML. The force SM is broken into the components ST, which is the force
toward the Earth and which keeps the center of mass motion as it should be, and
the force TM. Thus he concludes that the perturbing forces are LM and TM.
(Note that these are not orthogonal components; in the following proposition he
does introduce orthogonal components.)
Newton goes on to calculate the relative magnitude of the perturbation. He
finds that “the force ML (in its mean quantity) is to the centripetal force by
which the Moon may be retained in its orbit revolving about the Earth at rest, at
the distance PT,…as 1 to 178 29/40.” The perturbations are of order 2 percent.
These forces are now fed into the methods given in Proposition LXVI, Book I
to give results contained in Propositions XXVI to XXIX for various properties of
the Moon's orbit. Propositions XXX to XXXIII deal with the motion of the nodes,
and reasonable estimates are produced. Newton also includes supporting work
by John Machin. Propositions XXXIV and XXXV give Newton's calculation of
the inclination of the Moon's orbit to the ecliptic plane, and he claims agreement
with the observed results. As always, the Principia is difficult to follow with its
intricate geometric arguments, and the interested reader should consult the usual
references for clarifications. Note that the motion of the rotation of the line of
apsides is not covered in these Propositions. Newton had referred to it in the
second Corollary to Proposition XLV, Book I, concerning rotating orbits (see
section 14.3.4). However, he was able to account for only half of the observed
rotation, a major failing in his theory of the Moon.
There is no doubt that Newton had made an enormous advance in
understanding the Moon's motion. He had shown that the Sun not only carries
the Moon along with the Earth in their orbit around the Sun, but it also gives
force components that may be taken as those responsible for perturbing the
Moon's orbit around the Earth. His evaluations of inequalities were quite
respectable in many cases, although his dynamic model certainly could not
provide the accuracy required for longitude determination.
25.1.5. After Newton
In the eighteenth century, the dynamical theory of the Moon's motion was
attacked by a set of brilliant mathematicians: Alexis Claude Clairaut (1713–
1765), Jean-Baptiste le Rond d'Alembert (1717–1783), Leonard Euler (1707–
1783), Joseph Luis Lagrange (1736–1813), and Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–

1827). Gradually, algebraic methods took over, and the defining differential
equations could be taken as a starting point for study of the Moon's orbit.
Clairaut, d'Alembert, and Euler competed to find a way to account for the
rotation of the line of apsides. At one stage, Clairaut and Euler concluded that
the inverse-square law of gravity was not the whole story, and a modification
depending on 1/r4 should be made. However, errors in their working were
eventually located, and Newton's mechanism was shown to be correct. It took
the inclusion of second-order terms to find Newton's missing half of the
rotation's magnitude. Euler was happy with this situation, and no doubt he
expressed a generally held view when in 1751 he wrote to Clairaut:
the more I consider this happy discovery, the more important it seems to me, and in my opinion it is
the greatest discovery in the Theory of Astronomy…. For it is very certain that it is only since this
discovery that one can regard the law of attraction reciprocally proportional to the squares of the
distances as solidly established; and on this depends the entire theory of astronomy.4
No doubt Newton would have been delighted to read such a sweeping
statement by one of the greatest of all mathematicians. (See the references to
Bodenmann and Waff, listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter, for the full story of the apsides.)
Work on the Moon continues up to the present (see, for example, the books by
Cook and Linton in this chapter's “Further Reading” section), and very accurate
tables are available. It is interesting to note that a major change in the dynamical
theory was made in 1877 by G. W. Hill. Previous work had been based on an
initial elliptical orbit, as discussed above. Hill began with an orbit that built in
features of the three-body system dynamics, and that innovation proved to be a
major improvement.
25.2. COMETS
The year 1665 was a momentous one for Newton—it was the “plague year”
when he fled from Cambridge to Lincolnshire to do some of his greatest work.
The following year saw the Great Fire of London catastrophe. Newton would
have been aware of the comets that accompanied these events and how that
illustrated the stories around comets, making them one of the most feared, as
well as one of the most spectacular, astronomical phenomena. Here is novelist
and journalist Daniel Defoe in his A Journal of the Plague Year (1722):
In the first place, a blazing star or comet appeared for several months before the plague, as there did

the year after another, a little before the fire. The old women and the phlegmatic hypochondriac part
of the other sex…remarked (especially afterward, though not till both those judgments were over)
that those two comets passed directly over the city, and that so very near the houses that it was plain
they imported something peculiar to the city alone.5
Even the appearance of the comets (one “a faint dull, languid colour,” the
other, “bright and sparkling”6) matched the dreadful events they foretold. There
is a long history of comets as messengers and merchants of fear (see the books
by Brandt and Whipple, for example, listed in this chapter's “Further Reading”
section). For scientists like Newton, it would have been an important challenge
to establish the true nature and behavior of comets.
25.2.1. The 1680–1681 Comet
In November 1680, a comet was observed heading toward the Sun. It
disappeared on December 8. But then on December 10, a comet was seen
moving away from the Sun and it was observed until March 1681. There was
much debate about whether the two comets were involved, or whether it was a
single comet that bent in its obit very close to the Sun. Astronomer Royal
Flamsteed favored the latter option but claimed the comet bent in its path before
reaching the Sun, so being somehow repelled by the Sun. Eventually it was
concluded that one comet was involved and that it turned around the Sun, getting
to about one solar radius from it. Figure 25.3 shows Newton's diagram from the
Principia. The 1680–1681 comet was a wonderful example and challenge for
Newton.
Figure 25.3. Newton's drawing of the 1680–1681 comet. D is the Sun, and GH is the intersection of the
sphere containing the Earth's orbit with the plane of the comet's orbit. (From The Principia, trans. Andrew
Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)

There was no satisfactory theory for the orbit of comets or for the mechanism
for promoting their motion. Straight-line paths were favored, sometimes as
projections of great circles perhaps centered on a star like Sirius. Some theories
invoked magnetic attraction by the Sun. Descartes had his vortex theory (see
figure 2.3), but since comets sometimes moved against the vortex (in a
retrograde manner), that theory was not reliable. The theory of comets was
difficult, and even as late as June 1686, when Newton was trying to complete the
Principia, he confessed to Halley that he had no final theory and had wasted
much time on the matter.
25.2.2. Comet Basics
In the Principia Newton begins with Lemma IV: “That the Comets Are Higher
Than the Moon, and in the Regions of the Planets.”
As with everything about comets, Newton accompanies this Lemma with a
long (almost six pages) discussion presenting a variety of detailed evidence. The
statement in the Lemma is important because it contradicts the ancient idea of
Aristotle that there was an unchanging, perfect heavenly region beyond the
Moon. Newton also concludes that:
COR. 1. Therefore the comets shine by the Sun's light, which they reflect.
After comments on the related problem of observing comets near the Sun, we
find two major conclusions expressed in:
COR. 3. Hence also it is evident that the celestial spaces are void of resistance; for though the
comets are carried in oblique paths, and sometimes contrary to the course of the planets, yet they
move everyway with the greatest freedom, and preserve their motions for an exceedingly long time,
even where contrary to the course of the planets. I am out in my judgment if they are not a sort of
planets revolving in orbits returning into themselves with a perpetual motion.
That second conclusion (that comets are something like planets) naturally
leads to Proposition XL: “That the comets move in some of the conic sections,
having their foci in the centre of the Sun; and by radii drawn to the Sun describe
areas proportional to the times.”
This naturally follows using the results from Book I. It also allows Newton to
suggest how comet periods may be estimated and to conclude that they may be
very long—240 years, in the example he constructs. For the extremely elongated
orbits involved, conic sections (ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola) around the
focus are very close to each other (see figure 25.4). This makes the theory
difficult but also leads to:

COR. 2. But their orbits will be so near to parabolas, that parabolas may be used for them without
sensible errors.
Figure 25.4. An illustration of the similarity of different conic-section orbits near the Sun, which is taken as
the focus. (From F. L. Whipple, The Mystery of Comets [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985],
reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.)
It is easier to fit parabolas than ellipses, and corrections may be applied later,
as discussed below. Newton uses the parabolic section of orbit to discuss comet
velocity and orbit properties in two more Corollaries.
Thus the great step has been made: the comets are something like planets and
the theory of gravity used with Book I dynamics tells us about their orbits.
25.2.3. A Mathematical Interlude
Next come seven essentially mathematical Lemmas dealing with orbit fitting and
properties. Most readers would skip over this part, but that would miss out on a
mathematical gem LEMMA V: “To Find a Curve of the Parabolic Kind [a
Polynomial] Which Shall Pass through Any Given Number of Points.” This
curve may then be used to find the value of the curve at intermediate points (see

figure 25.5).
Figure 25.5. The values of the curve at A, B, C, D, E, and F are given, and the value at R is to be found.
(From The Principia, trans. Andrew Motte [Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995].)
This is the interpolation problem that was so important for table makers; for
example, when preparing a table of square roots or logarithms, can certain values
be calculated using the appropriate algorithm and then intermediate values be
found by the less-time-consuming process of interpolation? Newton brilliantly
solved this problem with a method now called the finite-difference method. It is
easy to understand why he called it “one of the prettiest problems I can ever
hope to solve.”7 Newton's method may be found in any textbook on applied
mathematics or numerical analysis. The given points need not be evenly spaced.
The method is easy to apply and Newton gives examples (see this chapter's
“Further Reading” section.)
In a Corollary, Newton points out that we can find the area under any given
curve simply by fitting a polynomial to it and then integrating that with methods
that are “vulgarly known.” In about one page, Newton sets out a powerful,
simple method for interpolation and then suggests how integrals may be
approximated. So, just as an aside, here are foundation principles for numerical
analysis!
25.2.4. Fitting Comet Orbits
Newton now gets down to business with Proposition XLI: “From Three
Observations Given to Determine the Orbit of a Comet Moving in a Parabola.”
It is instructive to read his opening paragraph:
This being a Problem of very great difficulty, I tried many methods of resolving it; and several of
those Problems, the composition whereof I have given in the first Book, [Sections IV and V] tended to
this purpose. But afterwards I contrived the following solution, which is something more simple.
There follows some of Newton's usual complex geometrical manipulations,
leading to “Example. Let the comet of the year 1680 be proposed.” Five pages

describe how data collected by Flamsteed and Newton himself were used. It
must have been a daunting task, using a combination of methods on a large
scale:
All of which I determined by scale and compass, and the chords of angles, taken from the table of
natural sines, in a pretty large figure, in which, to wit, the radius of the orbis magnus [Earth]
(consisting of 10000 parts) was equal to 16 1/3 inches of an English foot.
He then compared further points on the calculated orbit with other
observational data, and the table of comparisons shows a reasonable fit to the
data. However, “afterwards Dr Halley did determine the orbit to a greater
accuracy by an arithmetical calculus than could be done by linear [graphical]
descriptions.” The comparison table shows that Halley's orbit was a good fit
over the whole December–March observational period. There is a long
discussion of these results.
Halley also checked the records for comets and found that apparently the
1680–1681 comet had a period of 575 years and had been recorded three times
before, including “in the month of September after Julius Caesar was killed.” It
was using an elliptical orbit based on that idea that Halley had used to fit his
orbit data. However, it now appears that Halley was wrong about that periodical
behavior, so maybe he was somewhat fortuitous in his working!
Among all the discussion, Newton sets out two major conclusions:
And the theory which justly corresponds with a motion so unequable, and through so great a part of
the heavens, which observes the same laws with the theory of the planets, and which accurately
agrees with astronomical observations, cannot be otherwise than true.
    Now if one reflects upon the orbits described, and duly considers the other appearances of this
comet, he will be easily satisfied that the bodies of comets are solid, compact, fixed, and durable, like
the bodies of the planets.
25.2.5. Orbits and Halley's Comet
Being convinced that “comets are a sort of planets revolved in very eccentric
orbits about the Sun,” it remains to build on the near-focus parabolic estimation
using Proposition XLII: “To Correct a Comet's Trajectory Found as Above.”
Newton gives a long account of his methods and comparisons with
observational data. He concludes that “the motions of comets are no less
accurately represented by our theory than the motions of the planets.”
We now come to the most famous part of the comet story. Halley computed
details of the 1607 and 1682 comets and concluded that there was a single comet
—“Halley's comet,” as we now call it—with an orbital period of about seventy-

five years. (He also referred to a 1531 sighting.) Figure 25.6 shows the orbit of
Halley's comet and clearly illustrates the way in which comets travel to the outer
reaches of the solar system.
Figure 25.6. The orbit of Halley's comet projected onto the plane of the solar system. Note that it has a
retrograde motion—it travels in its orbit in the opposite direction to the planets. (From F. L. Whipple, The
Mystery of Comets [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985], reprinted with the permission of
Cambridge University Press.)
There are many records of Halley's comet throughout history; most recently,
we could observe it in 1986. But surely the most famous “return” was that
predicted for the end of 1758 or early in 1759. In fact, it was spotted on
Christmas Day 1758. Sadly, both Halley and Newton were dead by then.
Undoubtedly they would have enjoyed hearing the lecture about it at the Paris
Academy of Sciences on April 25, 1759, which opened with the words:
the Universe sees this year the most satisfying phenomenon that astronomy has ever offered us;
unique event up to this day, it changes our doubts into certainty, and our hypotheses into
demonstrations.8
It was at that meeting of the academy that Nicolas Lacaille first used the term
Halley's comet, surely an appropriate recognition for someone who helped to
give universal gravitation one of its greatest triumphs.
25.3. CONCLUSIONS

It took many years, but finally the intricate motion of the Moon and the
spectacular, vast motion of comets confirmed that Newton had indeed found the
theory for universal gravity.
The extent of his Principia discussions suggests that Newton was fascinated
by comets, and he allowed himself some rare speculations about them. He
suggested that they may help to replenish stars and could be responsible for the
nova that Tycho Brahe observed. When considering the effect of the Sun's heat
on comets, Newton tossed out one of his stunning asides: he suggested a way to
calculate the age of the Earth. Considering the cooling of a globe of red-hot iron
the same size of the Earth, Newton came up with the figure of fifty thousand
years. He discussed cooling mechanisms and commented that “I should be glad
that the true ratio was investigated by experiments.” About 150 years later, Lord
Kelvin was following Newton and calculating an age for the Earth by modeling
its cooling processes.
25.4. FURTHER READING
For the Moon:
 
Cohen, I. Bernard. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The
Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999. [see sec. 8.15 by G. E. Smith, “Newton and the
Problem of the Moon's Motion”]
Cook, A. The Motion of the Moon. Bristol, UK: Adam Hilger, 1988.
Bodenmann, S. “The 18th-Century Battle over Lunar Motion.” Physics Today
(January 2010): 27–32.
The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the
Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part B: The Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Centuries. Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Gutzwiller, M. C. “Moon-Earth-Sun: The Oldest Three-Body Problem.” Reviews
of Modern Physics 70 (1998): 589–638. [a comprehensive review by a
theoretical physicist]
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
McEvoy, J. P. Eclipse: The Science and History of Nature's Most Spectacular
Phenomenon. London: Fourth Estate, 1999. [“popular” introduction]
Peterson, I. Newton's Clock. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1993. [ch. 6 is a popular

account of the study of the Moon's motion]
Whiteside, 
D. 
T. 
“Newton's 
Lunar 
Theory: 
From 
High 
Hope 
to
Disenchantment.” Vistas in Astronomy 19 (1976): 317–28.
Wilson, C. “The Newtonian Achievement in Astronomy.” In The General
History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance
to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R.
Taton and C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 
Definitive papers by Forbes, Morando, Waff, and Wilson are contained in:
 
The General History: Volume 2, Planetary Astonomy from the Renaissance to the
Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R. Taton and
C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
 
For detailed analysis of Newton's work on lunar theory, see:
 
Nauenberg, M. “Newton's Perturbation Methods for the Three-Body Problem
and Their Application to Lunar Motion.” In Isaac Newton's Natural
Philosophy. Edited by J. Z. Buchwald and I. Bernard Cohen. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2001.
Wilson, C. “Newton on the Moon's Variation and Apsidal Motion: The Need for
a Newer ‘New Analysis.’” In Isaac Newton's Natural Philosophy. Edited by J.
Z. Buchwald and I. Bernard Cohen. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.
 
On comets, see the references above to Linton and Wilson, as well as the
following:
 
Bork, A. “Newton and Comets.” American Journal of Physics 55 (1987): 1089–
95.
Brandt, J. C., and R. D. Chapman. Introduction to Comets. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Hughes, D. W. “The Principia and Comets.” Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London 42 (1988): 53–74.
Kollerstrom, N. “The Path of Halley's Comet, and Newton's Late Apprehension
of the Law of Gravity.” Annals of Science 56 (1999): 331–56.
Ruffner, J. A. “Newton's Propositions on Comets: Steps in Transition, 1681–84.”
Archive for History of the Exact Sciences 54 (2000): 259–77.
Waff, C. B. “Predicting the Mid-eighteenth-century Return of Halley's Comet.”
In The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from

the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part B: The Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Centuries. Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Whipple, F. L. The Mystery of Comets. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1985.
 
For more on Lemma V and numerical analysis, see:
 
Goldstine, H. H. A History of Numerical Analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag,
1997. [sec. 2.5]
Turnbull, H. W. The Mathematical Discoveries of Newton. London: Blackie,
1945. [sec. 9]
Whitehead, D. T. “Patterns of Mathematical Thought in the Later Seventeenth
Century.” Archive for the History of the Exact Sciences 1 (1961): 179–388.

We expect to find a summing up and some general conclusions at the end of such
an extensive book as the Principia. There was nothing in the first edition, but
then Newton had produced the whole book in a comparatively short period, so
maybe he had no time or energy left for a final conclusion. He wrote the General
Scholium for the second edition, and it remained, after a few small changes, in
the final, third edition. It takes up only about four pages. We know that Newton
did consider other and longer concluding statements (see the reference to Cohen,
listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter, for a
discussion), but what we get is the General Scholium. I take the third edition of
the Principia to be Newton's own treatise on dynamics and its applications, and,
as such, it contains his work and opinions as he wished them to be known
generally and publicly. He expressed other views in private conversations, in
letters, or in other documents, but presumably Principia is what he wished us to
have as a public record of his work.
The General Scholium, or excerpts from it, is possibly the best known part of
the Principia and may be the only part that many people actually read! I
recommend that you too read the General Scholium before going on. Some
statements in it have led to extensive debates and analysis, and I will say more
on some points in the chapters in part 7.
26.1. REVIEW OF DESCARTES'S VORTICES
We recall from chapter 2 that the work of Galileo and others was essentially
kinematics: a description of motion, but with little or no causal mechanism. The
only major theory for motion of the planets and other entities was Descartes's
system of vortices in the heavens to carry bodies around in them. The Sun's
vortex sweeps the planets around it. Newton had critically discussed Descartes's
mechanism in Book II, and so he opens the General Scholium with the following
words: “The hypothesis of vortices is pressed with many difficulties.”
He makes three points. The vortex theory does not give the correct behavior
(as summarized in Kepler's laws) for the planets. There would need to be smaller
vortices “undisturbed in the greater vortex of the sun,” but moving around with

it, to account for the moons of Saturn and Jupiter. Lastly, the “comets are carried
with very eccentric motions through all parts of the heavens indifferently, with a
freedom that is incompatible with the notion of a vortex.” (Surprisingly Newton
does not mention the retrograde comets that move oppositely to the supposed
vortex around the Sun.) Descartes never gave a quantitative theory of vortices,
and Newton has shown that even qualitatively it does not make sense.
26.2. THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Newton first reminds us about the medium in which motion takes place. The
motions of bodies locally (“in our air”) suffer air resistance. However the
motion in “Mr. Boyle's vacuum” reveals no resistance forces, and “a bit of down
and a piece of solid gold descend with the same velocity.” Now we can consider
“celestial places” as free of air, and there will be no resistance forces hindering
the motion of planets and comets. Thus:
the planets and comets will constantly pursue their revolutions in orbits given in kind and position,
according to the laws above explained.
Newton is claiming that his theory as applied in Book III successfully replaces
Descartes's vortex theory and explains the motion of planets and comets.
However, there is one problem.
26.2.1. Initial Conditions
Recall that in section 13.5 I explained how the solution of a dynamical problem
involves two steps: first, use the laws of motion with the appropriate forces to
find the possible orbits; second, pick out the required orbit by using the initial
conditions, that is, the positions and velocities of the bodies at some given time.
It is to the question of initial conditions that Newton turns when he writes,
but though these bodies may, indeed, persevere in their orbits by the mere laws of gravity, yet they
could by no means have at first derived the regular position of the orbits from those laws.
The laws of motion do not contain the initial conditions. He then goes on to
remind us about the intricate, beautiful nature of the solar system. There are six
planets orbiting the Sun in (almost) circular orbits, all going around in the same
direction and in (almost) the same plane. Similarly and fitting in are the moons
of Jupiter and Saturn. “But it is not to be conceived,” Newton says, “that mere

mechanical causes could give birth to so many regular motions.” There are also
comets traveling vast distances and going slowly at their aphelions. Newton
suggests his famous resolution:
This most beautiful system of the sun, planets, and comets, could only proceed from the counsel and
dominion of an intelligent and powerful Being.
Newton believes that God is the “intelligent designer” (as some would now
put it) of the solar system. The suggestion is that only God could make such a
system and set it in motion in such a beautiful way. It is interesting that Pierre-
Simon Laplace (1749–1827), the man known as the “French Newton,” quoted
Newton on this matter but showed how things had advanced by his time with his
viewpoint:
But could not this arrangement of the planets itself be a result of the laws of motion, and could not
the Supreme Intelligence, which Newton makes to interfere, have made them all depend on more
general phenomena?1
Laplace was putting forward his nebular hypothesis. The origin of the solar
system is still not fully understood today (see the “Further Reading” reference to
Freedman and Kaufmann at the end of this chapter).
26.2.2. The Fixed Stars
I commented earlier (section 23.6) that there is little in the Principia about the
stars, but Newton does now make three points about them. First, there is the
possibility that they could act like our Sun:
And if the fixed stars are centres of other like systems, these, being formed by the like wise counsel,
must be subject to the dominion of One.
This is backed up by a use of Rule of Reasoning II (see section 22.2):
Especially since the light of the fixed stars is of the same nature with the light of the sun, and from
every system light passes into all other systems.
The third point concerns the stability of the universe, which we know Newton
worried about but restricted himself to this public statement in the Principia:
and lest the systems of the fixed stars should, by their gravity, fall on each other mutually, he hath
placed those systems at immense distance from one another.

God has taken care of things. I return to this matter in chapter 28.
26.3. GOD
Newton was an intensely religious man, as discussed in chapter 1, but in the
Principia he writes about God only in the General Scholium. Now his views are
clear and forcefully expressed, as these few examples reveal:
This Being governs all things, not as the soul of the world, but as Lord over
all.
The Supreme God is a being eternal, infinite, absolutely perfect.
He is eternal and infinite, omnipotent and omniscient; that is, his duration
reaches from eternity to eternity; his presence from infinity to infinity; he
governs all things, and knows all things that are or can be done.
After a lengthy discussion of such matters, Newton turns to the question of
how we can know God:
We have ideas of his attributes, but what the real substance of any thing is we know not. In bodies, we
see only their figures and colours, we hear only the sounds, we touch only their outward surfaces, we
smell only the smells, and taste the savours; but their inward substances are not to be known either
by our senses, or by any reflex act of our minds; much less, then, have we any idea of the substance
of God.
We can have limited knowledge of God:
We know him only by his most wise and excellent contrivances of things, and final causes.
And we come back to that belief that God must be responsible for the state of
the world:
Blind metaphysical necessity, which is certainly the same always and everywhere, could produce no
variety of things. All the diversity of natural things which we find suited to different times and places
could arise from nothing but the ideas and will of a Being necessarily existing.
Having explained his ideas about God, Newton now states that he supports the
concept of knowing God through God's works:
And thus much concerning God; to discourse of whom from the appearances of things, does certainly
belong to Natural Philosophy.
Some three hundred years later, we still debate this view of God, his relevance

for science, and whether a scientist may also be a religious person. Much has
been written on this topic, and to go deeper you might start with the recent long
discussion by Snobelen and its guide to other relevant literature. I return to the
subject in the next chapter.
26.4. GRAVITY
If the General Scholium is the most read part of the Principia, we now come to
the most famous of all paragraphs. Newton faces a problem that has been
bubbling away in the background for the whole book. The paragraph begins:
Hitherto we have explained the phenomena of the heavens and of our sea by the power of gravity, but
have not yet assigned the cause of this power.
He goes on to what we can be certain about: gravity has all those properties
first established in Book III (see chapter 22); it is an inverse-square-law effect
that extends from the Sun to immense distances, as we may deduce from the
motion of comets. Newton has used his theory of dynamics and an inverse-
square-law force to successfully investigate the effects of gravity, “but hitherto I
have not been able to discover the cause of those properties of gravity from
phenomena.” Added to that is his most famous statement:
and I frame no hypotheses.
I believe too much has been read into this statement. Newton is saying that
specifically he will set out no hypothesis for the mechanism behind the
gravitational force. He is not saying anything about hypotheses in general—we
have seen how he set out several hypotheses in the Principia.
Confusion may arise because he goes on to comment about hypotheses and
their use:
for whatever is not deduced from the phenomena is to be called an hypothesis; and hypotheses,
whether metaphysical or physical, whether of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in
experimental philosophy. In this philosophy particular propositions are inferred from the phenomena,
and afterwards rendered general by induction.
This is not an easy point for Newton to explain, but he is saying that the
theory-phenomena link is crucial, and if it cannot be made, then there is no value
in the form of the theory or any hypothesis involved in it. As an example, he
claims:

thus it was the impenetrability, the mobility, and the impulsive force of bodies, and the laws of motion
and gravitation, were discovered.
However, he has not been able to use the same approach to discover a
mechanism for gravity. He can give no underlying theory involving the exchange
of particles between interacting bodies, or waves, or deviations in some aether-
like medium in which the bodies move. He had already been clear in the
Scholium at the end of Section XI (see section 16.6) that he was dealing with
mathematical forces, not various interaction mechanisms. He now says that
within his methodological framework, he cannot go beyond the forces to those
mechanisms. Here was an admission that would leave him open to all sorts of
challenges, as he foresaw in his Preface. His way out of this difficulty is set out
in what may well be the most profound statement in the whole Principia:
And to us it is enough that gravity really does exist, and act according to the laws which we have
explained, and abundantly serves to account for all the motions of celestial bodies, and of our sea.
Newton has given us a scheme for describing and predicting properties of the
motions of bodies over a breathtaking range of instances. In effect, he is saying
we should glory in that success and accept the elements of the theory, even
though we might wish to have reasons why those elements take the form that
they do. “Satis est—it is enough.” It is a philosophy that has become a part of
modern physics. For example, the theory of electromagnetic fields is enormously
successful, but in his section 1–5, “What Are the Fields?” even the great Richard
Feynman finally states:
The best way is to use the abstract field idea. That it is abstract is unfortunate, but necessary. The
attempts to try to represent the electric field as the motion of some kind of gear wheels, or in terms of
lines, or as stresses in some kind of material have used up more effort of physicists than it would
have taken simply to get the right answers about electrodynamics.2
That is exactly the position Newton advocated, and it is used over and over
again in our modern physics.
26.4.1. Gravitational Worries
That was Newton's public position. We know that privately he did try to invent
mechanisms that would result in the gravitational force. The fact is, he could not
do it, and even today we have no accepted mechanism for gravitational effects.
We have a meson exchange theory for telling us how nuclear forces operate, and
we have a photon theory for explaining electric forces, but we have no

equivalent for gravity. Newton was worried by the concept of gravity, as he
expressed in his famous statement in a letter to Richard Bentley (see section
27.5):
That gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to matter, so that one body may act upon
another at a distance through a vacuum without the mediation of anything else, by and through
which their action and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity,
that I believe no man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking can ever fall
into it. Gravity must be caused by an agent acting constantly according to certain laws; but whether
this agent be material or immaterial, I have left to the consideration of my readers.3
Christiaan Huygens, a man greatly respected by Newton, certainly picked up
on that “absurdity” in a way that may not have surprised Newton but would
surely have dismayed him:
Concerning the cause of the tides given by M. Newton, I am by no means satisfied, nor by all the
other theories he builds upon his principle of Attraction, which to me seems absurd…. And I have
often wondered how he could have given himself all the trouble of making such a number of
investigations and difficult calculations that have no other foundation than this very principle.4
Absurd or not, Newton's theory still holds up today, and men have used it to
travel to the moon and guide spacecraft to the outer solar system.
26.5. FINAL MUSINGS
There is one final paragraph in the General Scholium, and (to me at least) it
seems surprising that Newton included it. It is really about electrical effects and
“a certain most subtle Spirit which pervades and lies hid in all gross bodies.”
Newton muses about this spirit and, for example, “all sensation is excited, and
members of animal bodies move at the command of the will, namely, by
vibrations of this Spirit, mutually propagated along the solid filaments of the
nerves, from the outward organs of sense to the brain, and from the brain to the
muscles.” Perhaps Newton is wishing to say that this new field of investigation
should come within his philosophy of science. Maybe he is thinking of some sort
of research program. Certainly it is something for the future as, he concludes,
“these are things that cannot be explained in a few words, nor are we furnished
with the sufficiency of experiments which is required to an accurate
determination and demonstration of the laws by which this electric and elastic
Spirit operates.”

26.7. SUPPORT BY COTES
Newton's position was explained, supported, and defended by Roger Cotes, who,
in addition to editing the second edition of the Principia, wrote a long preface to
it. As I am concentrating on what Newton himself wrote, I have not referred to
that preface. However, a reader will find lots of interesting history and science
there, and it is well worth reading alongside Newton's General Scholium.
26.8. FURTHER READING
Cohen, I. Bernard. “A Guide to Newton's Principia.” In Isaac Newton: The
Principia, by I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1999.
Freedman, R. A., and W. J. Kaufmann III. Universe. 7th edition. New York: W.
H. Freeman, 2005. [see ch. 8 for a discussion on the origin of the solar
system]
Snobelen, S. D. “‘God of Gods, and Lord of Lords:’ The Theology of Isaac
Newton's General Scholium to the Principia.” Osiris 16 (2001): 169–208.

The publication of the Principia was one of mankind's greatest steps, and this
part outlines some of the reactions to it and how it changed the way people
thought and acted in different areas of intellectual life. The Principia laid the
foundations for the science of mechanics, and chapter 28 (the second chapter in
this section) reviews how subsequent developments were built on it. These are
enormous topics, so obviously these chapters can provide only a brief
introduction and suggest suitable references for further study. The book ends
with some parting words from the author!
 
Chapter 27. RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE
Chapter 28. MECHANICS AFTER NEWTON
 
Reading plans: If you have reached this point, you should have an idea about the
style and contents of the Principia. If you wonder what came next, these chapters
give some answers plus some final thoughts from the author.

Even today it is impossible not to be impressed—perhaps overawed—by the
sweep and power of Newton's achievements in the Principia. Add to that his
Opticks and other writings, and we should have no doubts about the widespread
impact of Newton and his work. Already in 1687 David Gregory had set the
scene when he thanked Newton “for having been at pains to teach the world that
which I never expected any man should have knowne.”1
Just how so many new things had been discovered was sure to bring both
admiration and curiosity. We might also expect other responses, such as jealousy,
belittling, and disbelief. People of all kinds, not just the academically minded,
would soon begin to look for a suitable introduction to this new wonder.
The publication of the Principia came at the start of the period known as the
Enlightenment. In fact Bacon, Newton, and Locke are sometimes known as the
“patron saints” of the Enlightenment. A variety of scientific, religious, and
philosophical matters became of importance, as I discuss in sections 5 through 7
below.
This is already a large book, and to deal fully with the “What came after
the Principia?” question would require another equally large book. This
chapter has very limited aims: to pick out a few themes for brief comment
and to list examples from the expansive literature on this topic.
27.1. NEWTON'S WORK: SOURCES OF WONDER
AND DISPUTES
Kepler and Galileo gave us kinematics, mathematical descriptions of some
important examples of bodies in motion. Newton made the enormous step to
dynamics, explaining how motion “works.” In Einstein's words (see section 3.5),
Newton produced a “self-contained system of physical causality.”2 This was
based on the mechanical philosophy, supplemented by the notion of force. As
this book has revealed, Newton's success is breathtaking.
Newton set out his approach in the Preface to the Principia: the use of
mathematics to develop and explore theories, plus the essential interplay
between theory and experiment. He began with definitions and axioms (or laws),

and gradually built up a whole structure for dynamics and its applications. He
followed the same approach in his Opticks, which opens with the statement:
My Design in this Book is not to explain the Properties of Light by Hypotheses, but to propose and
prove them by Reason and Experiments: In order to which I shall premise the following Definitions
and Axioms.
It is both interesting and important to note that it is only at the end of his
books (in the General Scholium in the Principia, and in Query 31 in Opticks),
that Newton fully discusses some more philosophical and religious matters.
This respect for mathematics and the experimental method was supported and
dramatically illustrated by the Enlightenment philosopher David Hume (1711–
1776) in the final paragraph of his An Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding:
When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles, what havoc must we make? If we take in
our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask “Does it contain any
abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?” No. “Does it contain any experimental
reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?” No. Commit then to the flames; for it can
contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
Newton's basic methodology has survived and remains in place today. Here is
Newton's approach, set out again in the twentieth century by Einstein:
Science is the attempt to make the chaotic diversity of our sense experience correspond to a logically
uniform system of thought. In this system single experiences must be correlated with the theoretic
structure in such a way that the resulting coordination is unique and convincing.
    The sense-experiences are the given subject matter. But the theory that shall interpret them is man-
made. It is the result of an extremely laborious process of adaptation: hypothetical, never completely
final, always subject to question and doubt.
    The justification (truth content) of the system rests in the proof of usefulness of the resulting
theorems on the basis of sense experiences, where the relation of the latter to the former can only be
comprehended intuitively.3
The data were clear, and Newton's theory fits magnificently. However, there is
a problem in the phrase “the theory that shall interpret them is man-made.”
Newton built his theory on the concept of force and attractive forces (gravity)
that act over large distances. These aspects of his theory were not explained in
terms of mechanical models or causes. For some people, the fact that the theory
works so well was never enough; not for them, “satis est—it is enough.” Equally,
Newton set out “to explain the Properties of Light,” rather than definitively
establish the absolute nature of light.
Thus, the scene is set. There is room for both wonder and disputes.

27.2. RECEPTION AND REVIEWS
The 1687 first edition of the Principia attracted four reviews in 1687 and 1688.
The first was by Edmond Halley in the Philosophical Transactions, and, hardly
surprisingly, it was somewhat extravagant in its praise. The second, in the
Bibliothéque Universelle, published anonymously but attributed to John Locke,
was largely a summary of the contents and not particularly penetrating. The
anonymous review in Acta Eruditorum was, according to I. Bernard Cohen,
written by Christoph Pfautz. It was a serious and detailed review, and it gave
many their first ideas about the Principia and its contents. The fourth review
appeared in the Journal des sçavans, and it too was anonymous, although it is
clear that the author strongly favored the Cartesian philosophy. The actual
technical achievements are of less interest than the underlying approach. This is
where we find the famous comments about Newton having written a perfect
work in mechanics, which now needed an equally impressive work in physics. If
we seek the first indication of the battle lines between the rival approaches of
Newton and Descartes, this review could well be the answer.
There now followed a period during which experts such as Christiaan
Huygens, Johann Bernoulli, and Gottfried Leibnitz subjected both the
mathematics and the science in the Principia to a searching analysis. Further
details are given in Hall's paper “Correcting the Principia.” Obviously care had
to be taken, and fortunately Newton had Roger Cotes to help him prepare the
1713 second edition. This time there were three reviews. The Journal des
sçavans review was less critical and more complimentary, but the 1718 one in
Mémoires de Trévoux did make the good mathematics—but poor physics
judgment. The Acta Eruditorum noted the changes from the first edition,
especially reviewing the General Scholium. The Acta Eruditorum similarly
reviewed the 1726 third edition.
The printing figures also tell a story about interest and demand. Around 300
copies of the first edition were printed, 750 for the second, and 1,200 for the
third. At that time, apparently (see the Speiser reference in the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter), 250 was a large printing, so the
Principia must have been wanted by many people. (Of course, how many of
them actually read, or could fully understand, the book was a different matter!)
It seems safe to say that the Principia was received enthusiastically in Britain
but raised opposition and many doubts in continental Europe. The gradual
development of dynamics is covered in the next chapter, and some of the
philosophical matters are referred to below.

27.3. STYLE AND INFLUENCE
Chapter 28 deals in more detail with the development and application of
mechanics following the Principia. In Britain, Newton's use of forces and
geometrical formalism continued to be taught for many years, with the
modifications by Euler and Lagrange and the mathematical notation and ideas of
Leibnitz and others gradually finding acceptance. (See the paper by Harman and
other references in this chapter's “Further Reading” section.) As an example, you
may look at the readily available Principles of Mechanics and Dynamics by Sir
William Thomson (later known as Lord Kelvin) and Peter Guthrie Tait. This
leading textbook was published in 1879 as Treatise on Natural Philosophy, and
it is unashamedly Newtonian; although the introduction of new dynamical
formalism, the concentration on the conservation of energy, the use of algebra
and analysis, and the range of applications make it mostly a world away from the
Principia. It is fascinating to read their introduction to Dynamical Laws and
Principles, written almost two hundred years after the Principia first appeared:
We cannot do better, at all events in commencing, than follow Newton somewhat closely. Indeed the
introduction in the Principia contains in a most lucid form the general foundations of Dynamics. The
Definitiones and Axiomata sive Leges Motûs, there laid down, require only few amplifications and
additional illustrations, suggested by subsequent developments, to suit them to the present state of
science, and to make a much better introduction to dynamics that we find in even some of the best
modern treatises.4
The tradition lives on today. There are textbooks (by Landau and Lifshitz, for
example) that begin with the principle of least action and Lagrange's equations
(see the next chapter for details), but many are still very much in sympathy with
Thomson and Tait.
Newtonian mechanics, along with its various extensions, covers a vast amount
of classical physics (that is, pre-quantum and pre-relativity physics). The big gap
is electric and magnetic phenomena, the study of which was well under way in
Newton's time. The great step was made in the nineteenth century with the work
of Faraday, Kelvin, and Maxwell, culminating in the theory of the
electromagnetic field. This also provides the wave theory of light. The story of
this discovery has parallels with the work of Newton on gravitation. The
mechanical philosophy was famously espoused by Kelvin in his Baltimore
lectures: “I never satisfy myself until I can make a mechanical model of a thing.
If I can make a mechanical model I can understand it. As long as I cannot make
a mechanical model all the way through I cannot understand; and that is why I
cannot get the electromagnetic theory.”5 Maxwell used equations from fluid

dynamics to develop theory for the electromagnetic field, but stressing that this
was a technique using analogy to find appropriate mathematics rather than some
underlying physical reality (see my 2003 paper in the “Further Reading” section
at the end of this chapter). To this day, there is no mechanical model for the
electromagnetic field, and we are still left with Heinrich Hertz's concise
summary: Maxwell's theory is Maxwell's system of equations.6 As with his
theory of gravity, Newton might well add “satis est—it is enough.”
The success of Newton's approach as outlined above also influenced those
working in other disciplines. Just as Newton clearly followed Euclid, there were
those who sought to emulate Newton in other fields. David Hume wished to
become the Newton of the social sciences. In his An Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding, he referred to Newton's method and success in astronomy and
continued: “The like has been performed with regard to other parts of nature.
And there is no reason to despair of equal success in our enquiries concerning
the mental powers and economy if prosecuted with equal capacity and caution.”7
Raphael has discussed the influence of Newton on Adam Smith as he wrote An
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. There were even
attempts to deal with medicine in a Newtonian style (see Brown's paper in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter).
27.4. BOOKS AND READERS
First, a reminder of a few dates. The three editions of the Principia appeared in
1687, 1713, and 1726. They were all in Latin, and Motte's English translation
did not appear until 1729. The Opticks was published (in English) in 1704,
although papers on Newton's theories had appeared much earlier.
Obviously, news of Newton's achievements had spread far and wide, and the
demand for details would have been enormous. A number of people soon saw
the opportunity for courses of lectures aimed at undergraduate students and the
general public. Those lectures were also converted into books. (See the paper by
Snobelen and the catalogue of publications given by Gjertsen, both listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.) Thus there were popular
and highly successful books in English by William Whiston (1696, 1715, and
1716), Willem ’s Gravesande (1723), John Theophilus Desaguliers (1728 and
1734), Benjamin Martin (1743) and James Ferguson (1756). The title of
Ferguson's book is revealing: Astronomy Explained upon Sir Isaac Newton's
Principles, and Made Easy to Those Who Have Not Studied Mathematics. It is
sometimes said that the mathematical barrier between the professional and

public appreciation of scientific advances began in Newton's time—and it is as
strong as ever today.
The wonderful The Newtonian System of Philosophy: Explained by Familiar
Objects in an Entertaining Manner for the Use of Young Persons appeared in
1761. The author is “Tom Telescope,” usually reckoned to be Oliver Goldsmith.
(A facsimile of a later edition is available today through Nabu Public Domain
Reprints.) There are six lectures and an Introduction, which begins:
A party of young people of both sexes being invited to spend the holidays with a friend in the
country, were sometimes at a loss for amusement, especially when rainy weather confined them to
the house.
Enter Tom Telescope to save the day with his exciting lectures. Try this book
for fun and to get an idea of the way things were presented at that time.
There were also more serious textbooks and commentaries, beginning with
John Keill's 1701 Introductio ad veram physicam; David Gregory's 1702
Astronomiae physicae et geometricae elementa; John Maxwell's Course
concerning God, which was the first book containing English translations of
parts of the Principia, including the General Scholium; Henry Pemberton's 1728
A View of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy; and Colin Maclaurin's 1748 An
Account of Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. John Desaguliers was in charge of
experiments at the Royal Society meetings when Newton was president, and his
influential A Course of Experimental Philosophy appeared in 1733.
In his introduction to Book III, Newton writes that he had composed a book
“in a popular method that it might be read by many.” However, to avoid
controversies (see section 7.5), he wrote the more mathematical version that
forms the last book of the Principia. His book “in a popular method” did not
appear until 1728 (in both Latin and English). Other great scientists followed
suit, with Leonard Euler's wonderful Letters to a German Princess appearing in
1772 and Laplace's System of the World in 1796. Euler's book was translated into
eight languages and published in over a hundred editions. (Those books by
Newton, Euler, and Laplace are readily available today and make wonderful
reading.)
Thus Newton's work became available in a large variety of presentations
suitable for a wide audience. It is noticeable that women were involved and
catered for—see the chapter Newtonian Women in Feingold's book and chapters
6 and 10 in Alic's book (both in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter). Franceso Algarotti's 1737 Newtonianism for Ladies was extremely
popular.
Of course, not everyone was thrilled by Newton's work and fame. In the

literary world, the reaction was mixed. (For an outline, see the section “Poetic
Tradition” in Gjertsen's book.) At one extreme, we have Alexander Pope's
famous couplet:
Nature and Nature's laws, lay hid in night:
God said, Let Newton be! and all was light.
 
At the other extreme, we might put Keats, who almost equally famously wrote
in the poem “Lamia”:
Do not all charms fly
At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:
We know her woof, her texture; she is given
In the dull catalogue of common things.
Philosophy will clip an Angel's wings,
Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,
Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine—
Unweave a rainbow.
 
The power of reason and mathematics did not appeal to everyone!
27.5. RELIGIOUS MATTERS
The debate about religion and science is very much alive today with a stream of
books and articles regularly appearing. (See the Oxford VSI Science and
Religion, listed in this chapter's “Further Reading” section, for a short modern
introduction to the topic.) However, in Newton's time, the work of scientists like
Boyle and Newton was quite intimately linked to views about God and his
powers. Unlike Descartes, who began his Principia Philosophiae with
considerations of God, Newton left his explicit comments until the end of the
Principia and Opticks. Nevertheless, his views on and respect for God are clear
(see the previous chapter).
Newton saw his work as revealing the power and glory of God, but for some,
it also raised questions.
If God made everything and set it going, why does he need to exist from then
on? If he does exist, and perhaps needs to reset things (as Newton hinted at in
the Opticks), can we see him as a less-than-perfect creator of the universe? If
observation, reason, and analysis reveal the workings of nature, why not see God
in that and dispense with the God of faith and revelation as in the Bible? The
philosopher David Hume presented a powerful argument against the belief in

miracles (see the next section).
The idea that reason might challenge faith (instead of the reverse, as we saw
in section 2.2) can lead to ideas of a new type of God or religion, and maybe
even to atheism. One person with such worries was Robert Boyle. In his will, he
left funds “To settle an annual salary for some divine or preaching minister to
preach eight sermons in the year for proving the Christian religion against
notorious infidels, viz. Atheists, Deists, Pagans, [and so on].”8 “A Confutation of
Atheism” was the title of the first such lecture, given in 1692 by Richard
Bentley, who became master of Newton's old college, Trinity at Cambridge
University. Bentley sought Newton's help when preparing his lectures, and the
four letters Newton sent to Bentley may be read in the book edited by Janiak
(listed in this chapter's “Further Reading” section). Many important points are
discussed, including the comments on the absurdity of action-at-a-distance
forces, as quoted in section 26.4.1. The first words in the first letter make
Newton's feelings immediately known:
When I wrote my treatise about our system, I had an eye upon such principles as might work with
considering men, for the belief of a deity, and nothing can rejoice me more than to find it useful for
that purpose.
In contrast to that, some hundred years later, when Napoleon questioned
Pierre-Simon Laplace about the absence of God in his great treatise on celestial
mechanics, Laplace is reputed to have replied “Sire, I have no need of that
hypothesis.”9
The debate about God and his role in science is closely allied to the
philosophical issues to which I next turn.
27.6. SOME PHILOSOPHICAL POINTS
The period under discussion saw the appearance of some of the great works of
philosophy:
Locke, John. An Essay concerning Human Understanding (1690).
Berkeley, Bishop George. A Treatise concerning the Principles of Human
Knowledge (1710).
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748).
Kant, Immanuel. The Critique of Pure Reason (1781).
In some ways, the titles tell the story. It was time for deliberations on some of

the great questions: How do we know things? What can we know? How do we
reason about things? What part do faith and reason play? Where and how does
God fit into the world picture? And so on.
Locke and Newton were friends, and it has been suggested by Rogers (see this
chapter's “Further Reading” section) that “between them they did supply such a
long-lived, and influential, not to say intellectually respectable, foundation for
much of the eighteenth century, and later, thought.”10
Newton had shown how reasoning (using a mathematical formalism) can be
combined with observational and experimental data to create a science or
“system of the world.” Obviously the merits and limits of that approach called
out for philosophical analysis. Few could dispute the success of Newton's
methods, but there were aspects of it that caused unease. They were largely in
the fact that “the sense-experiences are the given subject matter. But the theory
that shall interpret them is man-made,” as Einstein put it.11 Philosophical
problems arose when considering the following: the nature of space, the
existence of absolute space and time, whether inertia is a primary or secondary
quality, what the nature of force is, whether matter is active or passive, if force
can act only through direct contact, and so on.
Some of these matters placed Newton in direct conflict with Descartes and
Leibnitz. Not surprisingly, there were continental philosophers ready and willing
to try to discredit Newton's work. The most famous clash was between Newton
and Leibnitz. There are letters between Newton and Leibnitz (see the book
edited by Janiak listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this
chapter), but as the disputes became more and more bitter, it was Samuel Clarke
who wrote on Newton's behalf. (On a personal note: I have always wondered
how much time and energy Newton wished to dedicate to such things, even if he
did find the challenges extremely irritating.)
This leads us directly to the next section.
27.7. NEWTON AND THE ENLIGHTENMENT
A good, short introduction to the period known as the Enlightenment is given by
Dorinda Outram (see this chapter's “Further Reading” section). It is clear that
Newton would be a major influence when we read her characterization of the
period:
Enlightenment was a desire for human affairs to be guided by rationality rather than by faith,
superstition, or revelation; a belief in the power of human reason to change society and liberate the
individual from the constraints of custom or arbitrary authority; all backed up by a world view

increasingly validated by science rather than religion or tradition.
It was in France that the Enlightenment was so important, leading up, as it did,
to the French Revolution. It also spread to Germany, Italy, and America.
In order for that basic approach set out by Newton and Locke to conquer
Europe, it was necessary to overthrow the entrenched Cartesian philosophy. That
was a slow process. (See the recent major study by Shank, listed in the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter.) The first senior scientist who
became a confessed Newtonian was Pierre Louis Maupertuis, whom we met in
chapter 24 when discussing the dispute over the shape of the Earth. It was not
until 1732 that Maupertuis used Newtonian ideas in his book Discours sur la
figure des asters.
The leading champion of Newtonianism was the French writer universally
known as Voltaire. He had escaped to England in 1728–1729 to avoid personal
problems, and there he became acquainted with Newton's work. He
enthusiastically presented his observations of Newton and the scientific and
philosophical scene in England in his Les Lettres Philosophiques, also known as
Letters from England. For many Frenchmen, these gave their first contact with
Newton and his achievements. Voltaire followed up in 1738 with Elémens de la
philosophie de Newton. Voltaire took advice from Maupertuis, but his greatest
assistance came from his mistress Émilie du Châtelet. In contrast to Voltaire,
Émilie really did understand mathematics and physics and, in 1749, with the
help of Alexis Claude Clairaut, she published a French translation of the
Principia. In fact, it remains the only French translation. (For the wonderful
story of Émilie and Voltaire, see the recent books by Bodanis and Arianrhod,
both of which are listed in this chapter's “Further Reading” section.) Gradually
Newton was becoming triumphant over Descartes and Leibnitz.
Perhaps the greatest of all French writing in the Enlightenment is the
Encyclopédie. It was edited largely by Denis Diderot, and its seventeen folio
volumes of text and eleven volumes of plates were published in 1751–1772 (see
the book by Blom in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter). At
first, Diderot was assisted by Jean-Baptiste le Rond d'Alembert, whom we met in
chapters 24 and 25. D'Alembert wrote the great introduction or “Preliminary
Discourse,” which is a brilliant survey of knowledge, philosophy, and scientific
methods, setting the scene for the whole work. It is available in translation today
and is well worth reading. Here at last is a clear statement that Newton's
approach to the gravitational force is acceptable; when writing about mechanics,
d'Alembert states:

We extend our investigations even to the movement of bodies animated by unknown driving forces
or causes, provided the law whereby these causes act is known or supposed to be known.12
He puts astronomy at the head of “the physic-mathematical sciences.” After
commenting on its successes, he writes:
Thus it may justly be regarded as the most sublime and the most reliable application of Geometry and
Mechanics in combination, and its progress may be considered the most incontestable monument to
the success to which the human mind can rise by its efforts.13
The triumphs of Newton and those who followed him are finally given their
rightful recognition.
The publication of the Encyclopédie was an event of enormous importance.
Historian Philipp Blom summarizes it as follows:
What makes it the most significant event in the entire intellectual history of the Enlightenment is the
particular constellation of politics, economics, stubbornness, heroism, and revolutionary ideas that
prevailed, for the first time ever, against the accumulated determination of Church and Crown, of all
the established forces in France taken together, to become a triumph of free thought, secular
principle, and private enterprise. The victory of the Encyclopédie presaged not only the Revolution,
but the values of the two centuries to come.14
27.8. CONCLUSION
The work begun by Newton and Locke forms the basis for much of science as
we know it today. Newton's contribution may not be known in complete detail,
but his name remains synonymous with much in our scientific and intellectual
world. There are still cartoons about Newton and falling apples, and newly
discovered aspects of his stranger alchemist and religious studies still lead to
articles in our daily newspapers. (See the article by McNeil in the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter for more.) In my (and Newton's) old
town of Grantham, there is, naturally, a Sir Isaac Newton pub, and even the Isaac
Newton Shopping Center. I doubt that Newton would approve of either!
Even today, only Einstein can rival Newton as the great icon of science. In
2005, the Royal Society conducted a poll to assess opinions on who had made
the bigger contribution to science, given the state of knowledge during his time,
and who made a bigger contribution to humankind. More than 1,300 members of
the general public voted for Newton by 60.9 percent to 39.1 percent. It was
much closer for the 345 members of the Royal Society: Newton, 50.1 percent;
Einstein, 49.9 percent. There have been other polls, but always Newton and

Einstein are in a class of their own. I wonder how you would cast your vote?
27.9. FURTHER READING
A selection of general references. (If I had to nominate just one book for the
general reader, it would be the recent, large-format, beautifully illustrated book
by Mordechai Feingold.)
 
Cohen, I. Bernard, and G. E. Smith. The Cambridge Companion to
Newton.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Cohen, I. Bernard, and R. S. Westfall, eds. Newton: Texts Background
Commentaries. New York: Norton, 1995.
Dobbs, B. J. T., and M. C. Jacob. Newton and the Culture of Newtonianism. New
York: Prometheus Books, 1995.
Fauvel, J., R. Flood, M. Shortland, and R. Wilson, eds. Let Newton Be! Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1988.
Feingold, M. The Newtonian Moment: Isaac Newton and the Making of Modern
Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Hankins, T. L. Science and the Enlightenment. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985.
Janiak, A., ed. Newton: Philosophical Writing. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2004.
Koyré, A. “The Significance of the Newtonian Synthesis.” In Newton: Texts
Background Commentaries. Edited by I. Bernard Cohen and R. S. Westfall.
New York: Norton, 1995.
McNeil, M. “Newton as National Hero.” In Let Newton Be! Edited by J. Fauvel,
R. Flood, M. Shortland, and R. Wilson. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1988.
Schaffer, S. “Newtonianism.” In Companion to the History of Modern Science.
Edited by R. C. Olby, G. N. Cantor, J. R. R. Christie, and M. J. S. Hodge.
London: Routledge, 1990.
Westfall, R. S. Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1980.
 
For section 27.2:
 
Cohen, I. Bernard. “The Review of the First Edition of Newton's Principia in the
Acta Eruditorium, with Notes on the Other Reviews.” In The Investigation of

Difficult Things. Edited by P. M. Harman, Alan E. Shapiro, and D. T.
Whiteside. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Gjertsen, D. The Newton Handbook. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986.
Hall, A. R. “Correcting the Principia.” Osiris 13 (1958): 291–326.
Maglo, Koffi. “The Reception of Newton's Gravitational Theory by Huygens,
Varignon, and Maupertuis: How Normal Science May Be Revolutionary.”
Perspectives on Science 11 (2003): 135–69.
Speiser, D. “Newton's Principia.” In Discovering the Principles of Mechanics
1600–1800. Edited by K. Williams and S. Caparrini. Basel, Switz.:
Birkhauser, 2008.
 
For section 27.3, see the book by Hankins and:
 
Brown, T. M. “Medicine in the Shadow of the Principia.” Journal of the History
of Ideas 48 (1987): 629–48.
Harman, P. M. “Newton to Maxwell: The Principia and British Physics.” Notes
and Records of the Royal Society of London 42 (1988): 75–96.
Pask, C. “Mathematics and the Science of Analogies.” American Journal of
Physics 71 (2003): 526–34.
Raphael, D. D. “Newton and Adam Smith.” In Newton's Dream. Edited by M. S.
Stayer. Toronto: McGill-Queens University Press, 1988.
Thomson, Sir W., and P. G. Tait. Principles of Mechanics and Dynamics. New
York: Dover, 1962.
 
For section 27.4, see the general references (especially Feingold and Gjersten)
and:
 
Alic, M. Hypatia's Heritage: A History of Women in Science from Antiquity to
the Late Nineteenth Century. Reading, Berkshire, UK: Cox and Wyman, 2001.
Nicolson, M. H. Newton Demands the Muse. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1966.
Rogers, P., ed. The Context of English Literature: The Eighteenth Century.
London: Methuen 1978. [see particularly the chapters “Religion and Ideas” by
W. A. Speck and “Science” by G. S. Rousseau]
Snobelen, S. D. “On Reading Isaac Newton's Principia in the 18th Century.”
Endeavour 22 (1998): 159–63.
 
For section 27.5, see articles in the Cohen and Smith Companion, as well as
the Cohen and Westfall and Janiak books. Also see:

 
Dixon, T. Science and Religion: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008.
Jacob, M. C. The Newtonians and the English Revolution 1689–1720. Hassocks,
Sussex, UK: Harvester Press, 1976. [see especially chs. 4 and 5]
Strong, E. W. “Newton and God.” Journal of the History of Ideas 13 (1952):
147–67.
Westfall, R. S. “Newton and Christianity.” In Newton: Texts Background
Commentaries. Edited by I. Bernard Cohen and R. S. Westfall. New York:
Norton, 1995.
 
For section 27.6, this is a topic covered in many of the general references. See
the various articles in the Cohen and Smith, Cohen and Westfall, and Janiak
books.
 
Forbes, E. G. “Newton's Science and the Newtonian Philosophy.” Vistas in
Astronomy 22 (1978): 413–18.
Rogers, G. A. J. “Locke's Essay and Newton's Principia.” Journal for the
History of Ideas 39 (1978): 217–32.
———. “Locke, Newton and the Enlightenment.” Vistas in Astronomy 22
(1979): 471–76.
 
For section 27.7, see Feingold (especially the chapter “The Voltaire Effect”)
and:
 
Arianrhod, R. Seduced by Logic: Émilie du Châtelet, Mary Somerville and the
Newtonian Revolution. Brisbane, Aus.: University of Queensland Press, 2011.
Blom, P. Enlightening the World: Encyclopêdie, the Book That Changed the
Course of History. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
Bodanis, D. Passionate Minds: The Great Enlightenment Love Affair. London:
Little, Brown, 2006.
Bristow, W. “Enlightenment.” In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford
University Metaphysics Research Lab. Article first published in 2010.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/enlightenment (accessed May 22, 2013).
d'Alembert, Jean-Baptiste le Rond. Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia
of Diderot. Translated by R. N. Schwab. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1995.
Jacob, M. C. “Newtonian Science and the Radical Enlightenment.” Vistas in
Astronomy 22 (1979): 545–55.

Johnson, W., and S. Chandrasekhar. “Voltaire's Contribution to the Spread of
Newtonianism.” International Journal of Mechanical Science 35 (1990): 423–
53.
Outram, Dorinda. The Enlightenment. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
Shank, J. B. The Newton Wars and the Beginning of the French Enlightenment.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.

The work of Kepler, Galileo, Huygens, and Newton provided the basis for our
modern theory of dynamics and indeed for our approach to science as a whole.
In this chapter, I will briefly survey some of the key developments that followed
on from Newton's work.
28.1. NEWTON'S LEGACY
Newton made the decisive step from the kinematics of Kepler and Galileo
(among others) to a theory of dynamics. He began with inertial frames of
reference and how transformations are made between such frames. He then
introduced the concept of force, which accounted for changes away from
uniform inertial motion. The effect of a force on a body depends on its mass, so
it was necessary to define the mass of a body. Forces are vector quantities, and
the parallelogram law tells us how to combine forces or resolve a force into
components. The third law allows us to use those ideas for interacting bodies by
assuming that they exert equal and opposite forces on each other. In particular,
Newton discovered the universal force of gravity.
Those concepts are used mathematically when the laws of motion are applied.
Newton demonstrated how this leads to general results, like the conservation of
linear momentum and the uniform motion of the center of mass, and to specific
results, like the orbits of planets, moons, and comets.
While describing Newton's work, I have also pointed out various places where
he had come to barriers limiting his further progress in particular topics. These
deficiencies fall under three main headings:
 
mathematical and technical problems;
the need to extend the theory in order to cover more applications; and
fundamental and conceptual problems in the theory.
 
Addressing these issues lies at the heart of the history of dynamics.
28.1.1 Immediate Mathematical Problems

As we are now painfully aware, following the details in the Principia is made
difficult by Newton's use of limiting procedures set in a geometric approach that
is alien to the modern reader. In this book, I have given introductions to a
modern version of Newton's theory, which involves calculus and differential
equations. Although it is obvious that Newton was using part of that modern
formalism, it is almost never stated explicitly and, in places, apparently quite
deliberately hidden away. Thus a first significant step was the conversion of
Newton's dynamics into the form presented in chapter 11.
Pierre Varignon (1654–1722) was a French professor of mathematics who
corresponded with Newton and received from him a second-edition copy of the
Principia and even a portrait of Newton! He used calculus methods to derive
some of Newton's results for centripetal and centrifugal forces. He was also
involved in the Newton–Johann Bernoulli disputes about the correctness of parts
of the Principia. The first systematic presentation of Newton's mechanics in a
new mathematical form was probably that given by Jacob Herrmann in his book
Phoromonia, sive de viribus corporum solidorum et fluidorum, published in
1716. It is usually agreed that the formulation of Newton's mechanics that we
would recognize today was first set out by Leonard Euler (1707–1783) in his
1736 Mechanica sive motus scientia analytice exposita. From then on, scientists
like Jean-Baptiste le Rond d'Alembert and Alexis Claude Clairaut could use
differential equations and the algebraic or analytical theory to investigate
motion. This new formalism greatly helped with perturbation theory for tackling
problems such as those mentioned in chapters 23–25.
28.2 NEW APPROACHES: POTENTIALS
Although Newton was concerned about the nature and origin of forces, his major
achievement was to use the force concept to successfully describe the dynamics
of a dazzling array of phenomena. In one sense, he put aside the philosophical
difficulties with his “satis est—it is enough” statement in reference to those
successes. I now come to a different approach to forces, one that makes the
applications easier, paves the way for a more generalized approach, and
ultimately (see section 28.8) tackles the worrying conceptual problems.
28.2.1. Defining the Potential
Newton introduced the vector force F = (Fx, Fy, Fz), and the components are
used when the force is resolved in different directions to study the motion of a

body acted upon by that force in that direction. We now introduce a scalar
potential function V(x, y, z), which is related to the force by differentiation:
Thus, mathematically, giving V(x, y, z) is equivalent to specifying F = (Fx, Fy,
Fz). But what has been added to the physical picture?
28.2.2. Work Done by Forces
The work done by a force acting on a body is the magnitude of the force
multiplied by the distance moved, which will require an integral in the general
case. Suppose the force acts on the body moving from x0 to x1. For the one-
dimensional case, the work done is
A similar result holds in the general three-dimensional case: the work done is
given by the change in the potential function.
28.2.3. The Equations of Motion
Simply using equation (28.1) in Newton's second law gives an equation of
motion for a particle in terms of the potential,
We now speak of a body moving in a force field specified by its potential
function V.
If we consider the body moving from x0 to x1 and integrate the equation of
motion, we find

Two important observations can now be made. First, the equation of motion
begins as a second-order differential equation in (28.2), but is only a first-order
differential equation in (28.3). That takes us a long way toward finding the
particle trajectory, as explained in chapter 11.
Second, the second form in equation (28.3) is just the conservation-of-energy
law: if a body moves under the action of a force that may be described in terms
of a potential function V, then the sum of the kinetic energy T and the potential
energy V is a constant of motion. The potential has now been interpreted as an
energy term. Note that forces that cannot be written in terms of a potential, as in
equation (28.1), are dissipative, like the resistance forces studied in Book II, and
they cause a loss of energy.
28.3. GENERALIZING THE EQUATIONS OF
MOTION
Introducing the potential has given a way to eliminate forces; a body now moves
in a force field characterized by a potential function. Physically, we can relate
the potential to work done and create a definition of energy for a moving
particle. Old questions in the vis viva dispute (see chapter 6) are also settled by
this change of emphasis.
The next step was made by Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736–1813), who
introduced “generalized coordinates” to specify the state of a dynamical system.
A single coordinate q will specify the situation if we can write the kinetic energy
T and potential energy V in terms of it to obtainT( , q), where  = dq/dt, and
V(q). (Newton's fluxions may have been long gone, but his dot notation for a
derivative is still a useful abbreviation.) We now form what has come to be
known as the Lagrangian L:

The Lagrangian is simply the difference between the kinetic energy and the
potential energy. Then the Lagrange equation of motion is
If q is taken to be the usual spatial coordinate x, Lagrange's equation becomes
identical with Newton's equation of motion. Most often it will take several
coordinates q1, q2, q3,…qn to fully specify the system of interest if it has n
“degrees of freedom.” In that case, L will depend on all those coordinates, and
there will be an equation like (28.5) for each qi.
We are now moving into a technical area of the theory, and it is not
appropriate to go into details here; refer to the dynamics texts recommended in
section 6.9.1 for further information. However, we can note the key advances:
the theory now uses any appropriate and convenient coordinates, and the
dynamical behavior is determined by giving expressions for the kinetic and
potential energies. The vectors have gone and there is no messy resolving of
forces. The new formulation is sometimes called analytical mechanics. Here is
the way Lagrange expressed it in his Le Méchanique Analitique (1788):
There are several treatises on mechanics, but the plan of this one is entirely new. I have set myself the
task of reducing the theory of this science, and the art of solving problems concerned with it, to
general formulae, the simple development of which gives all the equations necessary to the solution
of each problem.
         No drawings are to be found in this work. The methods which I present require neither
constructions nor geometrical or mechanical arguments, but only algebraic operations, subject to a
regular and uniform process.
So no geometry and not a single diagram—surely a progression as far as
possible away from the Principia!
This formal development was extended into a highly sophisticated approach
by William Rowan Hamilton (1805–1865) and Carl Gustav Jacobi (1804–1851).
Mathematical techniques, such as the perturbation theory initiated by Newton,
were developed by many people, but particularly by Pierre-Simon Laplace
(1749–1827) in his five-volume Traité de mécanique céleste. Here is how he
summarized things in the preface to volume 1:
Towards the end of the seventeenth century Newton published his discovery of universal gravitation.
Mathematicians have, since that epoch, succeeded in reducing to this great law of nature all the
known phenomena of the system of the world and have thus given to the theories of the heavenly
bodies, and astronomical tables, an unexpected degree of precision.

For more on this topic, see Bruno Morando's article “The Golden Age of
Celestial Mechanics.” This area has continued to be of importance as satellites
were launched and space exploration began. The advent of computers also
extended the range of problems that can be tackled.
28.4. A DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVE
Newton's approach is to consider at each point in a particle's motion the
combination of an inertial component and a force-created component.
Expressing the second law of motion in analytical terms gives a differential
equation that contains the essence of Newton's approach, as illustrated in
equation (11.2) and discussed in section 11.1. The differential equation may be
integrated to give whole possible trajectories; initial conditions are used to pick
out actual paths. This provides the link to whole-path results like Kepler's first
law.
There is another approach to mechanics that seems quite different from
Newton's. It is still based on the Lagrangian, but now the fundamentals of
mechanics are expressed in:
Hamilton's Principle: The motion of the system from time t1 to time t2 is such
that the line integral, or action integral,
has a stationary value for the actual path of the motion.
A stationary value means either a maximum or minimum, but it is most often
a minimum. This way of looking at mechanics says that for a given time interval
in the motion, you can try out all possible paths or ways in which the whole
system can move, but if you evaluate the integral of the Lagrangian over that
selected interval, then you will find that only the actual, physically realizable
path gives a minimum for that integral. Hamilton's principle picks out the actual
paths for a dynamical system. This is a “whole-path” formulation.
What a strange and beautiful result. It turns out that most of physics can be
formulated in terms of similar “variational principles.” See the “Further
Reading” section at the end of this chapter for references—I particularly
recommend Richard Feynman's wonderful lecture titled “The Principle of Least
Action.” Some people see a mystic or religious side to these kinds of principles,
with thoughts about a God creating the best possible world or one

understandable in terms of meaningful principles.
This approach to mechanics is based on the mathematics known as the
calculus of variations. Newton was a pioneer in this area, as we saw in section
23.3.1. Problems involving the functions required to maximize or minimize an
integral can be shown to be equivalent to the solution of a certain set of
differential equations, named after their discoverers as the Euler-Lagrange
equations. In this way, Hamilton's principle leads to the Lagrange equations,
equation (28.5), and, hence, back to Newton's laws of motion. Thus, for many
situations, all approaches to mechanics are equivalent (as they must be), but they
may have different values in terms of computation or interpretation. For
example, dissipative systems may be described using Newton's laws (as we saw
in chapter 19), but they are not covered by Hamilton's principle.
28.5. CONSTANTS OF MOTION
Quantities that remain constant throughout the motion of a physical system, or
conserved quantities as they are often called, play a vital role in mechanics and,
in fact, in science as a whole (see the reference to Feynman). A typical example
is the energy T + V, as in equation (28.3). In this book, we have seen how they
play a crucial part in solving the equations of motion. Newton began the theory
of constants of motion when he showed quite generally that linear momentum is
conserved (see sections 6.3 and 6.6.1). I mention three points on this topic (the
details may be found in the recommended texts).
The form of the Lagrangian can immediately indicate that there are conserved
quantities, and then manipulation of Lagrange's equations (28.5) will lead to an
expression for those quantities. For example, if L does not depend explicitly on
the time t, so that ∂L/∂t = 0, then energy will be conserved.
We know that the search for more constants of motion is futile in certain
cases. Most importantly, for a system of discrete bodies with motions described
by classical mechanics, Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) showed that there are only
ten such constants. We saw earlier that this makes the solution of the three-body
problem very difficult.
The origin of conserved quantities was given a physical meaning by Emmy
Noether (1882–1935). Her main result, now known as Noether's theorem, states
that a symmetry in the dynamical system will be associated with a conservation
law. For example, if the Lagrangian is unchanged by linear shifts in time or
space specification, then we will get conservation of energy and linear
momentum, respectively (see the resource by Goldstein for the technical details).

Einstein built in much of the physics directly into his mathematical formulation,
as given in “The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity,” so it is no
surprise to find that he naturally comes, in section 17, to “The Laws of
Conservation in the General Case.”
28.6. EXTENSIONS
Newton began his theory of mechanics, as we still do today, by considering the
motion of a particle or a body that is so small that it may be described by giving
point coordinates. He deals with the two-and three-body problems and
comments on the general case (see chapter 16). He does offer some examples,
moving beyond that formulation with his work on large, composite bodies (see
chapter 17) and several discussions of nonspherical bodies, gases, and liquids in
Books II and III. As we have repeatedly seen, he reaches the limits of his
methods for these cases, and over the following century or so, it was a major part
of mathematical science to address those deficiencies. If there are many
particles, can we identify physical attributes of the collective system that allows
a theory to be developed?
28.6.1. Gases
In chapter 21, we saw Newton beginning a theory of gases that involved
“particles fleeing from each other” and the construction of scaling arguments
leading to Boyle's law. However, it is usually accepted that the first contribution
to what is now called the kinetic theory of gases was made by Daniel Bernoulli
in his 1738 book Hydrodynamica. (Readers should consult the book by Brush for
original papers and commentary, as well as Truesdell's book, both of which are
listed in the “Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter.) The idea that
many particles may be treated statistically, and that their collisions produce a
distribution of velocities, came over one hundred years later with Maxwell's
Dynamical Theory of Gases. Here was a satisfactory derivation of Boyle's law
and the properties of gases from mechanical principles. The theory was then
extensively developed by people like physicists Rudolf Clausius and Ludwig
Boltzmann, and eventually it evolved into the discipline known as statistical
mechanics.
28.6.2. Rigid Bodies

Rigid bodies are at the other extreme; the constituent particles are taken to be
fixed in place so that they form a single, unchanging body. Newton was
obviously aware of this case; right from the start when discussing Law I, he
writes of “a top, whose parts by their cohesion are perpetually drawn aside from
rectilinear motions.” Newton also introduced the idea of summing or
intergrating over all the constituent parts in order to produce an equivalent yet
simpler theoretical entity. In chapter 17, we saw that the interacting particles in
large spherical bodies could be replaced, for calculational purposes, by a single
force acting between the centers of those bodies.
Newton did consider nonspherical bodies and their attractions, but he
produced no general theory for their motion that involved their orientation in
space. We saw in chapter 24 that he used ad hoc methods when discussing the
shape of the Earth and its tides. The rotation of bodies is understood using the
notions of angular momentum and moments of forces, or torques. The idea of
the lever is ancient; Huygens had begun by considering the composite pendulum
and Jacob Bernoulli wrote about the center of oscillation using ideas based
around the lever. However, it was Leonard Euler who gave the theory to parallel
Newton's theory of linear momentum and the center of mass.
For a nonspherical body, it is necessary to specify its orientation in space and
to describe in some overall way the distribution of mass around any given axis.
This is what Euler did in Opera omnia with Theoria motus corporum solidorum
seu rigidorum, appearing in 1765. Look in a modern textbook and you will find
“Euler angles,” “moments of inertia,” and the “inertia tensor.” There are now
equations of motion for the rotational mechanics of rigid bodies, with famous
and beautiful applications to spinning tops. The theory for the precession of the
equinoxes was then successfully presented by d'Alembert and Euler.
28.6.3. Deformable Bodies and Elasticity
Newton had used deformable bodies in the collision experiments discussed in
the Scholium following the introduction of the laws of motion. However, he gave
no theory for extended, deformable systems, which became an intense area of
research in the eighteenth century (see this chapter's “Further Reading”
references to Speiser and Truesdell).
Perhaps the simplest (and certainly the most important and famous) problem
is the vibration of a stretched string. If a length of string (or wire, or whatever) is
stretched along the x axis, the deviation from a straight line may be quantified in
terms of y(x,t). Because the deflection depends on both position along the string
x and the time t, it is necessary to introduce a partial differential equation for the

dynamics. Thus a whole new area of mathematics must be developed. The
equation of motion for the string involves an elasticity constant determining how
the string resists stretching. The history of this problem is covered by Cannon
and Dostrovsky. Gradually it was shown that there are specific modes of
vibration with individual frequencies. The validity of the superposition principle,
in which those modes are linearly combined to give the total motion of the
string, is one of the great problems in early applied mathematics. These ideas
were extended to a variety of distortion and vibration problems in two and three
dimensions, and they assisted with the development of the theory of waves.
28.6.4. Fluids
This is another part of mechanics that Newton struggled with in Book II without
producing any real, general, dynamical theory. The continuous system is now
deformable and flows according to complex dynamics. The fluid must be
characterized by its local density and motion, and its properties are linked to
compressibility and viscosity. Obviously, partial differential equations are again
required. Euler was able to consider the motion of an element in the fluid to
derive the Euler equation relating fluid motion to pressure and any external
forces. This area has become of major importance in applied mathematics and
several branches of engineering.
28.7. THE NATURE OF MOTION
Newton solved problems about motion along conic sections and other relatively
simple curves. He knew that the analysis of the motion of systems comprising
three or more bodies was difficult, and he appreciated that even small perturbing
interactions might produce complex results, as for the motion of the Sun-Jupiter-
Saturn system, for example (see section 23.5). He also knew that the Earth was
nonspherical and its influence was not entirely described by one simple, central
force. Gradually these various complications led to questions about the nature of
the trajectories for bodies predicted by classical mechanics and realized in
nature.
A new approach is often associated with Henri Poincaré. One aspect of this is
to look not at the shape of curves traced out in space, but at the way the
canonical variables, position and momentum, change as the motion takes place.
As a simple example, figure 28.1 shows the curves traced out in the ,θ plane for
the pendulum with various amplitudes (see figure 20.2), and in the ,r plane for a

planet (see equation 11.26). These phase diagrams allow us to study the nature of
the motion and how positions and speeds vary during the motion. We can go on
to plot whole sets of curves on such diagrams showing how the motion
properties change as initial conditions or force parameters change. In this way,
the emphasis is placed on the nature of the motion for whole sets of orbits rather
than the specific time-evolution details for motion along a single trajectory.
Figure 28.1. Phase diagrams for the motion of a pendulum with various amplitudes of oscillation and a
planet.
It may be possible to study the nature of motion considered in this way even
when the complete details of any one example are extremely difficult to
generate. It has been discovered that the straightforward, regular sort of motions
familiar to Newton may not be present when problems deviate from their
simplest forms. For example, what happens when the forces are no longer central
or centripetal? Or what happens when three or four particles interact?
It is now known that even simple systems may produce very complicated
motions. Furthermore, it is sometimes the case that even very small changes in
the initial conditions may produce wildly different trajectories. This is now often
referred to as chaotic motion. (The books by Stewart and Peterson, listed in the
“Further Reading” section at the end of this chapter, provide simple and
relatively nontechnical introductions.)
One of the driving applications for this area of research is the study of the
stability of the solar system. When all the various planets and the occasional
disturbing comets are taken together, as one large interacting system, will we get
the stable “clockwork heavens” that appears to be the case? Of course, it
depends on the timescales involved, and computations projecting millions of
years into the future are now made. Laplace believed he had proven the stability
of the solar system, but today there are doubts (see the article by Laskar in this

chapter's “Further Reading” section). Whatever the final outcome, we do now
know that the regular, “deterministic” motion discovered by Newton is not the
whole story.
28.8. EINSTEIN AND RELATIVITY THEORY
Over two hundred years passed from the first publication of the Principia before
there were serious conceptual challenges to Newton's mechanics requiring a
change in the fundamental formulation. Early in the twentieth century, Albert
Einstein produced his theory of relativity.
The special theory followed Einstein's study of electromagnetic theory, and
brought that too into the framework in which physical laws were to be valid in
any inertial frame of reference. However, Einstein also had to build in the fact
that the speed of light is the same in any such frame. The result is that the simple
transition between inertial frames, as illustrated in Newton's sailor-on-a-ship
example (see section 5.5.3), must be replaced with the Lorentz transformation. It
also becomes necessary to modify thinking about mass and energy.
Einstein's 1916 general theory of relativity deals with major conceptual
matters. They take us back to matters raised by Newton. First, there is the
question of why the inertial and gravitational masses are equal (see section
22.6.1). Einstein used that fact in his famous deliberations about the comparison
of observations made in free fall or in a uniform gravitational field. (For his
lovely discussion, see chapter 20 in his Relativity: The Special and General
Theory.) Thus it was that he related these matters to geometry and the properties
of space-time. Newton had pondered the nature of space and time (see section
5.5), but the conceptual framework he proposed was attacked by Leibnitz and
has been challenged ever since. He was also troubled right to the end (see
section 26.4.1) by the nature and origin of the gravitational force. In Einstein's
theory, a body travels in a space with metric properties controlled by gravitation;
its path is determined by those properties rather than by a force. In the
memorable words of theoretical physicist John Wheeler, “Space-time tells matter
how to move; matter tells space-time how to curve.”1
So it was that Einstein tied up Newton's worries in one major step—mass, the
nature of space, and the operation of gravitation are inextricably linked. Here is
Einstein's summary:
There can be no space nor any part of space without gravitational potentials; for these confer upon
space its metrical qualities, without which it cannot be imagined at all. The existence of the

gravitational field is inseparably bound up with the existence of space.2
This is a difficult matter and, obviously in response to that, in 1952 Einstein
added an appendix on “Relativity and the Problem of Space” to his 1916 book. It
is well worth reading.
Before leaving this topic, I would like to make three points. First, it was one
of Einstein's requirements that his theory should reduce to Newton's in certain
circumstances. That is indeed the case, and it is the gravitational potential that
appears as a common quantity in the two theories. (See section 21, “Newton's
Theory as a First Approximation” in Einstein's 1916 foundational paper.)
Second, the logic and physical requirements, so beautifully used by Einstein
to produce his theory, lead naturally to an inverse-square-law gravitational force
in the Newtonian approximation. Einstein has explained why gravity follows
that particular force law, with all its wonderful ramifications, as discussed in
chapter 18.
Third, I must reiterate the point made in the preface and in section 5.7: it is
only necessary to move from Newton's mechanics to Einstein's in extreme
circumstances; in virtually all day-to-day situations, Newton's theory is
completely adequate. The famous tiny defect in the celestial-mechanics theory
for the motion of Mercury can be corrected by using the relativistic modification
to Newton's theory, as discussed in section 14.4.2.
28.9. CONCLUSION
The theories that Newton gave us in the Principia are often incomplete,
formulated in obscure ways, and tied up in models and analogies that only such a
genius could invent. History has shown us that the basic ideas are correct and
can be developed into a powerful and widely applicable part of science. The
Principia remains a great and stimulating document; it is with that book that the
science of dynamics truly began.
28.10. FURTHER READING
The mechanics texts recommended in section 6.9.1 cover the material in this
chapter. The book by Moulton has brief historical sections. For a more historical
treatment see:
 

Feynman, R. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987.
[see particularly the chapter titled “The Great Conservation Principles”]
Laskar, J. “The Stability of the Solar System from Laplace to the Present.” In
The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the
Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton.
Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1989.
Lindsay, R. B., and H. Margenau. Foundations of Physics. New York: Dover,
1957.
Linton, C. M. From Eudoxus to Einstein. A History of Mathematical Astronomy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Maglo, Koffi. “The Reception of Newton's Gravitational Theory by Huygens,
Varignon, and Maupertuis: How Normal Science May Be Revolutionary.”
Perspectives on Science 11 (2003): 135–69.
Morando, B. The Golden Age of Celestial Mechanics.” In The General History
of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the
Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R. Taton and
C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Nauenberg, M. “The Early Application of the Calculus to the Inverse Square
Force Problem.” Archive for the History of Exact Sciences 64 (2010): 269–
300.
Peterson, I. Newton's Clock: Chaos in the Solar System. New York: W. H.
Freeman, 1993.
Speiser, D. Discovering the Principles of Mechanics 1600–1800. Edited by K.
Williams and S. Caparrini. Basel, Switz.: Birkhauser, 2008.
———. “The Kepler Problem from Newton to Johann Bernoulli.” Archive for
the History of Exact Sciences 50 (1996): 103–16.
Steele, B. D. “Muskets and Pendulums: Benjamin Robbins, Leonard Euler, and
the Ballistics Revolution.” Technology and Culture 35 (19995): 348–82.
Stewart, I. Does God Play Dice? The New Mathematics of Chaos. London:
Penguin Books, 1990.
Taton, R., and C. Wilson, eds. The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2,
Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part
A: Tycho Brahe to Newton. Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1989. [see parts 6 and 8]
Truesdell, C. “History of Classical Mechanics Part I.” Die Naturwissenschaften
63 (1976): 53–62.
———. “History of Classical Mechanics Part II.” Die Naturwissenschaften 63
(1976): 119–30.

———. Essays in the History of Mechanics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1968.
Whittaker, E. From Euclid to Eddington: A Study of Conceptions of the External
World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949.
 
For action principles and the calculus of variations as used in mechanics:
 
Feynman, R. “The Principle of Least Action.” In The Feynman Lectures on
Physics. Edited by R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. Vol. 2.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1963.
Lanczos, C. The Variational Principles of Mechanics. New York: Dover, 1970.
Yourgrau, W., and S. Mandelstam. Variational Principles in Dynamics and
Quantum Theory. New York: Dover, 1968.
 
Many particle systems and continuum mechanics:
 
Brush, S. G. Kinetic Theory Volume 1: The Nature of Gases and Heat. Oxford:
Pergamon Press, 1965.
Cannon, J. T., and S. Dostrovsky. The Evolution of Dynamics: Vibration Theory
from 1687 to 1742. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1981.
Darrigol, O. Worlds of Flow: A History of Hydrodynamics from the Bernoullis to
Prandtl. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Darrigol, O., and U. Frisch. “From Newton's Mechanics to Euler's Equations.” In
Physica D—Nonlinear Phenomena 237 (2008): 1855–69.
Neményi, P. F. “The Main Concepts and Ideas of Fluid Mechanics in Their
Historical Development.” Archive for the History of Exact Sciences 2 (1962):
52–86.
Rouse, H., and S. Ince. History of Hydraulics. New York: Dover, 1957.
Trefil, J. S. Introduction to the Physics of Fluids and Solids. New York:
Pergamon Press, 1975.
Wilson, C. “The Precession of the Equinoxes from Newton to d'Alembert and
Euler.” The General History of Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy
from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part A: Tycho Brahe to
Newton. Edited by R. Taton and C. Wilson. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989.
 
On relativity see:
 
Eddington, Sir Arthur. Space, Time and Gravitation: An Outline of the General
Relativity Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920. [later

reprinted by other publishers]
Einstein, Albert. Relativity: The Special and General Theory. 15th ed. New
York: Crown Publishers, 1952.
———. “The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity.” 1916. Reprinted
in The Principle of Relativity. New York: Dover, 1923.
Lambourne, R. J. A. Relativity, Gravitation and Cosmology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University. Press, 2010.
Weinberg, Steven. Gravitation and Cosmology. New York: John Wiley, 1972.
Will, Clifford. Was Einstein Right? 2nd ed. New York: Basic Books, 1993.

“Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and the most fortunate, for we
cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish.”1
So wrote the great French mathematical scientist Joseph Louis Lagrange. The
Principia reflects Newton's genius and does give us the “system of the world”
much as we know it today.
Lagrange's statement implies that if Newton had not found that “system,” then
someone else would have. That has inspired comparison with William
Shakespeare, with the comparative thought that he alone could have written the
plays in the wonderful First Folio. The poet Coleridge suggested that “the Souls
of 500 Sir Isaac Newtons would go to the making up of a Shakespeare or a
Milton.”2 Be that as it may, Newton's Principia has survived to this very day,
alongside Shakespeare's plays, as one of the glories of our civilization. Certainly
it is barely known compared with those plays, but maybe this book has
convinced you that the Principia too has its glories and inspirations.
Shakespeare gave us new words and a sublime use of language; Newton gave
us a conceptual framework and methods for science that equally demand our
respect and admiration. The amazing thing is that the Principia contains such a
coherent and comprehensive story, beginning with Newton's ideas about science
and concluding with an explanation of the mystery of comets. Today, such
developments would be spread over hundreds of research papers with thousands
of different authors.
Many people may have a feeling for the great sweep of Newton's
achievement, but little knowledge of the originality and brilliance of the working
and steps involved. It was my intention to show you some of those
achievements. In retrospect, they are so many and so diverse that you may have
lost track of them. Perhaps a final review is in order. What has Newton given us?
Here are some of my favorite examples:
 
Conceptual: the concept of mass; importance of space, time, frames of
reference, and the first law of motion; the concept of force and the second law
of motion taking us from the kinematics of Kepler and Galileo to dynamics;
how to combine or resolve forces; the same physics applies on earth and in the
heavens; the moons of Jupiter and Saturn provide examples of little solar
systems; comets follow the same laws as do planets.

Methodology: going from phenomena to forces, and then from those forces to
other phenomena; exploring a formalism mathematically and producing
general results; setting out Rules of Reasoning; insisting on testing theory
against physical data.
Theoretical results: the third law of motion, the resulting conservation of linear
momentum and determination of center-of-mass motion; the complete
solution for the two-body problem; identification of forces giving closed and
rotating orbits; integrations to deal with composite bodies; theory of resisted
motion.
Applications: the Moon Test and universal gravitation; explanation of Kepler's
laws and a theory of the solar system; finding the mass of planets; the shape of
the Earth, its gravity, and its tides; precession of the equinoxes; trajectories of
comets; lunar theory and perturbation theory; calculating the speed of sound.
Experiments: testing the equality of inertial and gravitational masses; the use of
pendulums and falling bodies to measure resistance forces; testing for an
aether.
Mathematics: recognizing the importance of if-and-only-if results; limiting
processes to derive general dynamical laws; the non-integrability of algebraic
ovals; an application of the calculus of variations; scaling laws and similarity
theory.
Numerical analysis: iteration methods for solving equations; interpolation
methods and approximation methods for integrals.
 
Einstein called Newton's grand applications in Book III “a deductive
achievement of unique magnificence.”3 Newton's friend, the philosopher John
Locke, wrote of “the incomparable Mr. Newton.”4 For me, their assessments
remain equally valid today. I hope you have enjoyed finding out about the
Principia and what makes Newton worthy of those accolades.

Preface: Why You Should Read This Book
  1. Steven Hawking, “Newton's Principia,” in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, ed. S. W. Hawking
and W. Israel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
  2. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  3. Story related by Martin Folkes (1690–1754) who was vice president of the Royal Society when
Newton was president.
  4. I. Bernard Cohen, “A Guide to Newton's Principia,” introduction to Isaac Newton, The Principia:
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1999).
  5. Steven Weinberg, “Newtonianism and Today's Physics,” in Hawking and Israel, Three Hundred
Years of Gravitation.
  6. Einstein, “Mechanics of Newton.”
  7. Albert Einstein, “Time, Space, and Gravitation,” Out of My Later Years (New York: Philosophical
Library, 1950).
  8. Questions to John Arbuthnot, circa 1698. See Derek Gjertsen, The Newton Handbook (London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986).
PART 1. INTRODUCTORY MATERIAL
Chapter 1. Introducing Our Hero
  1. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  2. John Maynard Keynes, “Newton, the Man,” available (in part) in The World of Mathematics, vol. 1,
ed. James R. Newman (London: Allen and Unwin, 1956).
  3. Ibid.
 
 
4. 
I. 
Newton, 
Twelve 
Articles 
on 
Religion, 
Newton 
Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00008 (accessed April 22, 2013).
 
 
5. 
I. 
Newton, 
Seven 
Statements 
on 
Religion, 
Newton 
Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00006 (accessed April 22, 2013).
  6. Quoted in A. Janiak, Isaac Newton: Philosophical Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2004), p. 64. Also available online at I. Newton, Letter to Richard Bentley Dated 10 December,
1692, 
Newton 
Project, 
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00254
(accessed April 22, 2013).
  7. Humphrey Newton, Two Letters from Humphrey Newton to John Conduit, Newton Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/THEM00033 (accessed April 22, 2013).
  8. John Flamsteed, Suppressed Preface to the Historia Coelestis Britannica, Newton Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/OTHE00033 (accessed April 22, 2013).
  9. Quoted by Westfall in Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1980), p. 650 (taken from William Whiston in Authentic Records).
10. Quoted from William Whiston's 1749 Memoirs, in The Newton Handbook, by D. Gjertsen (London:

Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986), p. 610.
11. George Bernard Shaw, comments made at a 1930 banquet in honor of Einstein, recorded by Shaw's
secretary, B. Patch, in Thirty Years with G. B. S. by B. Patch (London: Gollancz, 1951).
Chapter 2. Setting the Scene
  1. Quoted in Andrew Gregory, Eureka! The Birth of Science (London: Icon Books, 2001), p. 30.
  2. Aristotle, Physics, in The Works of Aristotle, ed. W. D. Ross (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930).
  3. Ibid.
  4. Ibid.
  5. Ibid.
  6. Ibid.
  7. Ibid.
  8. Ibid.
  9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Quoted in The Beginnings of Western Science, 2nd ed., by D. C. Lindberg (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2007), p. 310.
14. Letter from Saint Augustine, in What Augustine Says, by N. L. Geisler (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Book House, 1982).
15. N. Copernicus, preface and dedication to Pope Paul III in On the Revolution of the Heavenly
Spheres (n.p.: 1543), reprinted in On the Shoulders of Giants, ed. Stephen Hawking (London: Penguin
Books, 2002).
16. M. Luther, quoted in O. Gingerich, The Book Nobody Read (New York: Penguin Books, 2004).
17. A. Osiander, “To the Reader: Concerning the Hypotheses of This Work,” introduction to
Copernicus, On the Revolutions.
18. J. Kepler, letter to Michael Maestlin, in Oxford Dictionary of Scientific Quotations, ed. W. F.
Bynum and Roy Porter (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
19. J. Kepler, Epitome of Copernican Astronomy (n.p.: 1618).
20. J. Kepler, letter to J. G. Herwart von Hohenburg, in Bynum and Porter, Oxford Dictionary of
Scientific Quotations.
21. Galileo Galilei, The Assayer (n.p.: 1623). See M. A. Finocchiaro, ed., The Essential Galileo
(Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing, 2008).
22. F. Bacon, A Proposition Touching the Compiling and Amendment of the Laws of England (n.p.:
1616). Also available in Bynum and Porter, Oxford Dictionary of Scientific Quotations.
23. Albert Einstein, letter to J. S. Switzer, April 1953. Quoted in Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel, by
Banesh Hoffman (Saint Albans, UK: Paladin, 1977).
24. Robert Boyle, About the Excellency and Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis (n.p.: 1674), in
Selected Philosophical Papers of Robert Boyle, ed. M. A. Stewart (Manchester, UK: Manchester
University Press, 1979).
25. R. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy (n.p.: 1644). Reprinted with translation by V. R. Miller and
R. P. Miller (Dordrecht, Neth.: Reidel Publishing, 1983), part IV, sec. 203.
26. Galileo Galilei, Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina (n.p.: 1615). Also available in M. A.
Finocchiaro, ed., The Essential Galileo.
27. Galileo Galilei, Two New Sciences (n.p.: 1638). Reprinted with translation by Drake Stillman
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974).
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.
30. R. Descartes, letter to M. Mersenne, quoted in Augustine to Galileo, by A. C. Crombie (London:

Penguin Books, 1959).
31. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, part III, sec. 30.
Chapter 3. A First Look at the Principia
  1. A. de Moivre, quoted in Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1980) p. 403.
  2. E. Halley, quoted in The Newton Handbook, by Derek Gjertsen (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1986), p. 460.
  3. W. Derham, quoted in Westfall, Never at Rest, p. 459.
  4. D. T. Whiteside, The Mathematical Principles underlying Newton's Principia Mathematica, 9th
lecture in the Gibson Lectureship in the History of Mathematics (Glasgow, UK: University of Glasgow,
1970).
  5. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  6. I. Bernard Cohen, “A Guide to Newton's Principia,” introduction to Isaac Newton, The Principia:
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1999), ch. 11.
  7. Albert Einstein, “The Theory of Relativity,” Essays in Physics (New York: Philosophical Library,
1950).
  8. Ernst Mach, The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its Development
(1893; repr., La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing, 1960), p. 226.
  9. A. Sommerfeld, introduction to Mechanics: Lectures on Theoretical Physics, vol. 1 (1942; repr.,
New York: Academic Press, 1964).
PART 2. HOW THE PRINCIPIA BEGINS
Chapter 4. Newton's Preface
  1. Richard Feynman, ch. 1 in The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Richard Feynman, R. B. Leighton,
and M. Sands, vol. 1 (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1972), pp. 1–2.
  2. Various sources, including certain translations of the Principia, present Halley's first name as
Edmund rather than Edmond. Unless in quoted material, his name will be spelled Edmond.
Chapter 5. Fundamentals
  1. J. Thewlis, Concise Dictionary of Physics and Related Subjects (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1979),
s.v. “mass.”
  2. F. Wilczek, The Lightness of Being: Mass, Ether, and the Unification of Forces (New York: Basic
Books, 2008), s.v. “mass.”
  3. Charles Lamb, letter to Thomas Manning, 1810. Quoted in Oxford Dictionary of Scientific
Quotations, ed. W. F. Bynum and Roy Porter (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
  4. Saint Augustine, Confessions, based on a translation by J. G. Pilkington, ed. Justin Lovill (London:
Folio Society, 1993), book XI, ch. 14. See also W. J. Oats, ed., Basic Writings of Saint Augustine (New
York: Random House, 1948).
  5. Murray Gell-Mann, The Quark and the Jaguar (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1994).
  6. Sir William Thomson and P. G. Tait, Principles of Mechanics and Dynamics (1888; repr., New

York: Dover Press, 1962).
  7. Herbert Goldstein, C. Poole, and J. Safko, Classical Mechanics, 3rd ed. (1950; repr., New York:
Addison-Wesley, 2002).
Chapter 6. Newton's Laws of Motion and Their Immediate
Consequences
  1. R. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy (n.p.: 1644). Reprinted with translation by V. R. Miller and
R. P. Miller (Dordrecht, Neth.: Reidel Publishing, 1983), sec. 203.
  2. Rudolf Peierls, The Laws of Nature (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1955).
  3. E. F. Taylor and J. A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1963).
  4. R. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics, vol. 1 (Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1963), ch. 12.
  5. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
Chapter 7. Mathematical Methods
  1. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  2. I. Newton, quoted in “‘Gigantic Implements of War’: Images of Newton as a Mathematician,” by
N. Guicciardini, in The Oxford Handbook of the History of Mathematics, ed. Eleanor Robson and
Jacqueline Stedall (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).
  3. Newton to Richard Bentley, quoted in John Roche, Let Newton Be! (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1988).
  4. H. Pemberton, quoted in Reading the Principia: The Debate on Newton's Mathematical Methods for
Natural Philosophy from 1687 to 1736, N. Guicciardini (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999) p.
30.
  5. Ibid., p. 2.
  6. C. Truesdell, Essays in the History of Mechanics (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1968).
  7. Guicciardini, Reading the Principia, p. 4.
  8. R. Descartes, letter to M. Mersenne, in The Geometry of René Descartes (New York: Dover, 1980).
  9. William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Parker and Deighton,
1837).
PART 3. DEVELOPING THE BASICS OF
DYNAMICS
Chapter 10. The Inverse-Square Law
  1. Johann Bernoulli, quoted in Reading the Principia, by N. Guicciardini (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999), sec. 8.6.2.7.
  2. Ibid.
  3. V. I. Arnol'd, Huygens and Barrow, Newton and Hooke (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1990), p. 33.
  4. Newton, quoted in Guicciardini, Reading the Principia, sec. 8.6.2.7.

Chapter 12. Time and a Mathematical Gem
  1. V. I. Arnol'd, Huygens and Barrow, Newton and Hooke (Basel: Birkhauser Verlag, 1990), p. 83.
  2. Ibid.
Chapter 13. Completing the Single-Body Formalism
  1. Christiaan Huygens, The Pendulum Clock; or, Demonstrations concerning the Motion of Pendula
as Applied to Clocks, translated from the original 1673 Horologium Oscillatorium by Richard J. Blackwell
(Ames: Iowa State University Press, 1986), pp. 45, 46.
  2. Eugene Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections: Scientific Essays of Eugene P. Wigner (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1967).
  3. Ibid.
  4. William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Parker and Deighton,
1837).
  5. Isaac Newton, quoted in N. Guicciardini, Isaac Newton on Mathematical Certainty and Method
(Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2011), p. 255.
PART 4. ON TO MORE COMPLEX SITUATIONS
Chapter 16. Many Bodies
  1. E. T. Whittaker, A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies, 4th ed.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1904; New York: Dover, 1944), p. 339.
Chapter 17. Big Bodies and Superb Theorems
  1. Albert Einstein, “Physics and Reality,” Essays in Physics (New York: Philosophical Library, 1950).
  2. See W. W. Rouse Ball, An Essay on Newton's Principia (1893; repr., New York: Johnson Reprint
Corporation, 1972), pp. 157–58.
  3. Ibid., p. 159.
  4. J. E. Littlewood, “Newton and the Attraction of a Sphere,” Mathematical Gazette 32 (1948).
Reprinted in Littlewood's Miscellany, ed. B. Bollobas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), p.
180.
  5. V. D. Barger and M. G. Olsson, Classical Mechanics: A Modern Perspective, 2nd. ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1995), p. 287.
  6. Rouse Ball, Essay on Newton's Principia, p. 61.
PART 5. ABOUT PRINCIPIA BOOK II
Chapter 19. Starting on Book II
  1. Clifford Truesdell in “History of Classical Mechanics Part I.” Die Naturwissenschaften 63 (1976):

53–62.
  2. Galileo Galilei, Day IV in Two New Sciences. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1974.
  3. R. Descartes, Principles of Philosophy (n.p.: 1644). Reprinted with translation by V. R. Miller and
R. P. Miller (Dordrecht, Neth.: Reidel Publishing, 1983), part II, sec. 38.
Chapter 20. Newton the Experimentalist
  1. William Stukeley, Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life, 1752. Also available online at William
Stukeley, 
“Revised 
Memoir 
of 
Newton,” 
Newton 
Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/OTHE00001 (accessed May 21, 2013).
  2. Einstein, quoted in Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations, Werner Heisenberg (New
York: Harper and Row, 1971), p. 77; see Oxford Dictionary of Scientific Quotations, ed. W. F. Bynum and
Roy Porter (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), s.v. “Albert Einstein.”
Chapter 21. What Lies Beneath
  1. E. T. Whittaker, A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies, 4th ed.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1904; New York: Dover, 1944), p. 47.
  2. Herman H. Goldstine, A History of the Calculus of Variations (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1980),
sec. 1.2.
  3. S. Chandrasekhar, Newton's Principia for the Common Reader (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), pp.
567–68, sec. 145.
  4. Clifford Truesdell, “History of Classical Mechanics: Part 1, to 1800,” Die Naturwissenschaften 63
(1976): 53–62.
PART 6. THE MAJESTIC PRINCIPIA BOOK III
Chapter 22. Book III and Gravity
  1. Widely attributed to Richard Feynman; see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy_of_Science
(accessed May 21, 2013).
  2. Albert Einstein, “On the Method of Theoretical Physics,” Herbert Spencer lecture, June 1933,
available in Ideas and Opinions, Albert Einstein (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  3. William Stukeley, Memoirs of Sir Isaac Newton's Life, 1752. Also available online at William
Stukeley, 
“Revised 
Memoir 
of 
Newton,” 
Newton 
Project,
http://www.newtonproject.sussex.ac.uk/view/texts/normalized/OTHE00001 (accessed May 21, 2013).
  4. Albert Einstein, “On the Theory of Relativity,” lecture, 1921, available in Einstein, Ideas and
Opinions.
  5. Albert Einstein, “The Equality of Inertial and Gravitational Mass as an Argument for the General
Postulate of Relativity,” in Relativity: The Special and the General Theory, 15th ed. (New York: Crown
Publishers, 1952), p. 69.
  6. William Whewell, History of the Inductive Sciences, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Parker and Deighton,
1837).
  7. Steven Weinberg, “Newtonianism and Today's Physics,” in Three Hundred Years of Gravitation, ed.
S. W. Hawking and W. Israel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
  8. R. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics, vol. 1 (Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1963), ch. 7.

  9. Einstein, “On the Method of Theoretical Physics.”
10. Albert Einstein, quoted in Subtle Is the Lord, Abraham Pais (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1982).
Chapter 23. Theory of the Solar System
  1. Newton, De Motu, in “The Newtonian Achievement in Astronomy,” The General History of
Astronomy: Volume 2, Planetary Astronomy from the Renaissance to the Rise of Astrophysics—Part A:
Tycho Brahe to Newton, ed. R. Taton and C. Wilson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
  2. Pierre-Simon Laplace, Exposition du Système du Monde (Paris: 1796).
Chapter 24. Earthly Phenomena
  1. Galileo Galilei, “Day 4,” in Dialogue on the Two Chief World Systems (n.p.: 1632). See M. A.
Finocchiaro, ed., The Essential Galileo (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2008), p. 268.
  2. Sir George Airy, quoted in From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy, C. M.
Linton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 281.
  3. I. Bernard Cohen, “A Guide to Newton's Principia,” introduction to Isaac Newton, The Principia:
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. I. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1999).
Chapter 25. Challenges
  1. I. Newton, quoted in D. T. Whiteside, “Newton's Lunar Theory: From High Hope to
Disenchantment,” Vistas in Astronomy 19 (1976): 317–28.
  2. Quoted by C. M. Linton, From Eudoxus to Einstein: A History of Mathematical Astronomy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), p. 295.
  3. Pierre-Simon Laplace, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities (1825; repr., New York: Dover,
1951).
  4. Leonard Euler, quoted in Linton, From Eudoxus to Einstein, p. 215.
  5. Daniel Defoe, A Visitation of the Plague (London: Penguin Books, 1986), pp. 24–25. Also in Daniel
Defoe, A Journal of the Plague Year (London, 1722).
  6. Ibid.
  7. Newton, quoted in H. W. Turnbull, The Mathematical Discoveries of Newton (London: Blackie,
1945).
  8. Joseph-Jérôme Lefrançais de Lalande, lecture to the Paris Academy of Sciences, April 25, 1759.
Chapter 26. The Concluding General Scholium
  1. Pierre-Simon Laplace, “The Evolution of the Solar System,” in Physical Thought: An Anthology,
edited by S. Sambursky (New York: Pica Press, 1975).
  2. R. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands. The Feynman Lectures on Physics, vol. 1 (Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1963), ch. 1.
  3. Newton, letter to Richard Bentley, February 11, 1692, available in Isaac Newton: Philosophical
Writings, ed. Andrew Janiak (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).
  4. C. Huygens, letter to Gottfried Leibnitz, November 18, 1690, quoted in I. Bernard Cohen, The
Newtonian Revolution (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).

PART 7. RECEPTION AND INFLUENCE OF
PRINCIPIA
Chapter 27. Reception and Influence
  1. David Gregory, letter to Newton, referenced in Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac
Newton (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980), p. 470.
  2. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).
  3. Albert Einstein, Out of My Later Years (New York: Philosophical Library, 1950).
  4. Sir W. Thomson and P. G. Tait, Principles of Mechanics and Dynamics (New York: Dover, 1962),
sec. 206.
  5. Lord Kelvin, Baltimore Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light
(Cambridge, MA: C. J. Clay and Sons, 1904).
  6. Heinrich Hertz, Electric Waves (London: Macmillan, 1893).
  7. David Hume, “An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding” (n.p.: 1751), in Great Books of the
Western World (Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica, 1952).
  8. Robert Boyle, quoted in Boyle: Between God and Science, by Michael Hunter (New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 2009), p. 241.
  9. W. F. Bynum and R. Porter, eds., Oxford Dictionary of Scientific Quotations (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005), p. 366.
10. G. A. J. Rogers, “Locke, Newton and the Enlightenment.” Vistas in Astronomy 22 (1979): 471–76.
11. Albert Einstein, “The Fundamentals of Theoretical Physics,” in Essays in Physics (New York:
Philosophical Library, 1950).
12. Jean-Baptiste le Rond d'Alembert, Preliminary Discourse to the Encyclopedia of Diderot, trans. R.
N. Schwab (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), p. 21.
13. Ibid.
14. P. Blom, Enlightening the World: Encyclopêdie, the Book That Changed the Course of History
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004), p. xiii.
Chapter 28. Mechanics after Newton
  1. J. A. Wheeler, Geons, Black Holes and Quantum Foam (New York: Norton, 2000).
  2. Albert Einstein, “Ether and the Theory of Relativity,” Sidelights on Relativity (New York: Dover,
1923).

Epilogue
  1. J. B. Shank, The Newtonian Wars (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), p. 4.
  2. W. F. Bynum and R. Porter, eds., Oxford Dictionary of Scientific Quotations (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005), p. 127.
  3. Albert Einstein, “The Mechanics of Newton and Their Influence on the Development of Theoretical
Physics,” Ideas and Opinions (New York: Crown publishers, 1959).
  4. John Locke, “An Essay concerning Human Understanding” (n.p.: 1690), in Great Books of the
Western World (Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica, 1952).

absolute space, 106–108, 504–505
globes thought experiment, 112–13
rotating-bucket experiment, 111
aether, 99, 368–69
apple story, 402
Aristotle, 43–48, 68, 102
Bernoulli, Johann, 215, 354, 476
Bertrand's theorem, 276, 336
Birkhoff's theorem, 322, 420
Boyle, Robert, 27, 65, 96, 344, 361, 461, 481–82
Boyle's law, 157, 377–79, 386
lectures, 481–82

calculus
controversy over, 164–66, 352
Principia in, 156, 164–66, 264, 325, 330, 351–52
calculus of variations, 381–83, 498
center of mass, 129, 136–37, 295, 302
motion of, 129, 136–37, 303
solar system, 415–16
collisions, 83, 132, 138–39
oblique, 129
comet, 92, 449–57
Halley's, 455–57
composite bodies, 158–63, 316–30, 407
conic sections, 202–204
motion in, 204–208, 230–31, 324
constants of motion, 231, 254, 312, 498–99
constraints, 257, 283–91
controversy, 35–36, 95, 164–66, 213–16, 242, 264–65, 352
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 52–53, 68
d'Alembert, Jean-Baptiste le Rond, 436, 448, 485
Descartes, René, 61–65, 68, 104, 131, 149–50, 166, 263, 333, 337, 354
vortex theory, 64, 387–89, 429, 461
drag, 362–63

Earth
age of, 457
gravity variations on, 426–29
shape, 423–26
tides on, 429–33
Einstein, Albert, 11, 23, 81–82, 97, 118–19, 141–42, 152, 277, 361, 405, 408, 475, 486, 504–505, 511
energy, 231, 254–55, 494
conservation of, 231, 254, 494
kinetic, 231, 254
potential, 231, 254
Enlightenment, 484–86
equal-areas law, 172–78, 228
angular momentum equivalent, 183–86, 228
converse, 178–79
time determination using, 181–82, 223–25
Euclid, 43, 79, 91, 163, 214
Euler, Leonard, 138, 311, 436, 448, 492, 500
falling bodies, 250–53, 349–51, 370–73
experiments with, 371–73
Feynman, Richard, 93, 140–41, 408, 497
fixed stars, 110, 397, 419, 463
Flamsteed, John, 35–36, 96, 443, 450
fluid, 377–89, 502
force, 102–106, 284–85, 312–13
centripetal, 102, 172–74, 178–79, 190, 284–85, 293, 334, 398
discovering, 192–96
inverse-cube, 197, 270–71, 326
inverse-square, 191–92, 202–17, 230–31, 271–73, 307, 318–24, 336
linear, 198, 224–26, 286, 307–309
resistance, 346–56, 362, 366, 370, 379–81, 413, 461
resolving, 127, 284–87, 446–47
frame of reference, 108–109, 116, 129–30, 137
Galilei, Galileo, 58–61, 68, 79, 200, 263, 283, 333, 337, 343, 430, 460
Gassendi, Pierre, 65–66
Gell-Mann, Murray, 117
geometry, 43, 90–91, 97, 152, 175
God, 32–33, 408, 463–65, 481–82
gravity, 92, 125, 393–408, 465–68
mechanism for, 465–68, 504–505
universal, 84, 402–403, 496
variation over Earth, 426–29
Halley, Edmond, 66, 75–76, 94, 191, 215, 317, 329, 454–56
Hamilton's principle, 497
Hooke, Robert, 35, 66, 75, 96, 167, 186, 191, 215, 317
Hume, David, 474, 478, 481
Huygens, Christiaan, 66–67, 80, 132, 138–39, 164, 192, 215, 263, 287, 333, 337, 468, 476
hydrostatics, 377

inertia, 100–101
inertial frame of reference, 101, 129–30, 137, 178, 504
initial conditions, 210–11, 262–63, 462–63
inverse problems, 189, 200, 213–16, 249
Jupiter, 397, 406, 414, 417–19, 424, 426
moons of, 397–98, 462
Kepler, Johannes, 53–54, 68, 81, 429–30
Kepler equation, 237–46
Kepler's laws, 53, 81, 173, 188, 209, 388, 397–98, 412–13
Keynes, John Maynard, 30
kinematics, 114–15, 141, 226
kinetic theory of gases, 379, 499–500
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 311, 448, 495–96, 509
Lagrange equations, 495
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 387, 418, 426, 433, 436, 448, 462, 482
laws of motion, 123–26, 131–33, 144, 491
first law, 124, 137
meaning of, 139–41, 220–21
parallelogram rule, 126–28
second law, 124–26, 133, 140, 220, 250, 346, 356–57, 494
third law, 126, 132, 135, 140
Leibnitz, Gottfried, 165, 352, 476
limiting processes, 153–56, 176–77
Locke, John, 27, 80, 346–47, 482–84, 486, 511
Mach, Ernst, 83–84, 112
mass, 98–100, 356–58
gravitational, 99–100, 356–58, 403–405
inertial, 101, 356–58, 403–405
planetary, 414, 421
mathematical methods, 56–57, 79, 89–90, 152–58, 166–67, 239–40, 337
example of Newton's in action, 158–64, 174–77, 271–73, 284–87
mechanical philosophy, 57–58, 83
Mercury, 277, 397
methodology, 83, 92–93, 105–106, 143, 188–89, 293–94, 312–13, 379, 393–96, 465–68, 475
momentum, 100, 115–16
angular, 184–87, 228, 234, 334, 500
conservation of, 83, 128, 135, 306, 334
Moon, 92, 94, 104, 276, 398–99, 426, 430–33, 441–49
Moon Test, 400–402, 407
motion, 41, 45–46, 51, 186, 494, 502–504
many-body problem, 293–94, 307–309
single-body problem, 249–65
three-body problem, 309–12, 443
two-body problem, 295–305
Neptune, 420
Newton, Isaac, 23–38
birth, 23

boyhood, 23–24
character, 34–36
death, 28
experimentalist, 110–11, 132, 361, 373
religious views, 32–33, 481–82
numerical analysis, 239–46, 453–54
orbits, 258–60, 334
bounded, 276–77
circular, 187, 190–92
closed, 276
decaying, 354–56
elliptical, 198, 204–10, 236
parabolic, 206, 235
rotating, 267–78
stability of, 275, 463, 504
oval-figure integration, 240–42
Peierls, Rudolf, 139
pendulum, 287–90, 356–58, 385
cycloidal, 287–90, 385
damped, 358
experiments with, 132, 364–69, 404
perturbation theory, 273, 310, 444–45
planets, 92, 321, 397–99, 406, 416–17, 461–62
Plato, 43–44, 68, 97
precession of the equinoxes, 433–37, 501
Principia
equations in, 80, 157, 394
influence of, 84, 118, 477–78
mathematics in, 80, 148–67, 264–65, 327, 329–30
organization of, 76–79
popularization, 479–80
publication history, 72–73, 479
reception, 468, 475–76
style, 79–81, 164–66, 477–78, 509
projectiles, 81, 103, 131, 222–24
air resistance and, 353–54
Ptolemy, 47–49
ray paths, 332–33
relative motion, 109–10, 116
relativity, 101, 118, 129–31, 504–505
rigid bodies, 500–501
rules of reasoning, 77, 394–96, 405–406
Saturn, 397, 406, 414, 417–19
moons, 397–98, 462
scaling theory, 378–79
Scientific Revolution, 41, 83, 361
shape of least resistance, 381–83
similitude, method of, 380–81

solar system, 412–21, 461–63
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 84

sound
speed of, 386–87
transmission of, 383–84, 386–87
System of the World (Laplace), 166, 480
thought experiment, 103–104, 112–13, 133
time, 106–108, 231, 233–46
absolute, 107
Truesdell, Clifford, 341, 344, 388
viscosity, 387
Voltaire, 484–85
waves, 383–87
Weinberg, Steven, 14, 93
Weinstock, Robert, 216, 322
Whewell, William, 167, 264
Wigner, Eugene, 262–63
wind tunnel, 381
Wren, Sir Christopher, 67, 75, 96, 132, 191


