
making natural
liquid
Soaps

making natural
liquid
Soaps
herbal shower gels • conditioning shampoos
moisturizing hand soaps • luxurious bubble baths,
d

and more…
catherine failor

Dedicated to K. D. Grace
Many thanks to the people who have given me emotional
support, offered a helping hand, and/or shed a little light:
Kay Whaley, Clyde Abston, Carla Dunn, Jim Morgan, Luis
Spitz, David Woodward, “Dr. Bob” McDaniel, Ray Linke,
Alan Zell, and the late Jim Bronner.
The mission of Storey Publishing is to serve our customers by
publishing practical information that encourages
personal independence in harmony with the environment.

Edited by Deborah Balmuth and Robin Catalano
Cover design by Carol Jessop, Black Trout Design
Cover and interior photographs by Giles Prett except those by
© Jeff Burke and Lorraine Triolo for Artville on pages 91, 93, 94, 95, and 98;
© Eyewire Images on pages vii, 32, 38, 39, 40, 53, 66, 67, 92, and 134;
© PhotoDisc, Inc. on pages 48, 55, 59, 65, 76, 84, 87, 92, and 115
Text design and production by Mark Tomasi
Production assistance by Susan Bernier
Indexed by Barbara Hagerty © 2000 by Catherine Failor All rights reserved. No
part of this book may be reproduced without written permission from the
publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages or reproduce
illustrations in a review with appropriate credits; nor may any part of this book
be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any
means — electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other — without
written permission from the publisher.
The information in this book is true and complete to the best of our
knowledge. All recommendations are made without guarantee on the part of the
author or Storey Publishing. The author and publisher disclaim any liability in
connection with the use of this information. For additional information please
contact Storey Publishing, 210 MASS MoCA Way, North Adams, MA 01247.
Storey books are available for special premium and promotional uses and for
customized editions. For further information, please call 1-800-793-9396.
Printed in Hong Kong by Elegance Printing
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Failor, Catherine.
Making natural liquid soaps / Catherine Failor.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-1-58017-243-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Soap. I. Title TP991.F26 2000
668’.12—dc21
99-057462
CIP

Preface
My love affair with soapmaking began more than twenty years ago when I
stepped into a small bookstore in Eugene, Oregon. A slender, charming little
book immediately caught my eye; the cover photo showed a woman carving
designs into bars of soap. The book was Soap: Making It, Enjoying It, by Ann
Bramson. As I stared at those bars on the cover, they seemed to me more
beautiful than precious jewels. I’ve been making soap ever since.
I’ve often wondered just what it is about soapmaking that’s held my attention
for all these years. In part, it’s because soap is so aesthetically pleasing. I never
seem to tire of making it and marveling at it. But perhaps an even bigger
attraction for me is that soapmaking offers so many avenues of inquiry,
discovery, and invention — a seemingly endless amount!
Considering how ubiquitous soap is and what an intimate role it plays in our
everyday lives, relatively little has been written about it. Compare that to
cooking; gardening; or other crafts, such as sewing, jewelry making, or
ceramics. Perhaps this is because soapmakers historically fell into two classes:
rural women who produced “true grit” lye soap (which removed not only dirt
and grime but the epidermis as well) and commercial soapmakers, whose
soapmaking techniques became trade secrets.
Several excellent soapmaking books published over the past few years have
helped turn the tide and refine the art of home soapmaking. All these books have
been about cold-process soapmaking. But I always have an eye out for what’s
not there, which is partly a personal bent and partly a businessperson’s survival
reflex. And what’s not there is information about hot-process soapmaking and all
the soaps that can be made with that technique: transparent and translucent bars,
liquids and gels, cream and floating soap, and more.
I first explored hot processing in my book Making Transparent Soap (Storey
Publishing, 2000). Making Natural Liquid Soaps is a cumulation of almost two
years of perspiration and further experimentation with hot-process soapmaking.
Emphasis is on the perspiration — because if you read any of the books listed in
the bibliography, you’ll see just how sketchy and incomplete the information on
liquid and gel soapmaking really is. What has been written is aimed at large-
scale industrial soapmakers who already know the tricks of the trade. So, in
addition to being an author, I’ve also had to function as a translator and an

interpreter: translating industrial manufacturing techniques down to kitchen
scale, and interpreting what seems to lie between the lines of those old
soapmaking manuals. Which is just about everything.
This book has been a methodical labor of love, but I must confess that many
discoveries happened quite by accident. I’m certain there’s lots more out there to
be learned and communicated about liquid soapmaking. I hope this book will
offer a starting place for some other enterprising soul.

contents
An Introduction to Soap
 Chapter 1: Getting Started

 Chapter 2: A Guide to Basic Techniques
 Chapter 3: Formulating Blends
 Chapter 4: Premium Natural Shampoos
 Chapter 5: Sumptuous Bath & Shower Gels
 Chapter 6: Luxurious Bubble Baths
 Chapter 7: Dyeing & Fragrancing
 Chapter 8: Troubleshooting
Bibliography
Glossary
Resources
Metric Conversion Chart
Index

an introduction to soap
What is soap and how does it clean?
The words soap and saponification share the same etymological ancestor:
sapo, the cleaning salve that the ancient Gauls prepared from animal fat mixed
with wood ash. Modern chemistry has refined the raw materials as well as the
technique, but soapmaking is basically the same as it was two thousand years
ago: In a chemical reaction called saponification, a fatty acid (from either an
animal or a vegetable source) combines with a solution of water and alkali
(sodium or potassium hydroxide) to produce soap and glycerin.
It’s All about
the Chemistry
Oil and water, as the saying goes, don’t mix. This presents a problem for
soapmakers when a lye solution is added to fats, because all chemical reactions
require that the two reactants be in contact. This difficulty is overcome by the
chemical makeup of fats. Fats and oils are composed of triglycerides: three
chainlike molecules of fatty acids attached to a single-molecule “spine” of
glycerol in a configuration that loosely resembles the capital letter E. These
triglycerides are tightly bonded molecules, but even the purest fats and oils
always contain a small proportion of free fatty acids, or acid chains not attached
to a glycerol molecule. When a caustic solution is added to a fat, saponification
first takes place between these free fatty acids and the alkali. Small amounts of
soap are formed.
Soap is an excellent emulsifier. The initial trace quantity of soap formed by
the reaction between free fatty acids and alkali emulsifies unsaponified fat by
breaking it up into small globules. The dispersed fat now has a much larger
surface area that creates a larger “interface” between fat and alkali.
Saponification proceeds more rapidly. (This principle has a very practical
application for the home soapmaker: A few ounces of scrap soap, either sodium
or potassium, can be dissolved in water, then used for making a lye solution. The
soap emulsifies the fat, greatly reducing the stir time.)
When all available alkali has reacted with all available fatty acid,
saponification is complete. Besides creating soap, this reaction yields glycerin,

derived from the liberated glycerol molecule. Glycerin is typically “grained”
(separated) out of commercial soap with common salt, then sold as a raw
material. Glycerin remains in homemade soap, contributing emollient properties
to the finished product.
Cleansing Action
Soap has a very contradictory nature. It has a water-loving, oil-hating “head,”
composed of sodium or potassium, and a water-hating, oil-loving “tail,”
consisting of a fatty acid chain. Soap’s effectiveness as a cleaning agent stems
directly from this contradiction, because soap acts as an intermediary between
two very incompatible substances: oil and water.
Once soap has dissolved in water, the oil-loving parts of the soap molecules
gravitate toward any patch of dirt on skin or fabric (a case of like attracting like)
and form a ring around the soil called a micelle. These oil-loving tails break up
the soil into smaller globules. Meanwhile, the water-loving halves of the
molecules are straining outward toward the water in the sink or washing machine
(again, like attracts like). The cleaning action of soap is thus a two-pronged
process: a breaking up, as the oil-loving tails surround and emulsify soil, and a
carrying away of soil, as the water-loving heads strain outward toward the
surrounding water.
Sodium vs. Potassium Soaps
All true soaps, whether liquid or solid, are created through the reaction of an
alkali with fatty acids. Sodium hydroxide and fatty acids produce hard bar soap
through the crystallization of sodium. What you actually see when you look at a
bar of soap is crystals; the bar appears opaque because the crystals cause light
waves to bounce off the bar. Transparent bar soaps are also sodium-based, but
they are see-through because the soap crystals have been largely dissolved in
solvents such as alcohol, glycerin, and sugar. The light waves travel through the
bar, making the soap appear transparent.
Potassium hydroxide is the base for all liquid soaps. Potassium is much more
soluble than sodium and less able to form crystals. Liquid soaps are clear
because light passes unobstructed through liquid soap much as it does through a
bar of transparent soap.
Why Make Your Own Soap?

y
p
Before World War I, all liquid soaps were based on potassium hydroxide. But
the shortage of fats and oils in wartime forced commercial soapmakers to
consider other alternatives. Synthetic detergent soaps quickly became the norm
and have remained so ever since. Many people today, though, are seeking
alternatives to detergent soap, and potassium soap is ideal. It’s formulated with
pure, natural ingredients; can be tailored to fit different skin types; and is easy
and inexpensive to make. Potassium soaps are also very versatile — one “base”
formulation can be modified with just one or two ingredients to form a hand
soap, a shampoo, or a bubble bath.

W
1 getting started
ater. Ammonium laureth sulfate. Glycol distearate. Cocamide MEA.
Stearyl alcohol. Disodium EDTA. All very common liquid soap
ingredients, but the only recognizable ingredient for most consumers is the
water.
These laboratory-produced compounds are part of a long list of ingredients
found in modern liquid soaps, which are actually detergents. Aside from their
cleansing properties, these “soaps” have been engineered for stability because
they’re often shipped thousands of miles to market and suffer from exposure to
heat, cold, and light. Before the days of international commerce and mass
marketing, liquid soap was soap, often consisting of little else besides coconut
oil and potassium hydroxide.
The ingredients and additives for “old-fashioned” liquid soap are listed in
this chapter. You can formulate soap with a single oil and potassium hydroxide,

or create blends of many oils enhanced with a wide variety of additives. A
review of the procedures and recipes in the following chapters will help you
decide before you spend your money.
hard fats
Hard fats are composed primarily of stearic, palmitic, and lauric acids. These fatty acids are solid at room
temperature, and the fats containing a predominance of these acids — whether tallow, coconut oil, or palm
oil — also tend to be hard at room temperature.
Coconut Oil
Coconut oil forms the backbone of most liquid soap formulations. Why?
Because of lauric acid, the predominant fatty acid in coconut oil. Lauric acid
possesses one supreme virtue: solubility.
The more soluble the fatty acid, the less potential for cloudiness in the
finished soap. Solubility also means that the soap has a quick, voluminous lather.
This property is particularly important for liquid soaps because dilution by water
reduces the soap s foaming action. The minerals contained in hard water also
reduce lather, making coconut oil soaps the best performers in unsoftened water.
Because coconut oil—based liquid soaps are so soluble, higher proportions
of soap to water are possible before the soap begins to congeal. A 100 percent
coconut oil soap is still fluid at 40 percent soap to 60 percent water, whereas an
olive oil soap begins to congeal at a much lower concentration: around 20
percent soap to 80 percent water. This is one reason why most public soap
dispensers are filled with coconut-based liquid soap: This won t clog the
dispenser.

One drawback of coconut oil is the drying effect of lauric acid. This negative
property can be overcome by blending coconut oil with soft oils, such as olive,
canola, or safflower oil. Palm kernel oil can be substituted for coconut oil
because it has a similar fatty acid profile, but it requires approximately 20
percent less caustic than coconut oil for neutralization. See the chart on page 50
for specific information on the proportions of alkali to oils.
 A strong-bristle brush is a good tool for cleaning under fingernails with
liquid hand soap.
Palm Oil and Tallow
Palm oil and tallow possess characteristics that make them ideal bases for
opaque hand soaps. They form rich, stable lathers and create a hard, long-lasting
bar. These qualities are derived from the palmitic and stearic acids that constitute
the bulk of both oils. But palmitic and stearic acids are mostly unwelcome in
liquid soaps, where crystal clarity is desired. The two acids react with potassium
hydroxide to form insoluble soaps, and these insolubles cloud an otherwise clear
liquid. Used sparingly, however, palm oil or tallow gives extra body to liquid
soap.
Cocoa Butter
Extracted from the roasted seeds of the cacao plant, cocoa butter is an excellent

emollient and skin softener. Like palm oil and tallow, however, cocoa butter
contains a high percentage of palmitic and stearic acids and should be used
judiciously in liquid soap formulations.
In gels, a small percentage of either palm oil or tallow helps prevent
“thinning” of the gel during hot summer months.
 The base of liquid soap is potassium hydroxide, a water-soluble alkali.

soft oils
Soft oils are generally liquid at room temperature: olive, canola, soybean, safflower, corn, or peanut oil.
High in oleic, linoleic, and linolenic fatty acids, these oils form moisturizing soaps with thin, weak lathers.
A mixture of 10 to 20 percent coconut oil and 80 to 90 percent soft oil forms a soap with enhanced foaming.
For liquid soap formulation, the choice of soft oils is up to the soapmaker
because all soft oils (except castor oil) require a similar amount of alkali for
neutralization. Aside from affordability and accessibility, these choices are in
part aesthetic: How deeply colored is the oil? How strong is its odor? Dark oils,
such as soybean oil, impart a markedly amber tone to liquid soap; strongly
scented oils, such as sesame oil, can alter the fragrance of the finished soap.
Another consideration in the choice of oils is stability, or shelf life. Soft oils
are unsaturated and therefore combine more readily with oxygen than saturated
fats, such as coconut oil or tallow. Oxidation leads to rancidity. In general, oils
high in linolenic acid are the least stable and most prone to rancidity (see the
chart on the facing page). But this is a bit simplistic because many other factors
influence the stability of a given oil, such as processing conditions, type of
container, temperature of storage, and presence of natural antioxidants. It is safe
to say that if you start with recently purchased oils that smell clean when
opened, your finished soap should enjoy a long shelf life.
Important Fatty Acids in Common Fats and Oils

OTHER HIGH-OLEIC SOFT OILS
Canola, almond, corn, and peanut oils, like olive oil, are high-oleic soft
oils. Avocado oil contains a high percentage of oleic acid but should be
used sparingly because it also contains a fairly high percentage of
substances that do not saponify and can cloud liquid soap.
Avoid formulating with vegetable shortening. Through the process
of hydrogenation, unsaturated fatty acids are converted into their
saturated analogs; for example, unsaturated oleic acid becomes
saturated stearic acid. Saturated acids form insoluble soaps, which
consequently produce milky liquids.
 A combination of coconut oil and soft oils will produce the most
successful liquid soap.

Olive Oil
Olive oil, which is 85 percent oleic acid, has been the favorite of soapmakers for
centuries. It penetrates the skin better than almost any other vegetable oil except
castor oil. The resulting soaps are moisturizing as well as mild, making olive oil
an excellent base for baby shampoo.
Castor Oil
Castor oil is in a class of its own. It s part oil and part alcohol a peculiarity
derived from the molecular structure of ricinoleic acid, the fatty acid accounting
for almost 90 percent of castor oil s bulk. Alcohols act as solvents, and castor oil
s solvency is readily apparent in soapmaking; it speeds saponification and adds
exceptional clarity to both transparent and liquid soaps. This explains why castor
oil is the only soft oil you ll ever see in transparent bar formulations. Aside from
its transparency-producing virtues, castor oil is exceptionally mild and is easily
absorbed by the skin, making it an excellent emollient and moisturizer.
Soapmaking Properties of Common Fats and Oils

Sulfonated Castor Oil
Also known as turkey red oil, sulfonated castor oil is created by the reaction
between castor oil and sulfuric acid. This oil first proved useful to the textile
industry over a century ago; its water-soluble nature not only allowed for better
penetration of dyes into wool and other fabrics but also increased the brightness
and luster of the colors. Turkey red refers to the brilliant red color produced
specifically on cotton cloth.
Water solubility makes sulfonated castor oil an ideal superfatting agent in
liquid soapmaking, adding the lubricity of an oil without compromising the
clarity of the soap. Sulfonated castor oil forms the base of soapless shampoos
(see recipe in chapter 4) and is effective in both hard and soft water. As an
unsaponifiable oil, it should never be substituted for regular castor oil in soap
formulations.

Waxes
Waxes are chemically similar to oils except that the wax molecules are composed of more alcohol than
glycerol. Small additions of a wax to liquid soaps enhance the moisturizing properties of the lather.
Lanolin
Lanolin, produced from the oil glands of sheep, is a water-absorbent base
material and consequently an effective moisturizer. Because lanolin contains a
high percentage of substances that do not saponify, it clouds liquid soap and
should be limited to 1 to 2 percent of any formulation.
Jojoba

Jojoba, which is similar to the sebum produced by our own oil glands, is a liquid
wax derived from the seeds of a desert shrub. Mexicans and Native Americans
have long used the oil as a hair conditioner and skin moisturizer; modern
marketers promote its usefulness as a sunscreen and treatment for wrinkles, crow
s feet, and dry skin. Like lanolin, it contains substances that do not saponify, and
it must be used sparingly if crystal-clear soaps are desired.
potassiusm hydroxide (caustic potash)
Because of its solubility, potassium hydroxide forms the ideal base for all liquid soaps. Manufactured
commercially from the electrolysis of potassium chloride, potassium hydroxide is sold as a liquid or
crystalline flake. It’s much more chemically reactive than sodium hydroxide, and more potassium than
sodium hydroxide is needed to saponify a given amount of fat — 1.4 times more, to be precise.
solvents
The solvents alcohol, glycerin, and sugar are what enable a soapmaker to transform opaque bar soap into
transparent soap. The solvents literally dissolve the soap crystals and then hold them in suspension,
allowing the light to pass through.
Solvents are very useful in liquid soapmaking. The soap can be dissolved
and cooked in alcohol (see the Alcohol/Lye Method on page 33), and small
additions of alcohol, glycerin, and sugar will improve the brightness and clarity
of the finished liquid.
Alcohol
Alcohols are solvents. In liquid soapmaking, solvents can speed saponification
as well as lower a liquid s cloud point, or the point at which insoluble substances
precipitate out of solution. When liquid soaps are slightly cloudy because of
excess fatty acids or minerals, a small addition of alcohol often clarifies the
solution. Excess alcohol, however, reduces the sudsing action of the soap.
The liquid soapmaker has a choice of two types of alcohol: ethanol or
isopropyl alcohol.
 Alcohol, glycerin, and sugar lower the cloud point of liquid soap, helping

create crystal clarity.
Ethanol. Colorless and odorless, ethanol is produced from the fermentation of
sugar, starch, and other carbohydrates. In liquor stores, ethanol is sold under the
brand names Everclear and Clear Springs. Scientific supply houses sell
denatured ethanol in gallon containers a much cheaper option than pure liquor
store ethanol. When ordering denatured alcohol, be sure to specify SDA
(specially denatured alcohol) 3A or SDA3C, two cosmetic grades approved by
the FDA. Both have been denatured with trace amounts of isopropyl alcohol and
methanol.
Isopropyl alcohol. Common isopropyl alcohol, or rubbing alcohol, can also be
used for liquid soapmaking. As a solvent, it s weaker than ethanol, but because
potassium soaps are so soluble, this weakness isn t a handicap. The strong odor
of isopropyl alcohol can potentially taint the finished liquid, but this problem is
easily rectified by evaporating the alcohol out of solution at the end of the
soapmaking process.
All drugstores carry isopropyl alcohol, usually at a 70 percent strength (the
remaining 30 percent is water). For the purposes of liquid soapmaking, stronger
concentrations, in the range of 90 to 99 percent, are desirable. Many pharmacies

stock the stronger solutions on the shelf, and some will special-order 99 percent
concentrations; otherwise, contact the nearest scientific supply house.
Glycerin
A natural by-product of saponification, glycerin is technically an alcohol. Added
to finished liquid soap, it lowers the cloud point the same way alcohol does,
helping clarify residual milkiness. In addition, it functions as a humectant,
drawing moisture from the air and holding it to the skin. Like ethanol or
isopropyl alcohol, excessive amounts of glycerin dampen the foaming action of
soap, though small amounts actually boost the foam. Purchase glycerin at
pharmacies or through the suppliers listed in Resources.
other key ingredients
In the strictest sense, soap consists of a hydroxide in chemical combination with a fat. But many other
ingredients determine the appearance and quality of the finished soap — what kind of water is used for both
the lye solution and the dilution of the soap base, how the soap is thickened and preserved, and what to use
for creating a neutral pH. The following are descriptions of some of these ingredients.
Sugar
Small percentages of sugar solution added to liquid soaps help dissipate
cloudiness. Ounce for ounce, sugar is a more effective clarifier than glycerin,
though it lacks glycerin s moisturizing properties.
Soft or Distilled Water
Minerals in hard water react with fatty acids to form insoluble fatty acid salts.
The result? Cloudiness, much like the cloudiness formed by insoluble palmitic
and stearic acid soaps mentioned earlier. For this reason, the use of soft or
distilled water is essential for all phases of liquid soap production.
Rosin
Pears, the very first transparent soap, was formulated with rosin. Distilled from
the oleoresin of pine trees, rosin saponifies much like an oil, but without any

resulting glycerin. It imparts clarity to soap and a smooth cold-cream finish to
the lather. It also acts as a detergent and preservative. Sold as fragrant, amber-
colored crystals, rosin can be purchased through the suppliers listed in
Resources.
Borax, or Sodium Borate
The detergent and water-softening properties of borax were first discovered by
Native Americans, who noticed that clothing washed in streams near borax
deposits came out cleaner.
Borax is one of the best all-around additives for liquid soaps, possessing
many desirable qualities. It s a viscosity modifier (thickener), an emulsifier, a
water softener, a moisturizer, a foam booster and stabilizer, a pH buffer, and a
preservative. Pharmacies carry borax (often behind the counter, so ask if it s not
on the shelf), or it can be obtained from the suppliers listed in Resources.
Calgon
Like borax, Calgon brand bath preparation enhances foaming, softens hard
water, and triggers gelling in liquid soaps. Calgon is a blend of various sodium
salts, mainly sodium carbonate and sodium hexametaphosphate. Buy the
nonfoaming bath variety. One drawback of Calgon is that the finished soap turns
blue because of the dye in the powder.
Neutralizers

eut a
e s
The recipes in this book all contain slight excesses of potassium hydroxide. This
ensures that no unneutralized fatty acids remain at the end of saponification. The
excess alkali can be neutralized with an acid. Boric acid, the buffer of choice
used by old-time liquid soapmakers, can be found in any pharmacy. Citric acid
also works. Wine-making supply shops carry citric acid, or it can be purchased
through the suppliers listed in Resources.
Borax, at a pH of 9.2, is also an excellent neutralizer. If you use borax as a
thickener in any formulation, no additional neutralizers will be necessary.
Potassium Carbonate
Potassium soap bases are quite sticky and viscous; stirring them is almost as
difficult as stirring hot tar. One additive used by old-time liquid soapmakers to
loosen the soap was potassium carbonate, or pearl ash. Pearl ash is a salt of
potassium. When it is added to a potassium paste, the molecules of the carbonate
actually insert themselves between the molecules of potassium hydroxide,
making the soap much more pliable. Potassium carbonate is an optional
ingredient, but if you d like to experiment with it, purchase it through any
scientific supply house.
 Rosin, which is readily available from soapmaking suppliers, enhances
the clarity and texture of liquid soap.
Preservatives
The most effective preservative for liquid soap is complete saponification.
Oxygenated fats trigger rancidity. Because oxygen attaches most readily to free
fatty acids, it follows that thoroughly neutralized soap offers no oxidation sites.
Fresh, clean-smelling soft oils are also very important because soft oils are by
their very nature unsaturated and are more receptive to oxygen than saturated
fats such as coconut oil and palm oil. A completely saponified rancid oil will
produce a rancid-smelling soap. No amount of cooking reverses preexisting
rancidity.
Many additives in liquid soap such as borax, glycerin, alcohol, rosin, and
citric acid also act as preservatives. Certain essential oils, such as clary sage, also
have preservative properties.
If you wish to use preservatives, use a mixed-tocopherol vitamin E. Vitamin

E is composed of many types of tocopherols, such as alpha, gamma, and omega.
The alpha tocopherols are effective for healing skin but not for preserving soaps.
If you specifically purchase mixed-tocopherol vitamin E, you re getting the
optimum preservative in vitamin E form.
Another new product on the market is rosemary extract, an excellent
antioxidant. Some of the suppliers listed in Resources carry rosemary extract.
Many soapmakers use grapefruit seed oil for its supposed preservative
properties, but grapefruit seed oil functions as an antifungal and antibacterial
agent, not as an antioxidant.
Biocides
Does liquid soap need an antibacterial agent, such as grapefruit seed extract or
its commercial derivative, Citricidal? Many people assume that it does, but this
assumption is based on the chemistry of the synthetic soaps that now
predominate the market. These soaps typically fall within a pH range of 6 to 7,
close to the neutral pH of water. Neutral pHs are microbe-friendly; synthetic
soaps are consequently bolstered with plenty of antimicrobial chemicals.
True soap doesn t suffer from this problem because it possesses a pH hostile
to microbial growth. Bacteria shun alkaline environments above a pH of 9;
neutral potassium soaps fall within a pH range of 9.5 to 10. Unless your soap is
overacidified with a neutralizer such as citric acid, you needn t worry about
bacteria growing in your homemade liquid soap.
phenolphthalein
No text on hot-process soapmaking would be complete without mentioning this important chemical.
Phenolphthalein (pronounced fee-nol-THA-leen) is a quirky chemical with diverse applications. It’s found
in laxatives and is a component of dyes.
For the soapmaker, phenolphthalein works as an acid-base indicator, turning

pink to red in the presence of excess alkali and remaining clear in the presence
of excess fatty acids. Many home soapmakers use pH strips to determine their
soap s alkalinity/acidity, but these strips are basically worthless. Their subtle
color gradations are almost impossible to read, and even if a reading is
approximately correct, approximate isn t always enough for liquid soap.
Phenolphthalein can be purchased either in a liquid form or as a powder,
which is then diluted in alcohol. Buy it through any of the suppliers listed in
Resources, or call a scientific supply house.
Phenolphthalein isn t on the required ingredient list, but diagnosing and
correcting problem soap become very difficult without it. See the box on page 14
for complete instructions on using phenolphthalein.
Home soapmakers often spend hundreds of dollars on tools such as
scales, thermometers, and mixers. Consider a small, inexpensive bottle
of phenolphthalein to be an equally important tool.
 Vitamin E is an antioxidant that can help extend the shelf life of
homemade soap.
 Display your creations in unusual or fun bottles!

 USING PHENOLPHTHALEIN
To prepare a test solution, add a few drops of phenolphthalein to a
pound of ethanol or isopropyl alcohol. Then stir in a very small
amount of weak potassium hydroxide solution; add until a faint pink
color develops in the alcohol. When testing soap, an ounce or two of
this test solution is all that’s needed.
Determine the alkalinity or acidity of the soap by removing a
sample spoonful of finished paste or alcohol broth. Do this before
diluting the entire batch with water. If the pH needs correcting, it’s
much easier to work with undiluted soap because oils and alkalis can’t
adequately react when diluted with large amounts of water.
To prepare a sample, dissolve 1 ounce of soap paste or alcohol

broth in 2 ounces of hot water. Stir the dissolved soap into 1 to 2
ounces of phenolphthalein test solution. The soap contains excess alkali
if the test solution turns a deeper shade of pink. The deeper the color,
the more alkaline the soap. Some pink color should be expected
because the recipes in this book are all slightly overalkalized. By
adding 8 to 12 drops of 20 percent citric or boric acid solution to the
phenolphthalein test sample, the solution should turn a faint pink to
clear, indicating neutrality. If the test solution remains a strong pink,
you can correct the pH using the technique outlined in chapter 8 for
overalkaline soap.
If the test solution becomes clear with the addition of soap solution,
the soap contains excess fatty acids. This isn’t necessarily a problem.
Determine whether it’s a problem by dissolving another ounce of paste
or broth in hot water. Allow the sample to cool. If it remains clear
upon cooling, then the excess fatty acids aren’t detrimental — in fact,
they’ll add extra emollience. If the solution clouds, then correct the
problem using the technique outlined in chapter 8 for excess fatty
acids.
Note: If phenolphthalein is added to neutral soap stock, the soap
will turn pink when mixed with tap water. This is caused not by excess
alkalinity but by hydrolysis, the splitting up of the soap molecule by
water into fatty acids and alkali. Liberated alkalis react with the
phenolphthalein; hence, the pink color.
basic equipment
Before pulling out your wallet and heading for the store, look in your kitchen and workshop for the
equipment listed here. You’ll probably be able to find (or borrow) almost everything on this list. Have you
already made cold-process soap? If so, a candy thermometer may be your only new expense.
Scale
An accurate scale is the most important (as well as expensive) investment you ll
have to make. It must indicate 1-ounce increments and have a minimum capacity
of 10 pounds. For used, reconditioned equipment, look under Scales in the

Yellow Pages.
Thermometer
Another, equally important piece of equipment is an accurate candy or deep-fry
thermometer capable of measuring up to 160 to 170¡F (71 to 76ßC). Most
grocery stores and specialty kitchen shops carry these thermometers; make sure
yours has a stainless steel stem.
Cooking Pot

An 8-to 12-quart enamel or stainless steel cooking pot will function as your soap
pot. Make sure it is enamel or stainless steel, because alkalis corrode other
metals, particularly aluminum.
5-Gallon Canning Pot
Hot processing is done in a double boiler; this is the closest a home soapmaker
can come to the steam kettles used in commercial soapmaking. Your 8-to 12-
quart soap pot will be placed in a larger kettle partially filled with boiling water.
This keeps the temperature constant (soap cooked in this manner will not get so
hot that it erupts ) and prevents the soap from scorching. A 5-gallon canning pot
is ideal. Whatever you use, make certain your soap pot fits completely inside the
larger kettle. (This second pot needn t be enamel or stainless steel, because no
caustic soap comes in contact with it.) If you don t already own one, 5-gallon
kettles are relatively easy to find at secondhand shops and garage sales.
Stirrers and Mixers
If you re hand-stirring soap, stainless steel whisks work better than spoons
because they re better at emulsifying the oil-lye solution. The faster a solution is

emulsified, the quicker the rate of saponification.
Many home soapmakers rely on stick blenders, regular upright blenders, or
food processors for the tracing phase of soapmaking. This rapid mechanical
motion speeds saponification by speeding the emulsification of oil and lye. Some
formulations will trace within 5 to 10 minutes; by contrast, hand-mixing can
require 30 to 60 minutes of constant stirring before the soap traces. With a stick
blender, no caustic soap solutions need to be transferred from one container to
another, and cleanup is also much simpler.
 Make a double boiler by placing your soap pot inside a canning pot.
 Metal whisks and metal or wooden spoons are all suitable for
soapmaking.

Goggles and Gloves
Unneutralized soap is extremely caustic, and care must be taken to protect the
skin and eyes. Always wear goggles and gloves, particularly before the soap has
completely neutralized.
Sheeting and Bungee Cords
If you follow the alcohol-lye method outlined in the following chapter, you ll
need plastic sheeting and two bungee cords. The plastic will be stretched over
the top of your cooking pot and fastened with bungee cords, ensuring that the
alcohol in solution isn t lost to evaporation.
Buy 3-or 4-ml clear plastic, which allows you to view the cooking soap. This
thick-gauge plastic can be found in any hardware or paint supply store. Thick
plastic is very important because it must be able to stretch without breaking as
the alcohol and steam expand in the soap pot. For this reason, don t use Saran
Wrap or any other thin kitchen plastic wrap.

 Glass and plastic are both appropriate materials for containers.
 Plastic sheeting and bungee cords are available at most hardware stores.

C
2 aguide tobasic techniques
old-process soap has been the queen of the kitchen for almost 30 years,
since the publication of Ann Bramson’s Soap: Making It, Enjoying It. The
procedures for cold processing are now so familiar that some soapmakers jest
that they can make soap blindfolded, with one hand tied behind their backs!
Hot processing is new and unfamiliar, and unfamiliarity breeds uncertainty
and reluctance. But the hot-processing procedure is actually very simple, and
with just a little experience it all becomes second nature. Even better, all soaps
currently on the market can now be made in your kitchen.
For small soap businesses there’s an extra incentive: Liquid and gel soaps
now account for approximately 25 percent of annual soap sales in the U.S., but
small-scale soapmakers have yet to create a presence in this market.

hot-process soapmaking
Why hot-process? Because it offers two things everyone loves: control and variety.
Hot processing is a simple technique whereby a soap base is cooked at
relatively high temperatures (180—200¡F; 82—93¡C) for 2 to 3 hours. Elevated
temperatures ensure that all the free fatty acids are neutralized, which is critical
for producing crystal-clear liquid soaps and transparent bar soaps. Hot
processing is necessary for producing other specialty soaps such as floating soap,
creams and pastes, and translucent bars as well. And if mistakes are made, most
of them are correctable. This is why hot processing has been the method of
choice for commercial soapmakers throughout the centuries.
Cold processing, by contrast, involves no cooking of the soap base. Oils and
lye solution are combined at relatively low temperatures (80—100¡F; 26—
38¡C), and then the emulsion is poured into molds, insulated with blankets, and
left alone for approximately 24 hours. During this time the soap is cooking itself,
heated by the reaction between the fatty acids and the alkali.
Most home soapmaking is done by the cold-process method, but cold
processing has many limitations. It s a one-trick pony that produces lovely
opaque hand soaps, but that s about it. Clear liquids and bars, creams, and
floating soaps are all beyond the technique s scope. In addition, once the soap is
poured into the molds, cross your fingers and hope is a familiar scenario with
many cold-process soapmakers. Cross your fingers and hope that what appears
the next day is soap, not soup. The cold-process technique offers one chance to
get things right; soap made from mismeasured ingredients or temperature is
usually punished with a trip to the trash can.
Here I present two methods for hot processing soap. Derived from
techniques first introduced in my book Making Transparent Soap, each method

has its own personality, interest, and appeal. Study both methods, then select a
recipe from chapter 3. Make the recipe according to both methods; this will help
you decide which technique you prefer.
the golden rule
If there’s one basic liquid soapmaking principle that needs to be underlined, emphasized, and shouted from
the rooftops, it’s this: Unneutralized fatty acids cause cloudiness.
When a caustic solution of either sodium or potassium hydroxide is added to
fat, the fatty acids separate from the glycerol in a process called hydrolysis (from
the Greek hydro, meaning water, and lysis, setting free ). Hydrolysis is a form of
decomposition. These liberated fatty acids then combine chemically with the
sodium or potassium ions to form soap. If an insufficient amount of alkali has
been added, if excess oils are present, or if the temperature of the saponifying
soap stock is relatively low, unneutralized fatty acids remain in the soap. For
opaque hand soaps, these fatty acids can be most desirable, adding extra richness
and emollience to the lather. Home soapmakers capitalize on these qualities by
purposefully superfatting their soaps.
 Hot processing is the only method that produces truly clear soap, whether
in bars or liquid form.

Achieving Transparency
Excess fatty acids are disastrous in transparent bars, liquids, or gels. This excess
manifests as an opaque milkiness. If you ve ever attempted to make a clear soap
using the cold-process method, you ve undoubtedly met with failure because no
matter how accurately you measure your oils and alkalis, the process seldom
generates enough heat to completely neutralize the fatty acids.
Saponification is a heat-generating chemical reaction. Within reason, the
more heat, the more complete the reaction. Hot processing adds the mechanical
heat from your kitchen stove to the chemical heat created through saponification.
Added heat bonds all the available fatty acids with the alkali. The result? Clear,
neutral soap.

the paste method
The paste method bears some resemblance to cold-process soapmaking. A caustic solution is added to warm
fats, then stirred until the mixture thickens, or traces. But the hot and cold processes diverge here; in hot
processing, traced soap is further cooked in a double boiler until neutral.
1 Prepare the Double Boiler
Fill a 5-gallon canning pot (or any pot large enough to contain the soap pot)
with 3 or 4 inches of water. This will become the bottom of the double boiler.
Place it on a back burner, cover it, and begin heating the water. You ll want a
gentle boil for cooking soap.
2 Add the Fats and Oils

To prepare the fats, first weigh the fats and oils, then empty them into the soap
pot, and place this pot over medium heat. Melt any hard fats or waxes first, then
add soft oils. Continue heating until the oils reach 160¡F (71¡C). Turn the heat to
low, and maintain this temperature.
The temperature of a potassium solution is considerably lower than
that of a pure sodium solution because it has roughly 50 percent more
water. The extra water “quenches” some of the reaction’s heat.
3 Prepare a Lye Solution

Put on your goggles and gloves, measure out the water portion of the solution,
and pour it into a 2-quart (or larger) glass, ceramic, stainless steel, or heavy
plastic container.
Weigh the potassium hydroxide.
Add the flakes to the water (A), and stir until dissolved (B). Be careful to
avoid inhaling the steam that s given off: The temperature will rise to 150¡F
(65¡C) almost instantly, and the steam itself is slightly caustic.
If you re adding potassium carbonate (pearl ash) to the soap, now is the time
to mix it in. Stir the powdered carbonate into the hot lye solution to ensure that
the carbonate dissolves completely.
 WARNING: POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE
Potassium hydroxide is quite caustic and can cause chemical burns on
contact. Always use goggles and gloves when handling raw flakes, lye
solutions, and unneutralized soap. Store these substances in well-
sealed, breakproof, clearly labeled containers away from children and
pets. In case of contact with skin or eyes, rinse for several minutes with
water. Lemon juice or vinegar is also effective for instantly
neutralizing hydroxide on the skin, but don’t splash these acids in eyes.
In case of ingestion, call the local poison control center.

4 Add the Lye to the Oils
Allow the caustic solution to cool to approximately 140¡F (60¡C). In a slow,
steady stream, add the solution to the 160°F (71°C) oils, stirring constantly.
One way to obtain a slow, consistent flow is to mix the caustic flakes and water
in a 2-quart jar fitted with a metal lid. Before mixing the water and flakes, punch
two holes in the lid with an ice pick or screwdriver. The two holes should be
opposite each other (12 o clock and 6 o clock), and one hole should be larger
than the other. The solution will be poured from the larger hole; the smaller hole
simply allows air into the jar.
5 Stir

Stir with a whisk or stick blender. If you have any experience with sodium-
based soaps, potassium soapmaking may initially perplex you. The stir phase for
sodium soap follows a gradual and predictable curve from thin to thick.
Potassium soap stock can remain stubbornly thin for some time before suddenly
thickening. It s very important to stir until the soap becomes quite viscous;
otherwise, separation may occur between the potassium solution and the soap
stock. In addition, the more thorough the mixing, the more thorough the
saponification.
Make sure to stir the oil and lye solution in the soap pot before adding
it to the blender; the oil and lye separate easily when left sitting.
Don t stop stirring at these first signs of thickening. Within a few minutes,
the thickened stock further changes to the consistency of sticky, saltwater taffy.
The more coconut oil in the formulation, the stickier the mass. Formulations
high in soft oils won t initially be quite as sticky; it takes an hour or so of
cooking for soft oils to reach a taffylike consistency. This is because soft oils
aren t as soluble as coconut oil.
The time needed to reach this phase depends on several factors: the
temperature of the stock, the oil type, and your stir speed. Throughout the
stirring, maintain a temperature of 160 to 170¡F (71 to 76¡C). Heat accelerates
the saponfication rate. Because of differences in chemical makeup, some oils

saponify more readily than others. Coconut and castor oil, for example, react
with an alkali much more rapidly than olive oil. And hand-stirring is to stick-
blending what the tortoise is to the hare.
Here are a few tips to help you economize stir time:
If you choose to hand-stir, a whisk mixes more efficiently than a spoon or
spatula because it speeds emulsification of the oils and lye.
A stick blender is more flexible, versatile, and tidy than a traditional blender
or food processor, but all three tools cut an extraordinary amount of time out of
stirring. If you are using a blender or food processor, fill the vessels only about
half full to allow headroom for any puffing up of the thickening soap as air is
incorporated. Always keep the cap on the blender when mixing.
Mix the hot oils and the lye the night before, stirring for just 5 or 10
minutes. Cover the soap pot with a blanket or two to conserve heat, then let it
stand overnight. During this time small amounts of soap will form, serving as a
starter by lowering the surface tension between lye and oils. The next day, heat
the mixture back up to 160 to 170¡F (71 to 76¡C) and stir until thickened.
A variation on the starter method above:
After making your first batch of soap, set aside 3 or 4 ounces of neutral,
undiluted paste, then refrigerate it in a jar or plastic bag until your next round of
soapmaking. Add this paste to the oil and lye solution, taking care to mix and
dissolve it thoroughly. You ll be amazed at how much time it trims off stirring.

A few ounces of alcohol, either ethanol or isopropyl alcohol, added to the oil
and lye solution will speed saponification by lowering the surface tension
between the oil/lye interface.
6 Cook the Paste
Check to make sure that the soap has thickened. Then place the soap pot into
the gently boiling water of the double boiler bottom. If the larger pot has a lid,
use it; this will both conserve heat and keep your kitchen from steaming up. The
total cooking time for the paste will be 3 hours.
After 5 or 10 minutes of cooking, remove the soap pot from the double boiler
bottom, and check for lye separation. Potassium solutions will separate from the
paste if the paste was understirred. If separation has occurred, it appears as a
watery layer at the bottom of the pot. Stir again it won t take long to incorporate
this solution back into the paste. Then set the pot back into the kettle and
continue cooking. In another 5 or 10 minutes, check for separation one more
time. Stir again if necessary.
Don t be alarmed if the paste puffs up. Potassium pastes are so sticky that
they readily trap air in the initial stir phase. During cooking, this air heats and
expands, creating a souffl effect. A few stirs with a spoon or spatula allow the air
to escape. If left in the soap, trapped air actually slows the saponification rate.
You may need to stir another time or two over the next half hour to liberate all
the trapped air, but the puffing eventually subsides. If the paste continues to puff
up after an hour or more of cooking, you may have a problem with excess alkali.

Consult chapter 8.
Stir the paste for a few minutes every 20 or 30 minutes over the next 3
hours. During this time, you ll notice a change in the paste s appearance.
Initially, it s opaque and off-white; after an hour or so, it gradually becomes
translucent. This is a sign that the soap is neutralizing. If the paste shows no
signs of translucence after 2 hours, the problem may be excess alkalinity. See
chapter 8 for more information.
7 Test for Excess Fatty Acids

At the end of the 3-hour cook time, look for signs of free fatty acids by
dissolving 1 ounce of soap in 2 ounces of boiling distilled water. The hot
liquid may be clear, but the real determinant of thoroughly cooked soap is the
appearance of the solution after it s cooled down. A cool sample will be slightly
cloudy because of the presence of insoluble soaps, but these soaps will
eventually settle out of solution. You can read more about insoluble soaps on
page 109.
A cooled sample that exhibits a pronounced milkiness indicates that the paste
still contains unneutralized free fatty acids and needs more cooking and stirring.
Return the soap to the double boiler and cook some more. After another 30
minutes, test again. If the soap doesn t test clearer after 4 hours of cooking, you
ve probably mismeasured the ingredients. Consult chapter 8 for help. Learning
to discern the difference between normal clouding that will clear upon
sequestering (described on page 31) and clouding that s a permanent problem is
a matter of some experience. Rest assured that if you measure ingredients
correctly and cook for the proper length of time, your soap will clear after
sequestering.
Always either use soft or distilled water in your liquid soap recipes.
The minerals in hard water combine chemically with fatty acids,
marring the transparency of the finished soap.

8 Dilute the Soap
After testing for free fatty acids, the soap is ready for dilution. A chart on soap-
to-water dilution ratios appears on page 42. If you wish to dilute your soap later,
or save a portion of the paste for a starter for your next batch, spoon the paste
into a plastic bag and store in the refrigerator. The soap can be kept indefinitely
in this manner, as refrigeration prevents the development of any possible
rancidity.

Bring the water to a boil, then add the paste; use a whisk or spoon to
help break the mass up. Pastes high in coconut oil dissolve more readily than
those high in soft oils. If you desire a highly concentrated soap solution, be
aware that the stronger the concentration, the more resistant the paste is to
dissolving.
 USING POTASSIUM CARBONATE
Other than dissolving the paste in alcohol, potassium carbonate is the
only way to make potassium soap softer and more stirrable. Add
potassium carbonate at a rate of 2 to 2.5 percent of the total weight of
paste. As each recipe in this book yields approximately 6 pounds of
paste, or about 100 ounces, add up to 2 or 2.5 ounces of dry pearl ash
per recipe. The powder should be stirred into the hot lye solution.
Potassium carbonate, or pearl ash, is somewhat alkaline, so
additional neutralizers are necessary when you are formulating with
it: 20 parts of pearl ash require 17 parts of boric acid for
neutralization, or 85 percent. So to neutralize 2.5 ounces of carbonate,
you’ll need 2.1 ounces (60 grams) of boric acid. Dissolve the powdered
boric acid in 4 ounces of hot water, and add after the paste has been

diluted with water. Remember, you’ll still need to add the standard 20
percent boric or citric acid solution (to neutralize the excess potassium
hydroxide) as well.
This difficulty can be overcome in two ways. A few ounces of ethanol or
isopropyl alcohol added to the water help liquefy the paste. Or make a less
concentrated solution by adding more water. After the paste dissolves, boil the
solution until the extra water evaporates; this will require a before and after
weighing of the soap pot to determine the soap s concentration.
If you re not in a hurry, the paste will dissolve if it is left alone in gently
simmering water, covered with a lid. Depending on the formulation, this may
take an hour or more, but it s easy, and no foam is produced in the process.
Depending on how concentrated you wish to make the soap solution, you
may need to transfer the paste to a larger pot for dilution. For example, 5 pounds
of paste diluted with 10 pounds of water yields a liquid soap with a viscosity
typical of the soap found in rest-room dispensers. That s a total of 15 pounds, or
approximately 2 gallons. Use the 5-gallon double-boiler pot for these larger
quantities. The soap is now neutral, so the lye won t affect the pot if it isn t
stainless steel or enamel. Just make certain the pot isn t rusty.
9 Neutralize the Soap
After the soap has been cooked and diluted, you’ll need to add “buffers” to

bring the pH down to neutral; neutral soap has a pH of 9.5 to 10. This is
necessary because every recipe in this book has been formulated with a slight
excess of potassium hydroxide to ensure that all free fatty acids are neutralized.
As an interesting aside, the water used to dilute the paste actually lowers the pH;
when 4 ounces of pH 10.35 paste are diluted with 6 ounces of water, the pH
drops to 10.
Foaming is sometimes a nuisance when the soap is whisked into the hot
water. A simple antidote for unwanted foam? Fill a spray bottle with
isopropyl alcohol: A few short spritzes will subdue even the most
menacing heads of froth. Take care to keep this spray away from open
flames.
But more than water is needed to neutralize soap. The neutralizers readily
available for home soapmakers are citric acid, boric acid, and borax. These
buffers should never be added directly to soap in their powdered form because
localized concentrations of citric or boric acid, in particular, can throw soap out
of solution and create a snow flurry of white flakes suspended in the clear soap.
(These snow flurries will disappear if the soap is brought to a boil and stirred.)
Dissolve neutralizers in water before adding them to liquid soap. To create a
20 percent buffer solution, add 2 ounces of citric or boric acid to 8 ounces of
boiling distilled water. Stir until dissolved. Boric acid will precipitate out of
solution when it is allowed to cool, so reheat it before adding to the soap
solution.
More borax is needed to neutralize a given amount of soap, compared with
citric and boric acid, so a more concentrated buffer solution will be needed.
Create this 33 percent solution by adding 3 ounces of borax to 6 ounces of
boiling distilled water. If you intend to use borax as a thickener, forgo the
addition of any neutralizers.
You ll find specifics on how much neutralizer to use per pound of soap on
page 42.
10 Add Dyes and Fragrances

The ideal time for adding dye and fragrance to the soap is immediately after
dilution and neutralization, while the soap is still near the boiling point.
Fragrances won t disperse in cold soap; they ll just float as a greasy layer on the
soap s surface.
Fragrances (whether essential oils or synthetics) can be added all at once into
the hot liquid, then stirred thoroughly to aid their dispersal. Dyes should be
added a little at a time, because a little color goes a long way in a clear liquid.
After the soap solution has cooled, you ll notice that the essential oils or
fragrance oils have caused some clouding in the soap. This is because these oils
aren t completely soluble even when stirred thoroughly into the hottest of soap
bases. Essential oils cause more clouding than fragrance oils because fragrance
oils have been purposefully formulated with solvents that help minimize
clouding. The good news is that clouding will usually dissipate within a few
days if the solution is allowed to settle.
Use only water-soluble or glycerin-based dyes for liquid soap. Oil-based
dyes will cloud the finished soap. Water-based dyes will disperse evenly in hot
or cold soap.
If you wish to add preservatives, the best time is while the soap solution is
still hot; this allows for a homogenous dispersal of the preservative. Specifics on
preservative amounts are given on page 43.

11 Sequester
Pour the cooled soap into bottles, screw on lids, and allow the soap to stand
for a week or two. This resting phase is called sequestering, a word that comes
from the Latin word sequestrare, meaning to remove, lay aside, or separate.
Clouding caused by the addition of fragrances into the liquid should disappear
during this time.

In addition, sequestering will clear up the minor clouding caused by
insoluble fatty acid soaps. (This minor clouding may be barely noticeable, but
the soap will appear brighter after a week of sequestering.) Even though liquid
soaps are formulated without oils high in stearic and palmitic acids (the fatty
acids responsible for forming insoluble soaps), all oils contain some percentage
of both. Olive oil, for example, contains 7 percent palmitic and 2 percent stearic
acid. Coconut oil is made up of 9 percent palmitic and 2 percent stearic acid.
These small percentages are enough to cause slight cloudiness. During the
sequestering phase, the insoluble particles coalesce and precipitate to the bottom
of the container; they will appear as a thin milky layer. The clear liquid can then
be decanted or siphoned off.
 Be sure to sequester the soap for at least a week to allow cloudiness to
dissipate.
The best place to sequester soap is a cool location, such as a basement. Clear
glass or clear plastic containers work best for sequestering because the progress
of the soap can be monitored. Commercial soapmakers actually age the soap for
several days in a refrigerated room; it s then run through a filter that traps the
precipitated insoluble substances. Obviously, the home soapmaker won t have
access to a filtration system, but sequestering makes a marked difference in the
brightness and clarity of the soap. Note: If you use borax as an emulsifier or
thickener, add it to the liquid soap after sequestering. Otherwise, the insoluble
soaps won t precipitate out of the more concentrated soap solution.

 USING SEQUESTERING AGENTS
If your soap remains cloudy after 2 weeks of sequestering, you
probably mismeasured the initial amounts of oil and lye or failed to
thoroughly cook the paste. Not much can be done to correct cloudy
soap once it’s been diluted, but you might try adding some
sequestering agents to help clarify the stock.
Sequestering agents lower the cloud point of a solution — that is,
the point at which insolubles coalesce and cause milkiness.
Sequestering agents available to home soapmakers are alcohol,
glycerin, and sugar solutions. A few ounces of any of these solvents can
correct minor clouding; however, excess solvent can dampen the
lathering ability of the soap. More details on sequestering agents are
given on page 45.

the alcohol/lye method
Commercial potassium soaps are stirred continuously and cooked at high temperatures to completely
neutralize all fatty acids. It’s impossible to duplicate these conditions at home using the paste method,
largely because of the difficulty of stirring the taffylike soap. But by dissolving the soap in alcohol, home
soapmakers can come much closer to producing commercial-quality potassium soap.
Modified from a technique first introduced in my book Making Transparent
Soap, the alcohol/lye method has several advantages over the paste method: It s
easier (no stirring), faster (2 hours versus 3 hours cooking time), and yields a
somewhat clearer finished soap. If you don t want alcohol in your finished soap,
it can be evaporated out of solution.
Alcohols are solvents. When ethanol or isopropyl alcohol is added to an oil
and lye mix, the alcohol accelerates saponification by lowering the surface
tension between the oil and the caustic solution. When added in large enough
quantities, alcohol dissolves soap completely; what remains is a clear amber
broth. As this broth cooks at a gentle boil, the mechanical action of the boiling
substitutes for stirring.
Either ethanol or isopropyl alcohol can be used for the alcohol/lye method.
Ethanol is an excellent solvent and is odorless as well. However, it can be
expensive unless purchased in gallon containers through scientific supply
houses. By comparison, isopropyl alcohol is inexpensive and readily available;
the downside is its strong, characteristic odor. Ideally, the isopropyl alcohol
should be at strengths of 90 percent or over; weaker concentrations introduce too
much water, which consequently slows the saponification rate. Whichever
alcohol you choose, always have a little more on hand than what the recipe calls
for. This reserve will be used to replace any alcohol lost through evaporation.
A note for crafters of transparent soap bars: The no-stir alcohol method
works for these soaps, as well.

1 Make a Cap and Prepare the Double Boiler
Before measuring the oils and lye solution, prepare a plastic “cap” for your
soap pot from plastic sheeting. Cut the plastic into two pieces large enough to
allow for 5 to 6 inches of additional drape beyond the circumference of the pot.
After the alcohol is added to the soap stock, the plastic will be tightly secured to
the rim of the pot with bungee cords.
Fill the 5-gallon canning pot with 3 to 4 inches of water and bring to a slow
boil on the back burner. This pot functions as the bottom of a double boiler.

2 Heat the Fats and Oils
Weigh the fats and oils, then add them to the soap pot, and melt over
medium heat. Continue heating until the temperature reaches 160 F (71 C).
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS FOR USING ALCOHOL
Alcohol is flammable. Commonsense precautions must be taken when this
solvent is used. The alcohol/lye method is not recommended for
soapmakers working over a gas range.
Keep all alcohol away from open flames. Electric ranges don’t pose the
same hazards as gas ranges. If you only have a gas range, you might
instead try cooking the soap on a hot plate. Be sure the hot plate’s electrical
cord is in working condition, and plug it directly into an outlet; do not use
an extension cord.
Make sure the work space has adequate ventilation.
Equip your area with a working fire extinguisher. You may also wish to
keep on hand a spray bottle filled with water. Alcohol is soluble in water,
so a spray aimed at the base of any flames will
3 Add the Lye-Water Solution

Weigh the potassium hydroxide and distilled water. In an alkali-resistant
container, add the hydroxide to the water and stir until dissolved. Then pour
this hot solution directly into the 160°F (71°C) oils and stir for a minute or
two.
4 Mix in the Alcohol
Add the alcohol directly to the oil and lye mix. Initially, the solution separates

into two layers you ll notice the oily layer swirling on top. Stir for a few minutes
until the solution appears homogenous. Stop stirring, and check for the
reappearance of the oily layer. If it appears, continue stirring until the solution is
uniform.
5 Cover the Pot

When the mixture has become homogenous, cover the soap pot with one of
the plastic sheets. Secure it to the rim of the soap pot with a tightly stretched
bungee cord the tighter the fit, the less evaporation. Be careful not to pierce the
plastic with the bungee hooks.
Reduce any slack in the plastic by gently pulling the excess underneath the
bungee cord; the soap pot should resemble a tight drumhead with ruffles around
the sides.
Repeat this procedure with the second sheet of plastic and the second bungee
cord.
6 Weigh the Pot
Before cooking the broth, weigh the soap pot. Include the weight of the plastic
and bungee cords in this figure, which will be your baseline weight. Over the
course of the 2-hour cooking time, you’ll occasionally remove the pot from
the stove and weigh it to monitor how much alcohol is being lost to
evaporation.
Always put on your protective goggles and gloves before handling any
caustic substances or cooking soap paste.

7 Cook the Paste
Through the plastic, watch for the boiling of the paste; this should happen
within a few minutes. Then adjust the heat so that the solution maintains a
gentle, steady boil for the next 2 hours. The emphasis is on a gentle boil;
vigorous boiling serves only to hasten the evaporation of alcohol.
The expanding steam and alcohol will stretch the plastic, causing it to
balloon above the rim of the pot. This may look a bit scary, but the plastic won t
rupture because of its thickness. This mushrooming will cause the excess plastic
frill around the pot to be pulled under the bungee cords. Make sure it doesn t pull
completely out from under the cords, allowing alcohol to escape. If necessary,
tighten the plastic by pulling it back under the bungee cords.
8 Weigh the Pot

In 20 or 30 minutes, remove the pot from the double boiler and weigh the
soap pot. Determine the alcohol loss by subtracting the new weight from the
original baseline weight. Please note that as long as the solution remains fluid, it
isn t necessary to add alcohol, even if a few ounces have evaporated. When the
solution develops a frothy head of foam, however, the solution is beginning to
revert to a paste. Now is the time to add more alcohol. If the baseline weight and
the new weight vary by 8 ounces, for example, unwrap the plastic and add 8
more ounces of alcohol. If the solution has lost 14 ounces, add 14 more ounces
of alcohol.
Reweigh the pot every half hour throughout the 2-hour cooking time. If the
plastic is tight and the solution isn t cooking at a high boil, you might not need to
replace any alcohol whatsoever.
9 Test for Excess Fatty Acids

Your soap should be neutral after 2 hours of continuous cooking. Test for the
presence of excess fatty acids in an alcohol-based soap using the same method
you d use to test a paste: Dilute a few ounces of soap in a few ounces of water,
and allow the solution to cool. If the solution shows more than slight
cloudiness, continue cooking. If dense cloudiness persists after 3 hours of
cooking, consult chapter 8.
 CREATING AN ALCOHOL-FREE SOAP PASTE
Alcohol can be left in the finished soap if you so desire. It enhances the
clarity and brightness of the finished soap. Essential oils are less likely
to cloud soap containing alcohol, because alcohol acts as a solvent.
If you wish to remove the alcohol, do so after the soap sample has
tested clear in cooled water. Remove the plastic from the top of the pot,
but leave the pot inside the double boiler. Bring the water in the
bottom pot to a fast boil. As the alcohol in the soap solution evaporates,
the soap thickens and foams. Continue cooking until the solution
becomes a paste; this can then be diluted with water following the
procedure outlined in the paste method.

10 Dilute the Soap Broth
Bring water to a boil, then add the soap paste. (See chart on page 42 for
dilution guidelines.) Another advantage of the alcohol-lye method over the paste
method is that the broth dissolves instantly in hot water no breaking up of paste
chunks will be necessary. Keep in mind that a little less water will be needed for
dilution to compensate for the alcohol in solution. For example, if the recipe
requires 1 pound of alcohol, use 1 pound less water when diluting the soap.

If allowed to cool, the broth hardens into a clear paste. This can be wrapped
up and refrigerated for later use. Alcohol-based paste dissolves quite rapidly
when added to boiling water because of the solvency of the alcohol.
11 Neutralize the Soap
Neutralize the solution by adding borax, citric acid, or boric acid solution.
To create a 20 percent buffer solution, add 2 ounces of citric or boric acid to 8
ounces of boiling distilled water. Stir until dissolved. Boric acid will precipitate
out of solution when allowed to cool, so reheat before adding to the soap
solution. If you prefer to use borax, see the information on page 30 for the paste
method.
 Always use distilled or soft water in your soap recipes for best results.

12 Add Dyes and Fragrances
Add the dyes and fragrances to the hot soap stock. Remember: Do not use
oil-based dyes, which can cloud the soap. Preservatives should also be added
now while the soap is still hot (see page 43 for preservatives). Whisk thoroughly
for optimum dispersal.

13 Sequester
Sequester alcohol-based soaps in covered jars in the same manner as soaps
made with the paste method: Allow the diluted liquid to settle for 1 to 2 weeks
until the insoluble soaps and the cloudiness caused by fragrance oils settle out of
the solution.
Whether you followed the paste method or the alcohol/lye method,
after the soap has been sequestered, it’s ready to use!

guidelines for dilution
The previous sections were intended as a broad overview of the two basic liquid soapmaking methods.
You’re certain to be nagged by many unanswered questions. Exactly how much boric acid is necessary to
neutralize soap? How many ounces of sulfonated castor oil are needed for superfatting? Just what is a 20
percent soap solution?
The following information will answer your questions. These guidelines
apply to all soap formulations in this book.
Dilution Rates
In commercial liquid soapmaking, soap concentrations are referred to as
percentages of true or actual soap. Actual soap means the combined weight of
the oils and dry hydroxide. Water and any other additives in the formulation aren
t counted. Water accounts for approximately 35 to 40 percent of the weight in a
potassium soap formulation; the remaining 60 to 65 percent of the paste is actual
soap.
The recipes in this book all yield approximately 6 pounds of paste. If, for

example, you dilute all 6 pounds down to a 20 percent soap concentration, you ll
see from the chart on page 42 that a 20 percent solution requires 2 pounds of
water per 1 pound of paste. Likewise, 6 pounds of paste requires 12 pounds of
water, for a grand total of 18 pounds of finished soap.
The dilution rates range from 15 to 40 percent for a reason: At
concentrations much below 15 percent, the soap becomes too thin to lather
effectively, and at progressively higher concentrations, the solution begins
coagulating back into paste. Because of the soluble nature of coconut oil, 100
percent coconut oil soaps can form the most highly concentrated solutions at 40
percent actual soap to 60 percent water. Soft oils form soaps that congeal at
lower concentrations, starting at about 20 to 25 percent actual soap. Blends of
coconut oil and soft oils will therefore yield soaps that require dilutions of
approximately 25 to 35 percent actual soap.
If you follow the alcohol/lye method and choose to leave the alcohol in
solution, always discount the weight of the alcohol from the weight of water
needed for dilution; otherwise, the finished soap will be thinner than planned.
All recipes require 20 ounces of alcohol, so subtract 20 ounces from the total
water weight, unless a few ounces of alcohol have evaporated during the 2-hour
cooking time.
Some fine-tuning may be necessary to create a proper concentration. A
solution is too concentrated if a sticky, viscous layer develops on the surface of
the finished soap. The thicker the layer, the more water is needed for dilution.
However, stronger soap concentrations without the layering problem can be
created by the use of borax. The addition of 2 tablespoons of a 33 percent borax
solution per pound of diluted soap emulsifies the soap and helps prevent the
formation of layers. Read more about the use of borax for emulsifying and
thickening on the facing page.
A Guide to Dilution Percentages

using additives
One of the beauties of liquid soapmaking is that a single soap base can be modified with different additives
to create completely different finished soaps. Here are some ideas and general guidelines; note that, with the
exception of neutralizers, all additives are strictly optional.
Neutralizers
One pound of soap paste requires approximately ¾ ounce (or 1½ tablespoons) of
a 20 percent boric or citric acid solution, or ¾ ounce of a 33 percent borax
solution, for neutralization. (See page 30 for instructions on making acid
solutions.) All the formulations in this book yield about 6 pounds of paste, so
approximately 4½ ounces (or 9 tablespoons) of either borax or acid (citric, boric)
solution is necessary.
Borax is a mild alkali (pH 9.2), not an acid. Its effectiveness as a buffer is
due to the fact that its pH is lower than the pH of soap (9.5—10). Because it isn t
an acid, borax won t throw soap out of solution, and it can consequently be
added to either hot or cold liquid soap. Remember, too, that no neutralizers will
be necessary when you use borax as a thickener.
The amounts of neutralizers for the recipes in this book are approximate
amounts only. Differences in types of oils, cooking time, dilution rates, and other
variables all affect the pH of the finished soap. The best way to fine-tune this
process is to use phenolphthalein. Instructions are given on page 14.

Preservatives
Thoroughly neutralized soaps with fresh, clean-smelling oils should need no
preservatives. If you feel more comfortable adding preservatives, use a scant
teaspoon of rosemary extract or mixed-tocopherol vitamin E per pound of soap
paste. Stir into hot, diluted soap stock for optimal dispersal.
Superfatting
Sulfonated castor oil is the only superfatting agent suitable for liquid soap.
Sulfonated castor oil lubricates like an oil but is completely water soluble; all
other oils will cloud the soap because of the liberation of free fatty acids.
For every pound of dilute soap stock, superfat with approximately 1 percent
sulfonated castor oil. For 12 pounds of liquid soap, for example, convert 12
pounds into ounces (12 × 16), then multiply by .01; 192 ounces soap will require
1.92 ounces, or approximately 4 tablespoons, of sulfonated castor oil.
Thickeners
As consumers, we re accustomed to thick, full-bodied liquid soaps. This
thickness isn t inherent in the soap itself but is created by surfactants, cellulose
derivatives, carrageenan, and other additives. Commercial soaps are commonly
20 percent soap and 80 percent water. At that concentration, soap is quite watery
if formulated without viscosity builders. Even though thin soap cleans as well as
thick, many of us still prefer fuller-bodied soaps.
Borax. One way to enhance soap viscosity is to add borax.
Borax is the silver bullet of liquid soapmaking. It enhances and stabilizes
foam, softens hard water, buffers pH, and acts as a preservative. Borax is also
invaluable for creating more concentrated soap solutions because of its ability to
both emulsify and thicken.
Different soap bases begin congealing at different concentrations. This
congealing is first apparent as a gooey crust on the surface of the soap solution.
In time, this thickening extends further down into the body of the soap until the
entire containerful has coagulated. Olive oil and other soft oils congeal in
concentrations as low as 20 to 25 percent actual soap to water; coconut oil
begins layering at much higher saturations approximately 40 percent soap to 60
percent water. The home soapmaker can overcome these limitations by adding 2
to 3 tablespoons of a 33 percent borax solution per pound of dilute soap. The

borax actually emulsifies the solution, creating a homogenous solution free of a
thick upper crust. You are now free to experiment with different concentrations
of soap than the soap might otherwise allow.
Borax is also a viscosity modifier, or thickening agent. Chemically, sodium
borate cross-links with hydroxide molecules to form thicker soap. Interestingly,
this tendency is very marked when borax is added to a soap high in soft oils,
which makes borax an ideal additive for gel soapmaking (see chapter 5). Little or
no thickening, however, can be observed when borax is added to a soap
formulation high in coconut oil, which is highly soluble. Borax will emulsify
coconut oil soaps but not thicken them.
One other limitation to the effectiveness of borax as a thickener is that it
works best in soaps of higher concentration. The thinner and less concentrated
the soap solution, the smaller the effect borax has on viscosity.
For thickening soap solutions high in soft oils, create a 33 percent borax
solution by dissolving 4 ounces of borax in 8 ounces of boiling water. Add to
diluted soap stock at a rate of ½ to 1 ounce of solution per 1 pound of soap stock.
Start with ½ ounce and test the viscosity. If you desire a thicker soap, add
another ½ ounce. The more borax, the thicker the emulsion. But past a certain
point, the soap progressively clouds with increasing additions of borax; this is
due to both a lower pH and an elevated cloud point and is particularly evident in
fragranced soap. When borax is used as a thickening agent, it s best to add it to
cold soap because changes in viscosity are more apparent in cold solutions than
in hot.
When using borax as an emulsifier or thickener, add it after the soap has
been sequestered unless you re satisfied with the clarity of the newly diluted
soap. Insoluble soaps won t be able to settle out of the more concentrated
solutions created by the addition of borax. If your sequestered soap has formed a
crust, remove it and remelt the soap in a microwave or double boiler. Stir this
solution into the clear sequestered liquid, and then add borax.
 MAKING CONCENTRATED SOAP SOLUTIONS
True potassium soaps lack the thickness of commercial soaps. Many
first-time makers of potassium soaps are surprised at how thin a
potassium soap solution can seem.

Homemade potassium soaps that can’t be thickened with borax can
be thickened by modifying the cooking method for gels outlined in
chapter 5. For every pound of paste, add 2 ounces of alcohol and 4
ounces of glycerin. Cook the paste, glycerin, and alcohol over medium
heat until the paste dissolves; another ounce or two of alcohol may be
needed to compensate for evaporation. Now stir in 6 ounces of water.
Test the viscosity of the liquid by spooning a small sample into a bowl
and covering it with regular plastic wrap to prevent evaporation.
When the solution cools, you’ll have a “snapshot” of your entire
batch. If the solution’s too thick, add a couple of ounces of water and
test again. If it’s too thin, continue boiling the solution, testing every
few minutes until you’re satisfied with the finished soap.
Calgon can be used in much the same manner as borax. The only drawback
is that its color and fragrance become your soap s color and fragrance.
Gums and seaweed extracts. Other natural additives for thickening soap
include carrageenan and cellulose derivatives. Many of these natural extracts
perform best in lower pH solutions and don t work as well in high-pH true soaps.
They often contain substances that cause minor clouding in the body of the
liquid soap; one exception is purified xanthan gum. If you wish to experiment
with carrageenan or other gums, add the gum at a rate of 1 percent of the total
weight of the diluted soap. These thickeners clump when added directly to a
liquid, so make a slurry by mixing the gum in a few ounces of glycerin before
adding it to the soap.
Sequestering Agents
Soap suffering from minor cloudiness caused by excess fatty acids or essential
oils can often be cured with alcohol, glycerin, and sugar solutions added to
diluted soap at a rate of roughly 5 percent. For example, 10 pounds of slightly
milky soap, or 160 ounces, can be mixed with up to 8 ounces of a sequestrant
(160 × .05 = 8). Five percent is a somewhat arbitrary number; start with less,
then add more if needed. Sequestrants in excess of 5 percent can be used, but
remember that too much will dampen the soap s foaming action.
Alcohol, glycerin, and sugar solution can be added alone or in combination.
You might try a 1:1:1 blend of all three. An effective sugar solution can be
concocted by boiling 1 pound of water, then adding 1½ pounds of sugar; bring

the solution back to a boil, and cook it until all the sugar has dissolved.
Reheat the soap solution before adding sequestrants. When mixed with cold
soap, the sequestrants take a day or so before a change in clarity becomes
noticeable. You ll see the effects immediately when you add a sequestrant to hot
soap. Nonetheless, it s a good idea to give the soap a few more days of
sequestering time, because it will continue to clarify after solvents have been
incorporated.
Note: Besides its usefulness as a sequestering agent, glycerin is an excellent
moisturizer, humectant, and lather booster. Add 1 to 2 ounces of glycerin to
every pound of diluted liquid soap for extra emollience and mildness.
Herbs
If you love herbs, as many soapmakers do, one of your first liquid soap
experiments will probably involve the dilution of soap paste with herb-infused
water. Because lavender is an excellent hair conditioner, isn t lavender water the
logical choice for a shampoo base? Yes, if it s added to a lowpH detergent
shampoo. But the higher pH of true soap doesn t react kindly with herbal
infusions; the infusions tend to turn brown and cloudy. Instead, use herbal
essential oils. Shampoo formulations, in particular, benefit from these oils.

A
3 formulating blends
dd goat grease to a liberal amount of spruce ash and mix well. This is one
of the first recorded “recipes” for potassium soap, written some two
thousand years ago in the Historiae Naturalis by Pliny the Elder of Rome. The
salve of goat grease and spruce ash was used by the Teutons not for washing but
for smoothing and “styling” hair, as well as for dyeing. It wasn’t until A.D. 200
that the Romans discovered the cleansing properties of soap.
These days, there are many different types of soap on the market. But why
use a synthetic detergent when you can create all-natural versions in your own

kitchen? This chapter will get you started with some basic recipes and provide
information for formulating liquid soap from scratch.
the first liquid soaps
Simple and Natural Early soapmakers learned to make sodium soaps by adding common salt to a potassium
soap base. Because of their ease of storage and transport, sodium soaps were the only soaps available until
the 1930s, when liquid soaps first appeared.
These early liquids, however, were formulated for industrial and institutional
markets. Not until the late 1970s was the Softsoap brand introduced: the first
liquid soap for personal, in-home use. Packaged in an attractive pump dispenser,
Softsoap s overnight success triggered a mad scramble for market share by every
major soap producer in the country.
Softsoap and most liquid soaps on the market today are synthetic detergents;
the notable exception is Dr. Bronner s brand liquid soap. From a mass-
production standpoint, synthetic soaps have much to recommend them: longer
shelf lives, more consistency in the raw materials, and more stability when
exposed to extremes of temperature.
Simple and Natural
The vast majority of home soapmakers today prefer more traditional soapmaking
methods that rely on simple, pure ingredients and a minimum of synthetic
additives. Old-fashioned potassium soaps are a perfect fit: They re formulated
with inexpensive vegetable oils, require little or nothing in the way of
preservatives, and allow much room for experimentation and improvisation.

 Proper oil measurements will ensure soap that is rich and has good
lather.
formulating your own soap
Soapmaking is an art as well as a science. The calculation of lye solutions, measurement of ingredients and
temperatures, proper cooking, and cure times are all science. The blending of oils and additives as well as
dyeing and fragrancing are all art.
Oil Blends
The most important art in liquid soapmaking lies in proper oil blending.
Potassium soaps are somewhat easier than sodium bar soaps in this respect
because liquids are formulated almost exclusively with coconut oil and soft oils.
Coconut oil forms the backbone of all liquid soaps, typically accounting for 70

to 90 percent of a formulation. It produces a high, foamy lather and performs
well in salt and hard waters, but a 100 percent coconut oil soap is drying to the
skin. This is why coconut oil is usually toned down with at least 10 percent of a
soft oil, which lends mildness and emollience. On the other hand, a 100 percent
soft oil liquid soap produces a stingy, low-lather soap and needs to be fortified
with a minimum of 10 percent coconut oil.
Many soft oils are available to the soapmaker. For a discussion of different
soft oils for soapmaking, see chapter 1. Please consult the Soapmaking
Properties of Common Fats and Oils chart on page 6 to find out which oil will
best fit your purpose.
Where crystal-clear soaps are desired, hard fats such as palm oil and tallow
should be used sparingly if at all. The palmitic and stearic acids in these oils
form insoluble soaps that have a milky appearance. The chart on page 5 will help
you select oils low in these two acids. Lanolin and jojoba also cause cloudiness
not because they form insoluble soaps but because they are technically waxes
and contain a high percentage of substances that do not saponify. When
formulating with cloud-causing oils or waxes, begin with small amounts
approximately 3 to 5 percent of the oil total. If crystal clarity is not important to
you, larger quantities of these oils and waxes can be used in your formulas.

 NO-FUSS BLENDING TECHNIQUE
Here’s an easy, timesaving technique for developing soap blends. If
you wish to create a soap combining coconut oil, castor oil, and jojoba,
for example, weigh out a pound of each oil, then mix up three separate
lye solutions. Mix each oil with its corresponding lye solution and stir
until thickened. Spoon into three 1-quart mason jars and place the jars
in a double boiler. Cook the three pastes until they are neutral, then
dilute them separately, using the same proportion of water for each.
Finding that perfect blend is now a simple matter of mixing the three
soaps in various combinations and testing until you’re satisfied. Be
sure to keep notes!
Alkali Needed to Saponify Common Oils/Fats/Waxes

Calculating Lye Proportions

Each soapmaking oil requires a different amount of sodium or potassium
hydroxide for neutralization; this amount is the saponification value.
Saponification values are numbers that are converted mathematically into
percentages of hydroxide per pound of oil. With simplicity in mind, the
percentages alone are listed in the chart on the facing page. For each oil needed,
convert the pounds of oil into ounces, then multiply by the percentage of
potassium hydroxide needed for neutralization. Add all the numbers together for
the total amount of potassium hydroxide needed for the recipe.
Let s say you want an oil blend consisting of 2 pounds of coconut oil, 1
pound of canola oil, and .5 pound of castor oil.
For coconut oil:
32 × .266 = 8.5 ounces KOH
For canola oil:
16 × .192 = 3.07 ounces KOH
For castor oil:
8 × .179 = 1.43 ounces KOH
Add all three hydroxide numbers together (8.5 + 3.07 + 1.43) for a total of 13
ounces of potassium hydroxide.
You ll overalkalize, however, to ensure that all free fatty acids are
neutralized. The recipes in this book are calculated in excess of approximately
10 percent potassium hydroxide. Multiply 13 × .1, and the hydroxide total equals
1.3 ounces.
Potassium hydroxide solutions typically contain 50 percent more water than
sodium hydroxide solutions. For every pound of dry potassium hydroxide,
multiply by 3; for example, 14.1 ounces potassium hydroxide requires 42 ounces
of water.
Your finished formula for 2 pounds of coconut oil, 1 pound of canola oil, and
.5 pound of castor oil is now: ¥ 32 ounces coconut oil
¥ 16 ounces canola oil
¥ 8 ounces castor oil
¥ 14.3 ounces potassium hydroxide
¥ 42 ounces soft or distilled water
To neutralize, just remember that each pound of finished paste (at 10 percent
excess alkali) requires approximately 1½ tablespoons of a 20 percent boric or

citric acid solution, or 1½ tablespoons of a 33 percent borax solution. These
amounts are only approximations; the use of phenolphthalein (see page 14 for
instructions) is the only method for guaranteeing truly neutral soap.
basic soap recipes
Using the instructions in chapter 2 as your guide, you can use the following formulas for basic hand and
body soaps. These are “no-frills” recipes; if you wish to enhance your soap with moisturizers, foam
boosters, or other additives, refer to the Additives Guide on page 60 for ideas, or let your imagination guide
100% Coconut Oil Soap
This soap is high-foaming and excellent for use in hard and salt waters. Not
recommended for dry skin.
Oil
48 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
14 ounces potassium hydroxide
42 ounces soft or distilled water
Mild C
Oil S

Mild Coconut Oil Soap
Another high-foaming formula, this soap is milder because it contains soft oils.
Oils
35 ounces coconut oil
13 ounces soft oil of choice
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
 Coconut oil is the basis of all liquid soaps, but you should blend it with a
soft oil to prevent drying of your skin.
Creamy Coconut Oil Soap
A terrific medium-foaming soap, with rich lather.
Oils
23 ounces coconut oil
25 ounces soft oil of choice
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water

36 ou ces so t o d st
ed wate
High-Foaming Rosin Soap
Beautiful amber liquid with abundant, moisturizing lather.
Oils
30 ounces coconut oil
9 ounces soft oil of choice
7 ounces rosin
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
Supermild Soap
Very mild, emollient lather, though not as high-foaming as the soaps in the other
recipes on these two pages.
Oils
10 ounces coconut oil
39 ounces soft oil of choice
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
High-Foaming Cold Cream Soap
Castor oil makes this soap produce lots of lather with a cold-cream,
moisturizing finish. Great for dry skin.
Oils
35 ounces coconut oil
11 ounces castor oil
3 ounces palm oil or tallow
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water

Liquid Soap with Palm Oil
Palm oil helps build “body” in liquid soap. Not quite as crystal clear as soft
oil/coconut blend soaps, but great nonetheless.
Oils
18 ounces coconut oil
22 ounces soft oil of choice
5 ounces palm oil or tallow
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water

Castor Oil–Jojoba Moisturizing Soap
The high percentages of soft oil, castor oil, and jojoba make this soap
exceptionally mild. The solventlike castor oil will also tone down the clouding
effects of jojoba.
Oils
24 ounces coconut oil
10 ounces soft oil of choice
10 ounces castor oil
3 ounces jojoba
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
Moisturizing Jojoba Soap

A very mild, moisturizing soap. Because jojoba contains some substances that do
not saponify, this soap may not be quite as crystal clear as some other
formulations.
Oils
16 ounces coconut oil
29 ounces soft oil of choice
3 ounces jojoba
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
 No matter which soft oil you choose, the soap will have cleansing
properties that rival those of commercial soaps.
Lanolin Soap
Lanolin, like jojoba, is chemically similar to our skin’s own natural moisturizers.
Lanolin contains many substances that do not saponify and tend to form a slight
film on the surface of the finished soap. This film can be skimmed off or shaken
back into solution.
Oils
16 ounces coconut oil
29 ounces soft oil of choice
3 ounces lanolin
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
Castor Oil–Rosin Soap
The very first transparent soap bars were formulated with castor oil and rosin
some two hundred years ago. These two ingredients impart exceptional clarity to
liquid soap as well.
Oils
39 ounces coconut oil
6 ounces castor oil
4
i

4 ounces rosin
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
 If you have dry skin, try using lanolin or jojoba in your recipes.
Remember to add the appropriate amount of ethanol or isopropyl
alcohol if you’re using the alcohol/lye method for any of these recipes.
See page 41 for more information.


L
4 premium natural shampoos
iquid shampoo is a relative newcomer. Throughout history, if and when
people washed their hair, they used bar soap. Liquid detergent shampoos
were first introduced in 1930 and were followed by cream and liquid cream
shampoos. A commercial “true soap” shampoo today will probably contain 25
percent coconut oil, a trace of olive oil, 15 percent alcohol, and 50 percent water
and glycerol.
You can make a host of different shampoos simply by varying the types and
proportions of oil. I’ve also included a section on additives that will improve the
cleaning, conditioning, moisturizing, and shine-enhancing capabilities of your
shampoos. As with other liquid soaps, you may also use dyes and fragrances to

embellish your finished shampoos.
what does shampoo do?
To a certain extent, shampoos are glorified liquid soaps. The recipes in chapter 3 can be used as shampoos,
and shampoo formulations can likewise substitute for liquid soap. Shampoos, however, do take a bit more
care and thought to formulate, because creating a perfect shampoo involves the reconciliation of two
opposing aims: cleansing and conditioning. An effective cleanser needs to remove deposits from the hair,
whereas an effective conditioner needs to deposit additives on the hair.

Cleaning and Conditioning
Hair becomes dirty because of the buildup of sebum, the oily substance
produced by the sebaceous glands contained in every hair follicle in the scalp.
For shampoos to clean hair effectively, they must first penetrate the layer of
sebum that coats the hair shaft. This is accomplished by using a preponderance
of oils that contain short-chained fatty acid molecules; these small molecules
dissolve the water-oil interface more rapidly than long-chained molecules, such
as stearic acid. The most notable short-chained fatty acid is lauric acid, the
predominant acid in coconut oil.
Conditioners are added to shampoos to counteract the damage done to hair
by other hair preparations, especially bleach and dye. Conditioners fall into three
classes: humectants, finishing agents, and emulsifiers. Humectants draw
moisture from the air and hold it to the hair shaft. Humectants commonly used in
commercial shampoos include glycerin, propylene glycol, sorbitol, and urea.
Finishing agents such as balsam peru and isopropyl myristate leave a film on the
hair, creating the soft and shiny look. Emulsifiers should be nonsticking and
should disappear when rubbed between the hands. Emulsifiers homogenize the
ingredients in the soap and also boost the penetrating cleaning power of the soap
by lowering surface tension. Alcohols, lanolin, spermaceti, glycerin, mineral oil,
and perfumes are common emulsifiers.

 While cleansing and conditioning might seem impossible to achieve with
the same product, you can easily create shampoos that both clean your hair
and improve its texture.
The protein in human hair is very similar to wool protein, and early
research on wool contributed greatly to our knowledge of the structure
and proper ties of human hair.
The protein keratin constitutes about 80 percent of human hair. Many
shampoos and conditioners on the market contain keratin or other proteins, such
as beer and egg; manufacturers claim that these additives replace the protein lost
in dry or damaged hair. According to the American Medical Association, there is
little evidence to substantiate this claim. If these proteins do have an effect, it is
similar to the coating effect of other conditioners.

Using Oils and Additives
Even if the arsenal of additives used by commercial soapmakers were readily
available to the home soapmaker, most home crafters would still turn to simple,
natural alternatives. The Additives Guide below should offer you plenty of
options for shampoo fillers, but don t stop there all crafts should be approached
in a spirit of adventure and experiment.
 GREAT SHAMPOO ADDITIVES
See page 42 for more information, but here’s a brief recap of some
excellent shampoo additives.
 BORAX. An excellent emulsifier, detergent, lather stabilizer, and
thickening agent. One research source claims that extended use of
borax can dry hair; another source claims that borax moisturizes. The
best bet for home soapmakers is to try it for themselves.
 CASTOR OIL. A superb cleanser as well as a conditioner and
moisturizer.
 ESSENTIAL OILS. Lavender, rosemary, and clary sage are herbs that
purportedly condition hair and stimulate hair growth.
 GLYCERIN. One or 2 ounces added to a pound of shampoo is an
excellent moisturizer and conditioner, creating shiny, lustrous hair.
 OLIVE OIL. Though all the formulations in this book offer the
soapmaker a choice of soft oils, special attention should be paid to olive
oil in formulating shampoos. Because of its molecular structure, olive
oil is extremely gentle and moisturizing. Sweet almond oil also shares
these virtues.
 SULFONATED CASTOR OIL. As a superfatting agent, 2 to 3 teaspoons
sulfonated castor oil per 1 pound of shampoo adds richness and
emollience without compromising the clarity

shampoo formulations
This section includes a wide variety of shampoo formulations, all based on the step-by-step instructions in
chapter 2. If you have dry hair, look for formulations lower in coconut oil and higher in soft oils, castor oil,
lanolin, jojoba, and cocoa butter. The addition of glycerin and/or sulfonated castor oil to the shampoo will
moisturize and condition.
You can also formulate your own shampoo. Oily hair will benefit from
shampoos high in coconut oil and lower in soft oils.
Unless otherwise directed, follow the instructions for mixing and cooking in
chapter 2. You ll need soft oil such as olive, almond, canola, safflower, or soy
for most of these recipes. Two rules apply to all of the recipes in this chapter: If
you’re using the alcohol/lye method to make your soap, add 20 ounces of
ethanol or isopropyl alcohol to the oil and lye solution.
To neutralize the soap, add 4½ ounces of a 20 percent boric or citric acid
solution or 4½ ounces of a 33 percent borax solution. Note: If you use borax as
an emulsifer or thickener, no neutralizers will be necessary.
Basic Shampoo
This simple-to-make shampoo is high-foaming and has enough soft oil for
emollience.
Oils
37 ounces coconut oil
11 ounces soft oil of choice
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide

39 ounces soft or distilled water
 You can use the same dyes to color shampoos and other liquid soaps; try
blending custom shades.
Castor Oil–Coconut Oil Shampoo
Castor oil conditions, moisturizes, and cleanses.
Oils
39 ounces coconut oil
8 ounces castor oil
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water

Jojoba Conditioning Shampoo
Like lanolin, jojoba moisturizes and conditions. The additional castor oil makes
this a very rich and conditioning shampoo.
Oils
37 ounces coconut oil
9 ounces castor oil
4 ounces jojoba oil
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
Vitamin E Hair Booster
A moisturizing formula, this shampoo contains vitamin E.
Oils
42 ounces coconut oil
3 ounces wheat germ oil
3 ounces jojoba
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
Gentle Shampoo
The high percentage of soft oils and rosin makes this a very mild shampoo.
Oils
25 ounces coconut oil
12 ounces soft oil of choice
6 ounces castor oil
5 ounces rosin
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
Liquid Silk Shampoo

Liquid Silk Shampoo
Lanolin, which is almost identical to the oil found on our own hair, conditions
and moisturizes.
Oils
32 ounces coconut oil
12 ounces soft oil of choice
3 ounces lanolin
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
Revitalizing Rosin Shampoo
Rosin adds a rich, cold-cream finish to this shampoo.
Oils
37 ounces coconut oil
5 ounces soft oil
5 ounces rosin
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
Goldilocks Shampoo
This is a shampoo high in vitamin E and moisturizers. The natural color of the
wheat germ oil imparts a beautiful amber hue to the liquid.
Oils
34 ounces coconut oil

10 ounces wheat germ oil
6 ounces castor oil
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
Marvelous Moisturizing Shampoo
High in castor oil and relatively low in coconut oil, this is an excellent shampoo
for dry or dandruffy hair.
Oils
24 ounces coconut oil
13 ounces soft oil of choice
11 ounces castor oil
2 ounces lanolin
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
Hawaiian Islands Shampoo
Cocoa butter, long used by the Hawaiians to condition the hair, is an excellent
moisturizer.
Oils
35 ounces coconut oil
11 ounces soft oil of choice
2 ounces cocoa butter
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
Because rosin has a much higher melt point than oil, melt the rosin
with 10 ounces of coconut oil. After the rosin has completely dissolved,
add the remainder of the oils.

baby shampoos
“Old-fashioned” baby shampoos used by hospitals were formulated with nothing but olive oil and
potassium hydroxide. Olive oil is composed of almost 90 percent oleic acid, an extremely mild fatty acid.
As a base for soap, olive oil creates a gentle, moisturizing lather, making it ideal for a baby’s sensitive skin.
100% Castile Soap Shampoo
Castile soap was originally a 100 percent olive oil soap, named for the Castile
region in Spain. This type of soap makes the mildest of shampoos, ideal for
baby’s tender skin. It’s not only for babies!
Oils
48 ounces olive oil
Lye solution
10 ounces potassium hydroxide
30 ounces soft or distilled water

For additional mildness, add 4 to 6 ounces of glycerin and 3 to 4
tablespoons of sulfonated castor oil to the recipes for 100% Castile
Soap Shampoo and Sudsy Fun Shampoo.
Sudsy Fun Shampoo
One hundred percent castile soap lacks a full lather. When 10 percent coconut
oil is added, the soap remains mild but produces a better lather.
Oils
41 ounces olive oil
5 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
10 ounces potassium hydroxide
30 ounces soft or distilled water
One of the very first shampoos was soapless; it was based on
sulfonated castor and olive oils.
“Soapless” Shampoo
At first, it’s going to feel quite strange applying a latherless oil to the hair
instead of soap. But you’ll be pleasantly surprised — sulfonated castor oil makes

a very decent shampoo.
1 cup sulfonated castor oil
1 tablespoon glycerin
1 tablespoon mineral or baby oil
fragrance of choice
Mix together all ingredients, and stir for half a minute to homogenize. Because
sulfonated castor oil is so soluble, no heating of the oils is necessary. Add
fragrance. Use as you would a regular shampoo.
 You’ll get peace of mind by formulating your own all-natural baby
shampoos.

dog shampoos
As the saying goes, animals are people, too, and anything you lather with can be used to lather your pet. All
the shampoo formulations in this chapter are suitable for dogs. If your dog has special problems, such as
eczema, consider the mild 100% Castile Soap Shampoo or a formulation lower in coconut oil. You might
also add glycerin and sulfonated castor oil to the shampoo for additional emollience.
Essential Oils for Flea Control
Lather aside, flea control is foremost on most dog owners minds. For natural flea
control, many essential oils possess fragrances particularly repellent to fleas;
these oils include citronella, peppermint, lavender, rosemary, tea tree,
cedarwood, rose geranium, cedar, clove, eucalyptus, pennyroyal, clary sage, and
pine oils. Add 2 teaspoons (or more if desired) of essential oil to 1 pound of
shampoo base, or try one of the blends below. Note: Essential oils are not
insecticides.
Fresh-Scent Blend
1 part clove essential oil
1 part peppermint essential oil
1 part lemon essential oil
Herbal Flea Tamer
2 parts eucalyptus essential oil
1 part lavender essential oil
2 parts geranium essential oil
1 part cedarwood essential oil
 Essential oils, which are made from plants, are terrific additions to liquid
soap blends.


 Put the power of herbs to work in dog shampoos that help repel fleas,
ticks, and other pests.
Pennyroyal–Citronella Special
5 parts pennyroyal essential oil
3 parts citronella essential oil
Woodsy Blend
2 parts pine essential oil
1 part rosemary essential oil
1 part tea tree essential oil
6 parts orange essential oil
Clean ’n’ Green
1 part clary sage essential oil
2 parts peppermint essential oil
½ part eucalyptus essential oil
Minty Dog
1 part tea tree essential oil
1 part citronella essential oil
3 parts peppermint essential oil
Great Outdoors
1 part lavender essential oil
2 parts cedarwood essential oil
1½ parts clove essential oil
Lemon-Fresh Repellent
3 parts lemon essential oil
1 part citronella essential oil
1 part rosemary essential oil

1 part rosemary essential oil

V
5 sumptuous bath & shower gels
iewed through a microscope, gels appear as fine, filamentous chains of
soap molecules; these filamentous chains are what give gels their
“elasticity.” Gels are “changelings.” They exist in a very narrow window
between liquid and semisolid, and you must do some fine-tuning to create that
ideal proportion of soap to water. Slight excesses of water turn the gel into liquid
soap; slight deficiencies of water make the gel revert to paste. Gels are also
temperamental in regard to temperature. High temperatures thin gels; low
temperatures congeal them.
Luckily for the home soapmaker, there are fairly simple solutions to the
problems encountered in formulating these beautiful, though elusive, soaps.

procedure for making gels
Use steps 1 through 7 of the paste method (on pages 22–27) for gel soapmaking, then continue with the
following steps. Don’t use the alcohol/lye method to make gels; excess alcohol prevents gel from
thickening.
Step 1: Add Solvents and Neutralizers
Cook the paste for 3 hours, remove the soap pot from the double boiler, and
place it directly over medium heat on the stove. For every pound of paste, add 1
to 1½ ounces of alcohol and 4 ounces of glycerin. A 6-pound batch of soap will
therefore require 6 to 9 ounces of alcohol and 24 ounces of glycerin. At this
phase, you ll also add the neutralizing solution (borax, citric acid, or boric acid)
at a rate of 4 tablespoons per 6 pounds of soap. If borax is to be used as an
emulsifier or thickener, forgo the use of neutralizers.
Step 2: Cook
Stir the paste, alcohol, and glycerin together and cook until the paste is
completely dissolved. If enough alcohol evaporates, the paste won t dissolve; in
this case, add a few extra ounces of alcohol. After all the lumps have dissolved,
stir in 6 ounces of distilled water per pound of paste, or 36 ounces of water for a
full 6-pound recipe. Weigh the soap pot, then return the pot to the stove, and

begin cooking. The solution is initially quite thin and, when stirred, produces a
very billowy head of foam. After water and alcohol begin evaporating, the
solution thickens. The foam thickens, too, becoming heavier and creamier as the
bubbles condense.
 Make bath and shower gels by first following the basic paste method.
Step 3: Add Water
Reweigh the soap pot. By the time the foam becomes thick and creamy,
approximately 12 to 16 ounces of water and alcohol will have evaporated from
the soap stock. Scoop the foam to one side of the pot in order to view the soap
solution. It will look noticeably different now; a thin, congealed crust will appear
on the surface, and when swirled in the pot, the soap won t be completely fluid.
Instead, it exhibits a jiggly and elastic behavior.
Step 4: Test the Viscosity
Remove the pot from the stove, and prepare a test sample of the stock by
scooping up a teaspoon of solution (foam-free) and ladling it onto the top of an
inverted quart jar. Cover the sample immediately with a piece of plastic wrap to
prevent evaporation, then allow the sample to cool. To hasten cooling, chill the
jar by placing it in the freezer for a few minutes.
If the cooled sample is watery, bring the soap back to a boil, and evaporate 2
to 3 more ounces of water. Test again. The state of readiness for a gel is partly

subjective. Some soapmakers may desire a very thick liquid, while others may
want a true gel, a concentration of approximately 45 to 50 percent soap.
Step 5: Add Dyes and Fragrances
Cook until the desired viscosity is achieved, then spoon off the foam, which can
be diluted and used as a liquid soap base. Dye, fragrance, and bottle the finished
gel immediately. If left to cool in the open air before bottling, gels develop a
thick crust on the surface; these crusts are impossible to reincorporate into the
solution. A small addition of borax will help emulsify the solution and prevent
separation; use ½ ounce of 33 percent borax solution per pound of gel.
 Let your imagination go wild when you make color blends for your gels!
alternative gel-making method
Because borax works so well for thickening soft oil–based soaps, it’s a perfect fit for gels that are always
formulated with high proportions of soft oil.
If you wish to forgo the use of alcohol and glycerin, dissolve the paste in
enough boiling water to bring all the soap into solution (1 to 2 pounds of water
per pound of paste). Add 1 to 3 ounces of borax to the water at the same time
you add the paste. The amount of borax you use depends upon how viscous you
want the gel. This requires a little experimentation. You can always add more
borax at any time during the cooking or even after the solution has cooled. (If
you add extra borax during the cooking phase, dissolve it first in a little hot
water.) After the paste and borax have dissolved, create a stronger soap

concentration by continuing to boil the solution. When the soap shows signs of
thickening, test its viscosity by spooning out small samples onto a chilled,
inverted glass. Cover the cooling samples with plastic wrap to avoid further
evaporation; this will give you a more accurate picture of the soap s consistency.
Cook and sample frequently until the desired thickness is reached.
Because borax increases the viscosity of soft oil—based soaps, your soap
will become a gel at a lower soap-to-water ratio than when you use the other gel
method outlined on page 70. Because of the borax, no neutralizers will be
necessary.
 Chill a glass or measuring cup before using it to test soap viscosity.
shower gel recipes

Gels have traditionally been formulated with high percentages of soft oils, which lend a smooth, salvelike
pliancy to the finished soap. However, soft oils produce low lathers; one-half ounce of 33 percent borax
solution per pound of gel will help improve the lather. The coconut oil in all the following formulations will
also boost lather.
Follow the directions on pages 70—71 to make any of the recipes in this
chapter. You ll need soft oil such as olive, almond, canola, safflower, or soybean
for all these recipes. In addition, you ll want to neutralize the soap with 4½
ounces of a 20 percent boric or citric acid solution or 4½ ounces of a 33 percent
borax solution. Note: If you use borax as an emulsifer or thickener, no
neutralizers will be necessary.
Basic Shower Gel
This gel is very mild and emollient because of the high percentage of soft oils.
Formulate with olive or almond oil to create an excellent “baby gel.”
Oils
43 ounces soft oil of choice
5 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
 Dress up shower gels in colorful or eye-catching bottles and dispensers.

Simple Coconut Oil Gel #1
This soap is mild like the Basic Shower Gel but a little foamier.
Oils
38 ounces soft oil of choice
7 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
Simple Coconut Oil Gel #2
Fairly high-foaming because of the high percentage of coconut oil, this gel is

good for oily skin.
Oils
33 ounces soft oil of choice
14 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
 THE LANGUAGE OF SOAPMAKING
Old-time gel soapmakers possessed quite an interesting language to
describe their soaps. Their texts are full of such phrases as “talking”
soap, soaps that “audibly break into roses,” and samples that “flower”
when poured onto glass.
“Figged” soaps were specialty gels requiring care and experience
on the part of the soapmaker. Oils high in stearic acid, such as palm oil
or tallow, were blended into a gel base. Upon cooking and cooling, the
stearic acid crystallized, forming a delicate lacelike pattern throughout
the body of the gel. These “fig” formulations were described in such
terms as “ricelike figging,” “small, ryelike figging,” or a “beautiful
medium figging.”

Coconut–Jojoba Fusion
The soft oils and jojoba make this gel ideal for dry skin or for preventing
chapping in cold weather.
Oils
38 ounces soft oil of choice
3 ounces jojoba
9 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water
Amber Allure
Rosin gives this gel a rich, cold-cream lather as well as a lovely nut-brown
color.
Oils
34 ounces soft oil of choice
8 ounces coconut oil
7 ounces rosin
Lye solution
11 ounces potassium hydroxide
33 ounces soft or distilled water

Rich and Creamy Shower Gel
Palm oil (or tallow) lends this soap a little extra body.
Oils
28 ounces soft oil of choice
18 ounces coconut oil
4 ounces palm oil or tallow
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
 Boost the lather of shower gels by using

Gels for Summertime
The higher the mercury in the thermometer climbs, the thinner gels become. One
way to fortify gels against thinning is through additions of slight amounts of oils
containing stearic and palmitic acids, whose higher melt points help prevent
thinning. These oils need to be used sparingly because they cause clouding at
higher percentages. To make any of these recipes, follow the instructions on
pages 70—71.
Coco-Loco Shower Gel
This is a high-foaming gel. Cocoa butter adds body and emollience.
Oils
24 ounces soft oil of choice
21 ounces coconut oil
3 ounces cocoa butter

3 ounces cocoa butter
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
Summertime Smoothie
Try this very rich, mild, and soothing gel. Castor oil contributes to the clarity of
the soap, offsetting the mild clouding caused by palm oil.
Oils
25 ounces soft oil of choice
9 ounces coconut oil
5 ounces palm oil
5 ounces castor oil
Lye solution
12 ounces potassium hydroxide
36 ounces soft or distilled water
A simple gel blended with a small percentage of alcohol served as an
effective automobile soap in the early twentieth century.
Display a vibrant collection of shower gels, or package some to give as
gifts!


O
6 luxurious bubble baths
f all soaps, either solid or liquid, bubble baths are most likely to be luxury items formulated almost
exclusively for show. Getting these soaps to look their best with quick, high-foaming, long-lasting
bubbles is a home soapmaker’s prime consideration.
Following the guidelines given in this chapter, you’ll be able to create rich
and effective bubble baths. Of course, just because these bubble baths work well
doesn’t mean they can’t look good too. Explore the possibilities in chapter 7,
Dyeing & Fragrancing, which will show you how to make ordinary soap into
something spectacular. As a bonus, I’ve included custom-made scents by
professional soapmakers on pages 93 to 103; use these to transform your
bathtime experience.

foam builders and stabilizers
Coconut oil (or any other oil high in lauric acid) forms the basis for all bubble baths because it produces the
fastest, highest foam. Small amounts of soft oil can be added for emollience.
Soft oils high in oleic acid such as olive, almond, and canola oils create a
higher, stabler lather than do soft oils composed of relatively little oleic acid.
Stabilizing the foam so that it persists in the bathtub is another big challenge.
Commercial soapmakers have many chemicals at their disposal that home
soapmakers lack. However, several additives mentioned in chapter 1 (glycerin,
borax, and Calgon) work well as foam stabilizers.
If you wish to experiment first with the foaming action of these additives,
dissolve 1 or 2 ounces of liquid soap in 10 to 12 ounces of water. Place the
solution in a large pot, and whisk it for 20 seconds. Note how high and lasting
the foam is. In a second pot, create an identical soap/water emulsion, then add a
half teaspoon or so of whichever additive you re interested in. Whisk this for 20
seconds, and compare this foam with the nonadditive soap foam. In this manner,
you can create your own bubble bath formulation.
 Lather will last longer if oils high in oleic acid are used in the recipe.

Glycerin
A few drops of glycerin added to ordinary dish soap creates an extraordinary
bubble-blowing soap. The same principle can be applied to bubble bath
formulations a few ounces of glycerin added to the soap solution noticeably
enhance foaming.
Borax
Borax (or Calgon) works even more effectively than glycerin. Borax acts as both
a detergent and a foam stabilizer, making it one of the best extras for bubble bath
formulations. In addition, borax is a water softener a big plus if your bathwater is
unsoftened.
Sodium–Potassium Soap
Sodium-based bar soaps markedly increase foaming when blended with a
potassium soap.

Formulations combining sodium and potassium hydroxide are beyond the
scope of this book because creating a homogenous emulsion with both
hydroxides can be tricky on account of their differing solubilities. The emulsions
tend to be grainy and very prone to separation. But for the first few bubble bath
recipes, a few ounces of grated bar soap dissolved in hot potassium liquid soap
will noticeably increase foaming. The sodium soap may cause a bit of clouding,
however, particularly if the soap is superfatted. To avoid this problem, add the
grated bar soap to the potassiumlye solution rather than after the potassium soap
has cooked. Any excess fatty acids in the bar soap will be cooked and
neutralized along with the potassium soap.
The sodium soap can be added to potassium soap in two different ways.
First, you can add it as part of the potassiumlye solution. One big advantage of
this method is that the presence of soap in the lye solution will increase the
saponification rate by increasing emulsification of the oil and lye. If you wish to
add 10 ounces of grated soap to your formulation, for example, dissolve it in 10
ounces of boiling water. Subtract this 10 ounces from the total amount of water
needed for the lye solution. In a separate container, prepare the lye solution by
mixing the hydroxide flakes with water (minus 10 ounces). After the soap has
dissolved, add to the hot lye solution, then mix with the oils.
The grated soap can also be added after the potassium paste has been cooked
and diluted. For every 1 ounce of soap, dissolve in 1 to 2 ounces of boiling
water.

Powdered Milk
Milk is added to bath preparations as a soothing skin cleanser. Use a maximum
of 4 percent milk (either dry buttermilk or regular nonfat) to the total diluted
soap weight, or up to  ounce per pound of liquid soap.
Sulfonated Castor Oil
One other additive you might consider is sulfonated castor oil. Since it s
completely water soluble, it can be used alone as a bath oil and blended with
various essential oils, or it can be mixed into the bubble bath solution for added
emollience.
Moisturizers, Foam Builders, and Stabilizers

 Familiarize yourself with the various additives. This will help you decide
which ingredient is best for creating “special effects.”



 A soothing bubble bath is only a few steps away with these simple
formulas.
luxurious bubble bath recipes
At the end of the day, nothing is more relaxing than a hot bubble bath. Additives such as glycerin,
sulfonated castor oil, and milk will enhance these soothing sensations, but consider too the aroma-
therapeutic effects of certain essential oils. For instance, the scent of rosemary helps relieve headaches, and
lavender relaxes muscles. Or try adding some flower waters, such as rose water or orange water, directly to
your bathwater.
Unless otherwise noted, follow the step-by-step instructions for making
liquid soaps in chapter 2. Two special rules apply to all the recipes in this
chapter: If using the alcohol/lye method to make your soap, add 20 ounces
ethanol or isopropyl alcohol to the oil and lye solution.
To neutralize the soap, add 4½ ounces of a 20 percent boric or citric acid
solution or 4½ ounces of a 33 percent borax solution. Note: If you use borax as
an emulsifer or thickener, no neutralizers will be necessary.
For higher, stabler foam, add borax, grated sodium soap, and/or glycerin
according to the instructions on page 80.
Pure Coconut Oil Bubble Bath
This bath formula is very high foaming, but it may be somewhat drying to

sensitive skin.
Oil
48 ounces coconut oil
Lye solution
14 ounces potassium hydroxide
42 ounces soft or distilled water
Cleopatra’s Milk Bath
Legend says that Cleopatra took all-milk baths. Add sulfonated castor oil to the
milk for extra mildness and emollience. After neutralizing and diluting the entire
batch of paste, add the sulfonated castor oil and powdered milk (dissolved in hot
water). Mix well into bubble bath.
Oils
44 ounces coconut oil
5 ounces olive, canola, or almond oil
Lye solution
14 ounces potassium hydroxide
42 ounces soft or distilled water
Moisturizers
½ cup sulfonated castor oil
1 cup powdered milk
Olive Oil Bubble Bath
Olive oil not only adds emollience but foams well, too.
Oils
36 ounces coconut oil
12 ounces olive oil
Lye solution
13 ounces potassium hydroxide
39 ounces soft or distilled water
 Why buy store brands when you can make bubble bath that is custom-
tailored to your skin’s needs?


 Never underestimate the power of great presentation: This gorgeous
bottle makes a statement of its own.
Supersudsy
Adding sodium soaps to a potassium base is one of the best ways to enhance and
prolong bubble bath foam.
Oils
42 ounces coconut oil
8 ounces olive, canola, or almond oil
Lye solution
14 ounces potassium hydroxide
20 ounces soft or distilled water
Foam Stabilizer
22 ounces grated sodium soap

Special instructions: The following variation applies to the basic instructions
outlined in chapter 2.
1. Dissolve the potassium hydroxide in 20 ounces of water. (The potassium
hydroxide actually requires a total of 42 ounces of water, but the remaining 22
ounces will be used to create a soap solution.) Bring the remaining 22 ounces of
water to a boil, and add grated sodium soap; cover and cook at a gentle boil until
the soap has dissolved. A few ounces of alcohol added to the solution aids in
dissolving the soap.
2. Now mix the soap solution with the lye solution, and stir into the hot oils.
Besides enhancing foam, the soap accelerates saponification.
 Make up several different bubble baths, and choose your favorite by
taking each for a “test drive”!
Essence of Rosin Bubble Bath
One turn-of-the-century formulary claimed that soap for bubble blowing could
be improved with a mixture of soap and rosin. Try it in your bubble bath!
Besides increasing foam and emollience, the rosin imparts a wonderful earthy

fragrance to the bath. You may need no additional fragrances.
Oils
40 ounces coconut oil
5 ounces olive, canola, or almond oil
8 ounces rosin
Lye solution
14 ounces potassium hydroxide
42 ounces soft or distilled water
Rosin has a high melt point and burns easily. Melt it over a double
boiler with part or all of the olive and coconut oils until dissolved.

A
7 dyeing & fragrancing
rose is a rose is a rose.” Or so said Gertrude Stein. Many people have
puzzled over the meaning of this phrase, but who knows — perhaps she
was referring to hot-process soapmaking, in which the fragrance rose and the
color rose both remain rose after being added to soap.
Not so with cold-process soapmaking, where there is much trial and error.
Colors and scents are added before the soap is neutral, so the additives must pass
through a brutal rite of passage in which they’re subjected to extremely high
levels of alkali. Some make it out alive, but many don’t. All cold-process
soapmakers have experienced the amazing vanishing scent, or the blue color
turned dishwater gray.
Hot-process soapmaking will come as a welcome relief. There’s no second-
guessing the soap and how it will affect colors and scents, because the soap is
neutral and has lost its “teeth.” You get to be selfish, thinking only about your

own wants and needs!
dyes
Most of the soap formulations in this book will yield soaps in a color range of pale gold to deep amber,
depending on the base oils. You may not want to alter these lovely colors with additional dye. If dye is
used, always proceed conservatively with just a few drops at a time. It’s very easy to color a liquid soap too
much.
Food Coloring
Food-grade dyes from the supermarket are the simplest and easiest to start with.
Blue, green, red, and yellow remain stable in liquid soap. Food dyes come in
both liquid and gel form; when using gels, be sure to dissolve the dye in hot
water before adding it to your soap. If the dye is added directly to the soap, you
can t really anticipate how saturated the final color will be because the gel takes
some time to dissolve.
Soap Dyes
Food dyes can be blended to create other colors: blue and yellow for turquoise,
red and yellow for orange. The color combinations are a bit limited, however,
because of the limitations in the shades of the four colors themselves. There s a
bit too much yellow in both the red and the blue, for example, to yield a decent
purple. Luckily, various colors of soap dyes are readily available. Resources has
an extensive list of soap dye suppliers.

Fabric dyes are not recommended for soapmaking because they
contain salt, which will cloud liquid soaps and gels.
 Use a single color, or create subtle variations by blending two or more
dyes.
fragrances
Fragrances, like dyes, remain true to form when added to hot-processed
soap. The lovely, captivating fragrance you bought last week is the same one
you’ll smell when opening your bottle of homemade gel or shampoo.
The fruity fragrances in particular can never be duplicated with
essential oils. Hot-process soaps are an ideal vehicle for these fruity
notes, but these scents usually lose much of their “color” and
“brightness” when added to cold-process soaps.

Fragrance Oils
There are two ways to fragrance: by using synthetic, laboratory-produced scents or by using true essential
oils derived from plant sources. These distinctions aren t quite as black and white as they seem on the
surface, because most synthetics are a blend of both essential and synthetic aromas. These blends can
contain scores of different oils and compounds. One of the great benefits of synthetic fragrances is that the
amateur soapmaker can enjoy the fruits of much trial-and-error blending done by the artists who work for
fragrance companies.
Another advantage of using fragrance oils is the wide range of choices they
offer the home soapmaker, not only in terms of price but also in terms of
novelty. A pound of true essential oil of rose or jasmine can cost $2,000 or more.
A good synthetic jasmine can be purchased for $20 to $40 a pound. And there is
no true essential oil of strawberry, pear, or dewberry.
For fragrance oil suppliers, please see Resources.

Pure Essential Oils
What pure essential oils lack in novelty they make up for in romance. Most
essential oils come from very exotic places deep forests in Indonesia or China,

sundrenched hills in the south of France. You can t help but think about these
places when you open a bottle of essential oil, nor can you help but think about
the people who produce them, often using centuries-old techniques, and then
contemplate all the leaves, twigs, and flowers required to produce these oils. For
instance, thousands of pounds of petals are needed to yield 1 pound of rose oil.
 You’ll find pure essential oils and even fragrance oils that smell like fresh
plants and spices.
Essential oils have been distilled from plants for centuries, and the art of
perfuming goes back just as far. The blending of essential oils to create the right
notes and effects is one of the most interesting and creative aspects of home
soapmaking. Hours and hours can go into getting just the right scent, and like a
feel for any art, a certain feel for fragrancing comes with time and experience.
There s some controversy over whether essential oils are healthier for the
skin than fragrance oils. It s easy to reflexively state that natural is always better
than synthetic, but some essential oils, such as cinnamon, can cause extreme
allergic skin reactions. It all comes down to personal preference. One advantage
essential oils have over fragrance oils, however, is their aromatherapeutic value
in relaxing, stimulating, or altering moods.
Leftover shavings from pencil manufacture are distilled into essential
oil of cedarwood.
fragrance formulations

The art of soapmaking is now experiencing an incredible revival, and along
with that, the art of fragrancing is also gaining renewed interest. Thousands
of amateur soapmakers and small-scale soapmaking businesses now create
their own unique fragrance blends. The blends in this chapter (both pure
essential oils and fragrance oils) have all been created by small-scale soap-
business owners across the country. All these businesses gladly sell to the
mail-order public. See Resources for more information.
Naturally Wild for Men
This blend is from Kathy Tarbox, a.k.a. The Petal Pusher, in Stanwood,
Washington.
5 parts Swiss pine essential oil
3 parts clary sage essential oil
2 parts grapefruit essential oil
1 part lemongrass essential oil
1 part sandalwood essential oil
 Grapefruit is an easily recognizable yet versatile fragrance that can be
used in a number of soap blends.
Most commercial soaps are fragranced at a 1 percent rate, or 1 percent of
fragrance per weight of the soap. But fragrancing is very subjective, and some
fragrances are much stronger than others. Use this as a rough guideline only.
Sweet Harmony for Women
Another one of Kathy Tarbox’s fabulous scents.
2 parts lemon verbena essential oil
2 parts jasmine essential oil
5 parts grapefruit essential oil
3 parts tuberose essential oil
3 parts bergamot essential oil
2 parts oakmoss essential oil

Smooth Operator
Renee Thompson of Country Scentuals in Newalla, Oklahoma describes this
recipe as “a sultry, mellow blend.”
2 parts lavender essential oil
1 part ylang-ylang essential oil
SOAPMAKING HISTORY
British soapmakers had a particularly difficult time during the Middle
Ages. The small soapmaking communities that developed around
London were taxed on all the soap they produced. This tax rose so high
that soapmaking kettles were fitted with lids that could be locked up
by the tax collectors every night. This ensured that no illegal soap was
manufactured under the cover of darkness.
Indian Dream
“The medicinal properties are what caused me to put [these oils] together,” says
Renee Thompson. “Even those who aren’t happy with patchouli love this.”
1 part sandalwood essential oil
1 part patchouli essential oil
4 parts sweet grass essential oil
Summer Fun

Another of Renee’s blends, one she says is “very Beach Boys, summer, and
fun.”
2 parts mango fragrance oil
1 part pineapple fragrance oil
1 part coconut fragrance oil
1 part banana fragrance oil
Spring Scent
From Trisha Walton of Homesong Handcrafted Soaps, in Williamston,
Michigan, comes this airy fragrance.
11 parts peach fragrance oil
8 parts grapefruit fragrance oil
1 part amber fragrance oil
Citrus Refresher
Helen Dubovik of Blue Moon Botanicals in Kingston, Illinois, created this
blend, which she describes as “a crisp and clean scent … mentally and creatively
stimulating.”
1 part bergamot essential oil
1 part grapefruit (preferably pink) essential oil
Love Potion #7
This is one of Helen Dubovik’s romantic, exotic fragrances.
3 parts Bulgarian rose essential oil
2 parts sandalwood essential oil
¼
t l
g
l
g
ti l il

¼ part ylang-ylang essential oil
 part vanilla essential oil 
part black pepper essential oil 
part
nutmeg essential oil
Sweet Earth
Says Helen, “[This scent is] warm and earthy [and] holds well in soap.”
3 parts sandalwood essential oil
1 part patchouli essential oil
1 part lemon essential oil
 Fruity scents are very popular in soaps. Experiment with different
types to find your favorites.
3 Cs Soap Blend
Jill Sidney of Iowa Natural Soapworks in Davenport, Iowa, created this unique
fragrance.
3 parts rose geranium essential oil
2½ parts palmarosa essential oil
2 parts rosewood essential oil
1 part basil essential oil
Mist Pine Barrens Soap Blend
Bob McDaniel of The Loom Rat in Chalfont, Pennsylvania, contributed this
original blend.
1½ part white pine essential oil 1 part cypress essential oil
1 part cedarwood essential oil
¼ part guaiacwood essential oil
Meadow Garden
Also one of Jill Sidney’s blends, this scent is simple yet beautiful.
3 parts rose fragrance oil
1 part clary sage essential oil

Citrus Delight
From Sharon Dodge of Serenity Soaps and Herb Gardens in Camano Island,
Washington, comes this fruity fragrance that is “yummy enough to eat.”
2 parts sweet orange essential oil
1 part lime essential oil
1 part pink grapefruit essential oil
Christmas Evergreen
Sharon Dodge also created this wonderful holiday scent.
2 parts pine essential oil
1 part cedarwood essential oil
1 part hemlock essential oil
Sultry Nights
A “warm-bodied scent for summer,” this blend was contributed by Diana
Johnson of Cat’s Paw Enterprises in Port Townsend, Washington.
9 parts rose essential oil
5 parts clove essential oil
4 parts peppermint essential oil
 Rosemary and other piney fragrances are good choices when making
soap blends

Essential oil of orange comes from Haiti, compliments of Christopher
Columbus. After discovering the New World, Columbus returned to
Spain, bringing along the seeds of many different plants. Among these
plants were the true bitter orange and the true sweet orange.
My Guy’s Blend
Diana Johnson created this fragrance especially for guys.
10 parts caraway essential oil
5 parts lavender essential oil
3 parts rosemary essential oil
Patchouli–Almond Spice
This spicy blend is courtesy of Mary Byerly of Gentler Thymes Soap Company
in Palos Heights, Illinois.
3 parts patchouli essential oil
2 parts bitter almond essential oil
1 part cassia essential oil
Bath Balm
This is another of Mary’s creations. Lavender eases tired muscles, making it
perfect for adding to a bubble bath soap.
20
t l
d
ti l il

20 parts lavender essential oil
4 parts tea tree essential oil
2 parts lemongrass essential oil
1 part cassia essential oil
Lemon Refresher
A “wake-up” blend from Mary Byerly.
12 parts lemon essential oil
4 parts bergamot essential oil
2 parts eucalyptus essential oil
1 part lavender essential oil
Classical Romance
A woodsy and exotic blend, courtesy of Mary Byerly.
2 parts ylang ylang essential oil
1 part rosewood essential oil
 Color and fragrance will transform common liquid soap into an
exceptional treat.
Summer Garden
A flowery, sweet scent with some nice top notes of citrus, compliments of
Gentler Thymes.
4 parts geranium essential oil
3 parts spearmint essential oil
2 parts sweet orange essential oil
2 parts grapefruit essential oil
1 part linden blossom essential oil
Sunshine Sprit
Karen White of Natural Impulse Handmade Soap and Sundries in Birmingham,
Alabama, created this uplifting fragrance.
10 parts sweet orange essential oil

13 parts palmarosa essential oil
1 part Litsea cubeba essential oil
Island Breeze
Flowery with a hint of spice, this fragrance would go well in a summer gel.
Compliments of Karen White.
2 parts jasmine, either essential oil or fragrance oil
1 part coriander essential oil
Honey Pie
Sweet and simple, this scent is compliments of Karen White.
1 part vanilla fragrance oil
1 part honey fragrance oil
Mint Julep
Another summery blend created by Karen White, this fragrance combines
essential and fragrance oils.
8 parts honey fragrance oil

7 parts Litsea cubeba essential oil
4 parts peppermint essential oil
3 parts spearmint essential oil
3 parts heather fragrance oil
Don’t stop at fruity fragrances; try vegetable, flower, and herb scents,
too.
Too Sexy (Hers)
One more from Karen White — a mellow, “autumnal” blend.
4 parts pumpkin-pie spice fragrance oil
3 parts lavender essential oil
Dream Weaver
From Debbie Graybeal of Indian River Creations in Melbourne, Florida, comes
this simple blend.
1 part clary sage essential oil
2 parts cedarwood essential oil
2 parts petitgrain essential oil
Flower Child
Flower Child is a warm, earthy blend from Indian River Creations.
1 part patchouli essential oil
2 parts Litsea cubeba essential oil
2 parts ginger essential oil

Reminiscent of a refreshing aftershave, this formula is from Debbie Graybeal.
For Men
2 parts tangerine essential oil
2 parts petitgrain essential oil
1 part lavender essential oil
1 part coriander essential oil
½ part cassia or cinnamon essential oil
Heavenly
A bracing concoction from Debbie — good for a “wake-up” shower gel.
1 part clove essential oil
1 part lavender essential oil
2 parts tangerine essential oil
2 parts grapefruit essential oil
2 parts lime essential oil
2 parts petitgrain essential oil
4 parts lemon essential oil
Tangerine Dream
One of Debbie’s favorites, this is an excellent fragrance for a soothing bubble

bath.
1 part patchouli essential oil
2 parts tangerine essential oil
4 parts clary sage essential oil
8 parts lavender essential oil
Lavender–Patchouli Blend
Tammy Hawk of the Southern Soap Company in Fultondale, Alabama, offers
this blend.
1 part patchouli essential oil
3 parts lavender essential oil
¼ part cedarwood essential oil
CREATIVE MARKETING
Thomas Barratt, the “father of modern advertising,” was a
soapmaker. The son-in-law of Andrew Pears, Barratt made Pears soap
into an internationally recognized brand with a series of bold and
imaginative marketing techniques. He imported a quarter of a million
French centimes and stamped one side with the name “Pears.” These
went into wide circulation before Parliament created a special law
prohibiting the coins. Barratt was also the first person to reproduce
fine art in poster form for the general populace.
You’ll barely be able to keep enough homemade soap around once
you start experimenting with scent combinations.

Eau De Cologne
This perfumelike fragrance is by Rebecca Keifer of the Delaware City Soap
Company in Delaware City, Delaware.
4 parts sweet orange essential oil
3 parts lavender essential oil
3 parts rosemary essential oil
2 parts lemon essential oil
Rebecca’s Patchouli
Rebecca Keifer also formulated this variation on a familiar favorite.
8 parts cedarwood essential oil
3 parts patchouli essential oil
3 parts geranium essential oil
1 part sassafras essential oil
Lime Smoothie

Lisa and Matt Redman of Flower Moon Soaps in Chestertown, Maryland, came
up with this fun and fruity blend.
2 parts vanilla essential oil
2 parts Mexican lime essential oil
Old Kent Garden
Another blend courtesy of Lisa and Matt Redman, this scent recalls Victorian
gardens.
1 part French lavender essential oil
½ part rosemary essential oil
1 part lemon verbena essential oil
½ part sweet basil essential oil
1 part rose essential oil
 You can’t go wrong with classic fragrances, such as rose, lavender, and
patchouli.

Rose of Bengal
This is another of Rebecca Keifer’s special creations.
8 parts palmarosa essential oil
4 parts rosewood essential oil
1 part cinnamon leaf essential oil
Cinnamon Forest
This blend was provided by Maggie Anderson of Scentsables in Battle Ground,
Washington.
4 parts cinnamon leaf essential oil
4 parts vanilla fragrance oil
2 parts patchouli essential oil
1 part lavender essential oil
½ part Peru balsam essential oil
Signature Blend of Squeaky Clean … Naturally!
From Darlene Nielsen of Squeaky Clean … Naturally! in Circleville, New York,
comes this one-of-a-kind creation.
6 parts lavender essential oil
6 parts orange essential oil
4 parts ylang ylang essential oil
2 parts clary sage essential oil
Arabian Nights
Donna Ramsey of the Soap Box in Cochrane, Alberta, Canada, came up with
this multilayered romantic blend.
2 parts rosewood essential oil
1 part patchouli essential oil
2 parts sandalwood essential oil
1 part neroli essential oil
1 part jasmine essential oil
1 part rose essential oil
2 parts white grapefruit essential oil

2 parts white grapefruit essential oil
1 part bergamot essential oil
1 part gardenia essential oil
Tropical Citrus Blend
This is another of Donna Ramsey’s trademark scents.
3 parts pink grapefruit essential oil
5 parts sweet orange essential oil
3 parts lemon essential oil
3 parts lime essential oil
HERB HISTORY
Lavender oil, made from a plant native to the Mediterranean region, is
produced almost exclusively in southern France. Because it grows in
relatively barren soils, it can spread like a weed. Early in the twentieth
century, many marginal French farms were abandoned as the rural
populace swarmed to the industrializing cities. Lavender moved in as
the farmers moved out.

Strawberry–Rhubarb Pie
AnnaLiese Moran of Designs By AnnaLiese in Corvallis, Oregon, dreamed up
this delicious scent.
3 parts strawberry fragrance oil
1 part rhubarb fragrance oil
Christmas Carnation
This spicy holiday fragrance was created by Bill and Trina Wallace of Snowdrift
Farm Natural Products in Jefferson, Maine.
1 part ylang ylang essential oil
1 part clove bud essential oil
Noir Blend
Bill and Trina Wallace also concocted this mysterious scent.
4 parts patchouli essential oil
2 parts lavender essential oil
1 part myrrh essential oil
Sea Breezy

Sea Breezy
Here’s a terrific herbal blend, courtesy of Bill and Trina Wallace.
2 parts Eucalyptus citriodora essential oil
2 parts lemongrass essential oil
1 part rosemary essential oil
Exotic Blend
Ethel Winslow of Pisces Rising Aromatherapy Arts and Crafts in Indianapolis,
Indiana, created this inspired fragrance.
6 parts ylang ylang essential oil
2 parts black pepper essential oil
2 parts coriander essential oil
2 parts sweet orange essential oil
 Choose fun containers, and wrap your creations with cellophane, paper,
and bows for the perfect all-occasion gift.
Sports Essential Blend
Ethel Winslow also formulated this blend with oils that help alleviate the pain of
sports injuries. Peppermint relieves pain and stimulates circulation, eucalyptus
relieves pain and warms muscles, marjoram relieves muscle spasms and warms
the muscles, and lavender relieves pain and warms and balances muscles.
1 part peppermint essential oil
2 parts eucalyptus essential oil
2 parts marjoram essential oil
6 parts lavender essential oil


8 troubleshooting
Ninety-nine percent of all failures associated with liquid and gel soapmaking are
due to improper measurement of ingredients or undercooking of the soap stock.
(An accurate scale and thermometer can save the home soapmaker much time
and trouble.) The good news is that almost all these failures are correctable.
The first portion of this chapter presents many common liquid soap
“ailments” along with simple suggestions for “cures.” Some of these problems
are associated with mismeasurement of oil or lye, however, and will require a
little more attention. Imbalances in pH can be treated by the methods outlined in
Correcting pH Problems on page 112.

problems & solutions
Problem: Oil-lye emulsion doesn’t thicken. Depending on the formulation and
how you mix your ingredients, an emulsion should form within 15 minutes to an
hour. If the emulsion hasn t thickened within an hour, your problem is due to
understirring, low cooking temperatures, or incorrect measurement of
ingredients.
Solution: If you ve been mixing by hand with a spoon, switch to a stick blender,
blender, or food processor. Also, make sure that your temperatures are in the 160
to 170¡F (71 to 76ßC) range. If these remedies don t work after another half hour
of stirring, you ve probably mismeasured your ingredients most likely, the oils
are in excess. Excess alkali usually manifests as a curdled appearance in the
emulsion or else creates a puffiness that can t be stirred down. In the case of
excess oils, consult Correcting Excess Fatty Acids on page 113.
Problem: Emulsion has a curdled appearance. This problem is
occasionally caused by a wide disparity between the temperature of the oils and
the lye solution before mixing. But most likely, it s due to excess alkali or
insufficient oil. Strong lye solutions don t combine readily with oils, and a
grainy, curdled appearance results.
 Blending or stirring is one of the most important parts of soapmaking.
Never skimp on this step.

Solution: If this problem was caused by wide temperature differences, add a few
ounces of alcohol to the emulsion, and stir. The alcohol will help homogenize
the emulsion, and it should smooth out within a few minutes. If your
temperatures were correct, you have excess alkali. Refer to Correcting Excess
Alkali on page 115 for further instructions.
Problem: Emulsion separates when cooking in double boiler. Potassium
emulsions tend to break more easily than sodium emulsions. It s important to
keep stirring the emulsion until it thickens to the consistency of saltwater taffy,
then place it in the double boiler. In the case of soaps high in soft oils, such as
gels, the emulsions won t be quite as sticky as those higher in coconut oil.
Thinner emulsions may appear homogenous, but appearances can be deceptive.
Regardless of the type of problem you’re trying to solve, you should still
follow the ingredient-handling cautions outlined in chapter 2.
Solution: Separated emulsions often require just a few more minutes of stirring
with a hand blender to thicken properly.
Problem: Paste “puffs up” when cooking. Some amount of puffing is

normal when the paste method is used. During the mixing phase, soap captures
air, which then expands when heated.
Solution: Stirring with a spoon or spatula allows the air to escape. You may
need to repeat this process a few more times in the next hour to hour and a half
of cooking. Beyond that time, excessive puffing that doesn t seem to stir down is
a good indication of too much alkali. Remedy this problem using the technique
outlined in Correcting Excess Alkali on page 115.
Problem: An oily layer floats on top of alcohol-lye solution. The alcohol, oils,
and lye solution need to be thoroughly mixed before the pot is capped with
plastic and cooked.
Solution: Mixing should take just a few minutes, but even if the solution appears
homogenous, it s best to let it sit for a minute and see whether further layering
occurs. If so, stir for a few more minutes. Check once more for separation before
covering with plastic.
Problem: Alcohol stock becomes thick and gummy while cooking.
Overevaporation of alcohol causes this problem.
Solution: Always weigh the pot before cooking. If the stock becomes frothy and
gummy, weigh the pot again to determine just how much alcohol was lost.
Replace the missing ounces with more alcohol.
Problem: White filmy residue floating on top of clearer soap solution. This
film is composed of unsaponified fatty acids.
Solution: Either the soap needs more cooking, or the ingredients were
mismeasured. In the case of mismeasurement, the mixture will need to be
adjusted by the techniques given in Correcting Excess Fatty Acids on page 113.
A white film also develops when a wax such as lanolin is used, because of a
high proportion of substances that do not saponify. In this case, no amount of
cooking will change the soap s appearance. Shake these emollients into solution,
or skim them off if you desire clear soap.
Problem: Cloudy soap. The causes of cloudy soap are many, as you will soon
discover.
Solution: Prudent soapmakers will first dissolve an ounce of paste or
alcoholbase soap in 2 ounces of hot water before diluting the entire 6-pound
batch. If clouding appears after the sample solution has cooled (it often doesn t

appear in a hot solution), you can still work with the paste or broth. You can t
work with diluted soap. The presence of so much water effectively dampens any
further chemical reactions between the oils and alkali.
Note: Please remember that initially undiluted soap (particularly when made
with the paste method) will appear slightly cloudy because of insoluble fatty
acids. These eventually precipitate out of solution. Don t interpret this kind of
clouding as a sign of trouble. Learning to distinguish good clouding from bad is
a matter of experience.
Alcohol boosts the rate of saponification.
The Causes of Clouding
Clouding is a major concern for makers of liquid soap, and this problem can be
caused by several factors. It will take a little trial and error for you to discover
which cause is the culprit, but here is a guide to the most common causes.
 Oils or Additives. Oils containing high percentages of palmitic or stearic
acids form insoluble soaps, which in turn cause milkiness. Waxes such as lanolin
and jojoba can cause clouding because of a high percentage of substances that do
not saponify. Additives such as aloe vera juice and herbal infusions may be clear
by themselves but can cloud when mixed with soap. Test everything possible in
small samples, particularly additives, before compromising your entire batch of
soap.

Hard Water. The minerals in hard water, particularly calcium, react with
hydroxides to form insoluble mineral salts. Always use soft or distilled water.
 Insufficient Stirring of Paste. Commercial potassium soaps are stirred
constantly and cooked at very high temperatures. It s impossible to recreate these
ideal conditions at home. A thoroughly mixed oil and lye solution, however,
goes a long way toward ensuring a successful batch of soap. Stir until the
emulsion turns into a thick glue, a sign that the oils and alkali are intimately
mixed. Lighter, creamier emulsions may seem homogenous, but the oils and
alkali won t be as intimately commingled. These lighter emulsions may not
saponify properly. This problem might be corrected by cooking the paste for
another hour or so. Otherwise, dissolve it in alcohol, and continue cooking until
a test sample dissolved in water remains clear on cooling.
 Undercooking. Generally, 3 hours for a paste and 2 hours for an alcohol
soap broth is enough time to adequately neutralize all the fatty acids. But
perhaps the water in the double boiler wasn t initially warm, or maybe the
alcohol broth wasn t boiling throughout the 2 hours. Free fatty acids will be
present in undercooked soap.
 Mismeasurement of Ingredients. Excess fatty acids occur in liquid soap
for any number of reasons, including understirring, undercooking, insufficient
hydroxide, or excess oils. Too much oil or too little hydroxide from
mismeasurement are the most common causes. Always double-check your
weights. For correcting clouding caused by excess oil or insufficient alkali,
consult Correcting pH Problems on page 112.
 Overaddition of Neutralizers. Citric or boric acid will throw soap out of
solution when added in excess, and this soap is further broken down into
hydroxides and free fatty acids, causing cloudiness. Don t attempt to create a pH
7 commercial-style soap using these buffers; commercial soaps aren t soap. A
pH 7 solution is possible if citric acid is added to true potassium soap, but by the
time the pH is that low, the soap is no longer cloudy instead, it actually breaks
back into layers composed of oil and lye solution.
A soap solution can t be buffered below pH 9.5 with boric acid. Boric acid
combines chemically with hydroxide to form potassium tetraborate, a cleansing,

mild alkali. But even though the pH won t budge from a 9.5 reading, cloudiness
increases with further additions of boric acid.
The clouding caused by excess neutralizer is probably best corrected by both
the addition of solvents (alcohol, sugar, or glycerin) and a week or two of
sequestering.
 With careful planning and attention, you can avoid most, if not all,
soapmaking problems.
 Essential or Fragrance Oils. Essential oils and fragrance oils aren t
completely water soluble. It s important to add them to hot soap to optimize their
dispersal. But some cloudiness will occur regardless, particularly with essential
oils. A few days of sequestering usually clears the cloudiness caused by essential
oils and fragrance oils. If this doesn t work, add a few ounces of solvent, such as
glycerin, alcohol, or sugar solution, alone or in combination.
 Excess Borax. If your soap is too thin, you might be tempted to add a little
extra borax for thickening. Try confining yourself to 2 to 3 percent (dry weight)

borax per weight of diluted soap. Past that, you re bound to run into cloudiness
because as the pH lowers, fatty acids are split from the soap. The best way to
correct this problem is to thin the solution with some solvents, then sequester the
soap for a week or two.
Fragrance oils have been formulated with added solvents that aid in
their dispersal. Most fragrance oils won’t cloud soap to the extent that
essential oils will.
 Soap Solution Is Too Thick. If the paste is made into a highly concentrated
soap solution, cloudiness may occur; insoluble soaps are unable to precipitate
out of solution because of the concentration of the liquid itself. This type of
clouding is very minor, but if it bothers you, dilute the soap and sequester for a
week or so until it is clear. Decant the clear liquid, then reheat the solution and
evaporate it until the desired viscosity is achieved. Or add a few ounces of
sequestrant.

Correcting pH Problems
Phenolphthalein is practically indispensable for treating pH problems. A test
solution of phenolphthalein turns clear in the presence of excess acid and
changes to deep pink or red in the presence of excess alkali. It s that simple.
Without it, you can only make educated guesses.
 How to Test the pH. For detailed instructions on using phenolphthalein to
test the pH of your soap, see page 14.
What did the old-time soapmakers do before phenolphthalein? They used
their tongues. If you don t have phenolphthalein, you might try their method.

Using a very small amount of soap, lightly touch the cooled sample to the tip of
the tongue. Neutral soap will have a mild bite, but only after several seconds. An
immediate sharp sting indicates excess alkali. A very bland flavor with no bite at
all indicates insufficientlye. This test is not very exact or scientific, but it may be
better than nothing!
 Don’t panic if you encounter a setback. Try one of the troubleshooting
methods outlined here to correct a problem batch.
Correcting Excess Fatty Acids
Excess fatty acids can cause a soap to turn cloudy or form a film over the top.
Fortunately, this problem can be fixed.
 IN THE PINK
If a sample of cloudy soap solution turns the phenolphthalein test
solution an even deeper shade of pink, this indicates that the soap
contains excess alkali. In this case, more cooking is necessary, or
additional oils might be needed.
 How to Fix the Problem. The first, and least painful, remedy for clouding
caused by excess fatty acids is to cook the soap a little longer. The excess acids
may just need more time in which to react with alkali. For pastes, another hour
of cooking combined with some stirring should be sufficient. For alcohol-lye
soaps, return the soap to the heat for another half hour.
After this additional cooking, withdraw an ounce of soap and dissolve it in 2
ounces of water. Allow the solution to cool. Is the soap sample still excessively
cloudy? If so, stir the sample into an ounce of the phenolphthalein test solution.
You know you have excess fatty acids in your soap when the faint pink of the
test solution disappears. It s now time to add more hydroxide.
A little extra cooking time is usually all that’s needed to fix the clouding
caused by excess fatty acids.

 Add Hydroxide. Create additional hydroxide solution by dissolving 2
ounces of dry hydroxide into 6 ounces of water (1:3 is the standard ratio for
potassium solutions). The hydroxide must be blended into the soap, which is no
problem if you re making the soap with the alcohol-lye method. But blending
additional hydroxide into a tarlike paste is nearly impossible, so the paste must
first be dissolved in 20 ounces of alcohol.
Now add 1 to 2 ounces of hydroxide solution, and cover the soap pot with
plastic as instructed on page 34. Cook for another 20 to 30 minutes. Then
withdraw another sample ounce of the soap, dissolve it in 2 ounces of water, and
add to an ounce of phenolphthalein test solution. If the pink in the sample
changes to clear, you know that more hydroxide is needed, so add another ounce
or two of solution, and cook for another 20 minutes or so. Test again. Repeat this
process until the phenolphthalein test solution remains faintly pink or a sample
of soap dissolved in water exhibits only slight clouding when cooled.
If you don t have phenolphthalein, you ll need to rely on the appearance of
the soap itself. Add an ounce or two of hydroxide solution according to the
instructions above, cook for 20 to 30 minutes, then dissolve a 1-ounce test

sample of soap in 2 ounces of water. Let cool. Does the solution still appear
cloudy? If so, add another 1 to 2 ounces of hydroxide solution, and continue to
cook. After 20 to 30 minutes, withdraw another 1-ounce sample, dissolve it in
water, and cool. When the solution no longer clouds on cooling, your soap is
ready to dilute and fragrance.
 Give yourself a head start by becoming familiar with possible problems
before you begin crafting.
 Try Sequestering Agents.
Finally, if you don t want to recook your soap, consider adding sequestering
agents, such as glycerin, alcohol, or sugar solution. In addition, let the soap sit
for a week or two much of the clouding may disappear. Remember, too, that
cloudy soap is just as usable as clear soap, even though it may not be as
aesthetically pleasing.
Correcting Excess Alkali
Soap contains excess alkali if 1 ounce of soap dissolved in 2 ounces of water
registers a deeper pink when added to a phenolphthalein solution. The deeper the
pink, the more alkaline the soap. Most likely, all samples will initially turn pink,
because the formulations have been purposefully overalkalized. The addition of

8 to 12 drops of a 20 percent boric or citric acid solution should dissipate the
pink. If a deep pink to red color remains, the soap is overalkaline.
If you don t have phenolphthalein, it may be difficult to diagnose
overalkaline soap. Excess fatty acids manifest as a cloudiness in the soap, but
excess alkali actually makes the soap clearer. (Keep in mind, however, that soap
can be overalkaline as well as cloudy an indication that it hasn t cooked long
enough and that free fatty acids have yet to be neutralized.) Excess alkali can
sometimes be spotted in the initial cooking phase of the paste, in such symptoms
as a curdled emulsion or a paste that continues to puff up even after repeated
stirrings. But not always.
 Use bath beads, colorful bottles and sponges, and tub toys to enhance
your soap display.

So without phenolphthalein, you can always try the taste test mentioned on
page 112. Excess hydroxide in the soap will register as an immediate sting on
the tip of the tongue.
How to Remedy

y
The first course of action is to treat the overalkalinity as a problem stemming
from undercooking. Return the paste to the heat for another hour; alcoholbased
soap just needs another 30 or 40 minutes. After that, test a sample (1 ounce of
soap dissolved in 2 ounces of water) in 1 ounce of phenolphthalein solution. Add
8 to 12 drops of citric or boric acid solution. If a deep pink color develops, it s
time to add more oil.
Dissolve the paste in 20 ounces of alcohol; if you cooked the soap using the
alcohol-lye method, you re all ready to add the oil. Add 1 to 2 ounces of castor
oil to the solution, then cover with plastic according to the instructions outlined
in The Alcohol/Lye Method on page 36. Return to the double boiler, and cook
another 20 to 30 minutes. Test a sample (1 ounce of soap dissolved in 2 ounces
of water) in 1 ounce of phenolphthalein solution. Add 8 to 12 drops of a 20
percent citric or boric acid solution. If a deep pink to red color again appears,
additional castor oil will be needed. Add another ounce or two to the soap
solution, cover, and continue cooking
Castor oil is the best oil for adjusting pH because it saponifies much
more rapidly than other oils and helps impart clarity to the soap.

 After a little trial and error, you’ll no doubt be creating flawless
handmade soaps, shampoos, gels, and bubble baths.

Bibliography
Brannt, William. The Soapmaker s Handbook. Philadelphia: Henry Carey Baird Company, 1912.
Cavitch, Susan Miller. The Soapmaker s Companion. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 1997.
Fatty Acids and Liquid Soaps, Emery Technical Bulletin. Cincinnati, OH: Emery Industries, 1964.
Lamborn, Leebert. Modern Soaps, Candles and Glycerin. New York: Van Nostrand Company, 1906.
Milwidsky, B. Soap and Detergent Technology, Household and Personal Products Industries. Ramsey, NJ:
Rodman Publications, 1980.
Stanislaus, I. V. American Soapmaker s Guide. New York: Henry Carey Baird Company, 1928.
Thomssen, E. G., and Kemp, C. R. Modern Soap Making. New York: MacNair-Dorland Company, 1937.
Winter, Ruth. A Consumer s Dictionary of Cosmetic Ingredients. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1984.

Glossary
Additive. A substance blended into finished soap to improve or fortify the soap.
Sequestering agents, foam boosters, preservatives, and thickeners are all
additives.
Alkali. Any base of hydroxide soluble in water and able to neutralize acids. In
soapmaking, sodium or potassium hydroxide neutralizes fatty acids.
Borax, or sodium borate. A mild alkali used as a water softener, preservative,
emulsifier, foam booster and stabilizer, pH buffer, and viscosity modifier. One
of the best all-around additives for liquid soap.
Cloud point. The point at which insoluble substances in a soap solution coalesce
and cloud the solution. Solvents such as alcohol, glycerin, and sugar lower the
cloud point, making it more difficult for these precipitates to coalesce. Chilling a
soap solution will raise its cloud point, potentially causing clouding not present
at room temperature.
Cold process. A soapmaking technique that relies almost exclusively on the heat
generated by the chemical reaction of fatty acids and alkali to produce soap. No
external heat is applied once the ingredients have been mixed.
Distilled water. Water that has been boiled, then condensed, to remove any
minerals or other impurities.
Essential oil. A volatile oil steamed or pressed from the fruits, flowers, stems, or
roots of plants. Used especially for perfumes, soaps, and flavoring.
Ethanol, or ethyl alcohol. Clear, colorless, and very flammable alcohol
produced from the fermentation of carbohydrates. The primary alcohol used in
the production of transparent soap.
Fatty acid. Any of the organic acids that, along with glycerides, are the main
constituents of animal and vegetable fats and that react chemically with the
alkalis to form soap. There are many kinds of fatty acids, and each has distinct
properties that affect the characteristics of the soap produced from it.

Fragrance oil. A laboratory-produced synthetic version of a true essential oil or
a natural fragrance, such as peach. Fragrance oils are often a combination of
both synthetic and true essential oils.
Glycerin. A thick, sweet-tasting, clear fluid that s actually an alcohol. A
byproduct of soap manufacture, it can also be produced synthetically from
propylene, a petroleum byproduct. Used as an emollient, a humectant, and a
primary solvent in the manufacture of transparent soaps.
Hard fat. Any animal or vegetable fat that is solid at room temperature; largely
composed of the fatty acids stearin and palmitin. Palm oil and tallow are the two
most common hard fats used for soapmaking.
Hot process. A soapmaking process whereby fats, oils, and a caustic solution
are cooked at high temperatures over prolonged periods of time. The hot process
is essential for all soaps in which clarity is desired, because high temperatures
are needed to completely neutralize the excess fatty acids that cause cloudiness.
Humectant. A substance used to preserve moisture content.
Hydrogenation. The process of adding hydrogen gas to liquid oils. This process
converts unsaturated fatty acids to their saturated analogs; oleic acid, for
example, is converted to stearic acid. Hydrogenated oils can cause clouding in
liquid soap.
Hydrolysis. From the Greek hydro, meaning water, and lysis, loosening.
Hydrolysis is a form of decomposition through the chemical action of water.
When fats or oils are mixed with a lye solution, hydrolysis causes fatty acids to
separate from the glycerol.
Isopropyl alcohol. A petroleum-derived alcohol sometimes used as a substitute
for ethanol. Isopropyl alcohol is an effective solvent and sequestering agent.
Lye. A very general term used to describe a strong alkaline solution. More
specifically, lye solutions are composed of potassium hydroxide for liquid soap,
or sodium hydroxide for bar soap.
pH. An abbreviation for the potential of hydrogen, indicating acidity or
alkalinity. A pH of 7, or the value of pure water, is regarded as neutral. Acids
have a pH below 7; alkalis, above 7. Neutral soap, however, has a pH of

approximately 9.5.
Phenolphthalein. A chemical compound used as an acid-base indicator.
Potassium carbonate. Also called pearl ash, this is a salt of potassium. When
added to a potassium soap base, the molecules of pearl ash insert themselves
between the molecules of potassium hydroxide, weakening the molecular pull
between the hydroxide molecules. The result is softer, more stirrable soap paste.
Potassium hydroxide. A strong alkali also known as caustic potash. When
combined with a fatty acid, it produces liquid soap.
Rosin. The pale yellow residue remaining after the volatile oils are distilled from
the oleoresin of pine trees. Rosin is composed largely of abietic acid, which
reacts with an alkali in much the same manner as fatty acids. Rosin adds
transparency and emollience to a liquid soap, and acts as a preservative as well.
Saponification. The chemical reaction that converts a fatty acid and an alkali
into soap and glycerin.
Sequester. This refers to the resting phase for the soap that lasts a week or two
after dilution. During this time, any insoluble soaps can coalesce and precipitate
out of solution. Sequestering improves the clarity of soap.
Sequestering agent. A soap additive that helps clarify the solution by lowering
the cloud point. Alcohol, glycerin, and sugar solutions are all effective
sequestering agents.
Soap. Along with glycerin, soap is the byproduct of a chemical reaction
involving fatty acids and caustic soda or potash. Soap is actually a salt.
Sodium hydroxide. Also known as caustic soda, it is one of two primary alkalis
used in the production of soap. Combined with a fatty acid, it produces a hard
soap.
Soft oil. Liquid at room temperature and characterized by a high percentage of
oleic and linoleic unsaturated fatty acids. These fatty acids won t mar the clarity
of the liquid. Castor oil is the soft oil of choice for transparent soapmaking
because of its ability to act as a solvent; it is characterized by a high percentage
of ricinoleic acid.

Solvent. A liquid capable of dissolving or dispersing another substance.
Alcohol, glycerin, water, and sugar solutions are all solvents used to hold soap in
a colloidal state for the purpose of rendering opaque soap transparent.
Sulfonated castor oil. Also called turkey red oil, this oil is produced by the
reaction of castor oil and sulfuric acid. Ideal for liquid soapmaking, it is a
superfatting agent that won t cause cloudiness, being completely water soluble.

Resources
In addition to the items listed, most of the following suppliers carry various base
oils, essential and fragrance oils, soap molds, glycerin and other soapmaking
supplies.
Angel’s Earth Natural Product Ingredients
651-698-3601
Sulfonated castor oil, jojoba, preservatives, dyes, lanolin, citric acid, rosin,
containers, clays, and beeswax.
Aqua Sapone
www.aquasapone.com.au
Melt-and-mold supplies, soapmaking kits, butters, preservatives, and beeswax.
Aroma Creations, Inc.
360-854-9000
www.aromacreations.com
Between Friends Too
877-379-6360
www.betweenfriendstoo.com
Clays, colorants, butters, oils, bottles, glitter, mica, citric acid, containers, soap
molds, preservatives, and waxes.
Brambleberry
360-734-8278
www.brambleberry.com
Bottles.
CamdenGrey Essential Oils
305-500-9630
www.camdengrey.com
Bottles and containers.
Cat’s Paw Soap Company

(A Division of Whiskey Hill Farm)
360-385-3407
www.whiskeyhillfarm.com
Cierra Candles
800-281-4337
www.cierracandles.com
Colorants, containers, soap molds and kits.
Cranberry Lane Natural Beauty Products
800-833-4533
www.cranberrylane.com
Bottles and containers.
Delaware City Soap Company
302-832-2469
www.delcitysoap.com
Authentic recreations of classic nineteenth-century soaps using fine vegetable
ingredients and essential oils.
Dianna’s Sugar Plum Sundries
423-902-0496
www.diannassundries.com
Beeswax, kits, lyes, colorants, butters and containers.
The Essential Oil Company
800-729-5912
www.essentialoil.com
Essential Wholesale
503-722-7557
www.essentialwholesale.com
Butters, waxes, extracts, preservatives, and soap molds.
Flower Moon Soaps
888-489-9090
www.flowermoonsoaps.com
Soaps of unusual color and textures, using high-quality oils and a unique
blending of fragrances for scents.

From Nature With Love
800-520-2060
www.fromnaturewithlove.com
Frontier Co-Op Herbs
800-669-3275
www.frontiercoop.com
Containers.
Fuji Vegetable Oil, Inc.
914-761-7900
www.fujioilusa.com
Georgie’s Ceramic & Clay
800-999-2529
www.georgies.com
GloryBee Foods, Inc.
800-456-7923
www.glorybee.com
Soap paints and colorants, soap molds and stamps, containers and bottles.
Herb Products
888-339-4372
www.herbproducts.com
Colorants, extracts, and vitamins.
Herbal Accents
619-562-2650
www.herbalaccents.com 
Clays, bottles, butters, waxes, herbal extracts, citric acid, preservatives, dyes,
containers and melt-and-pour supplies.
Indian River Soap
800-686-7362
www.indianriversoap.com
Every uniquely scented soap from Indian River Soap has a purpose, such as
antibacterial, disinfecting, relaxing, or energizing.
Iowa Natural Soapworks

800-265-5252
www.iowanaturalsoapworks.com
High-quality, handcrafted, natural soap.
Janca’s Jojoba Oil & Seed Co.
480-497-9494
www.jancas.com
Butters and containers.
Liberty Natural Products
800-289-8427
www.libertynatural.com
Preservatives and containers.
LorAnn Oils, Inc.
888-456-7266
www.lorannoils.com
Containers, bottles, and waxes.
Majestic Mountain Sage
435-755-0863
www.the-sage.com
Bottles, citric acid, dyes and containers.
Milky Way Molds
800-588-7930
Soap molds.
Mineral and Pigment Solutions
800-732-0562
www.mp-solutionsinc.com
Colorants, mica, waxes, clays, and resins.
Mountain Rose Herbs
800-879-3337
www.mountainroseherbs.com
Containers, bottles, clays, butters, beeswax, citric acid, and resins.
My Sweet Victoria
(formerly Gingham ‘n’ Spice, Ltd.)

215-258-0805
www.fragrancesupplies.com
Bottles, beeswax pearls, citric acid, kaolin clay, colorants, and mica.
Natural Impulse
877-467-8573
www.naturalimpulse.com
Luxurious handmade soaps and toiletries.
North Country Mercantile
603-795-2843
www.northcountrymercantile.com 
Soap paints and colorants.
Pine Meadows
801-221-0483
www.pinemeadows.net
Exfoliates, clays, butters, colorants, and soap molds and stamps.
Scientific Distributors
(formerly Nurnberg Scientific)
800-826-3470
www.nurnberg.com
Rosin and phenolphthalein.
Penta Manufacturing Co., Inc.
973-740-2300
www.pentamfg.com
Potassium and sodium hydroxide and citric acid.

Pharmco Products, Inc.
800-243-5360
www.pharmco-prod.com
Five-gallon containers of SDA-3A (denatured alcohol), one per year without
permit.
Pisces Rising Aromatherapy Arts and Crafts
317-375-1718 http://pages.prodigy.net/ewinslow/pisces.htm
All-natural personal care products, plus articles about aromatherapy.
The Ponte Verde Soap Shoppe
904-543-8296
www.pvsoap.com
Bottles, jars, butters, waxes, molds, pigments, mica, colorants, clays, citric acid,
and melt-and-pour supplies.
Poya Naturals, Inc.
800-844-5606
www.poyanaturals.com
Pretty Baby Herbal Soap Company
800-673-8167
www.prettybabysoap.com
Natural handmade soap.
Rainbow Meadow, Inc.
800-207-4047
www.rainbowmeadow.com
Citric acid and beeswax beads.
Robert and Katherine McDaniel
562-761-5311
Dr. Bob’s Herbal Soaps, made from skin-friendly aromatherapy-type oils, bath
salts, and powders.
Saratoga Scents
518-584-5361
www.saratogascents.com
Waxes, clays, citric acid, butters, clays, soap molds, soap paints and colorants,
and sodium hydroxide.

Shay and Company, Inc.
877-293-5053
www.shayandcompany.com
Butters.
Simple Pleasures
603-425-7445
http//members.aol.com/pigmntlady
Pigments and dyes.
Snowdrift Farm, Inc.
888-999-6950
www.snowdriftfarm.com
Handmade soaps from all-natural products, plus essential oils and raw materials
for soap and toiletry makers: waxes, bottles, preservatives, potassium hydroxide,
dyes, and containers.
Soap Crafters Company
877-484-5121
www.soapcrafters.com
Melt-and-mold supplies, wax, and citric acid.
Soaper’s Choice
(A Division of Columbus Foods)
800-322-6985
www.soaperschoice.com
The Soap Box Company
866-840-7627
www.soapboxcompany.com
A wide range of earth and animal friendly soaps and other body care essentials.
The Soap Saloon
916-334-4894
www.soapsaloon.com
Citric acid, dyes, butters, beeswax, lye, and kits.
Soapscope, Inc.
888-340-5877
www.soapscope.com

Colorants, butters, containers, and bottles.
StevensonCooper, Inc.
888-420-1663
www.stevensoncooper.com
Beeswax, tallow, and rosin.
Sunfeather Natural Soap Co.
315-265-3648
www.sunsoap.com
Colorants, waxes, soap stamps, preservatives, and dyes.
Sweet Cakes Soapmaking Supplies
952-945-9900
www.sweetcakes.com
Kits, containers, and colorants.
TKB Trading
510-451-9011
www.tkbtrading.com
Containers, lanolin, beeswax beads, waxes, mica, dyes and melt-and-mold
supplies.
Uncommon Scents
800-426-4336
www.uncommonscents.com
Earth-friendly, cruelty-free bath and body care products in recyclable packaging,
available in more than 50 custom scents.
Wholesale Supplies Plus, Inc.
800-359-0944
www.wholesalesuppliesplus.com
Dyes, containers, melt-and-mold supplies, butters, soap stamps, and bottles.
Wildweeds
800-553-9453
www.wildweeds.com
Colorants, bottles, clays, and containers.
Ye Olde Soap Shoppe

800-390-9969
www.soapmaking.com
Soap cutters, kits, and butters.
Zenith Supplies
800-735-7217
www.zenithsupplies.com
Containers, dyes, beeswax pearls, and resins.

 CONVERTING RECIPE MEASUREMENTS TO METRIC
Use the following chart for converting U.S. measurements to metric.
Since the conversions are not exact, it’s important to convert the
measurements for all of the ingredients to maintain the same
proportions as the original recipe.

Index
A
Acid-base balance. See pH
Actual soap, 41
Additives
bubble baths, 80—83
clouding, causes of, 109
herbs, 45
neutralizers, 42
preservatives, 43
sequestering agents, 45
in shampoos, 60
superfatting, 43
thickening agents, 43—45
Alcohol, 8—9, 32, 45
Alcohol-free soap, 38
Alcohol/lye method
alcohol, mixing in, 35
basic recipes, 52
bubble bath, 84
double boiler, use of, 34
dyes and fragrances, adding, 40
fats and oils, heating, 34
fatty acids, testing for excess, 38
lye-water solution, adding, 35
pots, covering/weighing, 36, 37
problems/solutions, 107
sequestering/resting phase, 40
soap, neutralizing the, 39
soap broth, cooking, 37
soap broth, diluting, 39
techniques, 33, 55, 61
Alkali, 50, 115—16. See also Lye; pH
Almond oil, 5, 60, 80
Amber Allure (recipe), 75
Arabian Nights (fragrance), 101
Avocado oil, 5

B
Baby shampoos, 64—65
Basic Shampoo, 61
Basic Shower Gel, 73
Bath Balm (fragrance), 97
Bath gels. See Gels, bath and shower
Biocides, 12
Blenders and blending, 16, 25, 49—50
Borax, 30, 43—45, 60, 81, 111
Boric acid, 11, 39, 42, 70
Bottles and jars, 17
Bubble baths
about, 79
foam builders and stabilizers, 80—83
recipes, 84—87
Bubble-blowing soap, 81, 87
Bungee cords, 17
C
Calgon, 11, 45, 81
Canning pots, 16
Canola oil, 2, 4, 5, 51, 80
Carrageenan, 43, 45
Castile Soap Shampoo, 100%, 65
Castor oil, 6—7, 50, 60, 82, 116
Castor Oil-Coconut Oil Shampoo, 62
Castor Oil/Jojoba Moisturizing Soap, 54
Castor Oil/Rosin Soap, 55
Caustic potash, 8
Cedar, 66
Cedarwood, 66
Cellulose derivatives, 43, 45
Christmas Carnation (fragrance), 102
Christmas Evergreen (fragrance), 96
Cinnamon Forest (fragrance), 101
Citric acid, 11, 12, 39, 42, 70
Citronella, 66, 67
Citrus Delight (fragrance), 96
Citrus Refresher (fragrance), 95
Clary sage, 12, 66

Classical Romance (fragrance), 97
Clean n Green (dog shampoo recipe), 67
Clear Springs, 9
Cleopatra s Milk Bath, 85
Clouding/cloudiness, 8, 21, 45, 108, 109
Cloud point, 8
Clove, 66
Cocoa butter, 3
Coco-Loco Shower Gel, 76
Coconut—Jojoba Fusion, 75
Coconut oil, 2, 51, 52—53, 74, 80
Coconut Oil Shampoo, 62
Cold-process soapmaking, 20, 22, 89
Concentrated soap solutions, making, 44
Cooking pots. See Pots
Corn oil, 4, 5
Creamy Coconut Oil Soap, 53
Curdling, 106
D
Detergents, 1
Dilution, guidelines for, 41—42
Distilled water. See Soft (distilled water)
Dog shampoos, 66—67
Double boilers, use of, 16, 22, 34, 107
Dream Weaver (fragrance), 98
Dyes and fragrances. See also Essential oils
about, 88
alcohol-lye method, 40
bath and shower gels, 71
food coloring, 90
fragrance formulations, 93—102
paste method liquid soapmaking, 30—31
soap dyes, 90
E
Eau de Cologne (fragrance), 100
Emulsifiers, viii, 58
Essence of Rosin Bubble Bath, 87
Essential oils, 38, 60, 66, 91—92, 111

Ethanol, 9, 32, 55
Eucalyptus, 66
Everclear, 9
Exotic Blend (fragrance), 103
F
Fats and oils. See also Fragrance oils
alcohol-lye method, 34
alkali proportions, 50
clouding, causes of, 109
hard fats, 2—3
oil blends, 49—50
paste method liquid soapmaking, 22
in shampoos, 60
soft oils, 4—7
Fatty acids, viii, 2, 4—5, 27, 38, 113—15
Finishing agents, 58
Flea control, 66
Flower Child (fragrance), 98
Foam builders and stabilizers, 80—82
Foaming, 29
Food coloring, 90
Food processors, 16, 25
For Men (fragrance), 99
Fragrance oils, 30, 91, 111. See also Dyes and fragrances Fresh-Scent Blend (dog shampoo recipe), 66
G
Gels, bath and shower
about, 3, 69
alternative methods, 72
making, procedure for, 70—71
recipes, 73—76
for summertime, 76
Gentle Shampoo, 62
Glossary, 118—20
Gloves. See Goggles and gloves
Glycerin, viii, 9, 32, 60, 81
Goggles and gloves, 17, 23
Goldilocks Shampoo, 63
Grapefruit seed oil, 12

Great Outdoors (dog shampoo recipe), 67
Gums, 45
H
Hair, 59. See also Shampoo Hard fats, 2—3
Hard water. See Soft (distilled water)
Hawaiian Islands Shampoo, 63
Heavenly (fragrance), 99
Herbal Flea Tamer (dog shampoo recipe), 66
Herbs, 45, 102
High-Foam Cold Cream Soap, 53
High-Foaming Rosin Soap, 53
High-oleic soft oils, 5
Honey Pie (fragrance), 98
Hot process soapmaking, 20
Hot-process soapmaking, 16, 89, 90
Humectants, 9, 58
Hydrolysis, 21
Hydroxide solution, 114
I
Indian Dream (fragrance), 94
Island Breeze (fragrance), 98
Isopropyl alcohol, 9, 29, 32, 55
J
Jars, 17
Jojoba, 7, 49, 50, 75
Jojoba Conditioning Shampoo, 62
Jojoba Moisturizing Soap, 54
L
Lanolin, 7, 49
Lanolin Soap, 55
Lauric acid, 2, 58, 80
Lavender, 45, 66, 84, 102
Lavender—Patchouli Blend (fragrance), 99

Lemon-Fresh Repellent (dog shampoo recipe), 67
Lemon Refresher (fragrance), 97
Lime Smoothie (fragrance), 100
Linoleic acid, 4
Linolenic acid, 4
Liquid Silk Shampoo, 62
Liquid soap. See also Bubble baths; Gels, bath
and shower; Shampoo
formulating your own, 48
historical aspects, 47—48
simple and natural, 48
Liquid soapmaking equipment, 15—17
Liquid soapmaking ingredients
fats and oils, 2—7
other, 10—14
potassium hydroxide, 8
solvents, 8—9
waxes, 7
Liquid soapmaking recipes
Castor Oil—Jojoba Moisturizing Soap, 54
Castor Oil—Rosin Soap, 55
Creamy Coconut Oil Soap, 53
High-Foam Cold Cream Soap, 53
High-Foaming Rosin Soap, 53
Lanolin Soap, 55
Liquid Soap with Palm Oil, 54
Mild Coconut Oil Soap, 52
Moisturizing Jojoba Soap, 54
100% Coconut Oil Soap, 52
Super-Mild Soap, 53
Liquid soapmaking techniques
additives, using, 42—45
alcohol/lye method, 33—40
basic, 19—45
blending technique, 50
blends, formulating, 47—55
blends, oil, 49
concentrated solutions, 44
dilution, guidelines for, 41—42
hot process, 20
lye proportions, calculating, 51
paste method, 22—32
principles of, 21

transparency, achieving, 21
troubleshooting, 105—16
Liquid Soap with Palm Oil, 54
Love Potion #7 (fragrance), 95
Lye solutions, 23, 51, 106. See also Alcohol-lye method
M
Marketing techniques, 99
Marvelous Moisturizing Shampoo, 63
Meadow Garden (fragrance), 95
Mild Coconut Oil Soap, 52
Milk, powdered, 82
Milk Bath, Cleopatra s, 85
Milkiness, causes of, 9, 21, 27, 49
Mint Julep (fragrance), 98
Minty Dog (dog shampoo recipe), 67
Mist Pine Barrens Soap Blend (fragrance), 96
Mixed-tocopherol vitamin E, 12, 43
Mixers and mixing, 16
Moisturizing Jojoba Soap, 54
My Guy s Blend (fragrance), 96
N
Naturally Wild for Men (fragrance), 93
Neutralizers
about, 11, 42
alcohol-lye method, 39
basic soap recipes, 52
bath and shower gels, 70
in bubble bath, 84
overaddition of, 110
paste method liquid soapmaking, 29—30
in shampoos, 61
Noir Blend (fragrance), 103
O
Oils. See Fats and oils
Old Kent Garden (fragrance), 100
Oleic acid, 4, 5, 6, 80

Olive oil, 6, 55, 60, 80
Olive Oil Bubble Bath, 85
100% Castile Soap Shampoo, 64
100% Coconut Oil Soap, 52
P
Palmitic acid, 2, 3
Palm oil, 2, 3, 49
Paste method liquid soapmaking
double boiler, preparing, 22
dyes and fragrances, adding, 30—31
fats and oils, adding, 22
fatty acids, testing for excess, 27
lye, adding to the oils, 24
lye solution, preparing, 23
problems/solutions, 107, 109
sequestering/resting phase, 31—32
soap, diluting the, 28—29
soap, neutralizing the, 29—30
stirring, 24—25
Patchouli—Almond Spice (fragrance), 97
Peanut oil, 4, 5
Pearl ash, 11, 23, 28
Pears Soap, 11, 99
Pennyroyal, 66
Pennyroyal—Citronella Special (dog shampoo recipe), 67
Peppermint, 66
pH, testing/adjusting, 12, 38, 45, 112—16.
See also Neutralizers
Phenolphthalein, 13—14, 42, 51, 112, 113
Pine oils, 66
Plastic sheeting, 17, 34, 36
Potassium-based soap, 48, 49, 81
Potassium carbonate, 11, 23, 28
Potassium hydroxide, ix, 8, 23, 35, 51
Pots, cooking/canning, 15—16, 22, 34, 36
Powdered milk, 82
Preservatives, 12, 31, 40, 43
Pure Coconut Oil Bubble Bath, 85
R

R
Rebecca s Patchouli (fragrance), 100
Recipes
baby shampoo, 64—65
bath and shower gels, 73—76
dog shampoo, 66—67
fragrance formulations, 93—102
shampoo, 61—67
Resource list, 121—27
Resting phase. See Sequestering/sequestering agents
Revitalizing Rosin Shampoo, 63
Rich and Creamy Shower Gel, 75
Rose geranium, 66
Rosemary, 66, 84
Rosemary extract, 12, 43
Rose of Bengal (fragrance), 101
Rosin, 10, 53, 54, 87
Rosin Shampoo, Revitalizing, 63
Rosin Soap, 55
Rubbing alcohol, 9
S
Safety procedures, 17, 23, 29, 34
Safflower oil, 2, 4
Saponification, viii, 50, 51, 108
Scales, measuring, 15
SDA3A and SDA3C, 9
Sea Breezy (fragrance), 103
Seaweed extracts, 45
Sequestering/sequestering agents, 31—32, 40, 45, 115
Shampoo
about, 57—58
additives, 60
baby, 64—65
cleaning/conditioning, 58—59
dog, 66—67
formulations, 61—63
oils in, 60
Shampoo recipes
Basic Shampoo, 61
Castor Oil-Coconut Oil Shampoo, 62

Clean n Green, 67
Fresh-Scent Blend, 66
Gentle Shampoo, 62
Goldilocks Shampoo, 63
Great Outdoors, 67
Hawaiian Islands Shampoo, 63
Herbal Flea Tamer, 66
Jojoba Conditioning Shampoo, 62
Lemon-Fresh Repellent, 67
Liquid Silk Shampoo, 62
Marvelous Moisturizing Shampoo, 63
Minty Dog, 67
100% Castile Soap Shampoo, 64
Pennyroyal—Citronella Special, 67
Revitalizing Rosin Shampoo, 63
Soapless Shampoo, 65
Sudsy Fun Shampoo, 65
Vitamin E Hair Booster, 62
Woodsy Blend, 67
Sheeting, plastic. See Plastic sheeting
Shower gels. See Gels, bath and shower
Signature Blend of Squeaky
Clean… Naturally! (fragrance), 101
Simple Coconut Oil Gel #1, 74
Simple Coconut Oil Gel #2, 74
Smooth Operator (fragrance), 94
Soap, viii—ix. See also Liquid soap Soapless Shampoo, 65
Soapmaking. See also Liquid soapmaking
historical aspects, 94
introduction to, viii—ix
language of, 74
marketing, 99
Sodium-based soap, 48, 81
Sodium borate, 11
Sodium hydroxide, ix, 8, 21, 51
Soft (distilled water), 10, 27, 109
Soft oils, 4—7
Softsoap, 48
Solvents, 8—9, 70
Soybean oil, 4
Sports Essential Blend (fragrance), 103
Spring Scent (fragrance), 94
Starter method, 25, 28

Stearic acid, 2, 3, 5, 49, 58
Stick blenders, 16, 24, 25
Stirrers, 16
Strawberry—Rhubarb Pie (fragrance), 102
Sudsy Fun Shampoo, 65
Sugar, 8, 10, 32, 45
Sulfonated castor oil, 7, 43, 60, 64, 66, 82
Sulfuric acid, 7
Sultry Nights (fragrance), 95
Summer Fun (fragrance), 94
Summer Garden (fragrance), 97
Summertime Smoothie, 76
Sunshine Spirit (fragrance), 97
Superfatting agents, 21, 43
Supermild Soap, 53
Supersudsy Bubble Bath, 86
Sweet Earth (fragrance), 95
Sweet Harmony for Women (fragrance), 93
T
Tallow, 2, 3, 49
Tangerine Dream (fragrance), 99
Tea tree, 66
Thermometers, 15
Thickening and thickening agents, 22, 25, 43—45, 72, 106
3 Cs Soap Blend (fragrance), 95
Tocopherols. See Mixed-tocopherol vitamin E Too Sexy (Hers) (fragrance), 98
Tracing phase, of soapmaking. See
Thickening and thickening agents
Transparency, achieving, 21
Triglycerides, viii
Tropical Citrus Blend (fragrance), 101
Troubleshooting
about, 105
alcohol-lye solution, 107
alcohol stock become thick/gummy, 108
alkali, correcting excess, 115—16
borax, excess, 111
cloudiness, 108—9
emulsion appears curdled, 106
emulsion separates when cooking, 107

essential or fragrance oils, 111
fatty acids, correcting excess, 113—15
filmy residue on top of solution, 108
mismeasurement of ingredients, 110
neutralizers, overaddition of, 110
oil-lye solution doesn t thicken, 106
paste method, 107
pH problems, correcting, 112—16
True soap, 41
Turkey red oil, 7
V
Viscosity. See Thickening and thickening agents
Vitamin E, 12
Vitamin E Hair Booster, 62
W
Water. See Soft (distilled water)
Waxes, 7, 50
Weighing, the soap, 36, 37, 70—71
Whisks, 16, 24, 25
Woodsy Blend (dog shampoo recipe), 67
X
Xanthan gum, 45

Other Storey Titles You Will Enjoy
The Essential Oils Book: Creating Personal Blends for Mind & Body,
by Colleen K. Dodt.
A rich resource on the many uses of aromatherapy and its applications in
everyday life.
160 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-0-88266-913-7.
The Herbal Home Spa: Naturally Refreshing Wraps, Rubs, Lotions, Masks,
Oils, and Scrubs, by Greta Breedlove.
A collection of easy-to-create personal care products that rival potions found at
exclusive spas and specialty shops.
208 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-1-58017-005-5.
Making Transparent Soap, by Catherine Failor.
Step-by-step directions to produce transparent soaps that are mild, rich, and
creamy.
144 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-1-58017-244-8.
Melt & Mold Soap Crafting, by C. Kaila Westerman.
Colorful, eye-catching soaps, made in the microwave without lye or other
hazardous chemicals.
144 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-1-58017-293-6.
The Natural Soap Book: Making Herbal and Vegetable-Based Soaps,
by Susan Miller Cavitch.
Basic recipes for soaps made without chemical additives and synthetic
ingredients, as well as ideas on scenting, coloring, cutting, trimming, and
wrapping soaps.
192 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-0-88266-888-8.
Organic Body Care Recipes, by Stephanie Tourles.
Homemade, herbal formulas for glowing skin, hair, and nails, plus a vibrant self.
384 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-1-58017-676-7.
The Soapmaker’s Companion, by Susan Miller Cavitch.
A resource for beginner and advanced soapmakers alike, from mastering basic
skills to creating soaps with a personal touch.

288 pages. Paper. ISBN 978-0-88266-965-6.
These and other books from Storey Publishing are available
wherever quality books are sold or by calling 1-800-441-5700.
Visit us at www.storey.com.

