
Mathematics of the Stars
Plan of the Chapter
A one-volume history of Greek mathematics has to be selective and
compressed. All the more so, a one-chapter history of Greek astronomy.
We follow an entire trajectory – from the beginnings to Ptolemy (second
century ). Chapter , “The Generation of Archimedes,” was a rondo
with Archimedes as its recurrent theme. Here, we progress through three
subchapters for our three main cast members:
I.
Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus
II.
Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus
III.
Culmination: Ptolemy
I
Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus
The ﬁrst section, “What Everyone Knew,” begins from ethnoastronomy
(the astronomical knowledge of simple societies). We dwell on this more
than we did on ethnomathematics in Chapter . Throughout history,
people knew about the sky more than we – most modern city-dwellers –
now usually do. To explain the history of astronomy, then, one must also
provide some of that once-elementary astronomical knowledge. The fol-
lowing section, “Bring in the Bureaucrats,” visits the astronomy of early
states across the globe, ending with Mesopotamia. We ﬁnd a common set
of themes – an interest in events seen on the horizon, as well as repeating
cycles and, above all, the calendar. This will remain at the background of
Greek astronomy itself, and Mesopotamian astronomy, speciﬁcally, is itself
a major protagonist in our story. It was on a par with Greek astronomy,
and eventually, the science of Hipparchus and of Ptolemy is best under-
stood as a synthesis of the two.
“Prelude: The Threshold of Greek Astronomy” brings us to Greece.
The earliest Greek astronomy was, perhaps, no more than whatever it was

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of Mesopotamian astral science that came to be, already, the shared
knowledge of the Mediterranean. Against this backdrop, Greek astronomy
proper began to develop. This, too – just as we saw for mathematics – may
have taken the form of generational waves. In the section “The First
Generation of Greek Astronomy: The Extent of Our Knowledge,” we
consider what may be safely asserted concerning Eudoxus’s innovation of
an astronomical model where the planets are carried by nested homo-
centric spheres. The following section, “The First Generation of Greek
Astronomy: The Limits of Our Knowledge,” is more speculative.
I emphasize the possibility that Eudoxus could have relied on mechanical
models (such visible displays will remain as a theme of Greek astronomy
throughout).
II
Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus
“The Astronomical In-Between?” notes how – following the generation
inspired by Eudoxus himself – the study of homocentric spheres seems to
disappear. A few works do survive from late in the fourth century and early
in the third, and their interests are, in some cases, closer to those of other
ancient societies (once again: horizon phenomena and calendrical cycles).
We also ﬁnd, however, traces of the more ludic science of the Hellenistic
era. The following creative generation of Greek astronomy culminates with
Hipparchus (second century ), but it is harder to say how it originated.
This is the subject of the next section, “A New Astronomy: Whodunit?,”
which considers the possible contributions of Archimedes, Apollonius, and
Hipparchus – and also brings in the unique witness of the Antikythera
mechanism. The following three sections revolve around Hipparchus’s
astronomy – which opens up to much more besides. “Hipparchus and
the Babylonians” discusses the broad outlines of Hipparchus’s contribu-
tion: astronomical models that integrate precise observations. The section
also picks up again the story of Mesopotamian astronomy (the origin of
many
of
Hipparchus’s
observations,
parameters,
and
techniques).
Hipparchus’s creativity is hard to deﬁne in any simple formula, even
considering astronomy alone. One of his contributions must have been,
more or less, the foundation of an entire mathematical ﬁeld – trigonom-
etry. This is, among other things, a reﬂection of the role of precise detail in
Hipparchus’s scientiﬁc project and is the subject of the section
“‘Industrious’: a Detour Regarding Trigonometry.” But this does not
nearly sum up the intellectual project as a whole, and the following section,
“‘A Lover of Truth’ and Hipparchus’s Character as a Scientist,” considers
Plan of the Chapter

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hipparchus’s scientiﬁc personality and brings in the evidence not just for
his astronomy but also for his contributions across mathematics as a whole.
III
Culmination: Ptolemy
Hipparchus was unique and, possibly, isolated. There seems to be much
less creative activity in the generations following him, and we indeed note,
once again, the sea change marked by the coming of Roman patronage. In
the history of astronomy, this sea change shows itself in the spectacular rise
of Greco-Roman astrology. “Before Ptolemy: Signs and Tables” starts,
once again, from Mesopotamian astronomy, now considered as a science
of astral omens. As we consider the rise of astrology, we also consider the
practice of the astronomical table. The use of tables is crucial for our last
major protagonist – Ptolemy. “Ptolemy: Toward the Canon” considers the
major outlines of Ptolemy’s science, “A View of the Monument” concen-
trates on an example (Book of the Almagest). Ptolemy aimed at
monumental ﬁnality, a science of astronomy where everything is com-
puted, concretely, from ﬁrst principles – but he also aimed to achieve the
same in other sciences as well, the project as a whole integrated within a
metaphysical program. Remarkably, he was successful, his project canon-
ized soon after his death. Eventually, he would be one of the pillars of the
scientiﬁc canon emerging in Late Antiquity – the subject of the
following chapter.
I.
Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus
What Everyone Knew
Why should simple societies not have an astronomy? We understand that a
people will know a lot about their environment, the lay of the land, its
animals and plants, its seasons. Star lore is a part of that knowledge woven
into a society’s fabric of life. This is often, literally, myth. The Gamilaraay
people – in what is today New South Wales – knew the tale of the Mayi
Mayi sisters, who, angry at the rape of one of their own, brought frosts to
the land; repenting of the harm to the people, they went up to the sky, as
stars, to bring back the warmth. Their appearance on the horizon foretells
the coming of dingo pups and of the warm season. The patterns of
appearance and reappearance are always associated with beliefs about the
weather, hence about the most basic life cycle; so, a widespread proverb in
Africa, south of the equator, reminds that “if the Digging Stars set in sunny

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

weather, they rise in rain; if they set in rain, they rise in sunny weather.”
(Why “Digging Stars,” then? Because they remind you when to dig –
speciﬁcally, to hoe – for the planting of new crops.) Star lore can be
maintained by tales but also, very often, by concrete artifacts: the Navajo
still make string ﬁgures that represent constellations, for instance, the
Dilyéhé, the constellation whose ﬁrst reappearance marks the end of the
planting season. Other artifacts try not to just to imitate constellations but
instead are observational tools, used to align the viewer with the sky. Large
earthworks, believed to date somewhere in the range from about 
to , are found all over the Ohio Valley, with single structures, on a
few occasions, measured in miles. Lacking any historical context – and
with the archeological evidence itself mostly eroded beyond recovery – no
certainty is possible, but the likelihood is that such structures served, at
least among other things, as permanent objects relative to which one could
site horizon phenomena, perhaps mostly those of the moon.This is, of
course, directly reminiscent of Stonehenge, which, once again, is but one
of many megalithic structures found all over Eurasia, from a period
preceding any written history. I traveled rapidly across the globe, and with
Stonehenge, we’re ﬁnally back on the same continent as the Greeks. And
this is as good of an opportunity as any to dispel a common misunder-
standing. Stonehenge – and its like – tends to impress us too much.
Indeed, the most superﬁcial familiarity with the evidence conﬁrms that
the layout of Stonehenge must have been aligned with astronomical
observations. You take this fact in, and your mind explodes: wow, they
knew astronomy! This must have been some kind of Atlantis – possessing
some weirdly advanced science, since lost (were they visited by aliens?) The
premise of such reasoning is that astronomy should be a type of science;
hence, it should be rare. The concrete facts of Stonehenge suggest, to our
mind, a lost Newton. In fact, astronomy – in the sense of paying close
attention to the changing appearances of the main features of the sky
(especially along the horizon) – is as common as it gets. It is remarkable
that the people of Stonehenge lifted all those heavy slabs. But there is
R. D. Haynes, “Astronomy and the Dreaming: The Astronomy of the Aboriginal Australians,” in
H. Selin (ed.), Astronomy across Cultures: The History of Non-Western Astronomy (Berlin, Germany:
Springer, ), p. ; K. V. Snedegar, “Stars and Seasons in Southern Africa,” Vistas in Astronomy
(): –; T. Griﬃn-Pierce, Earth Is My Mother, Sky Is My Father: Space, Time and
Astronomy in Navajo Sandpainting (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, ),
pp. –; R. Hively and R. Horn, “Geometry and Astronomy in Prehistoric Ohio,” in
A. Aveni (ed.), Foundations of New World Cultural Astronomy (Boulder: University Press of
Colorado, ), pp. –.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

absolutely nothing remarkable about the fact that they cared deeply, and
knew a lot, about what one sees on the horizon just before sunrise. This is
what people always did, everywhere.
Let us consider, then, what one sees on the horizon just before sunrise.
(Incidentally, the word sunrise implies a geocentric perspective; I will
switch freely, in my exposition, between geocentrism and heliocentrism.
I will also generally assume – this is Greek astronomy – a position in the
Northern Hemisphere). I explain basic things because I feel a need for
them, myself. For instance, I was told as a kid that the sun rises in the east,
and therefore I used to believe that it always rises at the same spot, due
east. In fact, as you look to the horizon from a ﬁxed spot, day after day,
you will notice the point where the sun rises, relative to ﬁxed elements of
the environment. It is “just right of that tree over there.” (In a place such as
Stonehenge, slabs of stone ﬁx those references.) This keeps changing. In
the dead of winter, it rises at a more southern spot. The next day, it will
rise a little to the north (“Now it’s behind that tree!”), and so on until the
middle of the summer. The sun will then rise at a much more northern
position. That rising position will start to migrate south again the very next
morning, all the way into the southernmost position reached, once again,
at the dead of winter. This north–south pendulum of the points of rising
forms a stable pattern, repeated year after year. When we say that many
civilizations know astronomy, we mean that they know such patterns.
The pendulum of the points of the risings of the sun is one set of events
associated with sunrise. As we look to the horizon, waiting for the sun to
rise, we can pay attention to the stars, as well. What stars are visible at the
horizon, just before sunrise?
Once again, this is perhaps not obvious to city-dwellers: the stars keep
changing. First, and more obviously, as the earth, in fact, rotates through-
out the night around its axis, we see this from our perspective as a rotation
of the stars. The Greeks ended up thinking of this as a big sphere – on
which the ﬁxed stars are set – turning around an axis. (By “ﬁxed stars,” we
refer to stars outside the solar system, all so enormously far away from us
that they do not seem to change their relative position at all even as we
change our position on the earth or as the earth rotates around the sun.)
The nightly rotation of the ﬁxed stars around their axis is quite rapid, and
even by looking at the sky for a fraction of an hour, we notice considerable
movement. Throughout the night, the stars are mostly replaced – the stars
visible just after sunset will mostly lie, by the end of the night, beneath the
horizon. Imagine, speciﬁcally, a star that is visible just above the eastern
horizon just after sunset. There are variations, depending on the position

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of the star to the north or to the south, but under the correct conditions of
this spherical geometry, we can follow the star throughout the night,
culminating near the top of the sky around midnight and then gradually
setting down until ﬁnally, just as the sun rises, it will set down in the west.
This, then, is when that particular star gets all the night to itself.
What constitutes that star’s luck on that particular night? It then has the
property that whenever it is above the horizon, the sun is beneath the
horizon. We can say that throughout that night, the sun is on the other side
of the earth from that star (this will be true from either a heliocentric or
geocentric perspective). This will obviously change throughout the passage
of the year. The stars that are visible throughout the night are those that
are to our back throughout the day. From our perspective, as we go
through the year around the sun, we have our back, during the day, to
diﬀerent parts of the starry sky. And so the identity of the visible stars
keeps changing.
I have mentioned stars noted by several civilizations: the Mayi Mayi, the
Digging Stars, the Dilyéhé. These are diﬀerent names for what the Greeks
(whose naming we still use) called the Pleiades. Indeed, these are quite
important to the Greeks – the poet Hesiod employed the same Pleiades to
mark the timing of the harvest.This is typical: most civilizations refer to a
fairly small and constant set of prominent stars and constellations. The
Pleiades are by no means universal, but they are truly widespread. And
what is noted, concerning them, is precisely the pattern of visibility.
Let us say that this is early in May (the precise date depends on the
location of the observation and also changes, very slowly, historically; right
now, I ignore such complications). Your gaze is ﬁxed, just before sunrise,
toward the eastern horizon. You notice a few last-minute stars rising, just
barely preceding the sun itself. And then, in all their sisterly beauty (see
Plate ), the Pleiades (which, to your mind, might be the Mayi Mayi, the
Digging Stars, or the Dilyéhé). A minute later, the sun shines, and the
Pleiades are no longer visible. On the next day, the Pleiades emerge above
the eastern horizon a little earlier (“earlier,” in this case, means not only as
measured by a clock but more fundamentally: relative to the rising of the
sun). Thus, they will have a little longer to be visible, disappearing only
when they are farther up in the sky. This goes on for the following nights
until the Pleiades ﬁnally become visible throughout the night, from its
beginning to end. What we notice is that in early May, the sun and the
Pleiades are nearly aligned (the sun, in a sense, is nearly between the earth
Hesiod, Works and Days, –.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and the Pleiades); by November, they are opposite each other (the earth, in
the same sense, is between the Pleiades and the sun).
The Pleiades were barely visible in early May because they were so close
to the sun (in the sense that they rose only a little before the sun itself did).
Just before that, then, they rose precisely together with the sun, and so
their rising was invisible. When the Pleiades were above the horizon, so
was the sun, and so, for all practical purposes, the Pleiades vanished from
view. This, in fact, went on for a while: the sun’s cloak of invisibility, so to
speak, spreads across many nights. (The precise length of the periods of
vanishing will vary, depending on the position of the observer on the
surface of the earth and on the position of the star to the north or the
south.) But note that before they vanished from view – in late winter into
the early spring – the Pleiades were on the other side of that “cloak of
invisibility”; that is, they were visible, brieﬂy, near the western horizon, just
after sunset. We can plot an entire sequence, then:
•
The Pleiades barely visible just before sunrise (early May)
•
The Pleiades visible for longer and longer stretches before sunrise
•
The Pleiades visible throughout the night
•
The Pleiades visible after sunset but for shorter and shorter stretches
•
The Pleiades barely visible just after sunset (late March)
•
The Pleiades vanishing from view entirely
At this point, the cycle repeats itself. This is once again a pendulum –
appearance, growth, diminution, disappearance – that echoes the pendu-
lum of the sun’s motion north and south. Each star and constellation goes
through a cycle of vanishing from view and reappearing, with its obvious
metaphorical resonance of birth, death, and rebirth. Of course, it is
precisely this motion of the sun that gives rise to the seasons, and so it
drives the actual cycle of life and death of all living beings. We tell this as
an astronomical, or geometrical, story, via diagrams and calculations,
whereas the Gamilaraay people tell this as a story about the Mayi Mayi,
via a particular constellation. But all humans know the same story outline,
connecting life, seasons, sun, and stars.
So, to begin with, for sun and stars. One more pattern we may add,
noting it very quickly (because it is still familiar to all), is that of the moon.
Once again, there is a key event of “birth” – the “new moon,” observed as
the near-transparent circle begins to ﬁll up again, becoming, night by
night, a wider crescent. This transition also follows a pendulum pattern,
the moon literally waning and waxing. (Obviously, in this case, the main
phenomena of disappearance and reappearance are not related to the

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

position relative to the horizon but to the angle between the sun, earth,
and moon; we will return to this later in the chapter.)
To conclude, a few notes on the long-term signiﬁcance of this widely
shared type of astronomical knowledge.
First, throughout premodern times, this knowledge never goes away. It
is not as if scientiﬁc astronomy replaces the star lore of the rising and
setting of the sun and the stars, the waning and waxing of the moon. Star
lore remains as a widely shared knowledge, taken for granted by more
scientiﬁc astronomers. Sophisticated astronomy, in the premodern world,
has, among other things, to provide an account of the pattern of key
qualitative events: the southernmost position of the sun, the ﬁrst risings of
stars such as the Pleiades, the phases of the moon.
Second, such accounts are not trivial. Already, the sun and the moon
create a major headache because, you see, the cycle of the month does not
align with that of the year! Bringing together the patterns of key qualitative
events is not merely a cultural requirement; it is also a diﬃcult and
interesting scientiﬁc puzzle. Very naturally, then, it forces itself upon
premodern scientiﬁc astronomers.
We often imagine the astronomer as the cartographer of the sky. Full
knowledge of astronomy, in this sense, would involve the ability to
produce precise spherical coordinates for each of the visible objects in
the sky and provide a numerically precise trajectory for each of their
movements. Some Greek astronomers would, indeed, engage in a compa-
rable project. But this is not the heart of premodern astronomy.
Historically, the astronomer was not a cartographer, but instead, he was
a calendrical master. The cartographer knows about positions and patterns
in space – even the trajectories are essentially spatial entities that simply
require time for their unfolding. But the calendrical master knows about
repetitions in time. For him or her, even the awareness of position in the
sky is necessary simply to identify the references anchoring the temporal
cycles. Star lore, historically, is signiﬁcant because it is the way in which
time is naturalized and made part of a society’s life. To understand ancient
astronomy, we must understand it as a science not of space but of time.
Bring in the Bureaucrats
Knowledge of the stars is not directly mathematical. It is an awareness of
patterns in time. However, the basic unit is clearly deﬁned – a single night.
Clearly deﬁned units make number come in naturally, and as states train
elite scribes – used to counting taxes and inventories – it becomes natural
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

for them to inventorize, so to speak, the events of the sky. At this point,
what was once star lore becomes a calendar.
The Maya of Central America had, during the ﬁrst millennium , a
complex civilization of city-states, with – of course – a stratum of special-
ized priests who were also masters of a complicated literacy. I refer to them
as “bureaucrats,” but it should be clear that they did not approach their
work with the impersonal objectivity that Weber, the German sociologist,
saw as the core of a bureaucracy. Stars, to them, were objects of intense
religious veneration. What marks oﬀthose priests is their highly literate,
numerical, specialized approach. Ritual, in fact, is often bureaucratic-like –
precise repetition in the fulﬁllment of one’s tasks becoming a goal to itself.
It is remarkable that this speciﬁc obsession with order emerges so often –
together with state formation – around the stars.
There were, for instance, many books produced by the Maya, the vast
majority now lost (many destroyed by uncomprehending Europeans, most
destroyed by the humidity of the Central American jungle). Four are now
extant and all are astronomical and, speciﬁcally, calendrical. A similar
emphasis on astronomy and the calendar (although, unfortunately, with less
elaboration than found in the books) is seen in Maya inscriptions on stone:
clearly, then, this astronomy was central to their elite culture. This is, in fact,
a ﬁendishly demanding system. What is at stake – we see the same across
many civilizations – is the naming of days. The most basic format of labeling
days had what to us appears, at ﬁrst glance, as an arbitrary cycle with thirteen
repetitions of a twenty-day sequence. Bear in mind, however, that Maya
numeration used not a base-ten but a base-twenty system; hence, the
twenty-day sequence came naturally. Note also that although this sequence
of labeling days strikes us as arbitrary, we ourselves ﬁnd it essential to keep
records of a seven-day cycle – the week – a division around which we have
structured a civilizational pulse, longer than the day but shorter than the
month/year; the need for such pulses is shared by many complex civiliza-
tions. The Maya -day pattern aligns neither with the moon nor with the
sun, but the Maya kept, alongside the -day-based year, another, more
practical year with days. It took considerable numerical ingenuity to
align the two and assign the correct -day calendrical labels for given
astronomical events. Masters of ritual, the Maya priests aligned together not
just -day and -day cycles but many other cycles as well (for instance,
a -day cycle – even more closely approximating our week – and on top of
this, of course, the cycles of the moon). Many of the inscriptions contain a
long list of the diﬀerent names of a day, all the names sacred and the
inscription becoming a kind of theological spreadsheet.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

All this made even more sense to the Maya because they cared deeply
not only for the sun and the moon but, no less, for planets: thus the -
day cycle was just one among several that needed to be accommodated. In
the Maya codices, we ﬁnd detailed knowledge, for instance, of Venus
and its cycle, which is days long. (I will get to this later on;
numerical everywhere, Maya priests must have been impressed by the fact
that  ¼  .) With this information, one can begin to build
numerical systems that align a -day cycle, a -day cycle, and a
-day cycle, which Maya priests developed and produced in richly
illustrated tables, a thousand and more years ago – a complex art, now
almost entirely lost. The art of the astronomer-priest is more sophisticated
yet: they explicitly recognized the imprecision of the alignments and
developed numerical rules for adjusting tables so as to maintain the correct
naming.This already becomes very challenging even for a modern reader
with access to our easy-to-use writing and numbering systems. Maya
writing is extremely hard – based on many glyphs, each of which strikes
one, at ﬁrst, as a brilliantly executed work of art. The point of Mayan
scribal culture was not to make it easier to the outsiders – not in their
writing, nor in their calendar.
Ancient China is better understood. Starting at , our grasp of
oﬃcial Chinese astronomy is very thorough, based on a continuous
tradition kept at the courts. In that year, the imperial court of the Han
dynasty brought together expert astronomers to reform the calendar (it is
clear that diﬀerent systems, now known only in fragmentary form, were
introduced by earlier dynasties).In this new system, the ﬁrst day for the
epoch was taken to be (what we call) December , . How is this
the “ﬁrst day”? It was the start of a lunar cycle (ﬁrst day of the month) and
solar cycle (ﬁrst day of the year). For purposes of calendrical astronomy, a
month was deﬁned as /days; a year was deﬁned, for the same
purposes, as /,days; so that ,years were precisely equal to
,months and to ,days. One could say, then, that precisely ,
years after the beginning of the epoch, one would hit, once again, the same
ﬁrst day of the month and year. Because a separate system existed for labeling
days in a somewhat arbitrary sequence of days, each with its distinct label
(this closely recalls the -day-based or -day-based system of the Maya),
and because ,does not have among its factors, we need to multiply
J. S. Justeson, “Ancient Maya Ethnoastronomy,” in A. Aveni (ed.), Foundations of New World
Cultural Astronomy (Boulder: University Press of Colorado, ), pp. –.
C. Cullen, “Motivations for Scientiﬁc Change in Ancient China: Emperor Wu and the Grand
Inception Astronomical Reforms of ,” Journal for the History of Astronomy ():
–.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

everything yet by to get to ,years, following which the ﬁrst day of the
month and year will recur, with the very same label. What this represented, ﬁrst
of all – as explicitly stated by emperors, who set such challenges for astron-
omers – was the serene expectation that dynasties should, and would, survive
for millennia. But more than this: emperors were required to head rituals and
follow omens based on the cycles of the sky; hence, one needed to be able to
tell in advance, precisely, the regular repetitions and thus, also, to be able to
notice (which Chinese astronomers were especially good at) when irregular
events – meteors, comets, supernovae – took place, as deviations from an
expected norm. More on this later in the chapter.
This becomes clear: as star lore becomes calendar and a group of
practitioners becomes responsible for its maintenance, one does not merely
keep in order the familiar observations preceding the bureaucratic state.
Instead, one notices many more patterns and begins to arrange them in
explicitly quantitative terms. Let us turn back and consider, then, such
patterns of the sky – those that are not universally well known to all
civilizations but become known as astronomy is picked up by the bureau-
crats. (Once again, I apologize for going through facts that are well known
to many of my readers.)
Now, we all know our solar system: just like Maya, or Han, bureaucrats,
we were explicitly taught about it, beginning in elementary school. Let me
point out something about the solar system that I am not sure elementary
school does a good enough job explaining. I refer to the following fact: the
solar system is nearly ﬂat. Perhaps you think of the solar system like the
model shown in Figure .
Figure 
Vector model of an atom. Anna Iamanova iStock/Getty Images Plus.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

That is, based on the familiar model of the orbits of the atom. This is
indeed a system with a center surrounded by “planets” – and it is also a
very three-dimensional system, the orbits occupying the entire space sur-
rounding the center. The solar system, however, is not like this. It is often
drawn as concentric rings, as shown in Figure .
And this is, in fact, not a schematic simpliﬁcation but, instead, the
correct way to draw it. The blobs of matter emitted out of the sun –
planets and, eventually, our moon – were all ejected along the same path
and now all reside within the conﬁnes of the same fairly thin disk. They are
almost like the tracks on a vinyl record.
It also happens that the axis of the daily rotation of the earth is not
orthogonal to the plane of this disk but is instead considerably oblique
to it. This, indeed, you may perhaps recall from elementary school: the
oblique angle at which the earth rotates has an important consequence.
It means that if you are north of the equator, you spend, in summer,
most of the twenty-four-hour rotation facing the sun (that is, in
daylight), whereas in winter, you spend most of the twenty-four-hour
rotation with your back to the sun (that is, in darkness). This is why
summer (in the north) is hotter than winter and is also the reason why
the sun rises at a more southern position in winter than in summer.
Uranus
Mercury
Sun
Venus
SOLAR SYSTEM
Earth
Mars
Saturn
Jupiter
Neptune
Figure 
Solar system with sun and all planets (vector sketch). pijama/DigitalVision
Vectors/Getty Images.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Had it not been for this obliquity, perhaps astronomy would not have
mattered to humanity all that much. But we are, in fact, rotating
obliquely to the plane of the solar system, and for this reason, we have
seasons.
These are indeed all “modern” facts, told from the perspective of a
heliocentric system. The near-ﬂatness of the solar system is especially
important, however, in terms of its consequences for premodern observers.
Now we get to the heart of what matters to Maya and Han astronomers.
Because the solar system resides mostly on a single disk, this means
that from our point of view, the objects of this system – sun, moon, and
planets – all change their positions (relative to the stars) within regulated
boundaries. The sun and the moon and the planets do not go just
anywhere, north or south. They are conﬁned, instead, to a fairly narrow
band, known as the zodiac.
To understand those terms, let us consider what is visible along this
band. First of all, the sun. More speciﬁcally: it is across this band that we
perceive the annual rotation of the sun. Every day, the sun rises in the east
and sets in the west. And every day, it does so in a slightly diﬀerent
position on the band of the zodiac – changing its position upon it, each
day, by roughly /the entire circle. (The daily and annual rotations
are, as it happens, opposed: this annual rotation takes place from west to
east.) Now, what do we mean by “the position of the sun on the zodiac”?
What we mean, eﬀectively, is the answer to the question: “What are the
distant stars with which the sun is exactly aligned at a given night?” As
noted earlier, the answer to this question cannot be given directly – the
stars, aligning with the sun on a given night, have to be invisible. But if we
gain a deep familiarity with those stars that lie along the band upon which
the sun makes its annual rotation, then we can note, precisely, the missing
stars – those that are invisible because, at this time of the year, they, so to
speak, host the sun. It therefore makes sense to pay attention, in particular,
to star constellations along this band – and to name them. The
Babylonians ended up with twelve such named constellations, which then
became the common heritage of the Near East and, slightly revised
through Greek astronomy, are still with us. Based on these constellations,
the Greeks ended up thinking of this band as constituted by a series of
“small pictures” or zōdia – each constellation considered, so to speak, as a
thumbnail work of art. Hence the name zodiac.
When we say that
“the sun is in Taurus,” then, what we mean is that the sun aligns with

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the constellation known as Taurus or “passes through” Taurus – which
happens today around May–June; this constellation is not visible at that
time. (Note that those famous twelve constellations exhaust, between
them, not the sky but merely the band of the zodiac; further, eventually,
the meaning of a term such as Taurus will come to be not the star
constellation but the precisely measured /th of the zodiac in the general
area of the constellation. In this more precise sense, the correct technical
term is not constellation but sign.)
The moon, too, keeps moving along the same band – indeed, much
more swiftly. If the sun returns – from our point of view – to the same
position, relative to the ﬁxed stars, every (roughly) days, the moon
does the same roughly every days. Wait, you ask, should this rotation
not take a month? Not quite. The universal idea of the month antedates
measuring bureaucracies. It is based not on the more quantitative, mea-
surable position of the moon along the band of its rotation but on the
more qualitative phenomenon of the phases of the moon. This cycle, we
now know (together with the Greeks, who ﬁgured that one out as soon as
they had an astronomy), depends on the moon’s optics. The moon’s light
is the reﬂection of its illumination by the sun. When the earth is near-
exactly between the earth and the sun, the entire face of the moon visible
from the earth is lit by the sun; hence, the moon appears full. When the
moon is between the earth and the sun, it is its “back,” the part turned
away from us, that is illuminated, so that we barely see the moon at all.
Because the sun and the moon both rotate in the same direction, this is a
bit of a hare-and-tortoise situation. When the moon returns, after roughly
twenty-seven days, to the same position relative to the ﬁxed stars, the sun
has already moved a little. It takes longer, then – twenty-nine days, roughly
– for the moon to return to the same position relative to the sun and the
earth. It is this three-body recurrence that we think of as a “month.” It will
be noted that when the moon is between the earth and the sun (that is, a
new moon), it may obscure the sun from vision; when the earth is between
the moon and the sun (that is, a full moon), the earth’s shadow may fall
upon the moon. We note the conceptual connection between the phe-
nomena of the eclipse and the thin strip along which the annual and
monthly rotations of the sun and the moon take place. The band is where
– and why – eclipses take place. Hence the other name of that strip – the
ecliptic. (Note that the terms zodiac and ecliptic are often used more
technically:
ecliptic
referring
to
the
one-dimensional
line
traced,
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

throughout the year, by the center of the sun; zodiac referring to the two-
dimensional band surrounding the ecliptic within which the moon and the
planets roam.)
Now, in the foregoing I used the words may (“it may obscure the sun
from vision”; “the earth’s shadow may fall upon the moon”). This is
because neither event is guaranteed because the solar system is not, in
fact, exactly ﬂat. Thus, even when the moon is just between the earth and
the sun, it might be just a little too low, or a little too high, relative to the
“disk” on which the earth and the moon rotate, to obscure the sun from
vision. What we may conclude, then, is that a solar eclipse may occur
during a new moon and at no other time; a lunar eclipse, during a full
moon and at no other time. To be able to tell with greater precision
whether or not an eclipse is likely to take place, we need a better under-
standing of the alignment of the overall cycles of the sun and the moon.
These involve not only the cycle of the phases of the moon but also the
cycle of the moon’s position relative to the ecliptic: it is sometimes slightly
above it, sometimes slightly beneath it, and it crosses the path of the sun –
the ecliptic, strictly speaking – by regular intervals (which are, of course,
much harder to detect and measure). This is already becoming quite
technical and complicated. There is one pattern of motion of the moon
relative to the sun, along the band of the ecliptic; this is the familiar cycle
of the phases of the moon. But there is, as we now notice, a diﬀerent
motion, orthogonal to the ecliptic. Combine the two cycles, and you are
able to more or less predict eclipses. Now, if you are a bureaucrat-
astronomer, your basic duty as a calendar master is to combine cycles,
and it is therefore natural that you will look for such devices.
Chinese and Babylonian astronomers came, independently, to recognize
certain patterns that bring together all the motions of the moon, relative to
the sun. All such cycles, stated in simple integer terms, are approximations,
and so there is more than a single “correct” solution. Probably the best is
the one referred to by historians of astronomy as the Saros: every 
months, almost exactly years elapse; more signiﬁcantly (in terms of
predicting eclipses), the moon returns almost to its precise same position
above, below, or precisely on the ecliptic. Thus, if there was an eclipse of
the moon on a certain day, it is very likely that such an eclipse will recur a
Saros later.
In a sense, every calendar is a prediction. When I use a -day year,
I make a – very rough – prediction that after days, the sun will return
to the same position in the pendulum of its south–north rising. This is not
exactly right (the year is not exactly days long; also, the motion of the

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sun is not uniform – although, over a -day cycle, average speed matters
much more than its variation). But this is good enough for the purposes of
a simple society making sense of its environment. Predicting eclipses diﬀers
by a matter of degree: it takes much more empirical work to verify and
reﬁne the prediction, and it is much less certain. (The prediction of solar
eclipses, in particular, is far from guaranteed, even with the Saros cycle,
because solar eclipses are visible only from a certain part of the earth.)
Because of the imprecise alignment of the various astronomical cycles such
as day, month, and year, the astronomical predictions of key qualitative
events were always a matter of some uncertainty. The new moon should
arrive after twenty-nine days, but sometimes it will have to wait till the
thirtieth day. If you assume, year after year, that the longest day of the
summer occurs every days, soon enough, you will notice that you
picked the wrong day. From the point of view of early observers, it is
obvious that astronomy is not a matter of mere counting but also involves
a certain art: a willingness to accommodate the failing of predictions.
One requires a special art – and this is just for the sun and the moon!
The planets bring in yet another dimension of complexity. The human eye
notices ﬁve more sources of light that keep changing their position along
the zodiac: Mercury and Venus are “inferior” planets. (From the modern
perspective, they are closer to the sun than the earth is. This means, in
practice, they are never seen by us to be far from the sun because their
circuit conﬁnes them to what, to us, appears as a region not far from the
sun.) Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn are “superior” planets. (They are farther
away from the sun than the earth, and so they do not necessarily appear
close to the sun.)
These, too, keep changing their position along the zodiac. Look for
Mars over consecutive nights, and you will likely see it surrounded by
diﬀerent ﬁxed stars, eventually passing from constellation to constellation,
all in the general direction of the annual rotation of the sun. However,
because we understand that this apparent motion is really a composite of
two distinct motions, it is not surprising for us to learn that its speed keeps
changing. To be clear, this is also, in part, because the planets – just like
the sun and the moon – move at nonuniform speeds and because they
move along ellipses rather than circles. However, those eﬀects are modest:
the ellipses of the planets are near-circular, and their speeds do not vary
dramatically. Most of the apparent nonuniformity of the speeds of the
planets is due not the inherent nonuniformity of the motion but to the
complex combination of the two motions, the earth’s and the planet’s.
Sometimes the speeds of the earth and of the planet are in opposite
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

directions, causing the motion to appear faster; sometimes they are in the
same direction, causing the motion to appear slower. In fact, sometimes
the speeds cancel each other out so that the planet stops moving – on two
consecutive nights, that planet appears surrounded by exactly the same
distant stars (this is known technically as a station). Or the motion of the
planet can appear to be “negative” (this is technically known as a retrogra-
dation; see Figure ). During a retrogradation, the position of the planet
on consecutive nights does change, but it changes in the opposite direction
to the annual rotation of the sun. Naturally enough, there is a pattern
regulating such events: normal motion, followed by station, then (perhaps)
retrogradation, then station again, and then normal motion resumes.
What would you make of this, as a premodern observer? Perhaps you
would give up in despair and just describe the planets as “wanderers,”
implying that they move more or less haphazardly. (This, “wanderer,” is
the literal meaning of the Greek word planet.) But it is also natural to look
for such patterns as can be found. We recall, indeed, that the Maya knew
the cycle of Venus. What does that mean? The planets, in their motion, are
sometimes farther away from the sun, sometimes close to it, sometimes
aligned with it. This means that, just like the ﬁxed stars, the planets have
their pattern of disappearance and reappearance: there will be nights when
a planet becomes invisible – followed by the ﬁrst night of its rising in the
P1
E - Earth positions
 
P2
P3
E3
E2
E1
E4
E5
P4
P5
A5
A2
A3
A4
A1
P - Planet positions
A - Apparent position of the planet
Note the retrogradation A2 - A4
Figure 
Retrograde motion. Brian Brondel, CC BY-SA .via Wikimedia Commons.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

east. The Maya recognized that this Venus event recurs every days,
and we now refer to such cycles as synodic cycles. Indeed, the planets go
through a number of key qualitative events throughout their cycle – not
only the ﬁrst rising just before sunrise but, for instance, the ﬁrst station
(preceding retrogradation), the second station (before resuming “normal”
motion), the last appearance just before sunset . . . Each planet goes, over
its cycle, through a complex narrative, which ends up being recorded and
predicted by star bureaucracies.
Although the average speeds of the earth and planets are – for a given
astronomical era – indeed ﬁxed, each planetary motion is nonuniform, and
such combinations can quickly become very diﬃcult. This matters little if
one is interested purely in counting days between major events, for which
the synodic cycle is a good enough approximation (on the lines of approx-
imating the year by days). But we have already moved to the realm of
the bureaucrats, and there is often much more information that one
gathers. The life cycle of planets is complicated. Some events, as usual,
are related to the horizon, such as the ﬁrst rising just before sunrise. But
others – such as the planet’s stations and retrogradations – are not related
to the horizon at all. This makes it possible to begin to think of a planet’s
life cycle not just in terms of the horizon but also in terms of the zodiac.
Thus, one naturally becomes interested in the zodiacal position of a planet at
a given event.
Suppose, for instance, Venus was in Taurus during its most recent ﬁrst
rising. In which constellation will it be during its next ﬁrst rising? Notice
that this demands some kind of measurement of position not merely along
the horizon but along an imaginary circle, passing through the dome of the
sky. Remarkable as this is, Babylonians evidently cared for such measure-
ments. Eventually, indeed, the Babylonians would develop sophisticated
arithmetical models for the prediction of the position of planetary events.
But it is clear that they were interested in such events from very early on
indeed. The tablets we now call the Mul.Apin (see Plate ) are a set of
copies, clearly dated to the early seventh century – that is, well before
the rise of anything such as Greek science or philosophy. These tablets
preserve knowledge that was developed in Mesopotamian temples over the
course of many preceding centuries.
Babylonians, it turns out, recorded synodic periods for the planets –
although some of the periods are very rough indeed. (For Jupiter, for
instance, the Mul.Apin proposes various synodic periods: a year, a year and
days, or a year and a month; the correct value is days. We see
similarly rough measures, incidentally, in China.) But this was all good
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

enough for the Mul.Apin bureaucrats. They were not mere observers of
the sky but court astrologers: their job was, precisely, to note what was
surprising – hence meaningful and literally ominous – about the stars. We
are reminded of Chinese astronomers and their fascination with meteors,
comets, and supernovae. The role of the predictive scheme, in this context,
is to produce a background of expectations, against which observations gain
meaning. You expect the planet to have its ﬁrst morning appearance at a
certain constellation, on a certain day – but in fact, this only happens a
week later, at a constellation far, far away. And this unexpectedness
constitutes an omen.
This seems to be true, then, whether you are in ancient Mesoamerica,
China, or Mesopotamia. The events of the sky are regular enough that
they are taken to constitute the very fabric of time. Hence, authority –
especially as it combines political and religious dimensions – calls for
knowledge of such regular patterns. But more than this: the events of
the sky have suﬃcient apparent irregularity that, by the very markedness of
the deviation of the irregular against the regular, such events are invested
with powerful meaning. Rulers need to interpret this meaning, as well.
Hence the astrologer – in court.
Prelude: The Threshold of Greek Astronomy
The Greek trajectory leading into astronomy is – as in so much else –
distinct. The Greeks had, to begin with, no powerful kingly courts or
temples, no bureaucracies. Sophisticated astronomy would have to come
from elsewhere. It did so, however, against the background described in
the preceding two sections. The Greeks had their star lore, and the
Mediterranean already had its star bureaucracies elsewhere.
Hesiod, after all, referred to the Pleiades as the sign for the harvest – and
Greeks would always structure time based on such patterns. However
mathematical Greek astronomy becomes, Greek scientiﬁc astronomers –
like their counterparts from other early civilizations – considered the stars,
above all, in terms of their key, recurring qualitative events.
Further, as we noted previously for mathematics itself, bureaucratic
knowledge is leaky. The observational diaries kept by Mesopotamian
astronomers were the property of temples and courts, but the output of
their work could become visible in public calendrical practice and in the
very language in which one referred to the stars and their phenomena.
Certain calendars, the division of the zodiac into twelve equal constella-
tions: such tools could be available, so to speak, “oﬀthe shelf.”

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Finally, at a later stage of the development of Greek astronomy, Greeks
became aware of the working details of Mesopotamian astronomy. Most
likely, this happened as Mesopotamian astronomers began to practice their
craft away from the temple setting – and throughout the Levant and the
Mediterranean – creating, along the way, the profession of the astrologer.
The resulting science was a synthesis, then, of two traditions, Greek
and Mesopotamian.
And yet this must be emphasized: Greek astronomy was also diﬀerent.
Let us note the earliest evidence. Aristophanes’s delightful comedy the
Birds was staged in . In it, two Athenians seek to escape from their
city and set up Cloudcuckooland, a peaceful city in the sky (a contrast to
Athens and its endless war with Sparta). Various visitors join them with
advice for the foundation of the new city, including a certain Meton, who
proclaims that he is famous in all of Greece and Colonos (a suburb of
Athens – implying that his fame, however much he otherwise protests, is
rather conﬁned). This Meton oﬀers to measure the city with his ruler and
compass. A sky geometer! In fact, we hear more from later sources; not one
but two Athenians of the time – Meton as well as a certain Euctemon – are
noted for several astronomical achievements: promulgating calendars,
observing the sky, and setting up public astronomical devices and inscrip-
tions. We hear of what is known as a parapegma, a stone where holes are
drilled, one for each day, with astronomical and seasonal observations next
to some of those holes. At the most basic level, one operates with such an
inscription by inserting a peg and moving it forward once a day. As one
goes along, one reviews the key qualitative events of the sun and the ﬁxed
stars, as well as the more meteorological, seasonal predictions: star lore,
inscribed as a public document. Note, however, that the very literacy of
this monument transforms such star lore. You cover the entirety of the
year, deliberately, and so, quite naturally, Greek parapegmata eventually
came to include much more information than was available to, say,
Hesiod. (Indeed, it now seems that parapgemata could involve much more
than one peg a day, for instance, by adding in extra, fancier pegs represent-
ing, for example, the phases of the moon; this already suggests future
astronomical devices, of which, much more later in the chapter.)
For this fuller understanding of the ancient parapegma, see G. Bevan, A. Jones, and D. Lehoux,
“The Miletus Parapegma and the Keskintos Astronomical Inscription: New Evidence from
Reﬂectance Transformation Imaging,” Zeitschrift fu¨r Papyrologie und Epigraphik ():
–.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The later reports concerning Meton mention that he knew of a calen-
drical cycle stating the nearly precise equality of years = months.
This, today, is referred to as the Metonic cycle, so that Meton, at the end,
did, in fact, become famous. In all likelihood, Meton knew this simply
because this was, at this point, part of the Mediterranean koine – after all,
this is the basic cycle of the Babylonian calendar (and is still used in the
Jewish calendar; although the Saros is especially good for predicting
eclipses, the Metonic cycle is good for preserving the alignment of years
and months). The Metonic cycle, – like, I believe, Pythagoras’s theorem –
is what many people in the Mediterranean simply knew back then and we
ended up naming after a Greek author.
At about the same time as Meton and Euctemon, we also hear of
Oenopides of Chios, perhaps producing observations of the sky and
perhaps setting up sundials. (Or perhaps Meton and Euctemon set up
sundials as well? Either way, the public display of scientiﬁc artifacts is a
theme of Greek astronomy from its inception; more on this later in the
chapter.) Astronomical or, more precisely, cosmological views are ascribed
to Hippocrates of Chios and to his otherwise-obscure follower, a certain
Aeschylus (to recall: not the tragedian!). Anaxagoras, a philosopher famous
for many other ideas of a “materialistic” character, appears to have been the
ﬁrst to explain in writing the optical basis of eclipses (he did this, remark-
ably, with the aid of geometrical diagrams).Even earlier – near the
beginning of the ﬁfth century – Parmenides argued for the claim that
the earth was spherical. Greek astronomy begins to stir.
But notice where it is, at this point: continuous with the evidence for
past civilizations. A parapegma is the traditional society’s star lore,
enshrined in stone. Otherwise, it seems that to the extent that there was
any interest in the mathematical aspects of astronomy, this had to do
mostly with the calendar. Those are mere leftovers from the table of past
star bureaucracies.
Several things, however, are new. The most obvious is that Meton, at
the end of the day, did not work for the state. In fact, whatever calendar he
promulgated, this did not become, in his lifetime, the state calendar of
Athens or of any other state. He is made, by Aristophanes, to oﬀer his
services to the nascent city of Cloudcuckooland, but the point is, precisely,
that he is too impractical even for the birds. This stands in marked contrast
The evidence for Anaxagoras’s astronomy, including his theory of the eclipse, is Hyppolytus,
Refutation of All Heresies ..–... Diogenes Laërtius .reports that Anaxagoras was the ﬁrst
to write with a diagram; it is no more than a likely hypothesis that the two went together.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to everything we saw in all other civilizations that had produced sophisti-
cated astronomy. For if not the state’s, whose interests did Meton pursue?
Clearly, his own. What he produced was Meton’s calendar, Meton’s para-
pegma. Aristophanes made the ﬁgure of Meton appear, mocked, in front
of the full theater. But this was Meton’s aim from the start: he sought
attention. He set up a public inscription, after all. It is for this reason that
we refer to “Pythagoras’s theorem” and also to the “Metonic cycle”: not
because the Greeks invented the theorem or the cycle but because they
invented the habit of naming. Astronomy was now pursued as a ﬁeld of
authorship, and one went into it with the aim of producing something new
and original, something that would live in memory.
This, then, opens up the possibility of a new kind of astronomy: a ﬁeld
of more speculative science. Soon enough, this will be pursued by
Greek mathematicians.
The First Generation of Greek Astronomy: The Extent of Our Knowledge
It does not appear as if Meton broke any new ground, relative to the
knowledge already available in the ancient Near East. And so, the ﬁrst
green shoots of Greek astronomy diﬀer from those of Greek mathematics.
Hippocrates of Chios, with his lunules, already made something entirely
new. Recall our observation that, of course, he had to: no one would have
been interested in boring, mundane mathematics. Astronomy is diﬀerent.
Everyone cared about it already: produce a parapegma, and you are bound
to get an audience.
A uniquely Greek astronomy does emerge, eventually: within the ﬁrst
generation of Greek mathematics and late even by these standards, cham-
pioned by the last great ﬁgure of that generation, Eudoxus. Astronomy – as
mathematics’ echo. We will see more of that later on in the chapter.
The evidence for Eudoxus’s astronomy is early, clear, and tantalizingly
insuﬃcient. His original works are now all lost – this is typical for his
generation. But we have a clear sense of a wide astronomical program.
To begin with, Eudoxus is a key ﬁgure at the background of two extant
works: () Aratus’s poem the Phaenomena and () Hipparchus’s critique of
that poem (this critique is often referred to, misleadingly, as Hipparchus’s
“commentary to Aratus”). Aratus, a major poet of the third century ,
wrote a poem that presented the elements of the celestial globe, especially
the ﬁxed constellations (but avoiding the planets). You recall how Hesiod –
one of the canonical poets of Archaic Greece – knew about the Pleiades.
We know this from a major poem called Works and Days that recounts
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

information such as, for instance, the astronomical beat of the seasons. It is
typical of Hellenistic poetry to go back to Archaic poetry and to retell it in
new, clever combinations, and it appears that Aratus, among other things,
retold Hesiod – but based on more recent, “scientiﬁc” astronomy!
Speciﬁcally, Aratus’s poem was apparently based on a scientiﬁc treatise in
prose by Eudoxus – or perhaps more than one – which set out to describe the
ﬁxed stars. The terms in which Aratus presents his facts are vague and almost
entirely qualitative, but Hipparchus nonetheless criticizes them as if they were
precise descriptions implying precise numerical values. This is sometimes put
forward by Hipparchus as a critique of Aratus, sometimes of his source,
Eudoxus. The overall implication is that Eudoxus – unlike past astronomers
in past civilizations – did engage in that “geographical” kind of astronomy
where one’s goal was to produce a map of the sky. Perhaps we should imagine
a three-dimensional model, described in writing. And so, once again, the
astronomer as the artiﬁcer of monuments, in this case a globe?
If indeed Eudoxus tried to provide some kind of quantitative mapping
of the stars, he did something quite unprecedented. But this may well have
been – quite literally – merely background for his real innovation, having
to do not with the ﬁxed constellations but with the planets.
Here is where our evidence is most authoritative – and most tantalizing.
We have a direct testimony from Aristotle (and also much more detailed
reports – although much less reliable – by late ancient commentators to
Aristotle). We also have what appear to be references to the same system
from Plato and from Epicurus. The leading philosophers of the day all
noted Eudoxus’s astronomy. This is all excitingly early evidence (the
reference from Plato, indeed, must have come when Eudoxus was
still alive). (In later depictions, Plato could be envisaged gazing at a model
of the stars – see Plate – perhaps that of Eudoxus?).
In Book Λ, Chapter , of the Metaphysics, Aristotle provides us with his
own account of motions in the heavens (this is quite signiﬁcant to
Aristotle, as such motions are in a sense, for him, a manifestation of the
divine and, relatedly, the ultimate explanation for physical reality as a
whole). Aristotle explicitly cites his sources: he follows an account pro-
posed by Eudoxus with what seems like an improvement by Callippus
(apparently, a follower of Eudoxus), and ﬁnally, he himself, Aristotle, adds
some original detail. This is remarkable: in his astronomy, Aristotle
was content to be, eﬀectively, Eudoxus’s disciple. There are no obvious
parallels to Aristotle relying so directly on another person, and the impli-
cation is that for many in this generation, Eudoxus’s astronomy
appeared authoritative.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Here, then, is what Aristotle learned from his master:
Eudoxus held that the motion of the sun and moon involves in either case
three spheres, of which the outermost is that of the ﬁxed stars, the second
revolves in the circle which bisects the zodiac, and the third revolves in a
circle which is inclined across the breadth of the zodiac. But the circle in
which the moon moves is inclined at a greater angle than that in which the
sun moves.
We assume that the ﬁxed stars constitute a large hollow sphere – a black
shell on which bright dots are inset. This sphere rotates around the axis of
the universe, which passes through the earth’s North and South Poles.
(The center of this sphere is the same as that of the earth; this is technically
known as being homocentric with the earth.) This rotation takes place from
east to west, at uniform speed. This is the sphere responsible for our
experience of seeing the stars rotating through the night, and this is all
uncontroversial: practically all Greeks, at this point, assume that, and
indeed, this is a very natural way of describing the nightly progression of
the ﬁxed stars.
The idea is to derive everything else in the sky through the insertion of
more homocentric spheres, each determined by the following:
•
The position of its poles
•
The direction of its rotation
•
The speed of its rotation (assumed to be uniform)
Speciﬁcally, the idea is to rely on a combination of such spheres. One
sphere is inset within another so that as the outer sphere rotates, it carries
the inner one, which also has its own independent motion. The two
motions end up combining to produce a distinct, more complicated
pattern. The pattern of inset spheres is a physical (or mechanical) repre-
sentation of what is, geometrically, a kind of parallelogram of forces: the
geometrical solution to the problem of what happens when two motions
combine. (We have seen this kind of curve-producing combination of
motions with Archimedes’s spirals; the idea may well have originated in
astronomy.)
We can envisage, then, a sphere such as that of the ﬁxed stars. Within it
and attached to it is another sphere, rotating around an oblique pole,
whose angle is determined by the obliquity of the ecliptic. This second
The quotations here are from Aristotle’s Metaphysics L: H. Tredennick (trans.), Aristotle:
Metaphysics Books –(Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ), pp. –.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

rotation is not daily but annual, and it moves in the opposite direction to
the daily rotation. Fix the sun on the equator of this inner sphere, and you
get something like the apparent motion of the sun. Meanwhile, imagine
another two-sphere combination, once again with the ﬁrst sphere with the
daily rotation of the ﬁxed stars while the inner sphere, in this case, is
arranged obliquely as that of the sun – but with a monthly rotation in the
opposite direction. This gets us close to the moon. To both sets, however,
we add one extra inner sphere, rotating very slowly and somewhat
obliquely to the zodiac. There are several reasons why we would like to
add at least one more sphere for the sun and the moon. First, the
assumption of a uniform motion through the ecliptic is quite evidently
false. We did not mention this yet, but it is a well-known part of basic star
lore – the kind the Greeks enshrined in parapegmata – that the seasons
vary in their lengths. The motion of the sun, in other words, is not exactly
uniform (more on this later in the discussion). Further, the moon regularly
deviates – not by much – from the ecliptic, which, as we noted, is why
eclipses do not happen each month. (One should note immediately that
the moon has, in fact, many other complications: the one object in the sky
that is actually geocentric is also the hardest to reduce to simple circular
motions, which we understand as the consequence of being under the
inﬂuence of not one but two signiﬁcant gravities.)
So far, then, for the sun and the moon. That they can be accounted for
by uniform spherical motions is satisfying and ultimately not all that
counterintuitive because their motion does appear, as a ﬁrst approxima-
tion, like a regular rotation. One would think that the motion of the
planets, with their stations and retrogradations, cannot be accounted for
similarly, and Eudoxus’s key insight must have been to realize that this
impression is wrong. It is possible, in principle, to combine regular,
uniform motions so as to derive back-and-forth patterns. I return to the
same quote from Aristotle:
And he held that the motion of the planets involved in each case four
spheres; and that of these the ﬁrst and second are the same as before (for the
sphere of the ﬁxed stars is that which carries round all the other spheres, and
the sphere next in order, which has its motion in the circle which bisects the
zodiac, is common to all the planets); the third sphere of all the planets has
its poles in the circle which bisects the zodiac; and the fourth sphere moves
in the circle inclined to the equator of the third.
All the planets move (at various speeds) along the zodiac, in the same
direction as the sun. For this, we need, once again, the two basic spheres of

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the daily and annual rotations. If we had only those two spheres, however,
the planets would simply imitate the motion of the sun, although on
diﬀerent locations on the zodiac. But in fact, the planets change their
positions relative to the sun, in complicated patterns. To account for this,
Eudoxus added two more spheres.
What these did is left out by Aristotle (his readers could consult
Eudoxus directly). This provided an opportunity for later commenta-
tors to display their erudition, and fortunately for us, one of them did
and is still extant: Simplicius, writing in the sixth century . (This is
the same author from whom we have the lunules of Hippocrates of Chios;
we rely a great deal on the prolixity, and competitive erudition, of this
author.) It is clear that Simplicius did not simply make up his account,
although it is also evident that he does not rely directly on Eudoxus’s
original work and instead gleans his own information from other com-
mentators; it is also clear that he does not understand the underlying
astronomy very well. (This need not be taken as a major criticism because
the material is indeed very diﬃcult and also bore no relation to the astronomy
known in Simplicius’s own time; more on this later in the discussion.) Still,
some details are suggestive; perhaps the most useful piece of informa-
tion is that Simplicius informs us that the third and fourth spheres,
combined, produce a particular kind of curve, which Eudoxus called
the hippopede (“horse-fetter”). From other references to the term, it
seems probable that the hippopede is produced by the intersection of a
cylinder and a sphere internally touching each other, that is, an
inclined -shaped ﬁgure. The Greeks did not have the symbol “,”
but they did tie their horses by binding their feet together, which will
naturally give rise to two contiguous closed curves. So, in all likeli-
hood, the hippopede is an shape, and the combination of the two
spheres speciﬁc to the planets was supposed to generate motion along
an -shaped curve.
If the -shaped ﬁgure is very “narrow” and close to a single line, a point
moving along it essentially moves back and forth. One way of applying this
to the motion of the planets is by superimposing an -shaped curve,
directly, on a motion similar to that of the sun. This means that you get
a planet that moves generally as the sun but changes its speed, sometimes
faster, sometimes slower; with the right parameters, it can be made slow
enough so as not to move at all or even to move “backward” altogether.
We derive stations and retrogradations. The shape naturally forces the
planet to deviate from the ecliptic, which the planets do, of course, even if
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to a minor extent. Four homocentric spheres, each rotating at its own
uniform speed – and their combination gives rise to the entire range of
nonuniformity of the planets!
Plato insisted on the ultimate rationality of an order of reality above our
own and perhaps was attracted, for this reason, to the idea that even the
planets, ultimately, were not actually “wanderers.” In Plato’s last dialogue,
the Laws – so, in about the year – Plato has his “Athenian Stranger”
(more or less, Plato’s mouthpiece) complain that it is believed that the sun,
the moon, and the planets do not keep the same motion, whereas, in fact,
it is now known that they do.It is very hard to believe this could refer to
anything other than Eudoxus’s theory – which, at around , must
have been very recent. As promised: not only Aristotle but also Plato
referred to this theory! And this last reference, by Plato, is suggestive of
the theory’s possible motivations.
But what were the theory’s mathematical details? You will note that I do
not give here a geometrical account of how the combination of spheres
gives rise to an -shaped ﬁgure. In the Suggestions for Further Reading,
I refer you to articles that provide such derivations, but the fundamental
point is that I can refer you to multiple papers, each deriving diﬀerent
motions through diﬀerent types of combinations. This is, in fact, a new
development. The ﬁrst modern full reconstruction of a homocentric spheres
model was oﬀered by an Italian astronomer, Schiaparelli, in . In his
model, the inner two spheres characterizing each planet (or spheres three and
four, counting from the outermost sphere) were arranged as follows: the pole
of sphere three on the ecliptic, the pole of sphere four oblique to it, the two
rotating in equal and opposite speeds; the planet was ﬁxed on the equator of
sphere four. This speciﬁc combination had two distinct advantages. First, it
hewed very close to Simplicius’s description. Second, it provided a model
that was suﬃciently simple, in geometrical terms, so that one could, in
principle, calculate the positions at given times.
Unfortunately, Simplicius is not a reliable source, nor can we assume that
Eudoxus’s model was designed to be geometrically calculated. Here is the
crux: the many possible reconstructions diﬀer not just in their geometrical
detail but also in their implications for Eudoxus’s very project. Which is
why, indeed, our evidence is so tantalizing: we are told so much by Aristotle
and his commentators – and yet, we remain profoundly ignorant about what
it even meant, for Eudoxus, to invent mathematical astronomy.
Plato’s Laws a–c.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

How to Fetter a Horse?
The horse-fetter is produced by two homocentric spheres, one nested within
the other, rotating around distinct poles, at equal but opposite speeds. Why
does this combination of rotations yield just this ﬁgure? We do not have
Eudoxus’s proof (indeed, it is a historical inference even that this was the shape
of the hippopede, and that this is how it was produced). It is useful, however,
to get a sense of how such a result could have been proved by Greek means.
The proof that follows is the one suggested by Neugebauer. Not only is it an
impressive piece of mathematics, but it is also tantalizingly reminiscent of
Archytas’s ﬁnding of two mean proportionals; one is tempted to say this must
have been Eudoxus’s original proof!
X
Y
Y
A
B
C
Figure 
The two rotations happen simultaneously, but we can ﬁnd the position of
the planet at the end of the rotation by considering them in order. As the
planet rotates around the axis Y, it moves from point A to B; as it rotates
around the axis X, it moves from B to C. With the two combined, then, it
ends up moving from A to C. The only thing we need to know at this point is
that for each time frame chosen, because the speeds are equal, the two arcs are
equal as well, each on its own circle. (We assume at this point that the circles
are great circles and that the planet is located on the equator of the relevant
sphere.) Arc AB, then, is equal to arc AC.
It is convenient, for the sake of the following argument, to further subdivide the
motion around the axis Y into two components. First, imagine that the planet
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

moved around the axis X, starting from A but getting not to B but to Q (once
again, AQ ¼ AB ¼ BC); then, rotate the entire system by rotating the axis X until
it coincides with the axis Y. The point Q would then rotate along a small circle,
reaching from point Q to, necessarily, point B. The motion from Q to B is
reminiscent of motions we have seen in Archytas’s ﬁnding of two mean
proportionals. We take point Q and draw a small circle, passing parallel to the plane
that joins the two axes X and Y. This circle is also perpendicular to the equator of
the sphere whose axis is X. Note that point Q is the “variable” of this construction –
representing, eﬀectively, the time frame chosen for the rotation. From now on, all
points are either independently ﬁxed or determined by the choice of Q.
A
B
X
Y
Y
X
Q
Figure 
In what follows, we consider – as Greek mathematicians often preferred to
do – plane ﬁgures, easy to diagram. One is the plane of the equator around the
axis X. The other is the plane – orthogonal to this equator – that joins the two
axes X and Y. In both diagrams, O is the center of the sphere (¼ circle in the
plane section). OR is orthogonal to OA.
From now on, instead of thinking of the actual position of the planet, we
think about “its projection onto the equator” – that is, the point that is right
beneath where the planet is (the point where a perpendicular, drawn from the
planet down to the plane of this equator, hits the equator). We will refer to
this projection point – in a very modern symbolism – with the prime mark. B0
is the projection of point B; C0 is the projection of point C (points A and Q,
obviously, lie on the equator itself ).

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

You recall that we had obtained point B from point Q by rotating the entire
sphere so that the axis X will become the axis Y. The same rotation takes line
OR and brings it to line OS in Figure . In short, the angle SOR is equal to
the angle between the two axes. And so, in this rotation, R becomes S; S0 is the
projection of S on the plane of the equator (which is obviously seen here on
the line OT0PS0R). What are the points T0, T, and P, you are asking? Well, let
us look at the next diagram, of the equator, shown in Figure .
We know the meaning of the points A, Q, B0, and C0: they represent the
journey of the planet through its rotations. (It gets from A to Q, then from
O
T'
T
S'
P
R
S
X
Y
Figure 
The plane joining the two axes.
C'
B'
T'
O
R
Q
A
P S'
E
F
Figure 
The plane of the equator.
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Q to B, then from B to C; points B and C are above the equator, so we only
see their projection on this plane.)
Point O, to recall, is the center of the sphere, and line OR is perpendicular
to OA. OR is thus also parallel to line QB0 (recall that the circle along which
Q rotates to B is perpendicular to OA).
We also know what S0 is: it is the projection on the equator plane of point
S, which we get, in turn, by rotating R upward, in exactly the same rotation
through which Q became B.
Now we draw a circle with its center at O and its radius equal to OS0. This
hits line OA at point F. Note that the rotation from R to S is ﬁxed (the angle is
equal to the angle between the two axes, which is a ﬁxed value, independent of
the frame of time we choose for our particular rotation). Thus, point S is ﬁxed,
as is point S0, and so also point F. No matter for how little or long we rotate
the two spheres, point F will not budge.
We may now continue. We draw B0T0 and QP, both perpendicular to B0Q.
We know now what P and T0 are, and we need reﬂect but a minute to realize
that the rotation of P to T is the same as the rotation of Q to B. Hence, T0 is
indeed the projection of T. Further, E is the point where B0T0 cuts OQ.
Notice that the triangle QB0E is, by construction, right-angled.
So far, really, all we did was produce a construction. We have a long, complicated
thought experiment of a three-dimensional arrangement. What we want to prove is
a very straightforward, although still surprising, claim: the same point E – deﬁned by
the intersection of B0T0 and OQ – is also where the arc S0F cuts the same line OQ
(that is, we need to prove that OE ¼ OS0).
Why is this important? Because if point E lies on this arc, we may conceive of
the ﬁnal rotation of the planet from B to C as also carrying the entire triangle
projected onto the equator, QB0E, so as to become the triangle AC0F. Recall that
F is a ﬁxed point, so AF is a ﬁxed line; we may conceive of AF as the diameter of
a ﬁxed circle. The position of C0 will change, depending on how little or long we
wish the rotations of the two spheres to go on. But no matter where we pick C0,
it will always be at the vertex of a right angle lying on AF – the diameter of a ﬁxed
circle – and so we ﬁnd that any point C0 must be on the circumference of the
circle whose diameter is AF. This in turn means that point C must be on a
cylinder, erected on top of the circle whose diameter is AF. And this means that
point C – the result of combining the rotations of the two spheres – must lie on
the intersection of a cylinder and a sphere, mutually tangent at a point, with the
cylinder contained in the sphere – which is obviously -shaped.
At this point you must be eager to ﬁnd out why OE ¼ OS0. Well, we have
quite a few similar triangles to play with (this is very Archytean). Obviously,
by similar triangles in the plane of the equator:
OT0 : OP :: OE : OQ:
But also, by similar triangles in the plane of the two axes:
OT0 : OT :: OS0 : OS:

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And because OP ¼ OT (the same line, rotated), we have:
OT0 : OT :: OT0 : OP:
So that we can establish
OS0 : OS :: OT0 : OP:
Which, combined with the ﬁrst proportion, yields
OS0 : OS :: OE : OQ:
But OS and OQ are both radii of the sphere; they are equal to each other, and
therefore, so must be OS0 and OE. Thus, the arc OS0, rotated, must cut the
line OQ at point E, and the horse is fettered.
Note ﬁnally that the precise position of point C0 is given by the angle AFC0,
same as QEB or QOA. In other words, we ﬁnd that as the radius sweeps the
circle, point C0 keeps rotating on its circle, proving that the ﬁgure in fact
covers the entire hippopede and also suggesting how, under the most simple
interpretation of the hippopede, one may use the time (which translates
directly to the angle QOA) to ﬁnd the position of the planet.
The First Generation of Greek Astronomy: The Limits of Our Knowledge
In the eighteenth century, as Pompeii and its environs were dug up, one of
the most spectacular ﬁnds was a villa with thousands of burned shreds of
papyri, miraculously still – just barely – legible.The reading of these
papyri is one of the most demanding skills in classical scholarship, and
even now, more than two hundred years after they were ﬁrst unearthed,
papyri are being deciphered. In David Sedley succeeded in recovering
meaning in a long passage of a papyrus that must have come from
Epicurus’s massive work On Nature. (For this and the following studies
cited in this section, see Suggestions for Further Reading.) There, Epicurus
inveighed against the mathematicians active in Cyzicus. This gets our
attention! We are told by ancient biographies that in his later years,
Eudoxus set up a school in that city. This, then, completes our trio of
fourth-century philosophers, all commenting on Eudoxus (Plato, Aristotle,
Epicurus); usefully, we also gain a diﬀerent kind of perspective. Epicurus
hated them all: science, astronomy, and likely, Eudoxus himself.
For this incredible ﬁnd, see D. Sider, The Library of the Villa dei Papiri at Herculaneum (Los Angeles:
J. Paul Getty Museum, ). It is notable, and puzzling, that no other papyri are known to have
been excavated from anywhere else in Pompeii and its environs. (Very few, indeed, are ever found
outside of Egypt.)
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

So, what did Epicurus dislike about the mathematicians of Cyzicus? We
learn from his comments that those mathematicians were making mechan-
ical models of the motions of the sky, but these – so argued Epicurus –
were not reliable: What makes you think that such a mechanical model is
an accurate representation of what takes place among the stars?
Epicurus, in fact, wished to argue against the divinity of the sky and,
indeed, against the rational order of the universe: the exact opposite of Plato.
It is not surprising that he would be anti-Eudoxean. But it is remarkable that
we learn that according to him, Eudoxus (or one of his followers) was, at
least in part, the builder of mechanical models. This, once again, is not
inherently surprising: we recall the inscriptions with parapegmata, the
sundials, the many ways in which Greek astronomers displayed their astron-
omy. Why shouldn’t the mathematicians of Cyzicus? But we should bear
this in mind as we consider the meaning of Eudoxus’s astronomy.
I noted previously that under Schiaparelli’s speciﬁc reconstruction,
Eudoxus’s model could be calculated. That is, one could, in principle,
generate numbers: on this day, the position of this planet should be at that
point along the zodiac. Indeed, as we will see in the following discussion,
centuries later than Eudoxus, Greek astronomical texts did include tools that
could generate such precise numerical values. Historians of ancient astron-
omy mostly assumed, until recently, that so did Eudoxus’s treatise, as well.
In an inﬂuential article from , Bowen and Goldstein called this
assumption – that Eudoxus oﬀered quantitative models – into question. As
we shall see from the following discussion, it is clear that from the second
century onward, Greek astronomers had access to Babylonian records
of observations. Bowen and Goldstein suggested that until then, Greeks
simply did not have the available astronomical data with which to generate
theoretical predictions and, indeed, did not even have the habit of thinking
about the positions of the planets in these numerical terms. If so, it could
be that Eudoxus merely attempted to provide qualitative geometrical
models: the point was simply that certain shapes could be derived by the
combination of spherical motions – the shapes agreeing in their overall
character with the somewhat halting motion of the sun and the moon, the
somewhat pretzel-like motion of the planets.
Now, one possible advantage of such a deﬂationary account is that as a
quantitative model, Eudoxus’s homocentric sphere, in Schiaparelli’s recon-
struction, is problematic. This model generates the component of the
planets’ motion that goes back and forth, through a particular -shaped
ﬁgure, and we get the variations in speed through the length and breadth
of the links in the shape. This means that the model predicts a correlation

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

between the breadth of the planet’s motion (how far it deviates from a
strict line) and the non-uniformity of its speed. Mars, in particular, an
especially changeable planet, would also have to deviate considerably –
much more than it actually does – from the ecliptic.
In fact, the problem runs deeper. Although Schiaparelli’s reconstruction
of Eudoxus’s model does generate nonuniform, zigzagging speeds, it is not
at all “topologically” correct. For instance, this model generates neat,
symmetrical, precisely repeated loops, but in fact, planets do not deviate
from the ecliptic symmetrically and do not repeat precisely the same
pattern in each cycle. Arguably, then, even on Bowen and Goldstein’s
deﬂationary account, Eudoxus’s model should have been seen as an obvious
empirical failure.
One way to solve this would be to go back to the historical data and ﬁnd
reconstructions diﬀerent from Schiaparelli’s, with better ﬁt to the phe-
nomena. When all has been said and done, the few comments in Aristotle
and even in Simplicius do not really constrain us so much. No one ever did
this until the last generation, primarily because this is such a hard task.
Personal computing made it suddenly doable, and in the late s, not
one but two new reconstructions were oﬀered simultaneously, by Yavetz and
by Mendell, for which, indeed, see the Suggestions for Further Reading. The
essence of such models is that they allow much more freedom in their
parameters – for instance, the planet is allowed to rest not on the equator of
the fourth sphere but on some other point; or the angle at which the -
shaped ﬁgure is aligned with the ﬁrst two spheres is allowed to shift. All of
this quickly becomes very hard to calculate analytically. Yavetz and Mendell
can calculate their predicted planetary trajectories on their computers, but
Eudoxus could not. Perhaps such reconstructions work best with the
evidence found by Sedley, then. It is perfectly possible to imagine a com-
plicated mechanical arrangement of spheres (rings, in practice?). One can
follow the motion of a point set on the innermost ring and note that its
trajectory in fact ﬁts that of a particular planet. If you throw in, within your
mechanism, a graduated ring representing the ecliptic, you can measure the
position of the planet so that this device becomes an analog computer. Even
without this, the model can be used to derive an observed trajectory, which
may or may not ﬁt qualitatively with observed planetary trajectories. So was
this Eudoxus’s project?
To many readers, the idea of a calculation based on a mechanical device
appears unsatisfactory. I suppose the intuition is that to gain a scientiﬁc
understanding of the behavior of an object such as a planet, one would like
to have some kind of solvable equation in which the position in space is
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

provided by the laws, the rational principles, governing the planet’s
motions. We look, then, for a function of the following form:
position ¼ function ðtimeÞ:
The moment in time should be given in suitable numerical terms, which
we then plug in to the function, calculate it, and derive the numerically
given position. For this to work, we also want the function to be practically
calculable with the tools at our disposal. The point of such a calculation is
not just ease of use but also a certain epistemic transparency: the process of
calculation tells us how the passage of time causes positions to change.
Obviously, the Greeks did not use our modern equations. They did,
however, have the concept of the “given”: Y being given in terms of X. So,
in a geometrical conﬁguration, once the magnitude of a certain object X is
known, so is that of another object Y, dependent upon it. We would
therefore look for a geometrical solution where the position of the planet in
space is known, once the moment in time (represented, perhaps, by the arc
of rotation of the ﬁrst sphere?) is known as well, based on a well-deﬁned
construction. In a sense, this epistemic function is indeed satisﬁed by
Eudoxus’s model. But it is harder to deﬁne what we mean by “practically
calculable.” If we assume any of the more diﬃcult reconstructions by
Yavetz or Mendell, we can no longer (using Greek tools) plug in units of
time to derive, by a well-deﬁned calculation, a position in space. We need
to resort, instead, to a black-boxed mechanism such as the turning of the
knob in a device made of rings riding upon rings. Such a “calculation”
involves no understanding because it involves no rational access to the
manner in which one number gives rise to another.
This is a reasonable critique, but I wonder if it may not, in fact, be naïve
concerning scientiﬁc computation. More to the point, I wonder if this is
not naïve as regards the scientiﬁc computations ultimately admitted by the
Greeks themselves. I explain. We will see that Ptolemy will indeed be
capable of doing such things as telling the position of a planet, given a
point in time. However, this does not mean that Ptolemy has an equation,
simple or otherwise, deriving positions from moments in time. What
Ptolemy does, instead, is to refer to tables with numerical values, in turn
derived from previous tables, and so on in a complicated chain of deriva-
tion. (We will see a simple example of how this works in practice on
pp. –.) The astronomer, calculating a position from the date, does
not, in fact, directly see the rationality of the computation, and it is not
unreasonable to consider the system of tables as, so to speak, a mechanical
black box. It is a device that, with the appropriate input, gives out the

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

correct output. What we do not have in Ptolemy is anything like Kepler’s
laws. (To be clear, in the practical application of modern astronomy, actual
computations are, in fact, still dependent on devices such as tables, more
recently embedded in digital computers. Science is full of black boxes!)
But if so, why would it be so shocking for Eudoxus to rely on an actual
machine – so as to calculate the positions of the planets? This is certainly
within the range of the possible. What is unfortunate is that this range is so
wide. At the minimalist end – proposed by Bowen and Goldstein –
perhaps all Eudoxus did was to oﬀer a purely conceptual account, showing
that complicated patterns can be derived from the combinations of regular
spheres. Or perhaps he did oﬀer a somewhat stronger, but still qualitative,
approximation of the actual motions of (some of?) the planets. Or ﬁnally,
he could have provided a quantitative model, whose calculation, in turn,
we can understand in two ways: as a mechanical device or, ﬁnally, as the
geometrical solution to a problem in given magnitudes.
Let me recall, ﬁnally, a few more pieces of evidence.
First, the statement by Aristotle that Callippus revised Eudoxus’s model.
(He did so by adding in an extra sphere for each planet and also adding
two more for each of the sun and the moon.) Scholars from Schiaparelli to
Mendell and Yavetz have toyed with various accounts of how such added
spheres could have improved Eudoxus’s initial models. Perhaps nothing
may be said with certainty on such reconstructions. But this much is at
least suggested: Eudoxus’s project was not merely a conceptual exercise,
displaying the possibility, in principle, of generating nonuniform speeds
out of uniform, homocentric spheres. Likely enough, one paid some
attention to the actual resulting motions, whether in qualitative or quan-
titative terms. For otherwise, what was even the meaning of trying to
improve Eudoxus?
Second, we should recall Eudoxus’s other astronomical contribution:
the mapping of the constellations, reﬂected by Aratus’s poem. At the end
of the day, Hipparchus’s critique would make no sense had Eudoxus not
provided his map in explicit quantitative terms. And this gives rise to a
strong suspicion that Eudoxus’s planetary theories, too, were oﬀered in
numerical terms. Not only because it makes sense, if one begins to measure
the skies, to measure the positions not only of stars but of planets, but even
more to the point, because both problems are in fact conceptually related.
When we measure the positions of the planets, we do not do so in terms of
absolute space; we do so in terms of reference points. Nowadays, we
provide everything in terms of a coordinate system, and theoretically,
Eudoxus could have done so as well, but it is much easier – indeed, to
I. Rising: Greek Astronomy to Eudoxus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

begin with, it is almost inevitable – to locate a planet, ﬁrst of all, in terms
of its surrounding stars. This, indeed, was the primary use of the constel-
lations of the zodiac, and mapping those constellations in precise, quanti-
tative detail is therefore a crucial ﬁrst step for numerically given
planetary observations.
Finally, perhaps the most signiﬁcant context is that of the mathematics
of the generation of Archytas as a whole. So much of it, we recall, was
about speciﬁcally numerical ratios. Indeed, our sources for this generation
(above all, Plato) often pair up music and astronomy. Archytas’s music
must have been a major inspiration for Eudoxus – and that was not some
kind of qualitative musical theory, describing, say, how pitch could
in principle be related to the speed of motions in the air. It was, instead,
a fully developed system of numbers, with speciﬁed pairs of integer ratios
composed to form other ratios.
The admission of ignorance remains warranted. The entire range from a
purely conceptual exercise to a fully developed quantitative geometrical
model of the planets is all possible. But the more likely of all the options,
in my view, is that Eudoxus produced planet-imitating devices and wrote
them up, with a good amount of data given in numerical terms. The
evidence, however, is far from decisive, and it is better to conclude with
what can be noted, regardless of any such speciﬁc reconstructions.
We note, ﬁrst of all, that Plato, as an old man, was impressed with the
new astronomy – just as he was impressed, in his middle age, with
Archytas’s new music. I envisage mathematical authors, in this generation,
seeking a wider audience than just that of mathematicians. An astronom-
ical theory such as Eudoxus’s would have been calculated for this purpose.
Indeed, it was massively successful, as so many contemporary philosophers
did, in fact, take notice. Eudoxus was not a card-carrying Platonist or
“Pythagorean,” but the overall pattern of this theory is clear and consistent
with Archytas’s music: a seemingly messy part of physical reality is shown
to be composed of simple mathematical elements (simple integer ratios in
the case of Archytas’s music; uniform and homocentric spherical rotations
in the case of Eudoxus’s astronomy).
The most obvious analogy between the ﬁrst burst of Greek mathemat-
ics, that of the generation of Archytas, and the ﬁrst burst of Greek
astronomy, that of Eudoxus’s homocentric spheres, is that both were
generational events. This generational pattern is much more obvious and
much more striking in the case of astronomy. Eudoxus inspired, precisely,
a generation – the philosophers around him; a handful of mathematical
practitioners, such as Callippus. And then, his theory appears to have been

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

completely dropped. This, in itself, is a major historical puzzle. But in a
sense, it simply reminds us of the most basic, striking fact about this new
form of science. Eudoxus did not serve the state; he did not work for a
court or for a temple. Unmoored from formal institutions, Eudoxus aimed
to make a name for himself and therefore came up with an original,
persuasive theory, perhaps displaying it in public with his own, newly
devised instruments. Being autonomous can do wonders for scientiﬁc
originality! It is less helpful, however, for scientiﬁc continuity. Even as
Eudoxus was proposing his theories, unbeknown to him, temple practi-
tioners in Mesopotamia were busily improving their empirical data as well
as their predictive devices, year after year, generation after generation, heirs
to institutional traditions stretching back centuries. The main achievement
of ancient astronomy would have to wait till the moment that the two –
the science inspired by Eudoxus’s example and that informed by the
masters of Babylon – would come together.
II.
Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus
The Astronomical In-Between?
Simplicius’s problem was real. Writing a commentary to Aristotle, he
needed to explain the astronomical theory there – clearly based on homo-
centric spheres. But when he was writing his commentary, in the sixth
century , this theory had been dead for almost a thousand years.
I emphasize: there is no evidence that anyone other than a particular
network of authors around Eudoxus himself had ever pursued this astro-
nomical model. Which added to the puzzle faced by Simplicius: besides
having to come up with some account of Eudoxus’s theory, he also had to
come up with an account for why it was dropped. The best he could
muster was a report that Autolycus – active a little later than the generation
of Eudoxus – criticized the model of homocentric spheres because it
implied that the planets must always remain at the same distance from
the earth. In fact, Autolycus noted, Venus does undergo variations in its
brightness, which would naturally suggest changes in its distance. This is
not a stupid argument against the model of homocentric spheres, but I do
not think it can be seriously suggested that this is the reason for the
model’s demise. There are easy ways to account for such brightness
phenomena within a model of homocentric spheres, and surely Eudoxus,
and everyone around him, was well aware of such considerations to begin
with. They didn’t need Autolycus to tell them that! But an even simpler
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

point is that in the entire history of Greek ideas, there is no parallel for
people giving up a position simply because an objection was raised. Greek
cultural life thrived on debate; an objection should have naturally led to
counter-objections and a proliferation of alternatives. The point is not that
Autolycus shut out Eudoxus; the point is that he did not appear to oﬀer an
alternative and that by the time Autolycus came on the scene, the entire
model-building exercise seems to have been dropped.
Indeed, with Autolycus, our historical light shines a little more brightly.
Two works can still be read: On Rotating Spheres and On Risings and
Settings. They may be put side by side with the Phaenomena, an extant
work ascribed, by our manuscripts, to Euclid. So: three extant astronom-
ical works, possibly from around the year . All three are closely
related. The subject of study is a two-sphere model. One sphere is
stationary, representing the earth; another sphere, representing the ﬁxed
stars, rotates, daily, around a pole common to the two spheres. One
attaches to the moving sphere a circle – the ecliptic – whose pole is oblique
to the pole of the spheres. One assumes that the sun rotates annually
through this ecliptic (in this discussion, there is no mention of the moon
and the planets; also, the speed of the sun is taken to be uniform). The
basic phenomena of the seasons are the risings and settings of the ﬁxed
stars; these may be deduced from the aforementioned. Theorem .of
Autolycus’s On Risings and Settings may be cited as an example:
Among ﬁxed stars, those which are on the zodiac get from the apparent
evening rising to the apparent evening setting in half a year, while those to
the north get there in more than a half a year, those to the south – in less.
This begins to look familiar! A star is at its “apparent evening rising”
when it rises in the east just as the sun sets; it is at its “apparent evening
setting” when it is visible, a little above the western horizon, just as the
sun sets. These are the qualitative events people actually always note
about the sky – the type of information that got enshrined in Hesiod’s
poem. Historians of astronomy often turn to Autolycus with something
like a groan – after Eudoxus’s brilliance, is this all we get? – but to make
sense of the history of Greek astronomy, we must remember that the
subject matter of Autolycus’s discussion mattered much more than that
of Eudoxus’s.
There is a simple sociological reason, as noted previously, why a Greek
intellectual project need not have progressed beyond a single generation.
Eudoxus did not set up a permanent institution. But we must also bear in
mind that the problem of the irregular motion of the planets was not

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

exactly urgent. Of course, Greeks cared about the sky. But it was not
Mars’s retrogradations that made the sky paramount in one’s lived expe-
rience. The one main complication to this is that certain philosophers,
such as Plato, cared greatly for the idea that underneath apparent unin-
telligibility, there could lie a perfectly ordered cosmos, discovered by
science. With this enters our other sociological observation: throughout
much of the fourth century, mathematicians were aware of an interested
audience of philosophically minded readers. As the fourth century turned
into the third, this audience dried up. As we noted in Chapter : philo-
sophical attention drifted away from science. And so, those interested in
science no longer envisaged a philosophical audience. But astronomy was
of genuine interest to a wider audience: the audience that cared about the
ﬁxed stars, the zodiac, risings and settings. Perhaps the survival of
Autolycus’s work is more than sheer accident. Perhaps it was typical of
most astronomy produced throughout this era?
Astronomy, perhaps, could have been recalled to its natural position –
looking at the ﬁxed stars, from the court. As noted on page , in the
early third century, Aristyllus and Timocharis made observations, in
Alexandria, of the ﬁxed stars, which perhaps makes sense as a project
designed to create globes for the kings (this, then, is directly parallel to
Aratus’s poem). In the middle of the century, we have Conon, the
astronomer, involved in court intrigue, ﬁnding the lock of Berenice in
the sky (see p. ). Once again, what underlies this story is an observation
of the ﬁxed stars. As we saw, even the basic spherical geometry of the ﬁxed
stars gives rise to nontrivial (even if not very diﬃcult) geometry, and the
same is true for the observations of the ﬁxed stars. In later Greek sources,
we ﬁnd sophisticated discussions of the geometrical optics of instruments
of observation and, in particular, a mathematical theory for the measure-
ment of position on a sphere. (More on this later in the discussion.) It is
perfectly conceivable that mathematicians of the era engaged with such
questions. All of this is perhaps a little anticlimactic, and so far, I have told
this as a story of a Greek retreat, the individual authorship of a daring
astronomical innovation – folded into a project funded by the state. But
Hellenistic courts were anything but boring. They sought the remarkable,
the surprising, the gigantic. We recall Eratosthenes, measuring the size of
the earth through a geometrical thought experiment. From Alexandria,
through mathematics – measure all lands. Aristarchus, earlier in the third
century, went further. From Alexandria, through mathematics, he went on
to measure the sky. This, On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and the
Moon, is by far the most impressive piece of early Greek astronomy still
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

extant. It is a brief text, stated without any discursive introduction
(perhaps such introductions were made part of mathematical writing only
by Archimedes himself ). Based on a few postulates, Aristarchus quickly
deduces – strictly geometrically – the terms mentioned in the treatise’s
title, so that the smallest of mathematical tools give rise to the greatest of
magnitudes. Let us linger a little longer on this exercise.
Aristarchus takes for granted the model – developed, as noted, by
philosophers as early as Anaxagoras – of eclipses as shadows cast by the
earth or the moon. Several speciﬁc quantitative observations are postulated
as well, of which I mention the following:
•
As a background, remember that (to a ﬁrst approximation) when the
moon appears halved, the line joining the center of the earth to the
center of the moon is perpendicular to the line joining the center of
the moon to the center of the sun. It is, in principle, possible to
measure the angle created, then, by the moon–earth–sun, and
Aristarchus postulates that this angle is (what we call) eighty-seven
degrees. (Aristarchus himself expresses this diﬀerently: that the angle is
less than a quadrant by one-thirtieth of a quadrant.)
•
The shadow of the earth intercepts two moon-breadths (that is, a
maximal lunar eclipse covers twice the breadth of the moon; this value
is, in principle, measurable based on the length of eclipses).
(It should be noted immediately that these are presented as postulates, not
as actual measurements, and that although both measurements are some-
what tricky, it is clear that careful naked-eye observations should yield
better values. The low quality of the observations, in the context of the
brilliance of the geometrical deduction, is astonishing.)
Now, the measurement of the angle created by the moon–earth–sun,
when the moon appears halved, can be directly used to deduce the relative
distances of the moon and the sun from the earth. Aristarchus pursues
this in proposition . Even this fairly simple unpacking calls for some
geometrical work – in particular, Aristarchus assumes (without proof )
the theorem that in an arrangement such as that in Figure , we have
(GE:EH) > (∠GBE:∠HBE).
Aristarchus’s text may be read in English in T. L. Heath, Aristarchus of Samos, the Ancient Copernicus
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, ). (Although the original Oxford printing may be hard to ﬁnd, there
are many later reprintings, by Dover and by Cambridge University Press.)

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

B
E
H
G
Figure 
That is, in two right-angled triangles, having a ﬁxed side BE, the ratio
between the unﬁxed sides is greater than the ratio between the unﬁxed angles
or, if you will, a trigonometric inequality of the following type, for example:
a
b
Figure 
tanðαÞ : tanðβÞ > α : β:
This is not presented as a result in a separate ﬁeld such as trigonometry
(indeed, this is not presented at all and is instead simply an assumption,
likely based on previous mathematical works no longer extant). In this case
we appeal to trigonometry simply because we measure sides based on
angles in a right-angled triangle, but for reasons that will become apparent
through the chapter, we will see more and more trigonometry. It is
astronomy’s most lasting contribution to pure mathematics. (I used to
hate trigonometry in high school, and I think it is regrettable that the
discipline was taught without any sense of what any of it could be good
for. Astronomy, that’s what!) More of this, then, later in this subchapter: it
appears that with Hipparchus, trigonometry comes into its own.
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Back to Aristarchus himself, he can now show that his postulated angle
translates into the following claim:
The distance of the sun from the earth is more than eighteen times, but less than
twenty times, the distance of the moon from the earth.
Note that the fact that we have inequalities rather than precise mea-
surements is due not to Aristarchus’s admission of some uncertainty with
his observations – this is simply beside the point for him – but due to his
having to rely on a trigonometric inequality.
Aristarchus now states as a theorem, number , that during eclipses of the
sun, the sun and the moon coincide exactly (this could equally have been
stated as a postulate; it is asserted as a theorem, with observations brought to
support it, probably because Aristarchus, rightly, believes this is correct). Our
observation concerning the relative distances of the sun and the moon now
has the nice payoﬀthat we learn – in proposition – that the diameter of the
sun is at least eighteen times, but less than twenty times, that of the moon.
(Modern readers will realize that this is far too low a value, which suggests
that the postulated moon–earth–sun angle was far too low as well; the correct
angle is not eighty-seven degrees but instead eighty-nine degrees and ﬁfty-one
minutes!) Proposition simply states the cubes of and , respectively,
concluding that the sun (now taken as a solid magnitude) is more than ,
times but less than ,times the moon. Startling numbers and probably
fun for courtly readers; I cite this very simple derivation of cubic numbers
simply so as to give a sense of what such theorems were for.
Recall what we now know. The ratio of the diameters of the sun and the
moon is between eighteen and twenty. The same is true of the ratio of the
distances of the two bodies from the earth. Now, let us bring all that
together with the one postulate still left unused – the size of the shadow
cast by the earth: it is two diameters of the moon.
Now, what do we even mean when we say that the earth casts a “two-
moons” shadow? To simplify Aristarchus’s argument, we mean that if we
interpose the earth between the sun and the moon, at the given relative
distances of the three objects – then the shadow cast by the earth cuts oﬀ
an arc of a circle, whose center is the center of the sun and whose
circumference passes through the center of the moon, such that this arc
is twice the diameter of the moon.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

S
E
M
Figure 
We have a succession of three circles with the three centers S, E, M:
S unÞ
ð
 E arthÞ
ð
 M oon
ð
Þ:
We know the ratio of the distances SE to EM (between :and :), as
well as the ratio of the diameters of the extreme circles, S and M (as it
happens, the same ratio, ranging between :and :).
The postulate that the shadow of the earth on the moon is twice the
diameter of the moon carries a precise geometrical meaning, as noted
previously, in terms of the tangents drawn to the two circles, S and E.
We know the ratio of the circles of S and M but not yet of E. This, in
fact, is our single degree of freedom in the entire arrangement. We may
think of this as a point E that we may expand at will. If it is just a tiny
speck, then obviously, it will cast a tiny shadow (the tangents drawn to
the two circles, S and E, will not even reach M). If we make it very big,
obviously, its shadow can easily grow to more than two moons (for
instance, if we make E equal to S – the earth equal to the sun – the
tangents are parallel, so the shadow at the moon becomes, ignoring some
complications, about eighteen to twenty moons).
But we postulate, in fact, that the shadow of E is two Ms, which
determines the diameter of E. Intuitively, the earth should be bigger than
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the moon but smaller than the sun; in fact, the ratio of the diameters of the
sun and the earth (call it S:E) is found, in proposition , to be
43:6 > S:E > 19:3:
Although it is clear, in principle, that once we have the ratios SE:EM and
S:M, and we also know the size of the shadow of the earth, the ratio S:E is
indeed determined, this is, in fact, still a complicated calculation, involving
some really big numbers. Furthermore, having established the basic ratio of
the diameters of the sun and the earth, Aristarchus proceeds to derive
further the ratio of the earth and the moon and ﬁnally to cube everything
so as to get the ratios of the geometrical magnitudes involved – so,
obviously, once again, big numbers! Indeed, when one considers the
boundaries of ratios, one can get to very big numbers simply by being
precise. (At some point along the calculation, Aristarchus looks at the ratio
,,:,,.) The treatise concludes with the statement that
the ratio of the earth to the moon, E:M (now considered as magnitudes,
not as diameters), is bounded as follows:
216,000:6,859 > E:M > 12,519,712:79,507:
And it is clear that Aristarchus wanted to emphasize the sheer size and
complexity of the numbers.
I cited Aristarchus in some detail to make two points. First of all, it
would be only a small abstraction away to restate Aristarchus’s claim as a
functional relation. Given the angle of the earth/sun/moon, as well as the
size of the earth’s shadow cast on the moon in moon-diameter terms, it is
possible to calculate the ratios of size distances of the earth, the sun, and
the moon. The general validity of this geometrical relation is implicitly
displayed throughout the treatise, but most of the work is dedicated to the
actual calculation, with speciﬁc parameters. And this is the point: even
with the speciﬁc parameters, and even with a fairly simple geometrical
determination, the calculation for this single particular case takes many
steps. The mere existence of a direct function does not make its calculation
direct. We are content, in pure geometry, to show the solubility, in
principle, of a task. In astronomical calculation, however, one is asked to
go through the actual steps of the task, which is often an iterative,
laborious, and ultimately, opaque exercise. Hence the black boxes of
astronomy (and why machine computation is not such a bad idea after
all). We will see more of this in the discussion to come.
And yet – and this is my second point – with all the laborious
calculation, this treatise is a joy to read. In fact, Aristarchus is our best

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

witness to what astronomy, pursued as a science for science’s sake, could
have looked like in the Hellenistic era. Astronomy did not simply revert to
its role in the state, comparable to those Mesoamerican or Mesopotamian
temples or Chinese courts. Quite simply, even in the world of the
Hellenistic courts, the ﬁgure of the scientiﬁc author was too well estab-
lished. The cultural habit was to deploy the literary genre of mathematics
so as to make a name for oneself. The kings reached to the astronomers so
as to set up new monuments: a globe, perhaps. But signiﬁcantly, they did
not introduce new, mathematically inspired calendrical reforms. And
scientiﬁc authorship, itself, was not so much recruited by the courts as,
so to speak, it became inﬂected by its ﬁeld of gravity. And so we note, in
Aristarchus, the emphasis on a surprising result, surprisingly told – with
some big numbers – all of which being reminiscent, directly, of what we
have seen of Archimedes in Chapter .
In fact, the line from Aristarchus to Archimedes is direct. Archimedes’s
own treatise the Sand-Reckoner is even more Aristarchean than Aristarchus,
seeking even bigger spaces.Archimedes sets out to name a number that
will be bigger than the number of the grains of sand it would take to ﬁll the
entire universe – that is, to ﬁll up the entire sphere of ﬁxed stars.
Archimedes runs through estimates of the size of the cosmos, beginning
with the distance of the sun. (He improves directly on Aristarchus and also
quotes other authorities; in particular, we learn that a certain Pheidias,
Archimedes’s father, also oﬀered an estimate of the ratio of the sizes of the
sun and the earth!) Going further, Archimedes suggests that we may get –
to paraphrase – a much bigger universe by assuming that the earth is not
stationary. If we assume that the earth goes around the sun, it is reasonable
to take what was the ratio of the sphere of the earth to the sphere carrying
the sun and turn it into the ratio between the sphere carrying the earth and
the one carrying the ﬁxed stars (this is because in both cases, no parallax is
observed, although Archimedes does not linger on this explanation).
Famously, Archimedes asserts that this model, too, was proposed by
Aristarchus. And so we ﬁnd – as Copernicus himself knew very well,
centuries later! – that the Copernican model was on oﬀer, by a major
astronomer, already in antiquity.
This is simultaneously inspiring and disappointing. The Greeks
achieved so much! And the Greeks cast that away! This is rather like
The best English translation of this treatise is by Henry Mendell, available online at https://web
.calstatela.edu/faculty/hmendel/Ancient%Mathematics/Archimedes/SandReckoner/
SandReckoner.html (accessed February , ).
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hero, passing right next to the steam engine without noticing it. For
indeed, it does not seem that Aristarchus’s model was picked up at all
signiﬁcantly in antiquity itself (one astronomer – a certain Seleucus – is
said to have explored it further; the mathematics of Aristarchus’s model is
never cited, not even so as to be refuted, by any of our later extant
astronomers).
In some ways, the question of the disappearance of Aristarchus’s helio-
centric model is similar to that of the disappearance of Eudoxus’s homo-
centric spheres (in fact, had it not been for Eudoxus’s brush against his
contemporary philosophers, we would have known about his model no
more than we know about Aristarchus’s). Perhaps all we need to say is that
Aristarchus was isolated and, once again, that he had no institutional
continuity to perpetuate him. Surely, few cared, at the time, for whatever
cosmological speculations were on oﬀer by the mathematicians. We are
told by Plutarch, a Roman-era author, that Cleanthes, the Stoic philoso-
pher and Aristarchus’s contemporary, gruﬄy complained that the Greeks
ought to put Aristarchus on trial for disturbing the sun. Most likely, the
story itself is no more than one of those apocryphal anecdotes that later
Greeks loved to invent, bringing together, in vivid conﬂict, their past
masters. At any rate, this apparent anticipation of Galileo’s trial is no more
than one of those little jokes planted by history: in the third century 
itself, there was no “Aristarchus Aﬀair.” The scandal was that no one cared.
But even more to the point is the actual historical context, not of the
seventeenth century but of the third century . We are reminded,
indeed, of all those sympotic pieces of mechanics. Aristarchus’s own extant
work and Archimedes’s reception – in the Sand-Reckoner – are both
suggestive. It is likely that Aristarchus proposed his model precisely for
its shock value and, likely enough, also precisely for the sake of the kind of
big numbers it could generate – such as those exploited by Archimedes.
And if so, why should anyone be perturbed? There was probably always a
ﬂight-of-fancy quality to Aristarchus’s project. It was made for the delight
of the erudite, meeting in banquets; as the cup went around, so – for a
brief instant, in the scholars’ minds – went the earth, lifted by Aristarchus
from under their feet in a dizzying whirl that the most potent of wines
could not match. Was this what Aristarchus’s astronomy was for?
A New Astronomy: Whodunit?
As we move forward in time from the age of Eudoxus, the puzzle seems to
be that not much happens. As we move even later into the third and

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

second centuries, beyond Aristarchus himself, the puzzle has a more
positive character: a new astronomy seems to emerge, and we do not know
how. In general: our sources begin to fail us. We have extant, later than
Aristarchus and before the coming of Roman cultural patronage two
centuries later, no more than three securely dated works related to astron-
omy, of which two were mentioned already: Archimedes’s Sand-Reckoner
and Hipparchus’s critique of Aratus’s poem. Both oﬀer no more than an
oblique view of the astronomy of their time. The third – Spherics, by an
author named Theodosius – takes up the geometry of spheres, clearly with
astronomical motivation but, as it stands, mostly as a pure geometrical
exercise; this, then, too, provides no evidence for new astronomical theo-
ries. And yet, as we emerge into the Roman era – on the other side of that
historical lacuna – it is clear that a completely new kind of astronomy has
already been proposed. Who proposed this and why? This is the “who-
dunit” in the title of this section.
Hipparchus is our ﬁrst suspect. Extant, as noted, only in what to us
seems rather absurd – the critique of a poem – enough is reported to make
clear that he was one of the greatest creative mathematicians of antiquity.
We will look at his achievement (not only the astronomical one) through
the remainder of this subchapter.
And yet, it may be that some of the important events happened even
deeper in the shadows. This much is known: Archimedes did make an
astronomical contribution, beyond that of the Sand-Reckoner; Apollonius
probably did too; both are almost entirely lost to us, and Apollonius’s
contribution – and perhaps that of Archimedes, too – could have shaped
the route taken by Hipparchus himself. So, we must be even more
speculative – and also rely on more tenuous evidence. Indeed, our deduc-
tive gears all turn, ultimately, on a single piece of the Antikythera
mechanism.
We have already noted the Antikythera mechanism as an example of
ancient mathematical mechanics, an object of marvel, perhaps in some sense
related to Archimedes. Let us look at it a little more closely (see Plate ).
First of all, we really need to look from up close. This is a miniature
planetarium, a little more than thirty centimeters tall. (Jones’s classic study
of this artifact is titled A Portable Cosmos.) The sense of “miniature” is
especially obvious because so much of its surface is inscribed – and this,
with tiny letters (in current terms, it gets to a font size of less than pt.: it is
this small). So, this was not meant primarily for reading. It was meant for
turning. Attached to the inside of the box was a knob, and by turning it
either way, one could get the machine to move, essentially, back and forth
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

in time. Notice that it is impossible to make any discontinuous jumps in
time so that, in a sense, this is most like a clock, although one without a
spring providing its own motion. (Not an idle comparison: such springs
were ﬁrst introduced in medieval planetaria – rather diﬀerent in character
from the Antikythera mechanism – which is how the clock got invented.)
As the knob turned, so did several dials. One dial gave the correct date
label for the month, in the traditional calendrical system used in a certain
region (speciﬁcally, in Epirus, a remote part of northwestern Greece; more
on this in the following discussion). This is, of course, typical of the way in
which ancient astronomical systems did not supplant traditional calendars.
Another dial, on a diﬀerent plate, showed whether or not eclipses were
possible in that month. Yet another plate had at least two dials, this time
adjusted by individual days rather than months. It is certain that two
dials showed the zodiacal positions of the sun and the moon. In all probability
– although a fatal lacuna prevents us from stating this with certainty – this
plate had ﬁve more dials, showing the positions of the planets.
The remains of the Antikythera mechanism were found at sea near the
island of Antikythera in , among the (many other, often remarkable)
remains of a shipwreck from the s . All indications suggest that it
was heading west. Indeed, there are several features of this instrument that
suggest that it was “in transit.” A particular plate on the instrument is set to
begin at a date that suggests a “year zero” of the mechanism; this is
surprisingly early for the date of the shipwreck – it seems that this was
set in the ﬁnal decade or so of the third century . (“Aha!” – you are
tempted to say. We will get to that.) Many features of the implied
astronomy suggest the southern latitudes of the Greek-speaking world
(many scholars think of Rhodes, for reasons that will become apparent),
but its calendar, as noted, is that of northern Epirus. Indeed, the calen-
drical system refers to athletic festivals. That is: Greeks often labeled their
years by referring to the games taking place, in four-year cycles, of which
the most famous were, indeed, the Olympic Games, that is, those taking
place in the town of Olympia. The Antikythera mechanism relies on such
year names, but alongside the more famous games, it makes reference to
the truly obscure games of the Naa, held in Epirus. The destination in
Epirus, perhaps in the s , is therefore clearly established – for an
instrument whose chronological origins were perhaps in the late s,
whose geographical origins were perhaps in Rhodes?
All of this is especially surprising if we think of the instrument as
intended for some signiﬁcant patron because Epirus was always impover-
ished and marginal. What are the odds, really? I personally ﬁnd it much

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

more likely that the intended recipient was not a human patron but a god.
Marginal spaces are often holy, and it was in Epirus that the Greeks had
one of their holiest places, the precinct of Dodona, sacred to Zeus (where,
indeed, the Naa games took place). What better to dedicate to this god –
the master of all – than a portable cosmos? I imagine, then, a device,
originally devised elsewhere, copied (also, miniaturized?) for the sake of a
dedication to Zeus; Poseidon intervened to prevent the dedication, hitting
the ship with a storm near the island of Antikythera.
The actual device is in all likelihood derivative. Still, we cannot really say
for certain what such a derivation may have involved. Although it is not clear
that the Antikythera mechanism would have functioned very well in
mechanical terms – that is, it is not clear how much one could turn its
knob before it got broken – it is clear that in its underlying structure, it was
really well conceived. Anyone who was capable of producing it must have
had suﬃcient mastery over the underlying astronomy and its translation to
gear structure to be able to introduce some of their own innovations. Which
means that we cannot infer, from the make of this instrument, the make of
its ancestor. As usual, we press against a real lacuna in our knowledge.
But this much is clear: Archimedes did write, as noted in the previous
chapter, on the making of planetarium-like instruments. The key evidence
is this. In the middle of the ﬁrst century , the Roman orator Cicero
wrote his Republic, a dialogue in imitation of Plato. The main speaker was
Scipio, whom we have met already: the protector of Polybius in the second
century . At one point in this dialogue, another speaker by the name of
Philus recalls how Marcellus – the conqueror of Syracuse – brought out for
display the sphere produced by Archimedes. As Philus tells it, this sphere
was the only piece of loot taken by Marcellus (a clear mark, then, that we
are reading polite ﬁction). Cicero goes on (Republic .):
The invention of Archimedes deserved special admiration because he had
thought out a way to represent accurately by a single turn, those various and
divergent movements [of the sun, moon, and planets] with their diﬀerent
rates of speed.
The description here – a single knob, turned so that all the various
motions of the sky are produced – ﬁts the Antikythera mechanism almost
too well. Indeed, we may suspect anachronism. Cicero was among the
Romans who came to pay homage at Rhodes to Posidonius, the famous
C. W. Keyes, Cicero: De Re Publica, De Legibus (Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ),
p. .
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

philosopher-historian-geographer, and we know that he saw the planetar-
ium that Posidonius himself had produced. Everything suggests, then, that
the Antikythera mechanism we now have is somehow indebted to the
planetarium of Posidonius, and so it would have been possible that Cicero
could merely ascribe (as could be suggested by the ﬁction of a dialogue, set
in the second century ) a more recent device to the near-legendary
Archimedes. (Indeed, it is hard not to recall here the fact that Stoics were
especially close to the idea that the cosmos acted all in concert, guided by
Zeus. Was it Posidonius, or one of his Stoic followers, who devised a
version to be dedicated at Dodona?)
As we recall, Posidonius was the ﬁrst philosopher for nearly two centu-
ries to have been closely interested in science, and it is not surprising that
he would pick up this new innovation – produced by astronomers while
philosophers looked elsewhere – of the portable cosmos. But this much is
clear, even from the little we saw in the preceding chapter: Posidonius was
suﬃciently familiar with science to be able to adapt something like the
Antikythera mechanism. But he certainly was not at the mathematical level
of inventing anything like it. We must go back further in time.
Perhaps we do not need to go far. Hipparchus was active in Rhodes in
the middle of the second century, and as noted, he almost certainly was the
most signiﬁcant astronomer of his era. It is perfectly conceivable that he
could invent from scratch something akin to the Antikythera mechanism.
This is particularly plausible because of – as promised – a particular, tiny
piece of the Antikythera mechanism.
Obviously, a mechanism where a knob drives gears can yield circular
motions of various speeds, each uniform with itself (diﬀerent gear arrange-
ments can translate the same rotation into diﬀerent fractions of a rotation).
The mathematics required for this device, then, at this level, is simply that
of ﬁnding the best factorization (and approximation) given the periods in
use. So, for instance, the calendrical dial is based on the assumption that
the moon revolves times as the sun revolves times. (Recall that this
is not “months per years” because a month is not a revolution of
the moon but, rather, the return of the moon to the same angle with
the sun: moon revolutions to sun revolutions translates, in fact, to
the excellent calendrical, “Metonic” approximation of months in
years.) We want rotations of the axle to transform into rotations
of a particular gear – is obviously too many teeth, whereas is too
few for the ideal gear (it is preferable for the teeth to be reasonably close to
each other so as to latch on to other wheels). Thus, the relevant part of the
mechanism deploys six gears for this purpose, with the teeth counts as
follows:

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that drives , mounted on that drives , mounted on that
drives .
With all due cancellations, this is the same as a -tooth gear driving a
-tooth gear.
This, then, is ingenious but not so diﬀerent, astronomically, from the
calendrical games played by many other civilizations. This is a mere star
bureaucracy on wheels. As far as this goes, then, the Antikythera mecha-
nism is (in all likelihood) mechanically superior to whatever arrangement of
spheres or rings Eudoxus may have set up in Cyzicus, but astronomically
speaking, this – as yet – is less ambitious. This is because Eudoxus’s models
were designed to display the nonuniform speed of the sun, the moon, and
the planets. By having spheres, each moving uniformly, oblique to each
other, Eudoxus derived composite nonuniform speeds.
In fact, it is clear that the Antikythera mechanism, as well, derived nonuni-
form speeds. It would do no good to try to have gears oblique to each other,
but another idea achieved the same result much more directly. I have not
shared with you, in fact, the entirety of the train yielding the motion of the
moon. The actual train followed not the route described previously but
contained, instead, what might be considered “idle” parts – an added couple
of gears that got canceled out. Why? Because these were not designed to add or
take away from the count of rotations. They were set on top of each other, their
centers slightly apart. A pin attached to the bottom gear went up through a
radial slot cut through the top one. Depending on where the gears were in their
cycle, the pin, like one of those on–oﬀcircles we “toggle” on our touchscreens,
would change position in the slot. The motion of the gear would be constrained
depending on the position of the pin in the slot. In other words, the gear would
change its speed, in a predictable manner, depending on its position in the
rotation. We have now obtained nonuniform speed. Incredibly, this detail –
arguably, the most direct evidence for astronomical theory between Eudoxus
and Ptolemy! – was ﬁrst understood by modern scholars only in .
When this observation was ﬁrst made, scholars immediately set out to
calculate the resulting nonuniformity of the speed of the moon. This was
found to be close enough to the one that – according to Ptolemy –
Hipparchus predicted, providing us with a possible identiﬁcation of the
origins of the mechanism. But of course, we have no proof that Hipparchus
was the ﬁrst to suggest this particular nonuniformity. In fact, we have some
evidence to the contrary.
Once again, we rely on Ptolemy. Later on, we will get to consider
Ptolemy’s compendium of astronomy, the Mathematical Systematic
Treatise (also known as The Major [Collection], which, in Arabic
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

transliteration of the Greek becomes Almagest, the name with which we
will refer to this book from now on). In this book, Ptolemy accounts for all
the regularities of the sky, and in Book , he begins to tackle the apparent
anomalies – to begin with, the relatively simple case of the sun (which we
will return to follow in greater detail later in the discussion). Book .is
where he states that all astronomical motions are, in fact, circular and
uniform and explains why the appearance of irregularity comes about:
The reason for the appearance of irregularity can be explained by two
hypotheses, which are the most basic and simple. When [the bodies’]
motion is viewed with respect to a circle imagined to be in the plane of
the ecliptic, the center of which coincides with the center of the universe . . .
then we can suppose, either that the uniform motion of each body takes
place on a circle which is not concentric with the universe, or that they have
such a concentric circle, but their uniform motion takes place, not actually
on that circle, but on another circle, which is carried by the ﬁrst circle, and
is known as the “epicycle.”
These, then, are two methods of deriving apparent irregularity from uniform
circular motions. One – the eccentric – is to position the viewer away from
the center of the uniform rotation. Obviously, then, the rotation would
appear to be nonuniform (faster when the moving object passes closer to us;
slower otherwise). The method of the epicycle is this: we start with a circle
rotating around the earth, but instead of ﬁxing the star, directly, to that
circle, we ﬁx another, smaller rotating circle (the epicycle) whose center is
ﬁxed on the original rotating circle. The star is ﬁxed on the small circle.
VIEWER
VIEWER
EPICYCLE
ECCENTRIC
Figure 
G. J. Toomer, Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth, ), p. .

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Once again, as with Eudoxus’s homocentric spheres, we combine
regular motions to produce an irregular one. It so happens that with the
case of the sun, either eccentrics or epicycles will do, and in fact, the two
are related – a given eccentric model can be transformed into an epicyclic
model. Now, Ptolemy proceeds, in Book .– a much more diﬃcult
part of the treatise, dealing now with the theory of the planets – to quote a
geometrical result concerning the determination of epicycles. Remarkably,
he ascribes this result to Apollonius. Ptolemy shows repeatedly the ways in
which an eccentric and an epicyclic model are related, and he does so
immediately as he shows his proof in .. It is at least possible, based on
Ptolemy’s presentation, that Apollonius himself, already, was aware of the
relation between eccentrics and epicycles. It is unfortunate that we do not
know this for sure, nor do we know anything about the use to which
Apollonius put such theorems. This is unfortunate because epicycles and
eccenters are the two main tools of Ptolemaic astronomy. (They will
remain so all the way down to Kepler – Copernicus very much included.)
This brief mention of Apollonius in Almagest .remains as our only
indication that this astronomical tradition had already begun in the third
century .
To this, we may add a few more hints: a chatty biographical fragment
informing us that Apollonius’s nickname was “Epsilon” because of the
similarity of the letter to the moon, his beloved subject. (This is a strange
view, both of the moon and of epsilon.) Then again, there are other,
very late – and not very reliable – sources also reporting speciﬁc points
concerning Apollonius and the moon; all in all, it seems possible, at least,
that Apollonius did indeed write on astronomy.We have lost a great deal
by him: Could this have included a treatise foundational for all of future
astronomy?
But this is assuming that Apollonius originated epicycles and eccentrics.
Nothing in our evidence explicitly states this – all we know is that
Apollonius authored a particular theorem concerning epicycles. Our evi-
dence beyond that runs dry. Unless, that is, we return to the Antikythera
mechanism itself. Looking again at the arrangement of pin and slot, tying
together two equal gears with slightly mismatched centers, it is hard now
not to see there a combination of eccentric and epicycle. (The circle turns
on a pivot, which, away from its actual center, keeps changing its position.)
There is no systematic study of Apollonius as an astronomer (the evidence, at any rate, is too ﬂimsy
for that). Once again, the best starting point for the evidence and the discussion is the article
“Apollonius of Perga” in the Dictionary of Scientiﬁc Biography by G. J. Toomer.
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Not only does the Antikythera mechanism solve the problem of the
nonuniform speed of the moon, but it does this with a mechanical model,
which is the most direct implementation possible (given a system of gears),
of the idea of eccentric/epicyclic rotations. To the extent that we believe
that the overall features of the Antikythera mechanism go back to
Archimedes, then, it becomes attractive to assume that he was in posses-
sion of something akin to such astronomical models.
Of course, nothing forces us to ascribe any particular feature of the
mechanism to Archimedes. But recall that the epoch – “year zero” – of the
mechanism itself seems to be set for a year near the end of the third
century. There is no certainty that the design of the Antikythera
mechanism goes back to that era, but is there anything to show otherwise?
The point is not merely our lack of evidence. Rather, to repeat a point
made earlier, without anything such as the pin-and-slot device, a device
such as the Antikythera mechanism would be reduced to displaying ﬁxed
speeds only. It would be good enough for the basic calendrical purpose of
aligning months and years in the Metonic cycle, but it would be useless
for displaying the actual positions of the sun, the moon, and the
planets. Speciﬁcally, in this regard, it would likely be at least theoretically
inferior to the models produced by Eudoxus. Would Archimedes really
accept that?
What we seem to suggest is that, on ﬁrst principles, Archimedes should
have incorporated a pin-and-slot mechanism (or some other variation of a
device producing nonuniform speeds) into whatever planetarium he con-
trived. And if so, why not the device now attested?
This, then, is the “whodunit” of the title of this section. We need to ﬁnd
who ﬁrst introduced a new astronomy: based not on homocentric spheres
but on epicycles and eccentrics. Hipparchus certainly had such an astron-
omy; he is a plausible suspect. Ptolemy directly tells us that Apollonius, at
the very least, investigated the geometrical properties of epicycles. He is a
plausible suspect. And we know that Archimedes invented a new
planetarium-like device that, by all appearances, seems rather like the
Antikythera mechanism and so should have had some kind of device,
other than Eudoxus’s homocentric spheres, producing nonuniform
motion. He, too, then, is a plausible suspect.
It is a mystery we cannot solve. But looking at our prime suspects, I like
an account suggested by Evans and Carman in . This is that the
(mechanical equivalent of ) epicycle/eccentric models could have been
proposed originally as a mechanical solution to the problem of producing
nonuniform speeds. The geometrical theory of such models could then

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

have been devised in dialogue regarding, or even in response to, such
mechanical approaches. It is obvious how this might work with our
evidence. We may even ﬁnd, at the end of the day, that all three suspects
as responsible, in diﬀerent ways, for the emergence of the new astronomy.
We can envisage Archimedes as the author of a strictly mechanical treatise,
describing the mechanism of a planetarium, glancing, no more, at the
astronomical theory implied by the working of the machine. Apollonius,
responding to Archimedes, both emulated as well as criticized him by
showing some surprising geometrical properties of the motions so pro-
duced. Hipparchus, ﬁnally, could have been the ﬁrst to derive all of this in
an astronomically responsible way, relating the models to carefully exe-
cuted observations and explaining how they work as models of the sky.
The suggested sequence is mechanics, followed by geometry, followed
by astronomy. This, of course, is just one story out of the many that,
based on our slim evidence, we may tell. And it should be clear that the
three names – Archimedes, Apollonius, Hipparchus – are but three barely
visible islands, all that remain from an entire mountain range, now
submerged. It is perfectly plausible that several dozen authors, now
completely unknown, engaged with this kind of astronomy from the
late third and throughout the second century , each oﬀering slightly
diﬀerent approaches.
But one advantage of our story is that it comports, in general, with our
view of Archimedes, his inﬂuence, and his use of the mathematical past.
Once again, Eudoxus emerges as a major inspiration. But also, once again,
Archimedes reacts to Eudoxus as if Eudoxus was not a philosopher – as if
he were merely interested, in this case, in the construction of marvelous
machines. The cosmological signiﬁcance of Eudoxus’s models – their
representation of the universe as a system of concentric spheres – is cast
aside. Instead, one looks for the clever (and hidden) arrangement of gears
that produces a surprising combination of motions.
We will return, later in the chapter, to discuss the question of “instru-
mentalism” in astronomy – whether an astronomical theory is meant as a
description of the cosmos or merely as a device for calculation. We can
note immediately that the model of epicycles and eccentrics suggests a
certain retreat from cosmology in favor of mathematical ease (or perhaps,
mechanical ease). This retreat from philosophy, then, ﬁts best the math-
ematics of the age of Archimedes. And once again, just as with Eudoxus
and his homocentric spheres, we ﬁnd a new astronomy rising as a tentative,
belated echo to a ﬂourishing mathematical generation. Its acme,
Hipparchus, brings us already to the middle of the second century and
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

to an era that is, otherwise, almost entirely without attestation. The most
important ﬁgure in the history of ancient astronomy must be studied
almost without sources – and almost without context.
Hipparchus and the Babylonians
Historians love astronomy. Herodotus tells us that a war waged by Persia
against Lydia was called oﬀbecause of the scary omen of a solar eclipse –
and how else would we be able to date this event, so conﬁdently, to 
?There is a certain class of astronomical observations – speciﬁc
positions of planets, eclipses – such that their very description allows us
to narrow down the potential dates on which they were made. It should be
said, then, that up until this point in this chapter, the astronomical
observations made by Greek astronomers hardly help us date them. Few
astronomers engaged in systematic observations (the exception seems to be
Timocharis and Aristyllus; those of Aristyllus were of the ﬁxed stars, which
once again provide only vague clues for dating, although those of
Timocharis referred enough to the moon to allow better dating).
Otherwise, coming closest to precise observations, allowing dating, are
observations of the solstice (so, the most basic pendulum of the sun
moving south and north), which, most scholars agree, imply 
for either Meton or Euctemon and for Aristarchus. But this is as
far as it goes.
This changes with Hipparchus. This means much more than that we
can date him with somewhat more conﬁdence. It also means that, for once,
with this author, systematic observations seem to have mattered. Ptolemy
cites observations from Hipparchus made in the years –; other
observations cited by Ptolemy, not explicitly ascribed to Hipparchus but
probably by him, bring us further back to . All of this suggests an
author substantially removed in time from the generation of Archimedes:
Herodotus, Histories .. To be fair, though, we do not date this conﬁdently at all. We rely, in
practice, on a report by Pliny the Elder (Natural History .), according to which Thales’s
prediction pertained to an eclipse taking place in the year (obviously not the date
provided by Pliny himself, who uses instead the dating system based on counting Olympic
Games). This in fact corresponds to an astronomically computed eclipse, and for this reason, the
report is now usually trusted, but after all, there were several other solar eclipses in the surrounding
years, so eﬀectively, the date “” expresses, at the end of the day, not the certitude of astronomical
science but the feeble conjectural force of trusting Pliny the Elder. (I recommend F. Bailey, “On the
Solar Eclipse Which Is Said to Have Been Predicted by Thales,” The Philosophical Magazine 
[]: –.) Such anticlimactic conclusions are typical of the promise, and reality, of the use
of astronomy in history.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

born, perhaps, in around the same years that Apollonius and Archimedes’s
other interlocutors passed away.
Indeed, we didn’t look that much at this period. In the previous chapter,
I did mention Hipparchus’s contemporary, Polybius, a harbinger of the
coming of Roman patronage in the ﬁrst century . But otherwise, the
second century is surprisingly bare, coming after the great scientiﬁc
ﬂorescence of the third century – and before the great remaking of
Greek culture under Roman inﬂuence in the ﬁrst century . In between
is a century for which we have hardly any evidence at all – perhaps because,
in general, less was achieved? We have very little new to report from
philosophy and medicine, as well. I tend to suspect that this is the price the
Greeks paid, ultimately, for the rise of inequality. One thing that democracy
did was to establish a certain egalitarianism. This, in turn, allowed more
people to participate in culture. The rise of the Hellenistic kingdoms and the later
riseoftheRomanempiredealtablowtothisegalitarianism.Thiswasbalanced,to
a large extent, by the sheer rise of the demographic base due to the expansion of
Greek ideas across the Mediterranean, but before the inﬂux of Latin-speaking
elites in the ﬁrst century , this geographical expansion did not match the
socioeconomic collapse. The second century was not yet Roman but
already distant from the classical era. It enjoyed no more than a distant echo
of the democracy that made that classical past so vibrant.
In this world, then, a rare genius – quite possibly, an isolated one. It is
noteworthy how much of Hipparchus’s work took the past as its foil. The
one extant work, as noted, is the critique of Aratus (and through him, of
Eudoxus). He also was considered by Strabo, the Roman-era geographer,
to have been one of the leading authorities on the subject of geography;
what Strabo cites from Hipparchus seems to come from one source above
all: an extensive treatise by Hipparchus attacking the geography of
Eratosthenes.Another attested work took Chrysippus, the third-century
Stoic philosopher, as its target.
The last one, in fact, calls for a brief detour. Chrysippus – who invented
propositional logic – had proclaimed that from ten assertions, “millions of
combinations can be made.” Hipparchus then went through the trouble of
showing that, in fact, there are only ,, or at most, ,such
combinations. We know very little about this episode: Plutarch, an author
from the ﬁrst century , was keen to attack Chrysippus, and so he cites
the mere fact without much elaboration. It was considered a mere anec-
dote until a mathematician noted in that ,is, in fact, what is
See especially Strabo, Geography .–..
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

known as the tenth Schröder number, or the number of diﬀerent ways that
ten objects in a sequence can be put into brackets. (This, then, is an
obvious interpretation of “combinations of ten assertions”; I leave the
higher number ,aside, but with some complications this, too, is
now known to have a mathematical meaning.) It is impossible to come up
with such a number by simple enumeration, and so we learn that
Hipparchus engaged in theoretical combinatorics.Although a lot of
what Archimedes, in particular, did involved the counting of a number
of combinations (this is particularly true for the Stomachion), nothing
suggests he developed pure rules of combinatorics; evidently, Hipparchus
did – likely enough, the ﬁrst to do so. First – and alone, facing only the foil
of Chrysippus’s dead authority. Something similar may well be the context
for Hipparchus’s measurements of the sizes and distances of the sun and
the moon – of which we have only tiny reports. These had the sun and
moon farther away than Aristarchus’s (Hipparchus had the moon about
Earth radii away – essentially correct – the sun about radii away,
still a couple of orders of magnitude too close), and the little we do know
suggests the distances were based on a multitude of considerations and
observations, not just on one geometrical construction; it seems possible,
then, that this, too, was in some sense directed against Aristarchus.
And so: attacking Aratus, Chrysippus, Eratosthenes, perhaps Aristarchus
– almost as if this author of the second century systematically went
through the leading authorities of the third. Speciﬁcally, we also see a
pattern in all those refutations. Hipparchus is the master of painstaking
calculations. Aratus (and, behind him, Eudoxus) threw out rough approx-
imations of the positions of the ﬁxed stars; Eratosthenes did not calculate
his geographical coordinates with precision; Chrysippus merely stated
“millions,” never bothering to do the actual work of counting.
Aristarchus was happy, relying on a single geometrical ﬂight of fancy.
Hipparchus would prove them wrong by being precise.
Such an author would be interested, then, in gaining more quantitative
data. Indeed, Hipparchus clearly had access to a trove of Babylonian
knowledge of astronomy; as far as we can tell, no previous Greek did.
R. P. Stanley, “Hipparchus, Plutarch, Schröder, and Hough,” The American Mathematical Monthly
, no. (): –.
To be clear: is entirely speculative to suggest that this calculation was polemical against Aristarchus.
We have no indications of Hipparchus’s context for the calculation and no more than the bare
indications for the calculation itself. See C. Carman, “On the Distances of the Sun and the Moon
According to Hipparchus,” in C. Carman and A. Jones (eds.), Instruments – Observations – Theories,
, https://doi.org/./zenodo., pp. –.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This, then, calls for another, more prolonged detour. We last met
Babylonian astronomy with the Mul.Apin, a substantial set of observations
– and synodic periods – collected and relayed through many centuries
down to the seventh century . Such synodic periods were the basis for
the Babylonian temple practice of calendars and divination. Late in this
tradition, the historian David Brown notes a transformation. In the eighth
and seventh centuries , Mesopotamian astronomers started to predict
eclipses. We lack precise knowledge of the historical context for such
developments, but Brown notes a certain competitive professionalization
of scholarship at the court. There could have been extra prestige in
becoming the Sherlock Holmes diviner, the one capable of telling the
omen in advance. At any rate, such predictions derive, at this point, merely
from observations of cycles of recurrences of a calendrical nature. One can
say, therefore, that the Mesopotamians were, at this point, masters of
calendrical prediction. By the ﬁfth century if not before, such knowledge
was already suﬃciently familiar around the Mediterranean to make possi-
ble the calendars – perhaps even eclipse predictions – of Meton and of later
Greek authors.
But even as Greeks were starting on their own distinctive astronomical
journey, Babylonian temple astronomers were beginning to develop a new
set of techniques.
To recall, for the temple-based science of the stars – whether in Babylon
or in China – the ultimate unpredictability of the planets became some-
thing of a feature rather than a bug. One could not tell precisely where the
next planetary event would take place – and that made its identity all the
more ominous. This unpredictability arises because the apparent speeds of
a planet are nonuniform. The average speeds of the planets, however,
considered over longer periods, are much more stable – hence the possi-
bility of observing synodic patterns. It is a bit like the weather: if it is
January, it is very hard to tell if tomorrow will be colder or warmer, but it
is almost certain that (in the Northern Hemisphere) it will be hotter six
months from now.
Add to this also that what motivates astronomy, to begin with, and
certainly in the Mesopotamian context of divination, is the key qualitative
events, and it becomes easy to understand why the Babylonian predictive
planetary system was organized by those events and not by the day-to-day
motions of the planets. Someone, or perhaps a small group of practitioners,
came up not with one but with two schemes that did a fairly good job of
predicting the location on the ecliptic of planetary events such as ﬁrst
rising, beginning of retrogradation, and so forth. Each scheme modiﬁed,
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

each in its own way, the obviously false assumption that the planets move
at uniform speeds. In one of the schemes, the speed was assumed to be
uniform given a portion of the zodiac. (In certain signs, the planet was
supposed to move faster; in others, slower.) In the other, speeds were
assumed to vary regularly through what is known as a zigzag function:
becoming faster until you hit a maximum, then becoming slower until you
hit a minimum, and back again. This is a bit surprising to us, but the ideas
are not absurd: the diﬀerent-speeds-in-diﬀerent-signs approach feels very
natural in a context where one assumes, to begin with, that the entry of a
planet into a sign is an ominous, consequential event. The zigzag hypoth-
esis, in turn, feels very natural within an astronomical context where one
keeps noticing “pendulum” events such as the sun’s motion from north to
south, the moon’s waxing and waning. Further, my language – assuming
the algebra of continuous speeds, times, and distances – is already an
anachronistic modernization of a system that, for its practitioners, was
based on the synodic cycle as a discrete series of qualitative events. But this,
once again, is meaningful. Just as with the weather: those schemes do a
poor job of predicting the position of the planet from day to day because,
in fact, they do not even conceive of this problem in time, as a continuous
series. Because, you see: taken in the aggregate, across the many days
separating one qualitative event from the next, and provided the right
parameters, those schemes can become quite eﬀective approximations.
Perfected in the fourth century or perhaps even as early the ﬁfth, this
may well have been the ﬁrst fully scientiﬁc theory of the planets.
In past scholarship, this Babylonian achievement was sometimes dis-
missed as “merely” practical, the Babylonians unfavorably compared with
the Greeks in that they did not produce a geometrical account of the sky,
hence no physical model, so, unlike the Greeks, “not real science.” This is
obviously an absurd special pleading, where one deﬁnes as scientiﬁc
whatever it is that the Greeks do and then reprimands the non-Greeks
for failing to be Greek. The Babylonian theory is in fact directly analogous
to the Greek mathematical theory of music – whose scientiﬁc signiﬁcance
no one doubts. To recall: Greek music theorists explained musical harmo-
nies in terms of simple integer ratios. With hindsight, we understand that
simple integer ratios between pitches are signiﬁcant because they stand for
certain geometrical relations between waves. But it is perfectly valid to look
at the evidence and to consider the integer ratios, themselves, as a signif-
icant scientiﬁc discovery that could, in principle, be directly explanatory.
They were taken as such by the Greeks themselves. We have no indication
as to the metaphysics that Babylonian astronomers attached to their

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

numerical schemes, but as Rochberg insists, they were dead serious about
the stars. These were gods; the astronomers’ business was to worship them.
Can we really doubt that the Babylonian astronomers felt that in their
schemes, they had discovered deep truths about the planet gods? Those
truths were not related to geometrical shapes but to numerical parameters:
And so what?
More than this: had Eudoxus presented Plato not with homocentric
spheres but with Babylonian-like numerical schemes, would Plato really
object? Not at all: in fact, it seems, from Plato’s remarks in the Republic,
that he might have preferred a more abstract, Archytas-like astronomy!
The Babylonians were scientists. The contrast with the Greeks is real,
though. The Greeks started afresh, without a deep apparatus of observations.
A disadvantage – but also a certain freedom. The Greek astronomical
revolution involved a transition from a fairly unsophisticated Metonic,
integer-based, calendrical astronomy to a diﬀerent kind of astronomy –
geometrically based modeling, whose empirical foundations include no more
than a handful of observations, perhaps focused not only on treatise writing
but also on public display and on mechanical models. The Babylonian
astronomical revolution, in contrast, had much more to draw upon in terms
of observations of patterns, and so it kept much closer to calendrical practices.
Both approaches have their distinctive strengths, and astronomy was the most
successful science of antiquity because it was a synthesis of the two.
This synthesis was likely produced by Hipparchus. He learned all about
Babylonian astronomy through . . . Actually, we have no idea. Did he go to
Babylon? Or conversely, did he meet Babylonian astronomers who visited
Rhodes? Was such knowledge perhaps committed to writing, perhaps even
translated into Greek, even prior to Hipparchus? One way or another, the
one clear thing is that Hipparchus got his hands on Babylonian records as
well as on Babylonian techniques. He now had in his possession, in
particular, centuries-long data of eclipses. He knew certain periodicities
and algorithms that the Babylonians deduced from their observations. Was
he perhaps responsible for the transition into calculating astronomical
values with sexagesimals? (The main argument that he did is that anyone
writing after him in theoretical astronomy would have wished to be able to
compare their numbers with Hipparchus’s, and surely switching bases
would be a pain! However, the little direct evidence for Hipparchus’s use
of numbers does not involve sexagesimals, and it is quite possible that
sexagesimals trickled up under the Romans, like astronomy itself, not from
any theoretical sources but, instead, from astrological practice; more on
this later in the discussion.)
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Let us quote from Ptolemy’s Almagest (.) – the very beginning of
Ptolemy’s detailed model-building:
The ancients were in disagreement and confusion in their pronouncements
on the [length of the year], as can be seen from their treatises, especially
those of Hipparchus, who was both industrious and a lover of truth. The
main cause of the confusion on this topic which even he displayed is the
fact that, when one examines the apparent returns to equinox and solstice,
one ﬁnds that the length of the year exceeds days by less than 1=4 day,
but when one examines its return to the ﬁxed stars it is greater [than 1=4
days]. Hence Hipparchus comes to the idea that the sphere of the ﬁxed stars
too has a very slow motion.
We have already noticed that the “year” means, to early observers, above
all, the cycle from one solstice (northernmost or southernmost position of
the rising of the sun) to the next. This is now known as a tropical year.
Hipparchus claims that this is slightly less than 1=4 days.
There is also a separate meaning for the “year,” which is the return of
the sun to the same position against the ﬁxed stars (or against the zodiac).
This cannot be directly observed (it is impossible to see the sun and the
ﬁxed stars together) but can be inferred, as noted earlier, from the ﬁrst
risings of constellations on the zodiac. This is now known as a sidereal year.
Hipparchus claims that this is slightly more than 1=4 days.
At ﬁrst glance, both the tropical year and the sidereal year seem to
measure the very same process, namely (from a geocentric perspective), the
sun’s annual motion around the earth. One would expect solstices or
equinoxes to occur at “ﬁxed positions on the zodiac” – when the sun is
against the very same ﬁxed stars, almost as a matter of deﬁnition. It is
remarkable that Hipparchus was certain enough in the values he obtained
for those cycles that he preferred not to explain away such tiny diﬀerences
but instead to use them as a basis for a theoretical claim. He was right. The
ﬁxed stars move very slowly, so the stars against which the sun is posi-
tioned during the solstice, or equinox, very gradually transform over the
centuries: this is the “precession of the equinoxes.” We now understand it
as a tiny wobble in the earth’s rotation: even while the earth rotates around
its axis, the axis itself draws, slowly, a small circle or, more precisely, a
cone. (All, ultimately – as Newton realized – because of the interference of
the gravity of the moon.) Hipparchus thought that this precession of the
equinoxes completed a circle every thirty-six thousand years, whereas in
fact, it takes about twenty-six thousand years: a truly tiny error (an artifact
G. J. Toomer, Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth, ), p. .

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

of rounding, perhaps?), given Hipparchus’s very limited empirical
basis. But indeed, what was his basis? Ptolemy gives few further details
(according to him, it appears that Hipparchus relies strictly on comparing
his own observations to those made by previous Greek astronomers about
years earlier). Modern scholars sometimes wonder if Hipparchus could
have based one or even both measures of the year not directly on obser-
vations but, instead, on Babylonian parameters, but we can’t know and
can only marvel at Hipparchus’s intuition.
In the considerations concerning the lengths of the year, the contribu-
tion of Babylonian knowledge, in this case, could be that of parameters,
assuming which one may deduce underlying cycles. In the Almagest, we
have evidence for a more direct use of Babylonian sources: in several cases,
Ptolemy cites Babylonian observations, especially those of eclipses. We are
speciﬁcally told that Hipparchus compiled such observations, and because
we ﬁnd such a compilation already on Babylonian clay tablets, the con-
clusion appears to be that Hipparchus, or one of his predecessors, had the
Babylonian series (or some selection from it) translated into Greek. In all
likelihood, Ptolemy takes his data from Hipparchus – so, Babylonian two
times or more removed – and perhaps he also follows the outline of
Hipparchus’s own interpretation. (It is telling that this use of Babylonian
sources takes place mostly around the theory of the moon, which
Hipparchus apparently advanced the most: it is possible that the ﬁrst
iteration of Ptolemy’s moon theory is essentially Hipparchus’s.)
So let us read an example, once again, from Ptolemy (.):
The ﬁrst [of three eclipses used by Ptolemy] is recorded as occurring in the
ﬁrst year of Mardokempad, Thoth /in the Egyptian calendar. The
eclipse began, it says, well over an hour after moonrise, and was total.
The data were indeed compiled in Babylon: an event, taking place in
, available as the raw material for a theory promulgated in the
second century .
Notice how much the raw material has to be processed. The travel of
astronomical data requires the greatest care! Even the reference to the
Egyptian calendar involves, already, a reference to calendrical equivalences
that Ptolemy (or Hipparchus before him) had to establish independently.
(The Babylonian data, of course, were recorded according to Babylonian
calendars.) Following that, Ptolemy transforms the data into an absolute
time of the night, based on (a) the position in the solar (tropical) year of
G. J. Toomer, Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth, ), p. .
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the given calendrical event and (b) the length of the night at that point in
the tropical year. He ﬁnds that mid-eclipse was 1=2 hours before midnight.
He then transforms this further, as he makes all such observations uniformly
observed from the longitude of Alexandria (which perhaps was taken to be
the same as that of Rhodes, so he might have directly followed Hipparchus
in this manipulation). He thus shaves /hours (the time-zone diﬀerence
between Babylon and Alexandria) to get that the mid-eclipse, as observed
from Alexandria, was 1=3 hours before midnight. He then calculates the
zodiacal position of the sun at that particular moment, based on his tables.
And this ﬁnally makes it possible to extract, from a Babylonian dating of an
eclipse, the zodiacal position of the moon at a given time.
This is all required for only a single observation. Ptolemy repeats the
process twice more so that he acquires three precisely dated zodiacal positions
of the moon for three moments in time. This allows Ptolemy to calculate two
values: the average speed of the moon between the ﬁrst and the second
moment; the average speed between the second and the third. Because
Ptolemy derives independently (a much simpler exercise) the underlying
average speed of the moon, each result is interpreted as a deviation from the
moon’s underlying average speed. We have two data points: in period , the
deviation was of size X; in period , the deviation was of size Y.
In this exercise, we assume an epicyclic model, and the parameter we are
seeking is the size of the epicycle (in practice, its radius) in terms of the
radius of the main circle. The crux is that the two values we now have can
in fact determine, geometrically, the value of this parameter.
This is all in Ptolemy, but as Ptolemy makes clear, he is following the
approach of Hipparchus himself – perhaps the one represented in the
Antikythera mechanism. Depending on our solution of the whodunit
of the previous section, we may ﬁnd him to be either entirely original
or perhaps merely deducing and reﬁning an Archimedean/Apollonian
solution, based on new Babylonian materials. But in all likelihood, what
we would have found, had we had access to Hipparchus’s original works,
was – in Ptolemy’s words – industriousness and love of truth.
“Industrious”: A Detour Regarding Trigonometry
Let us take those in order. First, Hipparchus was industrious. That is, he
did not merely develop theories but also observed and calculated in detail.
It is clear that Hipparchus’s calculations were based, in some instances, on
Babylonian algorithms. But he had to go beyond the Babylonian methods
in order to derive the parameters for his own theories, based, as they were,
on circular motions that derive particular speeds.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Even this account elides much of the complexity of the calculations
required for ﬁxing parameters based on observations. Suppose one knows
that the average speed of the moon, along a certain arc of the circle, is X,
and that its average speed, along a diﬀerent arc, is Y. This, indeed, can be
derived from no more than three observations. And it is geometrically
correct that if one assumes a model of an epicycle or of an eccenter, these
two average speeds should be enough to determine just which epicycle to
take or just where to position the eccenter. However, the geometrical
argument for determining the parameter, given the values, is much more
complex than you might at ﬁrst think, not just in terms of the underlying
geometry but in terms of practical calculation. In particular, the argument
has to work, in part, through the determination of chords inside the circle
– straight lines – on the evidence of arcs of the circle. I will not go through
the detail of the argument but merely observe one of the several diagrams
used by Ptolemy in his own derivation to illustrate the kind of diﬃculty
we encounter.
Z
B
G
D
E
A
Figure 
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

To recall: we assume that the nonuniform speed of the moon is
produced by an epicycle and that the positions of the moon on the epicycle
at the midpoint of the three observed eclipses are A, B, and G. Our
evidence is the length of the arcs between the points. We need to ﬁnd
the size of this epicycle – that is, its radius – that will derive the observed
speeds. You may begin to sense the diﬃculty: we start with evidence
concerning lengths of arcs and derive from it a result concerning the
length of a linear unit – a radius. This becomes, in fact, much more
diﬃcult because in practice, we do not get directly from the arc to the
radius. The radius is derived geometrically by considerations of other
geometrical relations determined by the three points A, B, G. In this
case, Ptolemy draws lines from the center of the main circle (that is, the
center of the earth), at D, to the three points A, B, and G, and the
operation is based on manipulating the resulting straight lines. EZ, for
instance, is the perpendicular dropped from point E (where line DA
intersects with the circle) to line DB. The length of EZ is signiﬁcant in
Ptolemy’s derivation, and he ﬁnds it by ﬁrst producing the size that the
arc EZ would be at if we were to draw an imaginary circle based on the
points DEZ. (This may be produced because, after all, we see the moon
at the positions A and B, and so the angle EDZ is simply the observed
angle between the two observations – our eyes do not care that the moon
travels on an epicycle!) He ﬁnds the arc EZ to be (in degrees, written in
sexagesimal numbers):
15; 24:
And then immediately proceeds to state the following claim concerning
the straight line EZ:
EZ ¼ 16; 4, 42 with the units ðdiameter of the circle DEZÞ DE ¼ 120:
What Ptolemy just did is to take the measure of an arc – which one can
observe – and turn it into a measurement of a straight line. The arc EZ of
the circle DEZ is degrees and minutes; hence, the chord EZ stands
at the ratio ;,:to the same circle’s diameter.
This is a fundamental point. All astronomical observations are under-
stood by the Greeks as measures of angles on a circle or (equivalently) as
measures of arcs. On the other hand, a typically geometrical derivation
from such observations would require the ﬁnding of particular straight
lines as, at least, interim steps in the argument. But how to do this? We
wanted to do astronomy – and we ended up, pretty much, squaring the
circle! In short, we need to rely on approximation. Indeed, Ptolemy had a

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

table for this, containing such approximations: a table of chords. This went
through the possible measurements of arcs – in increments of half a degree
(what is the chord if the arc is half a degree? A degree? A degree and a
half?), all the way up to – and found the length of the associated chord
in terms of /th parts of the diameter of the same circle. The chord of
the arc , for instance, is /th parts of that diameter – because it
is the diameter! (This is one of no more than a handful of measurements
that are exact.)
We recall Aristarchus deriving conclusions from his postulate of the
angle of the moon–earth–sun when the moon is bisected – supposedly,
this angle was then equal to what we call (following Hipparchus and the
Babylonians) three degrees. From this, Aristarchus derived the ratio
between the distance of the earth and the moon, and the earth and the
sun. In other words, he produced a trigonometric calculation of a partic-
ular value – three degrees. It is likely enough that at the time of
Aristarchus, Greek mathematicians would indeed produce such results
piecemeal, as the need arose. But for the kind of purposes required by
Hipparchus, a more systematic table would become handy, and indeed, we
are told by Theon – a later astronomical commentator, on whom more in
the following chapter – that Hipparchus wrote an entire treatise (in twelve
books, no less!) titled On Chords. Hipparchus must have produced a work
dedicated to what we now call “trigonometry.”
It is impossible to say what this book included (and the report of twelve
books almost deﬁes belief ), but we can make some guesses concerning its
overall strategy. The ﬁeld of trigonometry lies at the intersection of
geometry and astronomy, and our evidence is divided accordingly. For
the geometrical inspiration, we probably need to look back to Archimedes;
for the astronomical context, we will rely on Ptolemy (but we are lucky to
have further evidence, in particular from Menelaus).
I have only brieﬂy mentioned Archimedes’s Measurement of Circle. In
part, this treatise is a standard (and surprisingly easy to accomplish)
Eudoxean, proof-by-contradiction measurement of a curvilinear object,
showing that a circle is equal to a right-angled triangle whose two sides
are the radius and the circumference of the circle. The rest of it is
dedicated to an explicit calculation of boundary values on the actual
length of the circumference, which is translated, in practice, to ﬁnding
the ratio of the circumference to the diameter – that is, ﬁnding the value
of π. Just like the Eudoxean proof, this is done by considering the ratio to
the diameter not of the circle but of regular polygons, inscribed and
circumscribed. For what follows, we are mostly interested in the case of
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the inscribed polygon. We start with the hexagon, a special case that
allows direct computation (Figure ).
B
D
A
C
E
Figure 
AE is a diameter, AD is the side of the inscribed regular hexagon, and
AB is the side of the inscribed regular dodecagon. Note that the angles at
D, B are both right (all of this goes back all the way to Hippocrates of
Chios). Archimedes proves generally that whenever BE bisects the angle
AED,
AE þ ED:AD::BE:BA:
(The proof is not self-evident, but because we are looking, right now, for
the evidence for Hipparchus, not Archimedes, I skip it.) Now, the angle
of a regular hexagon is what we call degrees, so that its half – DAE
here – is degrees. If we were to draw radii from the center to A, D, we
would have an equilateral triangle, and so AD is equal to the radius or to
half of AE. Whatever unit AE is, AD is half that. DE, then, is what we
would call √of AD, and Archimedes has a very close numerical
approximation of that. (This gives the lie, incidentally, to the notion that
the Greeks needed geometrical tools for the practical problems of calcu-
lating cubic roots for the sake of “duplicating the cube.” Such problems
could easily be solved numerically.) We can therefore use the previous
theorem to ﬁnd BE:BA and then use Pythagoras’s theorem to ﬁnd AE:AB,
for which Archimedes ﬁnds the following:
AE:AB < 3,013 3
4 : 780:
Which provides us with a close boundary on the chord of the arc of the
dodecagon, or what we call the thirty-degrees arc or ﬁfteen-degrees angle.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

If you will, the aforementioned value provides an answer to the question,
“What is the cosine – hypotenuse divided by opposite side – of ﬁfteen
degrees?” However, in the Greek conception, the triangle is incidental, and
the question concerns arcs and chords.
Now that we have the values for the triangle associated with the
dodecagon, we may go on by applying the same operation to ﬁnd the
values for the triangle associated with the -gon, which Archimedes
iterates, for both circumscribing and inscribed polygons, and then iterates
again, and again, until he reaches the -gon. His goal in the Measurement
of the Circle is this very elegant boundary on π:
3 1
7 > π > 3 10
71 :
But we have also learned, along the way, to measure a certain set of chords.
There are some indications that Hipparchus may have produced such
trigonometric tables for continuous bisections of what we think of as
degrees up to .degrees, or perhaps even smaller bisections.
It was suggested in the past that perhaps this was all Hipparchus did.
I personally suspect that he should have displayed some one-upmanship,
going beyond Archimedes. It remains signiﬁcant that the starting point for
this exercise (as for so many others!) is Archimedean and, speciﬁcally,
dependent on the quest for measuring curvilinear objects. To repeat, what
we now identify as ancient trigonometry never loses its connection to the
circle: it never becomes a ﬁeld pursued for its own sake and is always
studied (aside from the Measurement of the Circle itself ) with astronomical
applications in mind. However, because a measurement of an arc can
always be construed as a measurement of an acute angle in a right-angled
triangle (whose hypotenuse is the diameter), every astronomical calculation
of this type can become a trigonometric calculation in our own, modern
sense (as noted earlier for “cosine ”). Indeed, the ratio of the circumfer-
ence of the circle to its diameter is simply a special case of the ratio of arcs
to chords. An alternative geometrical universe, where there is a single
formula with which a chord may be calculated – a general, straightforward
construction for the general chord, given the general arc – must also be a
universe furnishing a straightforward construction of the straight line equal
to a given circumference of the circle. There isn’t such a simple geometrical
construction. (Archimedes achieves such a construction in On Spirals, but
this is possible only because the construction of the spiral, itself, relies on
the circle: this is, literally, a circular construction!) This means that
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

trigonometry, too, cannot be done on the basis of any single formula and
must instead be pursued through a grab bag of tricks, among which
Archimedes’s iteration of bisections was the ﬁrst to be found.
What was inside Hipparchus’s own grab bag? We can’t really tell. Our
next source of evidence is Ptolemy, whose originality cannot be ascertained.
Indeed, as usual, Ptolemy is economical in his presentation, providing an
overview of, eﬀectively, not more than the tools he requires for his precise
astronomical needs (Almagest .). I ﬁnd it likely that Hipparchus’s
discussions were more broad and systematic. Ptolemy’s discussion can be
taken, in my view, as a kind of lower boundary on Hipparchus’s.
Ptolemy’s goal, to repeat, is to produce a table of chords with 1=2-degree
intervals. As Archimedes does in the Sand-Reckoner, Ptolemy starts from
measurements that can be found directly by basic considerations of plane
geometry (to the self-evident case of the hexagon, Ptolemy adds the
somewhat more complicated starting points of the pentagon and the
decagon; this is all material related to Elements, Book ). We thus have
the chord measurements for seventy-two, sixty, and thirty-six degrees. It’s
helpful to have multiple starting points because, from this point onward,
we will use a kind of combinatorics to derive further values.
The simplest tool for extending our measurements is that of supple-
mentary angles. If we have the chord of arc , for instance, known in
terms of parts of the diameter, we also have the chord of arc . This is
because we can draw a right-angled triangle, one of whose sides is the
chord on arc , another of whose sides is the chord on angle , its
hypotenuse being the diameter.
DIAMETER
72°
108°
Figure 
Again and again, we apply Pythagoras’s theorem (notice that we will
need to ﬁnd a square root of some number, which we will most likely need
to approximate; this process is based on upper and lower boundaries
throughout). Ptolemy adds to this another simple and clever device.
In Figure , AD is the diameter, and the chords AB, AG are given.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The claim is that we can then compute chord BG. This allows us to ﬁnd
the chord of a diﬀerence between chords, then. We achieve this based on
the following theorem:
E
D
Z
A
B
G
Figure 
The rectangle contained by AG, BD is equal to the sum of the rectangle
contained by AB, DG and the rectangle contained by BG, AD.
(I will not prove this theorem; it is a simple result based on considerations
of similar triangles, that become proportions, that become equalities
between rectangles – as we have seen so many times before in Greek
mathematics!)
Now, we have the value of the rectangle contained by AG, BD (AG is
given directly, and BD may be found as the supplement to AB). We have
the value of the rectangle contained by AB, DG (AB is given directly, and
DG may be found as the supplement to AG). We thus can ﬁnd the value
of the rectangle contained by BG, AD, of which AD is the diameter, that
is, given. We thus can ﬁnd BG.
To this, Ptolemy adds an analogous theorem, allowing him to
compute not only the diﬀerence but also the sum of solved arcs. So, to
recapitulate, we have at this point the tools with which, given the
chord measurements for arcs X, Y, we can ﬁnd the chord measurements
for the arcs
180  X,
X  Y,
X þ Y:
And also, based on Archimedes’s technique, we can ﬁnd the chord
measurements for the continued bisections of X, Y. The entire process is
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

bootstrapped by three geometrically given starting points – , , and .
The smallest value we can directly derive is – ¼ , and with
continued bisections, Ptolemy gets to 1=2 and 3=4.
Ptolemy’s desired increment is 1=2, which he plans to get as the diﬀerence
between 1=2 and . But he notes, at this point, that he cannot get the
measurement of the chord whose arc is degree. Starting from , , and
, there are no combinations of addition and subtraction of which any
continuous bisection yields ! Ptolemy does not prove this theorem of
impossibility, but obviously, this follows from the fact that the factor is
common to our three base angles, a factor that our tools – addition,
subtraction, and bisection – cannot remove (there are shades of the numerical
manipulation of music theory, in all of that). To measure the chord whose
arc is degree, then, we need a geometrical procedure for trisecting the angle.
Ptolemy, once again, merely asserts that this is impossible (did Hipparchus go
on a long excursus regarding this geometrical problem?) and uses, instead, a
clever roundabout that, as he explains, is useful only for very small arcs. (Note
throughout the attention to the detail of actual calculation, taking precedence
even over ideals of generality; this, above all, strikes me as Hipparchean, if not
in precise technique than in its overall spirit.)
Ptolemy proceeds by proving that, in general, given associated chords
and arcs in a circle, the ratio of the greater to the smaller arc is greater than
the ratio of the greater to the smaller chord:
arc AD : arc AC > chord AD : chord AC:
A
B
C
D
Figure 
In Figure , we may now take the arc AD to be that of 1=2 degrees;
AC, degree; and AB, 3=4 degree. Ptolemy has already computed the

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

length of the chords of the 3=4 degree – this is, in sexagesimal value, ;,
units (where the radius is units) – and of the 1=2 degrees – this is, in
sexagesimal value, ;,units. We therefore know that the chord of
degree is as follows (slightly modernizing):
More than 4=3 times 0; 47, 8 but less than 2=3 1; 34, 15:
At the level of precision of two sexagesimal points, this settles the value
as ;,.
And with this, Ptolemy can now derive his table: ﬁrst, ﬁnding the chord
for 1=2 degree based on the values for and 1=2; and then, applying this
value for 1=2 degree across the board, based on addition and subtraction
from the many starting points available already. Almost all of this vast
operation of calculation is black-boxed so that all that we see is a table
providing a value: an arc measurement and, next to it, its associated chord
measurement. Ptolemy’s table begins like this:
Arc
Chord
1=2
;,

;,
1=2
;,

;,
1=2
;,

;,
Even sitting down to copy these values (which I take from Toomer’s
translation of the Almagest) caused me a little headache. I only got down
to out of , and needless to say, I didn’t compute anything. Ancient
astronomers computed all the values, without the aid of the calculator . . .
Hipparchus, in all likelihood, the very ﬁrst to do so.
Note the overall structure. One begins by producing theorems, showing
how, given a certain value X, another value Z is given as well. Such proofs
are indeed common in Greek mathematics (Euclid’s Data is all about such
relations). Elsewhere in Greek geometry, those are “proofs of concept” whose
point is to show the fact of a functional relation, hence the logical possibility of
a calculation. We do not know what proofs of this kind Hipparchus actually
used. What we do know is that whatever proofs he used, he then had to use
them not just as showing the possibility of a calculation but, instead, as
practical tools, applied again and again – and again – until he had written
down a full set of chords. This, I think, is the type of attitude Ptolemy had in
mind when praising Hipparchus’s “industriousness.” There was real labor
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

involved in this astronomical craft. (More on the practical aspect of such tables
follows in our discussion of Ptolemy.)
The labor becomes even more forbidding once we begin to consider
spherical trigonometry. Once again, we need to piece our evidence together,
although in this case it all postdates Hipparchus. We have extant, but only
in Arabic (and likely, somewhat mediated) translation, Menelaus’s Spherics: a
work from late in the ﬁrst century . The work considers various ques-
tions in the geometry of spheres and, in particular, various arrangements
with spherical “triangles” (that is, ﬁgures on the surface of the sphere
bounded by three arcs). One result stands out: Spherics ., which allows
the calculation of the ratio between spherical chords. The same theorem is
proved in the Almagest, .. Most scholars today believe that both Menelaus
and Ptolemy relied on a common source, who then, most likely, was
Hipparchus; by scholarly habit, this result is still referred to as “Menelaus’s
theorem.”It is obviously useful to be able to calculate arcs on a sphere, based
on other given arcs. For instance, if we know that a planet starts at a certain
position on the ecliptic and then moves with a certain average speed for a
given time, we can tell which position the planet will be in on the ecliptic.
This, however, will not tell us directly, for instance, how far up it will be
relative to the horizon. We seek to transform one arc measurement to another.
The way this is done in practice is through proportions that hold between the
chords of such arcs, and this is provided by Menelaus’s theorem.
D
T
G
H
L
E
K
Z
B
A
Figure 
In the arrangement in Figure , GA, BA, BD, GZ are all arcs on the
surface of a sphere; it is required that AG, AB are less than a semicircle and
My account is informed by N. Sidoli, “The Sector Theorem Attributed to Menelaus,” SCIAMVS 
(): –.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that E is taken (anywhere) inside the spherical triangle GAB, obviously
determining the positions of D and Z. We also take H, the center of the
sphere, and draw all the straight lines (it is proved that the straight lines
actually produce the conﬁguration shown here, in itself not a trivial obser-
vation). We associate each arc not with its own chord but with the chord on
its double. In the Latin translation, this is referred to as the “nadir” of the
arc, and regardless of the actual etymology, this may serve to explicate the
signiﬁcance of the chord-on-double-arc. In Figure , I concentrate just on
the arc ADG, adding in the points M, N so that the arc DN is twice the arc
DG, and the arc AM is twice the arc AG. I label the intersections of the
chords DN, AM with the line HT as P, R, respectively.
A
D
T
G
P
R
H
N
M
Figure 
HG is a radius of the sphere, and so, because DG ¼ GN, AG ¼ GM,
we ﬁnd that it is orthogonal to lines DN, AM. From the point of view of
line HG, point N is “directly underneath” D, and point M is “directly
underneath” A – so that, at the very least, a modern reader can use “nadir”
as a mnemonic to clarify the meaning of this chord-on-double-arc.As
To be clear: this is likely not the actual etymology of the word. In general for the theorem and the
history of its transmission, see, once again, N. Sidoli, “The Sector Theorem Attributed to
Menelaus,” SCIAMVS (): –.
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

usual, the presence of parallel lines is suggestive, to the Greek reader, of
proportions, and we immediately notice that DN:AM::DP:AR::DT:AT.
The “nadirs” of DG, AG are to each other as the line segments DT:AT.
In what follows, I refer to the nadir of an arc as “nadir (arc),” and I use
the expression “comp.” to refer to the composition of ratios (which is what
we think of as the multiplication of fractions). Based on this, it takes only a
moderate manipulation of proportion to get to Menelaus’s theorem
(Figure ):
nadir AZ
ð
Þ:nadir BZ
ð
Þ:: nadir AG
ð
Þ:nadir GD
ð
Þ
ð
Þcomp: nadir DE
ð
Þ:nadir EB
ð
Þ
ð
Þ:
The proportion manipulation underlying this theorem is not too demand-
ing; what makes it diﬃcult is the three-dimensional intuition required. But
this pales in comparison with the real diﬃculty of this proposition, which
lies, once again, not in its proof but in its application. For every speciﬁc
problem in the calculation of a desired arc on a sphere, one would need to
ﬁnd the useful combination of arcs satisfying Menelaus’s theorem, and
then one would need to calculate in detail: in the given conﬁguration,
certain arcs are known, and so one can ﬁnd the ratios of their chords or
nadirs (this, itself, takes up a lot of trigonometry). One would then
discover, based on this given and the basic proportion calculations of
Menelaus’s theorem, the unknown nadir or chord which, working back-
ward with some more trigonometry, would provide the desired arc.
Did Hipparchus’s book study both plane and spherical trigonometry?
Did it work out all problems in detail? Well, maybe it did take twelve
books, after all! Not that we know: everything is pieced together from
much later sources, and for all we know, Hipparchus could well have
treated plane and spherical trigonometry in distinct places, developing
them in some works in a more theoretical vein and in others, developing
the theory into practical calculation and into well-developed tables. He was
a proliﬁc author, after all. Nothing is clear, with his trigonometry as with
everything else. But the label of “industriousness” seems spot-on.
“A Lover of Truth” and Hipparchus’s Character as a Scientist
Now, what about the “love of truth”? This, too, calls for some unpacking.
I am going out on a limb a little – but just a little – here when I suggest
that when Hipparchus is said to be a “lover of truth,” what is really meant
is that he was a “hater of falsehood.” We do not need to bring any new
evidence for this and instead just consider the bulk of the evidence
summoned so far. We noted his one extant work: it was a heated critique
of Aratus and, through him, of Eudoxus (another astronomer, Attalus,

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

who justiﬁed Aratus in his writings, ends up, so to speak, as collateral
damage). We noted Hipparchus’s geography: it seems to have been a series
of critiques of Eratosthenes. We noted Hipparchus’s combinatorics: it was all
prompted by a critique of Chrysippus. Throughout, we see the same pattern:
Hipparchus leverages his industriousness (his ability to bring together not only
mathematical understanding but also plenty of hard-won data and calculations)
so as to refute a statement – regardless of the degree of numerical precision by
which the statement was even intended by its author. Hipparchus, implicitly,
demands everyone to be Hipparchus, then savagely criticizes them for failing.
We recall (p. ) Ptolemy’s statement concerning the length of the
year (that is, eﬀectively, Hipparchus’s great discovery of the precession of
the equinoxes):
The ancients were in disagreement and confusion in their pronouncements
on the [length of the year], as can be seen from their treatises, especially
those of Hipparchus, who was both industrious and a lover of truth.
What I believe this means is that Ptolemy had at hand a book by
Hipparchus on this question, in which Hipparchus went, in detail,
through all past work on the length of the year (on this, more calendrical
subject, claims could be found from many past authorities), refuting
them all.
This, then, is an interpretation of what, I believe, might have been one
of Hipparchus’s major springs of intellectual action: the detailed, numer-
ical refutation. As I said, this goes out on a limb (so little is known about
this author) but not too far: the emerging picture, pugnacious and prolix,
is one that we can easily ﬁt a Greek author to.
But if so, I think this suggests a certain interpretation of the most
famous of Hipparchus’s silences. I gave a ﬂavor – no more – of
Hipparchus’s theory of the moon, and we know that he produced a theory
of the sun. It is unthinkable that an astronomer of his ambitions would not
have written on the planets, and given his future inﬂuence, any such
theories he might have had would surely have been cited. Ptolemy clariﬁes
that Hipparchus did not, in fact, produce a positive theory of the planets
(Almagest .):
Hipparchus, being a great lover of truth . . . did not even make a beginning
in establishing theories for the ﬁve planets . . . All that he did was to make a
compilation of the planetary observations arranged in a more useful way,
and to show by means of these that the phenomena were not in agreement
with the hypotheses of the astronomers of that time.
G. J. Toomer, Ptolemy’s Almagest (London: Duckworth, ), p. .
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

What I think is clear enough is that the point of Hipparchus’s exercise was
not to say, with the wistful recognition of one’s own limits, “That’s it,
folks: here are the facts concerning the planets, and unfortunately, even
I can’t produce a theory based on such data!” I am more inclined to believe
that Hipparchus’s main tenor was perhaps rather like, “Those are the past
theories regarding the planets, and thanks to the new data I have now
arranged, I can calculate in detail and refute them one by one, deﬁnitely
showing that all past astronomers were wrong.”
Once again: this is going out on a limb. It is, of course, conceivable that
Hipparchus’s main target was simply Eudoxus’s homocentric spheres (this,
indeed, would be in line with Hipparchus’s extant treatise criticizing
Aratus and, through him, Eudoxus’s mapping of the sky). But because
Hipparchus’s modeling techniques were so distinct from those of Eudoxus,
I ﬁnd it hard to see how a critique of Eudoxus could have been viewed as the
grounds for Hipparchus’s refraining from pursuing his own model. A more
likely account, then, is that Hipparchus criticized a previous model – or
several previous models – describing the motions of the planets with
epicycles or eccenters. It is indeed extremely diﬃcult to account for the
planets in such terms alone, as the history of astronomy would continue to
attest from Ptolemy to Copernicus and beyond. (Ptolemy’s own approach
adds more ad hoc mechanisms, as I shall brieﬂy return to note later in the
discussion.)
Lacking
Hipparchus’s
Babylonian
data
and
numerical
techniques and probably lacking even Hipparchus’s table of chords, it is
easy to imagine how previous eﬀorts by, say, Apollonius, could have been, to
say the least, empirically crude. Would such a failure even matter, all that
much, to an author such as Apollonius, who may well have been more
interested in the geometrical polish of the theoretical arguments? It is easy to
imagine Hipparchus pulverizing such eﬀorts to the extent that, later on, no
one took them with great seriousness. One would go on reproducing the
mechanisms, inspired by Archimedes’s invention, but they would be seen as
mere approximations, and it was only much later – possibly, only with
Ptolemy? – that new planetary theories would be on oﬀer. Indeed, why
bother? For practical purposes, all one needed was to calculate the positions
of the planets – which one could do, tolerably well, with Babylonian-style
calculations. (The practical purposes would become ever more practical in
the generations following Hipparchus, through the explosion of astrology, to
which we turn immediately – which, indeed, continued, for many centuries,
to rely on the Babylonian tools.)
A negative result, then, but with perhaps a small addition to our
evidence concerning the whodunit of the previous section. So much of

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hipparchus’s output was critical and therefore reactive. This is especially
likely for his remarks concerning planetary theory, and thus I conclude
that the generation of Archimedes probably did produce some astronom-
ical works, broadly anticipating the models of epicycles and eccenters that
came to deﬁne future astronomy.
We do not reduce anything from Hipparchus’s greatness by noting his
use of the past. Indeed, part of his greatness lies in his intuition of which past
was worth using, indeed, in some sense ﬁnding and even inventing it. Likely
enough, Hipparchus created the route through which Greek astronomy
learned how to use a Babylonian past. This was by far the most signiﬁcant
scientiﬁc synthesis of distinct cultural traditions, up to that point.
We have one more small piece of evidence that invites us to put
Hipparchus in the context of his past – and, indeed, of his future. The
evidence, as is so often the case with Hipparchus, is tenuous. All we have
are a few comments from – who else? – Simplicius (Commentary on
Aristotle’s De Caelo .–.):
Hipparchus . . . in his work entitled On Bodies Carried Down by Their
Weight declares that in the case of earth thrown upward it is the projecting
force that is the cause of the upward motion, so long as the projecting force
overpowers the downward tendency of the projectile, and that to the extent
that this projecting force predominates, the object moves more swiftly
upwards; then, as this force is diminished () the upward motion proceeds
but no longer at the same rate, () the body moves downward under the
inﬂuence of its own internal impulse, even though the original projecting
force lingers in some measure, and () as this force continues to diminish
the object moves downward more swiftly, and most swiftly when this force
is entirely lost. Now Hipparchus asserts that the same cause operates in the
case of bodies let fall from above. For, he says, the force which held them
back remains with them up to a certain point which accounts for the slower
movement at the start of the fall.
This is a tantalizing passage, and it is infuriating that we hear no more of it
(and indeed, see nothing even like it prior to yet another commentator
to Aristotle – Philoponus, active even later than Simplicius in the sixth
century ! Philoponus develops a distinct theory of how the mover
provides the moved body with an “impetus,” which is then gradually lost
through the moved body’s motion, a theory that will come into its own
throughout the Middle Ages). But the lack of evidence is in itself signif-
icant. This was just not a typical area for Greek writing. Philosophers
For Philoponus as a creative natural philosopher, see R. Sorabji, et al. (eds.), Philoponus and the
Rejection of Aristotelian Science (London: Duckbacks, ).
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sometimes worried about the problem of motion; mathematicians, rarely,
made their geometrical claims signiﬁcant in physical terms. What we do not
see anywhere is any attempt to produce a fully ﬂedged mathematical model
of motion. Aristotle, indeed, comes closest, in that he discusses some of the
basic equivalences of motion (“faster” means the same distance traversed in
lesser time, etc.). He speciﬁcally believed that objects have a natural ten-
dency to move in certain directions – hence, earth falls, ﬁre rises, and so
forth. (Notoriously, it seems as if Aristotle concluded that the heavier the
body is, the faster it will fall.) All of this in Aristotle is not mathematics. I say
this because modern scholarship (to the extent that it engages with
Hipparchus’s On Bodies Carried Down by Their Weight at all) tends to read
Hipparchus speciﬁcally within an Aristotelian context. The attraction of
such a reading is clear: our evidence is from a commentary to Aristotle, and
other writings on the topic, from Philoponus through the Middle Ages and
all the way down to Galileo, are primarily responses to Aristotle. But this
much is clear: in the second century itself, Aristotle was marginal even
within philosophy, let alone to a scientist such as Hipparchus. It is quite
likely that Hipparchus never even read Aristotle’s Physics.
What is suggestive, however, in Hipparchus’s treatment – mediated and
fragmentary as it is – is the process of treating, ﬁrst, the conﬁguration
where two forces are acting against each other and then, from this basis,
drawing consequences for the conﬁguration where only one force is active.
This is reminiscent, speciﬁcally, of Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies.
There, one considers a ﬂoating solid, lighter than the liquid, as if it were
composed of two components: one, immersed in the liquid, pushed up;
the other, outside the liquid, pushing down. From the equality between
the two forces, one can deduce, then, the power with which a solid,
immersed in a liquid, is pushed up by it. It seems to me at least possible
that Hipparchus follows a similar train of thought: identifying the motion
of a projectile, pushed up, as the composite of two motions, its projectile
force and its downward-heading force. From this, Hipparchus moved on
to results concerning the nonprojectile, falling motion, where the
downward-heading force acts alone. (As we recall from Pappus and
Hero’s treatment of a body falling on an inclined plane [pp. –],
there is precedent for trying – unsuccessfully – to extend Archimedes’s
approach to other physical problems.)
Simplicius states nothing on the detail of Hipparchus’s argument. He
probably knew it only through intermediate sources, likely philosophical
in character. He probably knew nothing, then, of Hipparchus’s original
mathematics in this treatise. But given everything else we know of
Hipparchus, I do not believe that this treatise was strictly philosophical,

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

merely engaged with the metaphysical analysis of the forces acting on
moving bodies. Further, I ﬁnd it incredible – given everything else we
know about him – that Hipparchus would not produce lots of calculations
in support of his statements.
But if so, we come close to imagining a very Galilean Hipparchus. Let me
indulge myself, as in my mind’s eye Hipparchus climbs up the steps of the
remains of Rhodes’s Colossus – ready to drop his balls and measure the time
in fall ... This, of course, is sheer romance, and I understand why past
scholars have resisted engaging in such speculation. After all, had Hipparchus
anticipated Galileo, how come we had to wait so many years for the real
Galileo? How come we hear so little of this decisive breakthrough?
There are two complementary ways to approach this. First, everything
we know of Hipparchus depended on the destinies and choices of other
authors. He attached himself to the fame of Aratus by writing a critique of
that massively popular poem, thus securing his only extant treatise. Strabo
chose to cite Hipparchus extensively in his own, extant, great geographical
compilation; Ptolemy chose to cite Hipparchus extensively in his own,
extant, great astronomical compilation. Plutarch hated Chrysippus with
such relish that he was glad to cite any attacks upon him. It is via such
sources that Hipparchus’s light is reﬂected to us. He was an extremely
proliﬁc author (it appears that among his treatises is a catalogue of his own
works – surely the mark of a truly active author!). There was a lot to get
reﬂected, and so, even from such bits and pieces, a picture does emerge.
But you need later authors, engaged with their own enterprises, for such
reﬂections to emerge. There simply was not any more expansion of the
Archimedean project of the equivalence of geometry and physics – largely
because there was very little by way of advanced, pure geometry at all.
Hipparchus himself may be seen as a belated, critical echo of the second
generation of Greek mathematics. As we will see, he is followed by a cliﬀ.
Mathematics nearly disappears and is then reconstituted quite diﬀerently.
The Archimedean moment does not give rise to an Archimedean era.
And here is the second point: Hipparchus, after all, does come after
Archimedes. In which case, there is nothing very counterintuitive about
the idea that he should anticipate Galileo. As mentioned already in the
introduction, and as I will return to discuss in a little more detail in
Chapter , Galileo’s starting point was, quite simply, Archimedes, and
he did not use, in fact, any signiﬁcant mathematical techniques not
available already in the late third century .
Taruskin, a music historian, quotes his colleague, musicologist Joseph
Kerman, as fond of saying, “We live in the valley of the Ninth Symphony.”
What I point out is that for almost two thousand years, beginning already
II. Conjunction: Greece, Babylon, and Hipparchus

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

with Apollonius and going all the way up to Galileo and beyond, math-
ematicians had lived in the valley of Archimedes. Archimedes had in some
cases perfected, in other cases created, the tools that would make possible
the achievements of a more modern science. We will take a quick look at
this in Chapter : how Islamic science almost got there; how long it took
the European Renaissance to lift oﬀ. The story is one of centuries of false
starts. Of the many not-quite-scientiﬁc revolutions, Hipparchus’s was
the ﬁrst.
III.
Culmination: Ptolemy
Before Ptolemy: Signs and Tables
This may be the story not of one but of two multicultural empires. Iran, a
land of deserts, mountains, and plateaus, was marginal to the ancient Near
East until, in the sixth century, it was united by the Persians. In the year
, King Cyrus conquered Babylon itself. For the next two centuries, all
of the landmass between India and Greece was ruled from an Iranian
center.It was an empire with a light touch, gaining its legitimacy
through many acts of local delegation. Everywhere, life went on as before.
The Jews were allowed back into their holy city; the Chaldeans, too, were
allowed to keep on doing, in their temples, whatever it was they had been
doing since time immemorial.
What they were doing was looking for signs. So, for instance, for many
centuries, the priests were responsible – in Babylon as everywhere else – for
animal sacriﬁce. One killed the animal, cut it open – and looked inside. It
was a fraught religious event, rich with signiﬁcance. There were texts to
teach the priests how to read those moments:
If there are holes in the “head of the ﬁnger” [a technical identiﬁcation of a
part of the liver] – the destruction of the land will take place.
Our clay tablets record many statements of the form “if <an observation is
made> [then] <a prediction follows>.” The observations range widely
across many ﬁelds of human experience. The slaughtered animal body is
indeed an important site – but perhaps none was as important as the stars.
A comprehensive history of this remarkable state is P. Briant, From Cyrus to Alexander: A History of
the Persian Empire (State College, : Eisenbrauns, /).
I quote from the cuneiform tablet K. + K. from the British Museum, Omens and ,
via I. Starr, “Omen Texts Concerning Holes in the Liver,” Archiv Fu¨r Orientforschung ():
–.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

These were two places where many ancient people felt that they met the
divine. Indeed, why not both? Quoting from the very same tablet:
If there are holes in the “head of the ﬁnger,” on top of the “ﬁnger” – there
will be eclipse (predicting) a mourning in the country.
A prediction of a prediction! The world was a web of signs, pointing to
each other and ultimately shining light, above all, on the big questions of
the state: the rivers, the kings, the outcome of war. These were not mere
empirical observations. As Rochberg shows, the signs were written by gods,
and apparently, so were the collections of signs themselves: the books of
the form “if X, then Y” were taken to have, themselves, divine authorship.
How could one ignore that?
It should be clear that the star lore accumulated by the Mesopotamians
was motivated entirely by such encounters with the divine. The Mul.Apin,
recording events in the sky (together with indications of synodic periods),
was there for the sake of the Enuma Anu Enlil, the series of astronomical
omens. In the late kingdoms of Mesopotamia, in particular, observations
in the form of detailed diaries were preserved throughout many genera-
tions. Toward the end of this period, as noted earlier, master diviners
outdid each other by their skill in predicting eclipses. But this is as far as
Babylonian astronomy went, before Cyrus.
Now, with the Persians arriving, with the old kings of Mesopotamia gone –
what would happen to this old tradition? Well, remarkably, it went on.
Persepolis, however, was distant, and the astronomers found themselves, so to
speak, for the ﬁrst time, on their own. The interesting thing is that it was
then, precisely, that prediction took oﬀ. As we recall, schemes were now
developed to predict not only eclipses but also the major planetary events. At
the same time, the entire point of divination became reoriented, from the
court to something like daily life. The major new invention was that of the
horoscope, an astrological tool designed to tell the fortune not of the state but
of an individual. The two developments are independent: the speciﬁc pre-
dictive techniques developed were focused on what was still conceptually and
religiously primary – the qualitative events of the sky. They were not that
good at deriving continuous predictions that allow the calculation of posi-
tions at given points of time, but this is precisely what is required for the
casting of a horoscope (where one needs to calculate positions for a day
deﬁned through an extra-astronomical consideration: a person’s birthday).
To anticipate: one advantage of Greek geometrical techniques was precisely
that they led more naturally to continuous predictions and so were, in
principle, better suited to astrology!
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The astronomers of Babylon deﬁnitely came down in the world. Your
ancestors had the ear of the kings: no longer. On the positive side,
however, when you tell the fortunes of mere individuals, your potential
customers suddenly become the whole human race. Why stick around in
Babylon? It is clear that many did not. Perhaps our earliest unequivocal
evidence is an inscription from Thessaly – Greece itself! – from the second
century , commemorating Antipatros, born in Syria (so, already away
from Babylon), a “Chaldean Astrologer.”This is already contemporary
with Hipparchus. There is yet another set of archeological evidence that
is considerably later but is truly abundant: the Egyptian papyri of the
Roman era. Hundreds of fragments – in both Greek as well as Demotic
Egyptian – record the very same kind of astronomical and astrological
calculations found in Babylonian clay tablets. (The most signiﬁcant group
of such texts has been edited by Alexander Jones.)
The date of the papyri edited by Jones is not dispositive – most papyri,
anyway, are from the Roman era, and so there is nothing surprising or
meaningful about the fact that the same is true for the astrological papyri.
But it seems as if this other multicultural empire – Rome – did transform
the fortunes of astrology. For this, we need to turn to our literary evidence.
Antipatros the Chaldean was active in Thessaly in the middle of the second
century . He surely had his clients, and his type of craft was certainly
known to at least some Greeks. But it just did not register very much. In
fact, we are hard-pressed to ﬁnd even a single Greek author showing any
awareness of astrology prior to the ﬁrst century . Polybius keeps
emphasizing the technical skills required for leadership and keeps heaping
scorn on charlatans. One way or another – as a fan or as a detractor – we
would have expected him to refer to astrology if it had been a signiﬁcant
cultural presence. He never does. The same is true of Hipparchus: had he
believed in astrology, he surely would have made a contribution to it; had
he denied it, he could write splendidly scathing critiques – either way, he
would be likely to be quoted by his astrology-crazed posterity. It seems like
he didn’t care either way. (And this, while he clearly had a superior grasp of
Babylonian star lore, as a strictly astronomical technique!) And then – in
the ﬁrst century , our evidence explodes. Cicero keeps discussing
astrology as a key example of divination; our historical sources describe
how Roman leaders from Sulla onward rely on astrological predictions
The evidence is just the inscription, SEG :, discussed in detail only in Italian: I. Savalli, “Un
‘Astronomo Caldeo’nella Tessaglia tardo-ellenistica,” Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa.
Classe di Lettere e Filosoﬁa (): –.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(beware the Ides of March!). Sulla was active early in the ﬁrst century ;
we hear nothing similar of earlier Roman leaders or even, more remark-
ably, of Hellenistic kings. The transformation is decisive, quick, and
Roman. (Curiously, the Babylonian tradition of astrology ceases at the
same time. Clay tablets with astronomical contents become rare through-
out the ﬁrst century and extinct in the ﬁrst century . Did they all
decamp to the Roman empire?)
It is not that the Romans were congenitally more superstitious or less
critical. Rather, astrology ﬁtted well the wider cultural project pursued by
Roman patrons throughout the ﬁrst century . From Polybius onward
but especially from the ﬁrst century and later, Greeks served Roman
patrons with useful combinations of Greek knowledge. It was the age of
eclecticism and synthesis. And so, what’s better than this combination of
Greek and even more exotic knowledge? Which – in contrast to much else
that Greeks had on oﬀer – was also so obviously practical?
Greek and more exotic knowledge – combined. Let us pause to consider
this moment of astrological encounter. Just what was it that a Chaldean-
style astrologer knew? What was involved in the Hellenization of this
knowledge?
This should be made clear: most practicing astrologers were not,
remotely, engaged in scientiﬁc research, however capaciously we may
deﬁne the term. Already in Mesopotamia itself – already in the evidence
of the clay tablets – we cease to ﬁnd any innovation soon after the
emergence of the new predictive systems. It is unclear whether any
Babylonian astrologer, from about onward, ever paused to
consider why he used the tools he did; they had no occasion to. It was a
craft, to be mastered. Admittedly, a diﬃcult technique. One did not have
access to a single source that detailed the position of any heavenly body at
any given point in time. Instead, positions had to be computed. To get this
all started, one needed to acquire tables with the numerical coeﬃcients
determining the predictions – and to learn the technique of working with
such tables. Only then could one produce yet another set of tables –
almanacs detailing the major synodic events across a certain period of
years. (The calculations are laborious and iterative; as we will return to
see with Ptolemy, one uses tables as tools for the making other tables.)
With these at hand, one would further extrapolate the positions of the stars
at a given time. There is a great deal of technical knowledge and compu-
tation even after the bare positions are established. The position of a
planet, for instance, is to be given in terms of 1=12th of a sign – each
sign, so to speak, divided into its own twelve signs: the logic of divination
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

is always to maximize meaning by adding on yet more layers of what is
considered signiﬁcant. One also adds meaning by considering the relations
between signs: How many signs are the planets apart? One adds up all this
information and ﬁnally gets to the actual work of interpretation, where
suddenly, computation halts. This is now the realm of art. Whether from
training or from explicit handbooks, one knows a large number of “if, then
. . .” statements, which, however, by their sheer accumulation, rule out
algorithms: the signiﬁcance of the signs is contradictory and variable, and
so one, at the end, has to choose and reﬁne one’s own narrative.
The practicing astrologer, then, is a master calculator and a narrative
artist but not a theoretical scholar. Indeed, he need not even observe the
stars. His ancestors in Mesopotamia scoured the sky for portents because
their work was understood on the grand scale of court and cosmos so that
events, on the spot, carried immediate meaning (the same, of course, was
true in China, in the Maya, and in many other civilizations). Individual
destinies, however, were understood to be made at birth and so were
calculated and not observed. Neither a theoretical astronomer nor an
observer, the practicing astrologer was most like the practicing doctor,
carrying a set of books with the old lore and producing recipes – or
horoscopes – out of such old knowledge. The two professions would
continue to be plied, side by side, for centuries to come (in the Islamic
world, in particular, often by the same person; already the Romans, late in
the ﬁrst century , went through a quick fad of astrologically based
medicine). These were, so to speak, the two main scientiﬁc service indus-
tries of the premodern world.
If we look for applied mathematics, we ﬁnd it, ﬁnally, here, with the
symbolic service provided by astrologers. “Symbolic,” quite literally: they
took signs and applied a specialized technique so as to make those signs
“speak” so as to provide narrative meaning to individual life.
It is remarkable, then, that the chief applied mathematics of antiquity
was not a Greek mathematics. The numerical techniques were, in origin,
Babylonian. But this must be qualiﬁed. Babylonian astrology did become
partly Greek. It happened almost by necessity. It was a traveling astrology;
and astrology, in fact, has a hard time traveling unless it adapts. This is true
for a technical, astronomical reason. We have seen Hipparchus’s use of
Babylonian eclipse observations. He had the utmost faith in the accuracy
of the observations themselves (which, indeed, is remarkable from such a
critical author). But he did not take them as is. He ﬁrst transformed the
recorded time and transformed it into a time measured on an absolute scale
and then transformed this, in turn, to the time that would have been

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

observed from Rhodes. The ﬁrst thing one needs to do with astronomical
data is to calibrate them for time and place, which was never required at a
given Mesopotamian temple. Not so if your astrology is to be practiced
across the Mediterranean.
We are coming close to the Kuhnian notion of “paradigm,” with its
attendant questions of the “reality” studied by science. Is reality truly the
same across scientiﬁc paradigms? The Babylonians look at the sky and see
there the sun, the moon, and the planets, producing key events such as
eclipses or ﬁrst risings. The Greeks look at the same sky and see there a
rotating sphere. For the Babylonians, the zodiac is simply the baseline
within which events are recorded. For the Greeks, the zodiac is an
astronomical agent, its rotation and the angles measured upon it producing
the passage of the year. And so, Greeks do not merely introduce new
techniques to recalibrate astronomical events based on latitudes and lon-
gitudes. The zodiac itself is turned into an astrological sign. Speciﬁcally, at
the moment of birth, one notes not only the position of the sun, moon,
and planets but also the position at which the ecliptic rises above the
horizon – the “ascendant.”
The craft of the astrologer, then, is composite in at least two senses.
First, it combines a craft of computation (for the ﬁnding of signiﬁcant
astronomical positions, provided for given times and places) with the
hermeneutic art of turning astronomical positions into astrological pre-
dictions. Second, in the computation of the positions, it combines
Babylonian arithmetic techniques, with Greek geometrical ones. All of
this is reﬂected in a rich and varied extant literary tradition. We have the
Greek didactic poetry of Anubion (from the ﬁrst century , extant in
substantial papyrus fragments), the Latin didactic poetry of Manilius (from
the early ﬁrst century ), the Greek prose of Vettius Valens (second
century ), the Latin prose of Firmicus Maternus (fourth century).
Altogether, about a dozen ancient astrological authors are now extant.
Not bad, for what might strike one, at ﬁrst blush, as an esoteric ﬁeld!
Indeed, we would have expected the computations (which are, after all, a
matter of objective fact) to be widely shared while the hermeneutic art
(which is a matter of quasi-religious, exotic doctrine) was kept from wide
audiences and merely transmitted from master to pupil. We ﬁnd nearly the
opposite: most treatises merely glance at the technical details of astronom-
ical computations and instead engage almost entirely with the art of
interpretation. (Vettius Valens gives more such details than most others,
but this is because his text is enormous – in nine books – and even he
concentrates on the hermeneutic aspect.) What we know of techniques of
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

astronomical computation in the ancient world is known to us, most often,
indirectly – pieced together from the documentary evidence of the papyri
and from other, later sources, requiring painstaking deduction by modern
scholars. (Perhaps the most remarkable element in this modern jigsaw
puzzle is the argument – pursued, above all, by David Pingree – that we
must
trace
back,
to
independent
developments
in
the
Greek
Mediterranean, certain techniques of medieval Indian astronomy.) Likely
enough, such treatises were written with the interests of the wider audience
in mind. The audience did not want to know how to ﬁnd the position of
Jupiter. They wanted to know how long they would live and if they would
be successful in love. In short, this astrological literature hardly belongs to
the history of mathematics. It is a cliché of modern scholarship that until
modern times, the line between “astronomy” and “astrology” was blurred
(indeed, the words themselves – both, obviously, are Greek – were
interchangeable). But the truth is that we ﬁnd very few authors in
antiquity who were noted both as practicing astrologers and mathematical
astronomers in the tradition of Eudoxus or Hipparchus.
Let us pursue this brieﬂy – so as to understand better the nature of the
(qualiﬁed) yet major exception in the ﬁgure of Ptolemy.
Throughout the ﬁrst century , we simply do not ﬁnd authors whose
main identity was that of mathematical astronomers for the simple reason
that throughout this century, we ﬁnd no mathematical authors at all. This
is curious in an era of eclecticism and synthesis. Was not everything mixed
with everything? Indeed so: in Rhodes, some philosophers are even posi-
tively interested in mathematics. We noted Posidonius in the preceding
chapter. One of his followers, Geminus, wrote even more on mathematical
subjects, including an astronomical handbook that is still extant. This
work is important for historians of astronomy because so little else is
extant. But in all likelihood, Geminus was a Stoic philosopher who merely
dabbled in mathematics. The new spirit of eclecticism of this Roman era
meant that Greek mathematics could be added together with other
endeavors – whether philosophy or Babylonian astrology – but it was
precisely that, an addition, the side dish to other, more central projects.
Later in the ﬁrst century , Vitruvius wrote on architecture – and also
brought in some mathematics. Even later, in the ﬁrst century , our
evidence for activity in the exact sciences often comes from philosophers,
engaging with mathematics.
Once again from Rhodes, once again early in the ﬁrst century , we
have the rare ﬁnd of an inscription. It is known as the Keskintos
inscription, after the modern name of the locality where it was found.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This is an astronomical inscription (like the Antikythera mechanism itself,
then, we have yet another example of astronomers exhibiting their work in
public). It lists the synodic periods of the planets, culminating with a very
long, overarching cycle at the end of which all cycles return again: Was the
purpose of this cosmological, no less than astronomical? We do not know:
the remarkable inscription – like so much else of the astronomy of the time
– remains isolated.Geminus’s astronomical handbook is followed, per-
haps two centuries later, by another astronomical handbook by
Cleomedes; from the ﬁrst century we have extant a work by one
Theon of Smyrna, titled On the Mathematics Useful for Understanding
Plato. Even Nicomachus, an important mathematical author of the ﬁrst
century , appears to have a more philosophical set of interests (we shall
revisit him, and the rise of a new mathematical philosophy, in the follow-
ing chapter). These are all extant authors, but it is not as if we have a
plethora of merely attested authors whose works were somehow lost; on
the contrary, even though the amount of literature extant from the Roman
era is signiﬁcant (and certainly much bigger than that for the third and
second centuries ), it mentions mathematicians only very rarely. We
noted that the audience for astrology was interested more in its predictions
for life and love than in its computational underpinnings. And similarly,
the new audience for eclectic works, combining science and philosophy,
was interested in philosophy more than in science.
It is remarkable that Ptolemy cites astronomical observations that can be
dated to , probably made by Menelaus. As mentioned on pages
–, the Spherics of the same author is extant in Arabic. A work on
chords (certainly including a table of chords, as well) is also attested, and so
the impression is of a Hipparchus-like ﬁgure, ﬁnally: an author who made
contributions to astronomical theory – and also to the advanced mathe-
matics one requires to underpin it. But this already brings us very close to
the second century and to the time of Ptolemy himself. It is certainly
not the case that theoretical astronomy went from Hipparchus to, say,
Menelaus, simply untouched. We have lost so much that our view must be
distorted. But the overall impression is clear: not only astronomy but the
exact sciences as a whole went, at the very least, into decline. For gener-
ations, the most widely practiced form of mathematics was simply that of
astrology. Little wonder that the Latin word mathematicus, at this point,
comes to mean “astrologer.”
See A. Jones, “The Astronomical Inscription from Keskintos, Rhodes,” Mediterranean Archaeology
and Archaeometry, Special Issue (): –.
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

However much they could be described as mere “craftsmen,” the craft of
the astrologers did carry a new meaning – and only now, following its
(fairly recent) transformation into a horoscopic science, based on the
position of the planets at given moments in time. Throughout history,
across civilizations, people looked to the sky and cared, most, about the
key qualitative events: the year, the moon, the vanishings and reappear-
ances of stars. I noted, in connection with the loss of interest in Eudoxus’s
homocentric spheres, that, among other things, his research question
(What is the trajectory of the planets?) just was not all that urgent. The
stars were at the center of cultural attention, of course, but not for this.
That is – not as long as star lore was deﬁned by the Hesiod-like measures
of the passage of the year. But now, following the triumph of horoscopic
astrology, the position of the planets became absolutely crucial. The
Babylonians, in the last ﬂourish of their divinatory science, had changed
the very meaning of the sky. And it was in this, above all, that all future
astronomy would be inspired by Babylon.
Indeed,
even
more
technically.
Babylonian
astronomy
became
Hellenized, but at the same time, Greek astronomy became Babylonized.
This is apparent in the use of sexagesimals and, more generally, in the
practice of sustained computations. But there is more than this: the Greeks
did not merely inherit the Babylonian practice of calculating with sexages-
imals; they inherited, with it, the method of computation reliant upon,
and productive of, tables.
The use of tables was perhaps less remarkable on the Babylonian clay
tablet. It was, after all, a tablet! The written surface of Babylonian writing
was (typically) a unique, handheld store of information related to a
particular task (a handy-tablet, so to speak). The simplest arrangement
(found in most tablets) was to divide the surface of the tablet into
irregularly shaped “cells,” each of which included its own distinct infor-
mation. (Many tablets look as if you had to take notes and had only one
sheet of paper so that you ended up utilizing each piece of its surface,
ﬁnding creative ways to ﬁt in more and more notes.) Early in the second
millennium , some tablets began to be arranged in table form, the cells
arranged vertically and horizontally and each row and column having its
speciﬁed meaning. Almost all Babylonian tablets are accounts, and many,
beginning with the second millennium , take the form of a spread-
sheet. These administrative tables become less common in later
Mesopotamian history, during the ﬁrst millennium , but as Eleanor
Robson explains, this is an eﬀect of language. The old kingdoms used, for
their records, Akkadian-sprinkled-with-Sumerian (Sumerian was a dead

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

language, but the scribes prided themselves on their mastery of this esoteric
culture). The new kingdoms used Aramaic. Now, the cuneiform script of
Akkadian-sprinkled-with-Sumerian goes very well with the table form
because Sumerian is written in logograms (single signs standing for entire
words). This correspondence of visual and verbal symbolism naturally
suggests how the layout of information on the page can represent, visually,
the structure of the information. Hence, the habit of the table went out of
fashion in the late period of Mesopotamian administration. The temple
scribal practices, however, went on as before, and the Akkadian-sprinkled-
with-Sumerian, less central to the aﬀairs of the state, remained the vehicle
for the practices of the priests. Now, there are certain cognitive tasks for
which tables are good – such as the compilation of numerical information
and its use for reference purposes. And so, Babylonians had the means to
produce an eﬀective computational astronomy. The evidence for
Babylonian astronomy is, in fact, entirely tabular. To be a Babylonian
astronomer was to be the maker and user of astronomical tables, and so as
the Chaldeans began to move elsewhere, they took their tabular practices
with them.
Aramaic was not naturally put into table form, much less Greek. We
have noted earlier how Greek writing was produced in a literary culture
organized around performance. What mattered most was poetry, drama,
oratory. You read a text – and imagined it performed. It would have been
completely wrong to use the spatial layout of the papyrus to convey
information because the only information you were interested in was
speech itself. Thus, ordinary writing in Greek was entirely linear and
unadorned, like that shown in Figure .
As the Chaldeans bring their tables to Greek papyrus, they create
something unprecedented. Alexander Jones produced his edition of astro-
nomical papyri by going through the trove of unedited papyri from
Oxyrhynchus. In many cases, all he had to do was to look for those with
tables on them. Nobody, other than the astrologers, possessed such papyrus
(Figure ).
As modern scholars, we are never quite sure what to make of ancient
astrology. It is important to point out that it was nothing like the quack
nonsense we read in today’s tabloids, and so we sometimes go overboard,
stating that ancient astrology was actually a real science, that it actually was
of a piece with ancient astronomy. Neither is quite precise. It was a
(diﬃcult, honest) craft, one that involved a great deal of numeracy. But
it was socially and intellectually distinct from the practice of theoretical
astronomy, and beyond the original impetus provided by its Babylonian
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Figure 
Papyrus from Hyperides’s Pro Lycophrone. Egyptian (ﬁrst–second century). © British Library Board. All Rights Reserved/
Bridgeman Images.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Figure 
Fragment from P. Oxy. ..
Courtesy of the Egypt Exploration Society and the University of Oxford Imaging Papyri Project.
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origins, it did not make a direct contribution to the science. Perhaps what
mattered most, however, was not the content of astrology but its form.
Through astrology, the Babylonians contributed, to Greek science, the
tabular arrangement of quantitative information; this would blossom with
print but is very signiﬁcant, already, in Ptolemy.
Ptolemy: Toward the Canon
Ptolemy followed Hipparchus in many ways – among other things, in his
practice of producing and recording his own astronomical observations. In
this case, a very large corpus is still extant. The recorded observations range
from to . He also set up at least one astronomical inscription
(almost a professional requirement for astronomers, it seems), which is lost
but was suﬃciently well known to have been transcribed and preserved in
ancient manuscripts. The inscription carried a date (/).
Ptolemy’s extant works revised some of the claims of that inscription.
We ﬁnd that Ptolemy’s extant work must date mostly from the middle of
the second century and later.
The comparison to Hipparchus suggests itself. Not only is the older
astronomer continuously referred to – it is, indeed, mostly through
Ptolemy
that
we
know
about
Hipparchus
–
but
the
contours
of Ptolemy’s project partly reﬂect those of Hipparchus. In a nutshell:
“astronomy – but much more.” We have extant from Ptolemy an entire
series of astronomical works, at the center of which is a huge and highly
ambitious composition, the Almagest. But we also have, for many other
ﬁelds of the exact sciences, one contribution by Ptolemy (indeed, exactly a
single one – was this intentional or is this an accident of our survival?).
His Geography is extant in Greek, and so is the Harmonics. His Optics is
extant – as noted on page – only in Latin translation made through
the Arabic, with the beginning and end now lost. To be clear: we do not
know that Hipparchus wrote on optics, and it is very likely that he did not
write on music. Is the project, then, one of “Hipparchus-plus”? At any rate,
it should be noted that optics relates in a direct way to astronomy. (This is
not merely my own, outsider observation; Pappus, for instance, included his
own survey of optics as a part of his survey of his astronomy.) Geography as
a science is largely an extension of astronomy; the explicit goal of Ptolemy’s
Harmonics is the ﬁnding of parallelism between musical notes and the stars
(this was already a key theme of the inscription Ptolemy set up in /).
So is the project “astronomy – and everything upon which it touches”? It
comes as no surprise, then, that Ptolemy also wrote, as noted, a book on

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

astrology, known as the Tetrabiblos, discussing mostly – as was typical in the
genre – the hermeneutics of astrological signs. As noted previously, this
treatise seems to be a compilation by a sympathetic outsider rather than the
work of a practicing astrologer.
Two more works in the exact sciences are merely attested. We recall
Simplicius providing us a tantalizing glimpse of Hipparchus with the
treatise On Bodies Carried Down by Their Weight. Simplicius notes all this
in his commentary to Aristotle’s On the Heavens. It is from here that we
also learn of a work by Ptolemy titled On Balancing Forces or the Elements
(this must mean, in context, the elements of matter such as earth and ﬁre,
not “elements” in Euclid’s sense). The argument in that work was explic-
itly anti-Aristotelian (for once, the reference by our sources to Aristotle is
probably from Ptolemy’s original: by Ptolemy’s time, Aristotle was already
once again a major ﬁgure). Bodies move linearly when they are away from
their natural place (so, earth down, ﬁre up). In their natural place,
however, they may stand still – or rotate. The point of interest to us is,
once again, the direct analogy with Hipparchus, down to the very theo-
retical claims – Ptolemy explicitly stated, in fact, that bodies in their
natural position have zero weight (the pull up and down exactly balances,
then). Further, for Hipparchus, we have the record of the strange combi-
natoric work against Chrysippus, counting the number of combinations
made from the propositions. This is continuous with Hipparchus’s insis-
tence on precise calculations (and his penchant for polemic) but is also one
piece of evidence for some contributions to “pure” mathematics. We do
not have the same for Ptolemy, which is probably signiﬁcant: Had he
written on, say, the conics, surely Pappus, writing not that much later,
would have known and at least referred to such works? Proclus, however,
cites an attempt by Ptolemy to prove Euclid’s parallels’ postulate, and this
suggests that he authored some kind of study of the Elements. The simplest
hypothesis, in my view, is that he wrote a treatise introducing students to
the serious study of Euclid’s Elements: – much like Khayyam, nearly a
millennium later, as we will see in Chapter . The study of the nature of
matter in motion – ultimately explaining why the stars rotate – as well as
the introduction to the study of Euclid’s Elements, can belong to a project
of “everything to do with astronomy.” (Although Ptolemy never cites any
advanced mathematics – he does, however, develop some of it for his
trigonometric calculations and for his derivations of astronomical
parameters – he does assume, throughout, elementary geometry: some-
thing like an Introduction to the Reading of Euclid’s Elements could be seen,
then, as ancillary to Ptolemy’s astronomy.) With some stretch, we can even
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

add in here a brief study, On the Criterion – now extant – that is purely
philosophical. The subject matter is epistemology and so could plausibly
be seen as an introduction to any scientiﬁc knowledge, including, obvi-
ously, astronomy. But this is already tenuous. If indeed Ptolemy’s project
was so strictly organized around astronomy, however, it is strange that we
do not have from him more abstract works in spherics and trigonometry.
Perhaps the succinct treatment of such issues in Books and of the
Almagest was all he required. Perhaps he did write them and those are
simply not attested: even with such a well-preserved author, it is clear that
there are signiﬁcant lacunae in our knowledge. But enough is known to
suggest not only the continuity with Hipparchus but also one obvious
contrast. Hipparchus’s project was often polemic and largely piecemeal:
“this thing, about which that one is wrong; and that other thing, about
which yet another one is wronger.” Ptolemy is almost never piecemeal.
Everything that comes down from him is a summa of its ﬁeld, organized
by its own internal logic, polemic becoming fairly rare and subservient to
the internal needs of the theoretical ﬁeld. For which reason – with all the
bulk of his extant corpus – there is a residue of an enigma about Ptolemy.
More than most Greek authors, he disappears into his subject matter,
coming close to being the mute expositor of an impersonal logic.
Let us take the Harmonics. A compendium on a small scale – merely
three books – it achieves a sense of comprehensive treatment. Ptolemy
begins by noting that the two criteria for judging harmony are listening
and reason. The remainder of Book is organized around this duality.
Ptolemy ﬁrst sets out the purely Pythagorean theory, according to which
harmony is judged purely as a ratio between integers, and then the
alternative (put forward by Aristoxenus, Aristotle’s pupil), that harmony
is to be judged empirically, by the ear. Both positions are developed with
what (in the Greek context) can be described as sympathy, but both are
ultimately rejected, Ptolemy claiming to oﬀer some kind of synthesis. As a
matter of fact, however, it is clear that Ptolemy is much more of a
Pythagorean, and he does not, in fact, follow any speciﬁc Aristoxenian
doctrine, taking from the Aristoxenians merely the overall attitude of
respect for empirical evidence. Thus, the mathematical route is pursued
fairly rapidly, but it is decisive.
Ptolemy takes over the assumptions that the octave is :, divided into
:(the ﬁfth) and :(the fourth); that overall it is composed of two
fourths with a single tone added in between; that relations within the
fourth should be integer ratios of the form (n þ ):n; and that the octave is
:. Note that the question “What is the structure of the octave?” resolves

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

into the question “What is the structure of the fourth?” Now, to recall
(p. ), the Greeks did not even aim to have the octave evenly spaced out.
Let me explain this further: such even spacing is important if one wishes to
modulate or harmonize the same melody across diﬀerent keys, so that if
one modulates by a third, say – or two tones – the melody should be
recognizably the same but simply “two tones down.” This is speciﬁcally a
concern of modern tonal music, where modulation of keys is the main
organizing principle – a unique development of modern European music.
This modulation is easily achieved on the modern piano, which is indeed
“even-tempered.” To a Greek ear, such a tuning was less motivated
because modulation mattered less (indeed, sometimes was frowned upon),
and at any rate, such tuning would sound lacking because it did not
provide for the very close pitch diﬀerences – nearly quarter tones – that
were important for the Greek musical experience. The fourth was divided,
instead, unequally, allowing for greater and smaller gaps. The question
then becomes, to Ptolemy, very well deﬁned: how to divide :(the main
ratio of the fourth) into two smaller ratios, such that their own ratios take
the form (n þ ):n. Ptolemy’s originality, in fact, seems to be that he
insisted that all ratios have such form. (It appears that past numerical
musical theorists were more interested in developing a variety of systems
with other interesting numerical relations.) Ptolemy’s insistence on (n þ ):
n as a unique criterion within the fourth creates a constraint that allows a
sense of ﬁnality. At this point, Ptolemy simply asserts (without proof: this
will be simple) that there are only three ways to divide the ratio :into two
ratios of the form (n þ ):n:
16 : 15  5 : 4, 10 : 9  6 : 5, 8 : 7  7 : 6:
Which determines the three allowed tunings.
In the second book (and reaching into the beginning of the third),
Ptolemy puts forward his instruments for the empirical judgment of
harmony. This gives rise to a discussion of a musical/physical device, either
a single-string monochord with a moveable bridge or a many-stringed
“harmonic canon” (with strings of varying length). If the argument con-
cerning integers is mathematical through its calculations, the argument
concerning the monochord and the harmonic canon is mathematical
through its geometrical diagrams of the instruments. Lo and behold,
experiments with the instruments conﬁrm the theoretical tunings, and
Ptolemy’s system is complete. This takes over two books, as Ptolemy
describes, in detail, the proposals of past authors and as he calculates, in
detail, the entire systems resulting from all such proposals. These are
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

summed up in table form, with the ratios between diﬀerent notes in the
diﬀerent systems all laid side by side. (Book remains; I return to it later
in the discussion.) Ptolemy ends up with completion at several levels:
completing a theory of harmonics that is necessary and proved, that covers
both theory and experience, and surveys all the signiﬁcant past proposals.
The sense, indeed, is of ﬁnality.
Even in its fragmentary, mediated form, it is evident that this ﬁnality
was the goal of Ptolemy’s Optics. The extant work is made of three surveys
in sequence. First, a long array of optical illusions, surveyed and resolved
one by one (these are not very rationally ordered – it is hard to structure a
list of, essentially, odd visual phenomena – but their very great number
provides a sense of exhaustion). Second, a mathematical theory of mirror
illusions with both convex and concave mirrors, in this case going system-
atically through all the possible combinations of the geometry of the
mirror as well as the distance of the viewer. Third and ﬁnally, a study of
refraction, which once again joins together reason (in the form of geomet-
rical theory) and experience (in the form of observations of angles of
refractions in the transitions between three concrete media: air, water,
and glass; those values are provided in table form). We see a crescendo of
complexity as more diﬃcult problems are tackled, reaching the totality of
Greek optical knowledge and probably adding, originally, new observa-
tions and, especially, a new, more systematic presentation. (The basic
theory of light and perspective was undoubtedly treated in Book , now
lost.) The Geography is even more explicitly about the project of synthesis.
One has to combine mathematical reason and ordinary experience (one
has to rely primarily, we learn, on astronomical principles, but the dis-
tances reported by travelers should be taken into account as well). The
main contribution is in the systematic presentation: Ptolemy is trying to
provide the precise information required for a universal world map. He
discusses the mathematics of planar projection, but the original work itself
(unlike many of its later copies) did not include a world map and instead
was constituted – beyond its relatively brief discussion of theoretical
principles – by a massive set of tables of coordinates. More than any other
work by Ptolemy, the Geography is organized around a foil – Marinus of
Tyre – and so it is striking that even here, the tone of engagement is
respectful. (.: “[Marinus wrote] with absolute diligence . . . treated nearly
all his predecessors with care.” So Ptolemy, implying his own values –
“Since, however, even he turns out to have given assent to certain things
that have not been creditably established” – and Ptolemy’s own approach
ensues.)

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Ptolemy’s astronomical project was much more extensive than in any of
the other sciences. It includes a number of more specialized works (the
Tetrabiblos, as noted, on astrology; the Phaseis, a calendar or, in the Greek
precise sense, a parapegma). Two more technical works are the
Planispherium, the projection of a celestial sphere on a plane, required
for the production of the star-observation device called the astrolabe; as
well as the Analemma, a theory of the sundial. With both works, we see an
engagement with the mathematical theory underlying astronomical instru-
ments, which, once again, appears to be a repeated feature of the ancient
astronomical genre. It is mildly surprising, perhaps, that Ptolemy did not
write a comprehensive survey of astronomical devices, instead. But at any
rate, it is clear that he must have been even more proliﬁc than his extant
corpus suggests, and his lost works could very well have been mostly
astronomical and mostly dedicated to more isolated problems.
Yet the core of Ptolemy’s life must have been the creation of that major
astronomical summa, the Mathematical Composition or the Almagest. Two
other major works, in fact, are essentially derivative from it.
One, the Handy Tables, marks a transformation in the encounter of
Babylonian and Greek astronomies. As noted in the previous section,
Chaldean-inspired astronomers were active, certainly from the ﬁrst century
onward, all throughout the Mediterranean. Their craft was the
making of numerical tables, based on algorithms developed centuries
earlier by Babylonians: calculating key events such as ﬁrst risings of planets
and, based on these, calculating the positions of planets at given times. (To
clarify again: one could not just have the tables set once and for all because,
after all, the position of the stars kept changing! The “ﬁxed” tables
provided the tools with which one could calculate tables for one’s own
time and – in the Greek tradition – place.) Techniques developed between
Apollonius and Hipparchus could make it possible, in principle, to calcu-
late such positions relying on geometrical models, together with some
trigonometry. Even apart from the normal reluctance of craftsmen to give
up the tools of their trade, it is clear why practicing astrologers went on
using, in part, the Babylonian tables: these, after all, were already on the
shelf. It is not certain who was the ﬁrst to oﬀer an alternative set of
geometry-based tables, completely doing away with Babylonian tech-
niques. At any rate, this was achieved, in the deﬁnitive form, by Ptolemy
himself. Handy Tables was basically an extract from the Almagest, collecting
the tables useful for astronomical practice and setting them out with some
improvements and with a new, dedicated introduction. (To professors in
the tenure track, this is all very relatable.) The remarkable thing is that
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

these tables turn up in signiﬁcant numbers – almost uniquely, for the
corpus of advanced Greek mathematics – in the papyrological evidence. It
appears that almost immediately, astrologers started using Ptolemy’s tables,
largely replacing the old techniques. Active Babylonian astronomy ends
with Ptolemy – at the moment that the Greeks learned, from the
Babylonians, to use tables.
Another signiﬁcant contribution, essentially derived from the Almagest,
is the Planetary Hypotheses. Handy Tables was written for the practicing
astronomer and, already since Ptolemy’s time, was widely circulated.
Planetary Hypotheses was much less copied, and in fact, only the beginning
is still extant in Greek, whereas much of the work is known only in Arabic
translation (and some of it lost entirely). This, in a sense, is surprising
because this is the ultimate payoﬀof the Almagest: Ptolemy ﬁnally tells us
what the universe is like. Ptolemy provides a systematic description of the
structure of the cosmos in terms of nested spheres or rings, within which
are located the epicycles (all derived from values calculated in the
Almagest). The hypothesis of epicycles and eccenters (unlike that of homo-
centric spheres) implies a variation in a given star’s distance as it rotates
around the earth. Ptolemy calculates this variation in the Planetary
Hypotheses and uses it to derive a minimal workable set of sizes and
distances for the entire cosmos – not just for the sun and the moon, as
we already saw with Aristarchus (and the many later reﬁnements by other
Greek astronomers), but for the planets as well. All of this is framed,
however, not purely as an exercise in cosmology. Instead, Ptolemy presents
the treatise as his contribution to the genre of planetarium-making (an
echo, then, of the original Archimedean Sphere-Making). Unlike past
devices, Ptolemy claims that his should be able to represent not just the
visible eﬀect of the apparent positions of the heavenly bodies but, instead,
their actual spatial arrangement. (Was any such planetarium ever built by
Ptolemy? Or was he a merely theoretical maker of planetaria, just as he was
a merely theoretical caster of horoscopes?)
At the core of all of this stands the Almagest. This, quite simply, is a
massive book – almost a quarter million Greek words, in thirteen books.
This is the same as the number of books in Euclid’s Elements – certainly
established in Ptolemy’s time, as noted on pages –, as part of
normal education. Clearly, Ptolemy aimed to provide a full survey of the
sky, just as Euclid did of the elements of mathematics. At any rate, the
scale of the work emerges fairly naturally from the material itself. Nothing
here is superﬂuous, although everything is prepared in precise detail. Book
provides the basic presuppositions and tools – a geocentric model

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(for which Ptolemy explicitly argues, mentioning potential alternatives;
this will matter to future debates), the elements of trigonometry. Book 
provides the elementary results of spherical astronomy: the obliquity of the
ecliptic and the consequences for diﬀerent latitudes. This is all the same as
one found already, centuries before, in Autolycus or Euclid – but now with
rules for the derivation of speciﬁc numerical values, based on spherical
trigonometry (which, in turn, could well derive from Hipparchus; see
pp. –). Book provides the theory of the sun, and Book 
provides that of the moon, to the extent that it follows the same logic as
the sun. The motion of the moon is, in fact, rather more complicated, and
Book deals with such added complications. Obviously, all the calcula-
tions regarding the sun assume the tools of Books (general trigonometry)
and (spherics and the ecliptic). Less obviously, the calculations for the
moon already use measurements that derive from the position of the sun;
hence, Books and , too, rely on Book . (You recall how we relied on
eclipse observations to determine the positions of the moon: an eclipse is
the conjunction of the moon and the sun – and the position of the sun is
the one that is known already.) This nearly axiomatic structure continues
into Book , which combines the theories of the sun and the moon into a
theory of eclipse prediction. Books and are something of a fresh
start in terms of their subject matter and overall spirit. They discuss the
practice and theory of observations of ﬁxed stars and end up building a
ﬁxed-star catalogue set out as a massive table (,stars!). This is not
really a hiatus in the deductive sequence, however, because one requires
Books –for the overall structure of the sphere, and because the position
of the moon (from Books and ) does come in because angular
distances between a star and the moon are used for determining the
positions of stars. The ﬁxed stars are at the center of the Almagest as a
whole; following them, we get to the main business of geometrical model-
ing with, it so happens, ﬁve books for the ﬁve planets (not, however, on a
one-for-one basis) – Books –. These keep referring to positions of
the sun, moon, and stars, relative to which the positions of planets are
calculated – keeping with sense of a continuous deductive progression.
Book oﬀers the general approach, followed by the theory of Mercury;
Venus and Mars are studied in Book ; Jupiter and Saturn in Book . All
of those theories involve serious complications – it is never the case that a
simple epicycle or eccenter suﬃces to account for the observed motions,
and Ptolemy instead uses several ad hoc extra assumptions. (For instance,
that the motion is around an eccenter but that its speed is such that equal
angles are swept over angle times, relative to a point that is neither the
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

center of the circle nor its eccenter. For almost two thousand years, original
contributions to astronomy will engage not with the rather empty question
of heliocentrism versus geocentrism but, rather, with the problem of how
to make Ptolemy’s special tools for dealing with planets less ad hoc.) Even
so, the presentation is logically compelling: Ptolemy’s clear aim is to
convince us that the tools emerge as a mathematical consequence of
the observations.
Only based on the individual theories for each planet does Ptolemy
proceed to calculate particular outcomes: the retrogradations and other
features of the motions of the planets (Book ), the motion in latitude
(that is, departing from the ecliptic), and ﬁnally, the observations that are
at the core of the entire endeavor – the “phases” or such key events as ﬁrst
risings. The major recurrences, out of which it all began – now, the
outcome of a massive, thirteen-book-long deduction.
Modern readers sometimes learn about, say, Galileo and the scientiﬁc
revolution, about geocentrism and heliocentrism, and they then become
impatient with the past. How could people have been so naïve? Why follow
Ptolemy? In truth, how could you not? There is nothing quite like the
Almagest in the extant scientiﬁc literature from antiquity, and in truth,
there are not many books that compare with it since. Newton’s Principia
Mathematica comes to mind, or perhaps Darwin’s Origin of Species. (But in
a sense, Newton modeled himself on Ptolemy, Darwin on Newton.) Here
is a book that thoroughly derives the totality of a realm of nature, going
through both a lucid explanation of the process as well as the painstaking
detail of all the derivations. The Antikythera mechanism was “a portable
cosmos.” But so was the Almagest – somewhat more bulky, with its
thirteen thick rolls – a rational, ordered, massive system – a counterpart
to the system of no less than the universe itself.
A work of this ambition is unique in the extant literature from antiq-
uity. Was Ptolemy, in fact, the ﬁrst to have written a work of this type?
This is a diﬃcult question but one we must answer so as to try to
understand Ptolemy’s historical context.
As noted, it appears that later than Hipparchus, the very ﬁgure of the
author in the exact sciences became, at least, very rare. It is conceivable that
for generations, no signiﬁcant new works in mathematical astronomy were
produced at all – let alone works of Ptolemy’s ambition. In fact, between
Hipparchus and Ptolemy, the only astronomer of note emerging from our
evidence is Menelaus – now known to us (as mentioned earlier) mostly
through his very competent spherical trigonometry. Ptolemy does not cite
Menelaus for any astronomical theory, merely for a couple of astronomical

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

observations. Now, among the astronomical/astrological papyri, Jones
notes a few that seem more theoretical in character. With one exception,
these might be more “cosmological” in character (and so, perhaps, from a
more “philosophical” as opposed to a mathematical origin?), but one
clearly belongs to mathematical and observational astronomy and is a
report of an observation close in time, and similar in format, to those
Ptolemy cites from Menelaus: this involves Jupiter. Jones concludes that
this may well be, in fact, a fragment of Menelaus.
Perhaps this small shred of papyrus could have come from a basket of
rolls as imposing as that of the Almagest. Now, it is true that Ptolemy is
the opposite of a name-dropper: he mentions authorities sparingly,
looking for a handful of representative authors he needs for speciﬁc
purposes. He does use such authorities, however, and cites them as
necessary. For the cases of the sun, the moon, and the ﬁxed stars, his
foil is largely Hipparchus, who did work constructively on those very
topics (albeit, it appears, in piecemeal works). Such foils, as noted,
structure the Harmonics and the Geography, and I suspect that we have
lost Ptolemy’s account of previous work, in the lost ﬁrst book of the
Optics. However, at the beginning of Book , as Ptolemy turns to
the daunting task of the theory of the planets, he explicitly states his
originality – “there is a good reason why no-one before us has yet
succeeded in it” (.) – and continues to explain (as mentioned earlier)
that Hipparchus decided not to produce his own planetary theories, citing,
beyond that, no past authorities. I suggested previously that Hipparchus’s
refusal to issue his own theories of the planets could well have come from a
polemic against past theories (from the generation, say, of Apollonius?). If
so, Ptolemy could have felt justiﬁed in referring to Hipparchus alone: any
pre-Hipparchean theories, or their later descendants, would have been
suﬃciently
covered
by
Ptolemy’s
reference
to
Hipparchus’s
own
antitheoretical statements.
Menelaus remains, and it is true that he was unlikely to have recorded a
position of Jupiter purely for the pleasure of observation. Indeed, the brief
passage now extant from the papyrus refers not only to the new observa-
tion of Jupiter but also to a much older one, dated to years before.
This is the sure sign of a theoretical deduction (two observations of the
same object, given in terms of position and date of observation, are most
This papyrus is P. Oxy. , discussed in A. Jones, Astronomical Papyri from Oxyrhinchus
(Philadelphia: Amer Philosophical Society, ), .–..
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

likely there for the sake of a calculation of the mean speed: change in
position divided by time elapsed). But this should be qualiﬁed in two ways.
First, Menelaus is surprisingly close in time to Ptolemy. His recorded
observations are now dated to –, as against Ptolemy’s, from
to , so that he is a generation older than Ptolemy. Many
Greek authors show a preference not to cite living authorities by name,
and if so, Menelaus could well have been at the absolute latest moment of
citability. As Ptolemy cites authorities later than Hipparchus, he seems to
ﬁnd an author standing right behind his shoulder – and nearly no one else
farther back.
Second, Jones’s relative conﬁdence in the identiﬁcation of Menelaus is
remarkable. After all, we know very little about the author of the papyrus
fragment. However, the dates, place, and format of observation are all
precisely aligned, and – incredible luck – the author uses the ﬁrst person in
referring to the observation. But notice the implication: Of course this is a
sample of one, but is it not striking that when we ﬁnd a “randomly
selected” non-Ptolemy astronomer, this happens to be, likely, the one
astronomer of his time that Ptolemy cares to cite? The implication of all
of this is that major astronomers, in Ptolemy’s time, were recent and rare.
There is little astronomical context within which to put Ptolemy, which
means that to get some of his setting, we need to look at a broader context:
the historical setting as a whole and the evidence for the science of
Ptolemy’s era.
As we widen the zoom, our picture suddenly ﬁlls with life. This, after
all, is the height of the Roman Empire! The archeological sites now
admired by modern tourists all over the Mediterranean – theaters,
temples, statues, inscriptions, stone and marble everywhere – are mostly
the product of this era. Money is lavishly spent as patrons display their
power and their generosity. Perhaps the Mediterranean was somewhat
richer, at this moment of Roman Peace. It certainly was much more
unequal, and the patrons displaying their generosity had a lot to put on
display. Little wonder, then, that we also see, in this era, a mad rush to
reach the elite and to enjoy its goodwill. Everyone seeks “paideia,” the
good education that marks one as a true gentleman. This is represented
by knowledge of the Greek past and its literature, above all in one’s
rhetorical skills. There are orators everywhere, as well as teachers of
rhetoric oﬀering their services. But of more relevance to the history of
science, the two service industries – astrology and medicine – are also in
demand. For the case of medicine, our evidence is the most direct. We
have extant the huge corpus of Galen, who ﬁlls, in the history of

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

medicine, a role analogous to that of Ptolemy in astronomy. A much
more rhetorical author (as was always the case for Greek medicine – a
discipline more “literary” than the exact sciences), we hear from Galen a
lot – I mean, a lot – about his interactions with his many interlocutors.
Born in Pergamon and reaching the heights of Roman society (at times, a
physician to the emperor!), he is completely marked by the rush for
patronage. He was a great scientist – the greatest anatomist of antiquity
and the father of experimental methods in physiology. All of this, with
him, was pursued through vicious polemic, indiscriminately attacking
physicians past and present. We hear through Galen of many dozens of
physicians, many of them contemporaries or near-contemporaries (if we
include those who are merely reported in passing for contributing a
pharmacological recipe, the numbers rise to the hundreds). The clear
impression of his corpus is of a bustling and growing ﬁeld of medical
literature. Indeed, it is hard not to explain Galen’s great prolixity – his
extant works now occupy twenty volumes, but many have been lost –
other than through this rush of competition. Rome was swarming with
Greek medical authors, vying for attention. Galen sought to triumph
over them all by becoming the best experimentalist but also, quite
simply, by out-writing everyone else.
It is hard to say exactly how much astronomy was diﬀerent from that.
Ptolemy is simply not as chatty, which suggests, perhaps, that he has less of
a need to prove himself – so, perhaps, a less severely competitive ﬁeld? –
but that also means we do not have the chance to learn about his
immediate context. The simplest account is that, indeed, there was less
activity in astronomy than in medicine, but that, once again, things did
begin to stir up somewhat by Ptolemy’s time. Or again: we do not see in
Ptolemy anything like the rush for patronage evident in Galen. But it is
noteworthy that most of his astronomical works are addressed to one
Syrus. The language of the address is laconic, and so we cannot tell who
this Syrus was, but Cristian Tolsa has recently proposed the plausible
identiﬁcation with the Roman governor of Egypt, Sura (Syrus being, then,
a Hellenized version of the Roman name).Perhaps something structur-
ally similar to the case of medicine needs to be inferred for astronomy, after
all: on a more modest scale, authors in the exact sciences were seeking
patronage, were competing for it; a logic of inﬂation ensued, and
C. Tolsa, “Claudius Ptolemy and Self-Promotion. A Study on Ptolemy’s Intellectual Milieu in
Roman Alexandria” (doctoral dissertation, University of Barcelona, ), Chapter .
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

something such as Ptolemy’s project – seeking the monumentality of a
complete system – was its culmination.
A Galen-like chattiness, a constant bickering against past and present
authors, would have been alien to Ptolemy’s endeavor. A key goal of
Ptolemy’s project, we said, was its ﬁnality: such were the musical harmo-
nies; these were all the optical illusions produced by all variety of mirrors;
such were the motions of the planets. The constant back-and-forth of
debate, ultimately, undercuts such a sense of ﬁnality. To punch is to
suggest the possibility of a counterpunch. Or perhaps – and I wonder if
this more parsimonious explanation might not suﬃce – Ptolemy set out to
emulate Hipparchus but also to diﬀer from him, and so, among other
things, he sought to mark himself as the non-Hipparchus. Perhaps, simply,
by being polite?
A View of the Monument
The fact is, Ptolemy got his ﬁnality. I start the following chapter with a
commentary to Ptolemy’s Harmonics, and it appears that not long after his
death, Ptolemy had already obtained canonical status: recognized as the
ﬁnal word. He would continue to enjoy this for almost ﬁfteen hundred
years. The same, indeed, was true of Galen: it was a good time to get
canonized. We will return to see, in the following chapter, why and how
this canonization took place, but one fundamental reason should be clear
already: both Galen and Ptolemy were great scientists.
In such a rapid overview, it is hard to do the greatness of Ptolemy any
justice. I did give a sense of the monumentality of the work and of its
logical character. What is harder to convey is the mechanism through
which the logic is conveyed. Let me try to do so, very brieﬂy, for the
simplest of Ptolemy’s theories – that of the sun. A glancing overview, then,
of Ptolemy’s Book .
The book begins with an exposition of the year, a concept that (as
Ptolemy explains) has two meanings – relative to the zodiac and relative to
the ﬁxed stars – which, as Hipparchus discovered, are slightly diﬀerent
(this is the precession of the equinox that we have mentioned on
pp. –). The calculation of the length of the year is observationally
and conceptually diﬃcult, but once this is achieved, one can deduce the
For an English translation of the Almagest, we have G. J. Toomer, Ptolemy’s Almagest (London:
Duckworth, ). A monumental translation, worthy of its source.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mean position of the sun at a given point in time (“mean” position –
because the speed of the sun is not uniform). This is produced by Ptolemy
explicitly, not as a function (as we would do) but as a table; indeed, as
Sidoli notes, tables are often Ptolemy’s way of conveying a function.
A set of tables provides the mean position of the sun in eighteen-year
periods (starting at a deﬁned moment, of course, based on a Babylonian
epoch), in a given year within the period, in a month within the year, in a
day within the month, and in an hour within the day. Notice that all of
this is not merely scientiﬁcally precise but also supremely practical.
Had the speed of the sun been uniform, Ptolemy could have stopped
there. It is not. (The reasons for that are evident from a modern perspec-
tive: the earth proceeds not along a circle around the sun but along an
ellipse. Further, the earth does not cover equal angles at given times –
which would have been perceived as a ﬁxed speed – but rather, it is the area
of the sector of the ellipse swept by the earth through its motion that is ﬁxed,
given the time.) The nonuniform speed of the sun is not some arcane
observation but is instead a very familiar one to ancient observers, known
as the “inequality of the seasons.” Our next task is therefore to ﬁnd tables
that set out the deviation from such mean motion or the tables of the
“anomaly of the sun.” This is typical for the general task of premodern
astronomy: given an object, construct the tables for its mean motion,
followed by the tables for anomalies.
Ptolemy approaches this problem, as he typically does, from the more
general and abstract to the more empirical. He begins by setting out the
type of techniques available for deriving anomalies from regular circular
motions, which are shown to be the eccenter and the epicycle. He then
proceeds to show their equivalence for the problem at hand, as well as
further general properties (for instance, at what point of the circle we ﬁnd
the greatest and least speeds). This discussion goes beyond the needs of the
immediate theory of the sun but not beyond the needs of what would, in
fact, be applied through the treatise, all of which is typical to Ptolemy. This
passage, then, is a kind of “The Elements of Epicycles and Eccenters
Required for the Almagest.” Following that, Ptolemy simply states that
he will produce the theory of the sun through the eccenter (equivalent to
the epicycle, and simpler). The following proof is explicitly said to follow
Hipparchus.
N. Sidoli, “Mathematical Tables in Ptolemy’s Almagest,” Historia Mathematica (): –.
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A
N
Y
H
B
K
P
W
F
X
E
R
Z
T
Q
M
S
D
O
L
G
Figure 
In Figure , the sun rotates along the circle ABGD, and the earth is at
Z. A is the position of the sun at the spring equinox (when the day and
night are exactly equal); B, at the summer solstice; G, at the autumn
equinox; D, at the winter solstice. Had the earth been at the center, E, the
length of the seasons would have been equal. The eccenter hypothesis is
that the earth is at some point other than E, and we can fully determine the
theory of the sun by ﬁnding the position Z where the produced angles
agree with the observed facts. (In practical terms, we need to ﬁnd the
length EZ as a fraction of the diameter.) Assume Z found, and draw an
arbitrary circle around Z as the center. Our data for the length of the
seasons can be given as follows (this is an approximation, but it is a valid
one, given the limits on our observations): that the arc QK, equivalent to
the length of the spring, is traversed in 1=2 days, whereas the arc KL,
equivalent to the length of the summer, is traversed in 1=2 days. Divide
the days by the length of the year to get the length of the arcs in degrees. At
this point, we have the arc measurement of QK, KL and also NO
(semicircle), NP, and PO (quadrant). It is, at this point, easy to ﬁnd the
arc measurement of NQ, PK (diﬀerences between the aforementioned)
and so of the arcs QY, KW. Applying the trigonometric tables of Book ,
we can ﬁnd the length of QY – hence of QT, that is, RZ – as a fraction of
the diameter; similarly, we can ﬁnd the length of FK or RE as a fraction of

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the diameter. Once we have both, we apply Pythagoras’s theorem and ﬁnd
the length of EZ as a fraction of the diameter (;1=2 parts where the
diameter is – not too far from the center!). I merely outline the
geometric logic: for Ptolemy, everything has to be calculated in detail.
Following that, however, it is noteworthy that Ptolemy merely corrobo-
rates this calculation in passing, based on those two seasons, with reference
to the lengths of the autumn and the winter (instead of redoing the
calculation from scratch, based on the remainder of the data). This is
typical of his approach: calculations are thorough for the cases chosen, but
there is no eﬀort to expand the evidence base beyond those few cases. We
remember, for instance, how the changes in the speed of the moon were
estimated, to begin with, based on three observations, or two time intervals
(i.e., the absolute minimum). Later on, Ptolemy does check his theory
of the moon, obtained based on one set, against a single, other set of
three observations; but that’s it. It is true that Ptolemy does not yet have
a statistical technique with which he could ﬁnd the position of the eccenter
as the best ﬁt, given a number of measurements; however, he could still
have pursued several separate measurements and noted their agreement,
an option that he avoids, preferring the simplicity of relying on
minimal tools.
The distance between the earth and the center of the rotation of the sun
determines all we need to know in the cosmological theory of the sun –
answering the question of “what the universe is like” – and if that was our
goal, the study of the sun could have ended right there. Ptolemy, however,
is an astronomer, not a cosmologist, and so his goal is not just to say “what
the universe is like” but, rather, the much more ambitious and more
technical goal of computing the position of objects. Hence, the position
of the eccenter is just the beginning. The main part comes now.
Suppose that in Figure , Q is the position of the earth, and ABG is a
circle concentric with the circular trajectory of the sun or the ecliptic –
with its center at D. What we have established once and for all is the
position of the points D, Q, so we know the distance DQ – as a fraction of
the radius of the ecliptic – and we can also join the two points D, Q and
extend them to cut the circles so that the line EAQD forms a natural
starting point from which to measure angles. Now, here is what we will
need in astronomical practice. We will observe the sun at a certain angle,
which we measure from line EAQD. For instance, let us say that we
observe the sun at point Z, at “thirty degrees from point E.” This means
that we found the angle EQZ to be equal to thirty degrees. What we are
interested in, however, is the real position of the sun, which is the angle it
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

is covered on the ecliptic. This is the angle BDA or ZDQ. Now, from
Elements ., we know that
the exterior angle ZQE ¼ interior angle QZD þ interior angle ZDQ:
And so, to be able to ﬁnd, from the angle ZQE, the angle ZDQ, we need
to ﬁnd the angle DZQ ﬁrst.
Ptolemy approaches this neither as a purely geometrical problem nor (as
we would do) as a statement of an algebraic formula but through a worked-
out numerical example. This is indeed close to the experience of education
we are familiar with.
We take the example of the angle ZQE being thirty degrees.
We now extend ZQ to K where DK is perpendicular to ZK. Thus, we
have a right-angled triangle DKQ with a right angle at K and DQK being
also equal to thirty degrees.
A
Q
K
D
H
G
B
Z
E
Figure 
Now, the measure of QD is known: we found that it is ;1=2 parts –
Ptolemy now rounds this up to ;– where the diameter of the ecliptic is
. Recall how sexagesimals operate: ;is what we call 1=2. Recall how
the table of chords works. A right-angled triangle, for Ptolemy, is really a
site for a semicircle. We imagine a semicircle around DQK with DQ as its
diameter, DK as the chord on the arc of degrees (as the arc is measured
from the circumference), and KQ as the chord on the arc of degrees.
We turn to the table of chords and ﬁnd, rounded up, that the chord of arc

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

is ;, whereas that of arc is, of course, (this is the side of the
hexagon, which is, of course, equal to the radius), all when DQ – the
diameter – is units. Now, in the case at hand, DQ is considered to be
not but ;units, and so we need to transform the values. DK
obviously becomes half of ;, so ;. Ptolemy merely states the result.
I personally would go about this by ﬁrst dividing ;, which gets me to
the very same: ;,– these are sexagesimals! This gets me to the value
I would have had DQ been . It is, in fact, ;, or a quarter more.
A quarter of ;,is almost ;, and adding this to ;,, we
get almost ;,or almost ;,, which Ptolemy rounds up, once
again, to ;.
Now, QZ ¼ QE, which is equal to parts of the same units; thus,
KZ is ;of the same units, whereas KD is ;. The triangle KZD is
right-angled, so we can apply Pythagoras’s theorem to ﬁnd the value of
ZD, which Ptolemy asserts to be ;. We may now once again conceive
of the triangle ZDK as a site for a semicircle, with ZD as its diameter.
Once again, we transform everything to make ZD equal to units so
that we can apply the table of chords. DK has now become ;. We now
go back to the table of chords and consider it with the inverted query: For
the chord length ;, what is the arc? This turns out to be the arc ;
degrees. This, once again, is the arc as measured from the center and the
arc as measured from the circumference – that is, the angle DZK – now
found to be ;degrees. This is what we were seeking, and now we can
state that when the sun is seen to cover degrees from point E, it actually
covers ;degrees less than this.
In a table of “anomaly” – one that takes every measured angle and tells
us how much to subtract – we need to put, next to “degrees measured,”
the value “;degrees to subtract.”
Book , Chapter , of the Almagest is the table of the sun’s anomaly,
which means that for each value, Ptolemy had to ﬁnd the chords of the
given arc and of its complement; transforming both values from parts
to ;parts; adding to one of those values; applying Pythagoras’s
theorem to ﬁnd a third value, and then transforming that third value into
parts; then picking up the other previously found value and plugging
it into the inverse chord table to ﬁnd an arc – and ﬁnally to halve it so as to
ﬁnd the anomaly for the given arc. There are forty-ﬁve values (we skip by
six degrees each time through the quadrant –, and by three degrees
through the quadrant –; the remaining quadrants are obviously
symmetrical). These are forty-ﬁve iterations of going through the same
procedure, each time with diﬀerent numbers, dividing, multiplying,
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

adding, squaring . . . The table presents itself as a pristine two-dimensional
array of numbers, and it is, obviously, rather slim, a mere inset between
longer discursive and geometrical chapters. It should be clear, however,
that this table represents the more substantial mathematical investment –
and value.
It would seem as if at this point, one could simply take the two tables –
the table of mean motion together with the table of the anomalies – and
ﬁnd the position of the sun at a given time. However, as Ptolemy now
explains, our work is not yet done! In order to know which anomaly to
apply, one also needs to “calibrate” the two tables together: the ﬁrst day of
the table of mean motion is (what we call) February , , but this
is not necessarily “degree zero” of the table of anomaly. We need to ﬁnd
absolute dates on which to anchor the table of anomaly, and fortunately, our
result for the position of the maximal anomaly allows us to do just that.
Ptolemy records a precise date for an autumn equinox that he observed –
what we call September , (once again, relying for this operation
on the bare minimum – a single observation!). He calculates the number of
years and days passing between “day zero” and that measured equinox. On
this, he ﬁnally applies the table of anomaly to ﬁnd the position of the sun
on “day zero” and, signiﬁcantly, the implied position, for that day, of the
sun on the table of anomaly. Only once this is achieved does it become
possible to take the two tables – of mean motion and of anomaly – and
calculate, with no need for any more observational or geometrical input,
the position of the sun on the zodiac for any given date.
From this point in the Almagest onward, this is how positions of the sun
– necessary references for almost any other astronomical calculation – will
be found. Ptolemy’s discussion of the sun, however, does not end there
because besides calculating the position of the sun on a given day, the
astronomer also needs to deﬁne times in terms of hours of the day. Besides
the familiar fact that the length of the night changes from day to day based
on the time of the year and the latitude (as thoroughly discussed already in
Book ), one now needs to take into account that the “twenty-four hours”
of the day change somewhat according to the changing speed of the sun,
and Ptolemy ends the book with the calculations required to take care of
this deviation.
This, then, is Book – nearly the simplest of the Almagest. The whole,
thirteen books long, may well have been intended to echo, as noted, the
Elements. The comparison is signiﬁcant not only for the similarities but
also for the diﬀerences. Both works have, as their skeletons, long chains of
deduction. They diﬀer in the function of the chain.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

First, the similarity. When Euclid proves a problem, such as .(“on a
given line, to set up an equilateral triangle”), he relies on auxiliary con-
structions (in this case, there are circles set up on the original line). Then,
when such a problem is applied again, the construction of the auxiliary
circles is ignored. Now, a Ptolemaic table serves an analogous function.
There is tremendous labor going into the calculation of a given table (such as
the anomaly of the sun). This then is applied later: say, when a position of
the moon at a given time is correlated, later in the Almagest, to a position of
the sun computed to the same time. Similarly, the computation of the
anomaly of the sun sent Ptolemy back, time and again, to the table of
chords. Once again, as with the Euclidean problem: all the labor originally
invested in ﬁnding the table of chords is black-boxed relative to ﬁnding the
anomaly of the sun; all the labor invested in ﬁnding the anomaly of the sun
is black-boxed in ﬁnding the position of the moon. One needs merely to
ﬁnd and copy the numbers stated in the table. These, then, are the deductive
skeletons of the Almagest: a mathematical treatise constructed not as a
sequence of proved propositions but as a sequence of argued-for tables.
With both Euclid’s geometry as well as Ptolemy’s astronomy, one sets
up tools that are then black-boxed for future applications. But here is the
diﬀerence. In geometry, no one actually constructs equilateral triangles.
When the need arises for one’s diagram, one simply assumes that the
equilateral triangle has been magically constructed on the given line
because this can be done in principle. The proof of a problem in Euclid
acts as a conceptual labor-saving device. A Ptolemaic table is diﬀerent. The
goal is not the mere statement that one could, in principle, determine the
position of the moon: the goal is actually to compute it. The labor saved by
the table is not conceptual but real (and it is related to a work produced
habitually by actual craftsmen, the astrologers).
This means that the Almagest, in a sense, is more “necessary” than the
Elements. It is nice to have all the results one usually needs in place,
arranged in logical order, but in normal mathematical practice, Greek
mathematicians merely take the results of the Elements for granted.
Indeed, many works start “from the middle,” not from ﬁrst principles,
and merely postulate what they need along the way. Surely, this is how the
Greeks had started – Hippocrates of Chios’s squaring of the lunules must
have postulated the required proportions. What’s more, the same is true of
the little we see in Hellenistic astronomy – Aristarchus’s Sizes and Distances
or Archimedes’s Sand-Reckoner. There are calculations, but it is less sig-
niﬁcant that the calculations be right; the emphasis is instead on their
interesting conceptual structure.
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

By the time we get to the Almagest – partly, perhaps, because of the
example of Hipparchus, partly, perhaps, because of the habits of working
astrology – the emphasis shifted. Astronomy became a ﬁeld where actual
computation is paramount, and so its logical structure
changed
its meaning.
Each actual computation in astronomy does in fact depend on previous
calculations. It is necessary to refer to the position of the sun in the
computation of the positions of the moon and the planets, and all of them
do depend on the length of the year. An astronomy that is interested in the
conceptual computability of certain values can “start from the middle” and
handle, piecemeal, isolated topics. But once one is truly committed to a
valid computation of, say, the positions of the planets, one is naturally led
to consider the set of tools in its entirety.
This, ﬁnally, helps us understand why the Almagest gets written. This is,
quite simply, the thing to do – once one is doing astronomy and is serious
about it. The reason people before Ptolemy did not is simply that the task
is very hard. But if so, we can begin to understand why when the ﬁeld
revives and engages more authors, perhaps in the second half of the ﬁrst
century, it would not take more than a couple of generations to reach
its summa.
As a practical matter, then, the Almagest is a device for calculating
astronomical positions, and in some sense, however big, it is the “correct”
size for this purpose. This purpose, of course, does not exhaust the range of
theoretical questions that an astronomy could, in principle, address. In the
twentieth century, one of the most inﬂuential accounts of Ptolemy – that
of Pierre Duhem – emphasizes the constrained, limited remit of the
Almagest and of its entire astronomical tradition. Citing an Aristotelian
phrase, Duhem thought that ancient astronomers were interested merely
in “Saving the Phenomena.” The goal was not to ﬁnd what the universe
was like but simply, instead, to predict astronomical positions. The astro-
nomical models (such as epicycles and eccenters) were seen, according to
Duhem, purely as scaﬀolding, mathematical instruments of no inherent
meaning. The Ptolemaic response to the question of “what the universe is
like” would be mere shoulder-shrugging: such questions are metaphysical
but not scientiﬁc. For authors such as Duhem (and many modern philos-
ophers following him), this was to be lauded because the shoulder-
shrugging expresses a correct, “instrumentalist” (as opposed to “realist”)
philosophy of science. Theories, according to instrumentalism, are merely
tools for predicting observable results; they are not a window into the
hidden reality that lies behind those observables. Whether or not such a

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

hidden reality behind the observables exists at all, we have no access to it,
and so, at best, reality is a matter for metaphysical speculation, not for
scientiﬁc argument.
As Lloyd made absolutely clear, this is terribly wrong for the ancients.
No one in antiquity engaged with astronomy as merely “instrumental”:
every author in the ﬁeld took it for granted that astronomy could, in
principle, describe the real structure of the universe. That diﬀerent astron-
omers took this task at diﬀerent levels of seriousness is a diﬀerent matter.
But this is the point: when Aristarchus, perhaps half in jest, proposed that
the world could be heliocentric, the piquant power of the proposal lay
precisely in that it would be a remarkable, real phenomenon – and not a
mere instrumental device – if the earth did revolve around the sun.
Ptolemy is the worst possible instrumentalist, in that in his Planetary
Hypotheses (mostly unknown, however, to Duhem, writing when its
Arabic text was barely published), he patiently spelled out the implications
of the Almagest as a realist model!
And still, Duhem’s intuition was not silly. There is, after all, a diﬀerence
of emphasis between the Almagest and the Planetary Hypotheses, and it is,
after all, the Almagest that matters most. This diﬀerence of emphasis,
however, belongs not to the history of ideas but to the history of scientiﬁc
practices. At issue is not whether ancient astronomers were realists or
instrumentalists (of course they were realists) but whether or not they
engaged primarily with the question of the constitution of the universe or
with the question of astronomical computation. And once the cultural
choice was made to take astronomical numbers seriously, it is clear that the
practical questions of computation must occupy the bulk of astronomical
work.
Computation anchors the astronomical practice – to become its own
goal. This is the most surprising from a modern point of view – so that not
only “realism” but also “instrumentalism” become misleading labels.
Today, we normally take the structure of a scientiﬁc theory as a set of
hypotheses out of which predictions are deduced and then tested against
empirical observations. Realists think that the point of the observations is
to establish the truth of the hypotheses; instrumentalists think that the
point of the hypotheses is to derive, in an economical way, the totality of
observations. But it is extremely rare that Ptolemy engages with any of
that. We noted that even with the length of the seasons, Ptolemy relied on
the length of two seasons – which are geometrically suﬃcient to determine
the parameter of the theory – merely noting in passing that the result
comports with the length of the remaining seasons, even though (what we
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

consider) the empirical test of the theory is so readily available. And so, in
general: having produced the theory of an astronomical body, Ptolemy
displays little interest in testing this theory against a series of observations.
He could easily assert that having produced the theory of the sun, he then
observed the sun on many diﬀerent occasions, and lo and behold, applying
the table of mean motion together with the table of anomaly allowed him
to predict precisely where the sun would be. He does not say this because,
to him, this is just obvious. That the heavenly bodies recur precisely, once a
pattern has been deduced, is just a given, well known to all astronomers.
One needs to deduce the patterns, not to test them.
Ptolemy is not as chatty as many other ancient authors; he does not
speak about himself and only rarely mentions past astronomers other than
Hipparchus. What he does do, rather more than most other authors in the
exact sciences, is to engage, explicitly, with mathematical methodology,
not merely producing each particular derivation but also explaining why it
is called for. His goal was to achieve objective truth, and it seems that for
him, the true guarantor of truth was the rationality of one’s method of
deduction. Observational prediction becomes, then, almost beside the
point, and in a way, Ptolemy hardly predicts observations. The output of
his tables is a position at a given time, and the normal use of those tables is
not necessarily to ﬁnd the position at the present moment (which is what
we require for the empirical testing of a hypothesis). Arguably, the normal
use for which such tables were intended was to ﬁnd the position at some
point in the past. This, in fact, comes up already in the example we just
saw, in the theory of the sun. Ptolemy there made an observation of the
present-day position of the sun on September , – so as to be able
to deduce the position of the sun on February , . In this
theoretical structure, the present observation was an input, and the pre-
diction was the Babylonian-era position. Which is actually not too far from
the astronomical practice against which the Almagest took place: astrologers
computed, primarily, the positions of the stars at the (past, no longer
observable) moment of birth.
This is related to a key dilemma in our interpretation of astronomy in
the Ptolemaic tradition. Theoretical computation is the core of the practice
and is routinely applied as the input for further computations. It is
functionally equivalent, as a source of information, to observation.
Hence, it becomes impossible to tell, for any particular case, whether a
statement is based on observation or on computation. What did they
actually see; what did they merely extrapolate? Can we trust them? Some
scholars in the past have been scathing. To them, Ptolemy was a fraud. To

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a modern, the confusion of empirical data and theoretical constructs is a
grave sin: it is only through the clean separation of the two that one can
test hypothetico-deductive theories. What we ﬁnd is that Ptolemy was not
a modern hypothetico-deductive scientist, and separating observation from
extrapolation simply did not matter that much.
But then again, as noted, neither was he an instrumentalist. Not only
because he ultimately did use his models so as to deduce a physical reality
but also because this physical reality actually carried, for him, a meaning.
His daily lived practice was the making of tables, but setting things side by
side – the great table of all things, as it were – was, to Ptolemy, not just a
tool but also a metaphysical statement. This is hinted throughout his
oeuvre but comes to the fore at the conclusion of the treatise that, at ﬁrst
glance, appears the most removed from astronomy – the Harmonics. We
recall how Ptolemy produces, there, a synthesis of Pythagorean and
Aristoxenian positions, ultimately producing empirically grounded arith-
metical tables of the division of the octave, superseding (politely!) those of
his predecessors. These are the ﬁrst two books. The ﬁnal book is the payoﬀ
for this musical excursion. Having pursued the arithmetical theory of
harmony in the context of music, Ptolemy ﬁnally observes that harmony
can be found elsewhere – in souls, and in stars. He then pursues a
systematic analogy, ﬁrst between musical harmonies and ethical categories
(some ethical positions are more “balanced,” you see) and ﬁnally, conclud-
ing the entire work, between music and astronomical phenomena. The
division of the octave is like divisions of the zodiac; particular notes may be
likened to particular planets. The discussion, throughout, is closer to
astrology than to astronomy, engaged with the more symbolic values of
the stars. There is no eﬀort to connect the precise numerical values of
Ptolemy’s astronomical theories with those of his music. (Ptolemy did
pursue such more direct analogies in his Canobic inscription, perhaps
representing an earlier stage of his thought.) Modern readers might be
embarrassed by such metaphysical speculation, but in fact, if anything, this
is where Ptolemy precisely anticipates the scientiﬁc revolution. Kepler and
Newton – to mention just two examples – were attracted to the construc-
tion of a grand scientiﬁc model of the universe, precisely as the key to the
ﬁnding of the universe’s rational, divine structure, a pursuit that, in all
likelihood, goes back at least to Eudoxus. We need to understand Ptolemy
as
under
the
inﬂuence
of
two
unequal
forces:
the
pull
of
a
Pythagoreanizing metaphysics of the universe as a harmonious, mathemat-
ical structure and the pull of the mathematical technique of the construc-
tion and computation of astronomical tables. In the practice of Ptolemy’s
III. Culmination: Ptolemy

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

astronomy, the pull of technique is the more powerful, and so technique
becomes nearly its own independent pursuit, the metaphysics revealing
itself merely intermittently, through the cracks, as it were, of the system.
The tide of science will recede and rise again for many centuries to come,
but generally speaking – as we will see in the remaining chapters – the pull
of metaphysics tends to get stronger. With authors such as Kepler, the pull
of metaphysics is overpowering even as they seek to maintain the precision
of Ptolemy’s mathematical technique: it is then that modern science
takes oﬀ.
Suggestions for Further Reading
The history of astronomy is a specialized scientiﬁc expertise: one needs
to understand the mathematics of a theory – but then also to calculate
its consequences and compare them against currently known astronom-
ical observations. This is a piecemeal exercise of puzzle-solving, very
much like normal scientiﬁc practice. This was most brilliantly pursued
by Otto Neugebauer, whose three-volume monument must be men-
tioned ﬁrst: O. Neugebauer, A History of Ancient Mathematical
Astronomy (New York: Springer, ). (Known in the profession
simply as HAMA.) Neugebauer was a genius. Focused on getting the
details of the science right, Neugebauer was less interested in questions
of historical context, whether in society as a whole or even within the
scientiﬁc practice itself. To him, it was all parameters. Once you get
into the thick of a particular technical question, his writings become
compelling, even gripping, but I am not sure I can recommend
Neugebauer to most of my readers: his writings might strike you as
impenetrable and, frankly, unmotivated.
Alexander Jones is, more recently, the foremost author trained in
Neugebauer’s tradition, and unlike him, he is as much a historian as a
scientist, not only recovering the detail of past astronomical systems but
also accounting for their meanings and motivations to their original
authors. His exposition of the Antikythera mechanism – A. Jones,
A Portable Cosmos (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ) – touches on
most topics of ancient astronomy. (Jones’s claim is that the mechanism
was in fact designed to serve as an introduction to ancient astronomy, and
in Jones’s hands, it certainly becomes so.) This is also, in its own way, as
much a work of genius as HAMA and is, quite simply, the best introduc-
tion to ancient astronomy we now have. Another excellent introduction –

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

structured around examples and exercises and so almost a textbook – is
J. Evans, The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, ).
F. Rochberg, The Heavenly Writing (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ) focuses on Babylonian astral divination, but (because this was,
indeed, the motivation to Babylonian astral science as a whole) it is the
best introduction to Babylonian astronomy as a cultural phenomenon.
Particular points I discuss include the Mesopotamian invention of astro-
nomical prediction, the spread of astrological practice, and the invention of
the table. For the ﬁrst, see D. Brown, Mesopotamian Planetary Astronomy-
Astrology (Groningen: Brill, ). For the second, see A. Jones,
Astronomical
Papyri
from
Oxyrhynchus
(Philadelphia:
American
Philosophical Society, ). For the third, see E.Robson, “Tables and
Tabular Formatting in Sumer, Babylonia and Assyria, –,”
in M. Campbell-Kelly, M. Croarken, R. Flood, and E. Robson (eds.), The
History of Mathematical Tables: From Sumer to Spreadsheets (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, ).
I refer in particular to four individual studies on early Greek astronomy:
H. Mendell, “Reﬂections on Eudoxus, Callippus and Their Curves:
Hippopedes and Callippopedes,” Centaurus (): –, and
I. Yavetz, “On the Homocentric Spheres of Eudoxus,” Archive for
History of Exact Sciences (): –– the two articles that came
out, independently, in the same year, reopening the study of Eudoxus’s
astronomy. I suggest this should be read against the background of the
evidence of Epicurus’s reaction: D. N. Sedley, “Epicurus and the
Mathematicians of Cyzicus,” Cronache Ercolanesi (): –. An
attempt to debunk the entire project is B. R. Goldstein and A. C. Bowen,
“A New View of Early Greek Astronomy,” Isis (): –, now
mostly seen as an extreme but salutary reminder of our limited evidence.
For the whodunit – the question of how a new astronomy based on
epicycles and eccentrics was oﬀered in the Hellenistic era – I refer to
J. Evans and C. C. Carman, “Mechanical Astronomy: A Route to the
Ancient Discovery of Epicycles and Eccentrics,” in N. Sidoli and G. Van
Brummelen (eds.), From Alexandria, through Baghdad: Surveys and Studies
in the Ancient Greek and Medieval Islamic Mathematical Sciences in Honor
of J. L. Berggren (New York: Springer, ), pp. –.
The major ﬁgure of ancient astronomy must have been Hipparchus.
There is a real need for a monograph dedicated to him, but incredibly,
there is none (admittedly, there are relatively few sources). We do a little
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

better with Ptolemy, although once again usually focusing on the technical
detail of the astronomy. O. Pedersen, A Survey of the Almagest: With
Annotation and New Commentary by Alexander Jones (New York: Springer,
), is the best guide to the contents of this work, hence to the ﬁnal
developed form of ancient astronomy. Finally, the realism (as against instru-
mentalism) of ancient astronomy is the topic of G. E. R. Lloyd, “Saving the
Appearances,” Classical Quarterly (): –.

Mathematics of the Stars
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

