The Philosophy of 
Mathematics
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Mathematics 
and Explanation
Christopher Pincock
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
edited by
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
MATHEMATICS
AND EXPLANATION
Christopher Pincock
The Ohio State University
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009017664
DOI: 10.1017/9781009039154
© Christopher Pincock 2023
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
First published 2023
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-009-01766-4 Paperback
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mathematics and Explanation
Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
DOI: 10.1017/9781009039154
First published online: April 2023
Christopher Pincock
The Ohio State University
Author for correspondence: Christopher Pincock, pincock.1@osu.edu
Abstract: This Element answers four questions. Can any traditional
theory of scientiﬁc explanation make sense of the place of mathematics
in explanation? If traditional monist theories are inadequate, is there
some way to develop a more ﬂexible but still monist approach that will
clarify how mathematics can help to explain? What sort of pluralism
about explanation is best equipped to clarify how mathematics can
help to explain in science and in mathematics itself? Finally, how can the
mathematical elements of an explanation be integrated into the
physical world? Some of the evidence for a novel scientiﬁc posit may be
traced to the explanatory power that this posit would aﬀord, were it to
exist. Can a similar kind of explanatory evidence be provided for the
existence of mathematical objects, and if not, why not?
Keywords: explanation, pluralism, platonism, causation, inference
to the best explanation
© Christopher Pincock 2023
ISBNs: 9781009017664 (PB), 9781009039154 (OC)
ISSNs: 2399-2883 (online), 2514-3808 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
1 Introduction
1
2 The Challenge to Traditional Theories of Scientiﬁc
Explanation
2
3 Counterfactual Accounts of Mathematical Explanation
19
4 Explanatory Pluralism
34
5 Autonomy, Indispensability, and Inference to the Best
Explanation
57
References
75
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1 Introduction
Some scientiﬁc explanations involve mathematics. Within mathematics, some
proofs are said to explain. Do these practices tell us anything about the nature of
explanation or mathematics? In this Element this daunting topic is divided into four
parts. First, can any traditional theory of scientiﬁc explanation make sense of the
place of mathematics in explanation? Each traditional theory that is discussed is
a monist theory because it supposes that what makes something a legitimate
explanation is always the same (Section 2). Second, if traditional monist theories
are inadequate, is there some way to develop a more ﬂexible but still monist
approach that will clarify how mathematics can help to explain (Section 3)? After
a consideration of the limitations of some recent ﬂexible monist accounts, the
options for a pluralist approach are examined. What sort of pluralism about
explanation is best equipped to clarify how mathematics can help to explain in
science and in mathematics itself? While a pluralist can allow that different sorts of
explanations work differently, it still remains important to clarify the value of
explanations (Section 4). Finally, how can the mathematical elements of an explan-
ation be integrated into the physical world? Some of the evidence for a novel
scientiﬁc posit may be traced to the explanatory power that this posit would afford,
were it to exist. Can a similar kind of explanatory evidence be provided for the
existence of mathematical objects, and if not, why not? (Section 5).
In his 2001 paper “Mathematical Explanation: Problems and Prospects”
Paolo Mancosu argues that “mathematical explanations can be used to test
theories of scientiﬁc explanation and that an account of mathematical explan-
ation might have important consequences for the philosophy of science”
(Mancosu 2001, p. 102). This Element builds on this point by considering
how various approaches to scientiﬁc explanation can make sense of both (i)
explanatory proofs in pure mathematics and (ii) scientiﬁc explanations that turn
essentially on mathematical resources. In Sections 2–4 I argue that the best
option for clarifying how these explanations work is pluralism about explan-
ation. This means that different explanations employ different explanatory
relevance relations when they indicate why some target is the way that it is. In
Section 5 I consider the signiﬁcance of mathematical explanation for the
interpretation of pure mathematics. I argue that the existence of genuine math-
ematical explanations does not support the existence of mathematical objects
through the use of inference to the best explanation.
My own interest in mathematical explanation can be traced directly to the
pioneering work of Paolo Mancosu (see especially Mancosu 2000, 2001, 2008,
2018).1 I was lucky enough to have Mancosu as the advisor for my 2002
1 A new version of (Mancosu 2018) is currently in preparation.
1
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

dissertation on questions related to the applicability of mathematics. This
Element attempts to follow Mancosu’s call to attend carefully to mathematical
and scientiﬁc practice in philosophical work. I believe that the pluralism about
explanation that I argue for is consistent with Mancosu’s views, but he may not
agree with the account of what all explanations have in common that I offer here
(Section 4.3).
A draft of this Element beneﬁtted enormously from comments by Sam Baron,
Andre Curtis-Trudel, Marc Lange, and Paolo Mancosu. I have unfortunately not
been able to address all of their helpful suggestions here, and they are, of course,
not responsible for any remaining errors or oversimpliﬁcations of the issues
discussed. I am also grateful to two anonymous referees for their insightful
reactions to the penultimate version of this Element. I hope this Element will
help to introduce new readers to the wonders of mathematical explanation, and
also to inspire new work on this complex topic.
2 The Challenge to Traditional Theories of Scientiﬁc Explanation
This section starts by introducing ﬁve principles that are used to test competing
accounts of explanation, and illustrates how these tests work by developing
some standard objections to accounts that emphasize derivation and uniﬁcation
(Section 2.1). This section also considers three causal accounts of explanation
and argues that they are unable to make sense of the contrast between explan-
ations that merely employ mathematics to represent something else and explan-
ations whose explanatory power is tied more directly to the mathematics
employed (Section 2.2).
2.1 Derivation and Uniﬁcation
Philosophical investigations of a topic like explanation typically take for
granted some principles about that topic that make it possible to test competing
accounts. This Element takes for granted ﬁve principles. It supposes that an
account of explanation aims to cover all explanations, including those found in
science and mathematics. As I will argue, many accounts fail to respect the
principles articulated in this section. We can thus use these principles to identify
the problems with various accounts of explanation that have been proposed,
especially when one considers how mathematics ﬁgures into explanations. Of
course, one may avoid these problems by rejecting one or more of the principles
that are assumed here.
All participants in these debates agree that a scientiﬁc explanation provides
a reason why something is the case. The target of an explanation may be
something particular, like a speciﬁc event or state. The target may also be
2
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

something general, like a recurring pattern or phenomenon. A legitimate
explanation of a target indicates why that target is the way it is. This motivates
our ﬁrst principle for accounts of explanation:
1. There is an important distinction between a description of some target of
explanation and an explanation of that target.
This principle does not deﬁnitively refute any account, as a defender of any
account is liable to interpret “an important distinction” in their own self-serving
way. However, I will appeal to this principle to help to clarify my reasons for
questioning this or that proposal.2
A closely related principle involves the distinction between the evidence that
some phenomenon has some character and an explanation of that aspect of the
phenomenon. For example, careful paleontological investigations may deter-
mine that the rate of the Earth’s rotation on its axis is decreasing. But additional
accounts of the gravitational interactions between the Earth and the Moon are
needed to explain this change. Our second principle is thus:
2. There is an important distinction between the evidence for some fact and an
explanation of that fact.
The third principle that I will deploy assumes that there is an order to
explanation. If one says that B is the case because of A, then A provides
a reason for B being the way that it is. In some respect, then, A must be more
basic or fundamental than B. In causal explanation, A is partly responsible for
the occurrence of B, and so in this sense is also more basic. If this is right, then it
would be illegitimate to appeal to B when explaining A. One way to summarize
this point is to say that an explanatory relevance relation is asymmetrical: when
A stands in that relation to B, then B does not stand in that very relation to
A. However, the issue is complicated by the fact that an explanation may have
parts. To allow for explanations with parts, our third principle has the following
formulation:
3. (Priority) If A is part of an explanation of B, then B is not part of an
explanation of A.
For example, the mass of the Moon is part of the explanation for why the rate of
rotation of the Earth on its axis is decreasing over time. Our third principle thus
requires that the decreasing rate of rotation of the Earth on its axis is not part of
an explanation of the mass of the Moon.
2 For a recent discussion of this issue, see Taylor (forthcoming).
3
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Our fourth and ﬁfth principles help to identify the subject matter of this
Element. This is the special character of some explanations that involve math-
ematics. As we will see later in this section, many philosophers maintain that
some explanations that involve mathematics use the mathematics in a special
way that renders the explanation genuinely or distinctively mathematical.
Following Baker and Baron, I will call such explanations “genuine mathemat-
ical explanations.”3 Of course, not everyone agrees that there are genuine
mathematical explanations. But our fourth principle takes for granted that
genuine mathematical explanations exist and requires that an account clarify
their character:
4. There is a special way that mathematics may appear in a scientiﬁc explan-
ation that makes it a genuine mathematical explanation.
Our ﬁfth (and ﬁnal) principle relates to pure mathematics. One goal of
mathematical activity is to obtain a proof of a theorem. Mathematicians some-
times praise or criticize a proof based on its explanatory power. In certain
contexts, it is thought valuable to explain why a theorem is the case even after
it has been given a proof that is otherwise adequate. Our ﬁfth principle assumes
that this feature of mathematical practice is legitimate:
5. Some proofs of a theorem explain why that theorem is the case, while other
proofs do not explain why that theorem is the case.4
Combining our fourth and ﬁfth principles will turn out to be a powerful tool to
criticize some proposed accounts of explanation. Many proposals will fail the
fourth or ﬁfth test because they do not allow for genuine mathematical explan-
ations or they rule out explanatory proofs. As with the other principles, this does
not provide a deﬁnitive refutation of these proposals, but it does clarify their
limitations and also why some may reject those proposals.
Much of our discussion will turn on cases where mathematics appears in an
explanation. Our ﬁrst case is an answer to the question, “Why is the shadow cast
by the Ohio Stadium ﬂagpole 49 m in length at 3 p.m.?” An explanation of this
state may appeal to the position of the sun at the time and to the height of the
ﬂagpole. But this information does not seem sufﬁcient to explain the length of
the shadow, as there is a deductive gap between the statements that provide this
information and the statement characterizing the target of the explanation:
3 See especially Baker (2005), Lange (2013), and Baron (2019).
4 Contrary to the claims of D’Alessandro (2020), nobody assumes that all explanations in pure
mathematics are proofs. See especially Mancosu (2001) and Lange (2018b). I restrict my focus
here to proofs to make the discussion tractable.
4
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1. At 3 p.m., the light rays from the sun hit the top of the ﬂagpole at an angle of
45°.
2. The height of the ﬂagpole is 49 m.
Therefore, the length of the shadow is 49 m.
To close this deductive gap, we need to add a statement from geometric optics
that involves trigonometry:
3. The length x of the shadow cast by any pole of height y m when the light hits
at an angle of 45° satisﬁes the following equation: tan 45° ¼ x m=y m.
As tan 45° = 1 and y = 49, it follows that x = 49 (Figure 1). So for this type of
case, at least, the role for the mathematics in the explanation is to permit the
deduction of a statement characterizing the explanatory target.
Although the idea has a long history, Hempel is the philosopher who did the
most to argue that a necessary condition on an important kind of explanation is
that the explanation provide a deduction of a statement describing the explana-
tory target. Hempel called such explanations “deductive-nomological” (D-N)
explanations. The term “nomological” indicates an additional necessary condi-
tion on such deductions: they must deduce their target statement through the
essential use of a scientiﬁc law. Our statement 3 would be the law for this
D-N explanation. This is Hempel’s way of distinguishing an explanation from
a description.
Figure 1 The ﬂagpole and the shadow.
5
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Hempel offered different motivations for the need for laws in explanations.
In his famous Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation, for example, Hempel (1965)
says “[(i)] the argument shows that, given the particular circumstances and the
laws in question, the occurrence of the phenomenon was to be expected; and
[(ii)] it is in this sense that the explanation enables us to understand why the
phenomenon occurred.” But in addition “[(iii)] it is in virtue of such laws that
the particular facts cited in the explanans possess explanatory relevance to the
explanandum phenomenon” (p. 337).5 The relationship between (i), (ii), and
(iii) is far from clear. One interpretation of Hempel is that what makes
something explanatorily relevant is that this fact could have been used to
lawfully predict that state in advance. It is this that constitutes our understand-
ing of that state.
The most inﬂuential objection to Hempel’s D-N account takes for granted
that some laws permit deductions with a troubling sort of symmetry. Our
ﬂagpole case was in fact introduced into these debates to illustrate one such
troubling case.6 For in addition to the presumably acceptable explanation just
given, the following deductive argument also seems to meet all of Hempel’s
necessary conditions on D-N explanations:
1. At 3 p.m., the light rays from the sun hit the top of the ﬂagpole at an angle of
45°.
2’. The length of the shadow is 49 m.
3’. The height y of any pole that casts a shadow of length x m when the light hits
at an angle of 45° satisﬁes the equation: tan 45° ¼ x m=y m.
Therefore, the height of the ﬂagpole is 49 m.
If (3) is a law, then (3’) is also a law. As both arguments are deductively valid,
Hempel seems to lack any principled reason to exclude this explanation. But if
both explanations are granted, then we violate our third principle concerning the
order of explanatory priority. This principle says that if A is part of an explan-
ation for B, then B cannot be part of an explanation for A. But here we have the
height of the ﬂagpole being part of an explanation of the length of the shadow,
and also the length of the shadow being part of an explanation of the height of
the ﬂagpole. Thus we face a choice between agreeing with Hempel and main-
taining an order of explanatory priority. Applying our third principle requires
rejecting Hempel’s approach to explanation.
Most philosophers of science have accepted explanatory priority and thus
rejected Hempel’s D-N account as inadequate. By far the most popular
5 The explanandum is the target of the explanation or what is being explained. The explanans is the
explanation itself or what provides the explanation.
6 See Salmon (1989) for extensive discussion of this and other objections to Hempel.
6
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

approach adds a causal condition on explanation, which we consider in
Section 2.2. However, Kitcher offered a different diagnosis of the failings of
Hempel’s approach. He argued that Hempel failed because he tried to assess
explanations individually. The alternative approach that Kitcher pursued is to
evaluate explanations globally based on how well they help to unify or system-
atize a collection of accepted statements: “Science advances our understanding
of nature by showing us how to derive descriptions of many phenomena, using
the same derivation again and again, and, in demonstrating this, it teaches us
how to reduce the number of types of facts we have to accept as ultimate (or
brute)” (Kitcher 1989, p. 432). At any given time in the history of science, there
will be some set of accepted statements K. The “explanatory store” over K will
specify a set of argument patterns that permit some members of K to be derived
from other members of K. An explanation (with respect to this K) will then be
an instance of such an argument pattern. Kitcher adds that an explanation is
legitimate when it appears “in the explanatory store in the limit of the rational
development of scientiﬁc practice” (Kitcher 1989, p. 498).
To appreciate the explanatory role for mathematics that Kitcher’s approach
creates, it will be useful to introduce a case from pure mathematics.7 As
assumed in our ﬁfth principle, only some proofs in mathematics are judged to
explain the theorem proven. In Euclid’s Elements the solution to a problem
involves constructing a geometric ﬁgure using the limited resources licensed by
his postulates, for example to connect any two points by a line or to draw a circle
around a point with the radius of some line. One such problem is to bisect an
angle BAC (Book I, proposition 9; see Figure 2).
The ﬁrst step to solve this problem is to pick some point on line BA. Call this
point D. A circle centered on A and of radius AD can then be drawn to cross line
CA at a new point E. Radius AD is equal in length to AE. An earlier construction
in Euclid shows how to construct an equilateral triangle on any given line.
Construct such a triangle on line DE, with a third corner F. Finally, connect F to
A. The triangles ADF and AEF are congruent, as they have three sides of the
same length (AD = AE, DF = EF, AF = AF). As congruent triangles have
corresponding angles of the same size, angle DAF = angle EAF, and the
bisection is completed. Let us suppose that this construction not only proves
that every angle can be bisected, but also that it explains why every angle can be
bisected.
A construction procedure like the bisection of an angle can be iterated, and so
it is clearly possible to divide an angle into n equal parts when n satisﬁes the
equation n = 2m, for some m (n = 2, 4, 8, 16, …). Discussing a case like this,
7 For Kitcher’s own examples from pure mathematics, see Kitcher (1989, p. 424).
7
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Kitcher notes that “[e]ven when we are interested in explaining a particular
event or state, the explanation we desire may well be one that would also explain
something quite general, and any attention to the local details may be misguided
and explanatorily inadequate” (Kitcher 1989, p. 427). In this case, one may ask
why an angle can be divided into 64 equal parts. While one proposed explan-
ation would lay out all the steps of the construction, Kitcher’s view is that
a better explanation would connect the 64-part case to all the cases that are
amenable to a uniﬁed construction procedure. The goal of uniﬁcation is often
prominent in pure mathematics as well as in many scientiﬁc cases. In Kitcher’s
terms, this would lead the explanatory store over a K that includes Euclidean
geometry to contain a single argument pattern that covers all divisions of angles
into n parts, where n is a power of 2. The instances of this pattern would then
count as explaining their respective theorems.
More generally, the explanatory store over K is arrived at by identifying the
smallest number of stringent argument patterns that permit the most members of
K to be conclusions of some instance of some such pattern.8 It is not clear if
Figure 2 Bisecting an angle.
8 A stringent argument pattern places substantial conditions on how its instances can be generated.
These conditions are needed to avoid making uniﬁcations too easy to achieve.
8
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Kitcher’s procedure for picking out the explanatory store over K is well deﬁned,
and there are difﬁcult issues associated with how this procedure is meant to
accommodate scientiﬁc change. Kitcher does offer an intriguing place for math-
ematics in explanation, though. For it does seem that mathematical theorems are
well suited to unify large numbers of mathematical and nonmathematical claims.
This is clear even from our two cases so far. For both the ﬂagpole case and the
bisection case, the generalizability of the mathematical result shows how many
similar cases can be treated in a uniform fashion. All the members of K that
involve a shadow being of a certain length can be handled using a single argument
pattern whose crucial premise generalizes (3): The length x meters of the shadow
cast by any object of height y meters when the light hits at an angle of z degrees
satisﬁes the equation tan z degrees = x meters / y meters. Similarly, for any
number of parts n = 2m, the complete instructions for how to bisect any angle
into that many parts can be given using (n – 1) iterations of the angle bisection
construction.9
Kitcher also proposed an ingenious way to preserve explanatory priority
using his uniﬁcationist approach to explanation (Kitcher 1989, p. 484). His
general strategy was to argue that any purported explanatory store E(K) over
K that allowed for troubling symmetrical pairs of derivations would have
redundant argument patterns. So, E(K) could be replaced by a different explana-
tory store E’(K) that would provide a better uniﬁcation of K by disqualifying
one of the proposed explanations. In the ﬂagpole case, Kitcher allows for an
argument pattern that derives the height of ﬂagpoles from lengths of shadows
using our generalization of (3). But he insists that there will be another argument
pattern that derives the dimensions of ordinary objects like ﬂagpoles and towers
in terms of their origin and development or, as we might put it, their constitu-
tion. The height of the ﬂagpole can be derived by summarizing how it was
constructed, so that its parts combine to yield an object of this height. If E(K)
has this argument pattern and also has an argument pattern H that derives the
height of the ﬂagpole based on the length of the shadow it casts, then argument
pattern H only derives statements that can also be derived in some other way.
Thus, an explanatory store E’(K) that drops pattern H and retains the constitu-
tion pattern would mark an improvement.
The powerful role of mathematics in unifying derivations turns out to be
a problem for Kitcher’s approach. We can see this by recalling our ﬁrst two
principles for an account of explanation: a description is not an explanation, and
evidence for a target is not an explanation of that target. Kitcher is preoccupied
9 As each bisection increases the number of parts by 1, dividing an angle into n = 2m parts requires
n – 1 bisections.
9
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

with the number of stringent argument patterns needed to derive a given set of
claims. Here is a case from geometric optics that Kitcher’s analysis gets
wrong.10 The law of reﬂection says that when a ray of light hits a reﬂecting
surface like a mirror, the angle of incidence θi equals the angle of reﬂection θr
(Figure 3).
Another law of optics is Snell’s law, which concerns refraction: when a light
ray goes from one medium (like air) to another (like water), the direction of the
ray will change or refract. If the new medium is more dense than the old
medium, the angle that the ray makes to the normal axis will decrease so that
θ1 > θ2 (Figure 4).
Snell’s law connects the ratio of the sines of these angles to the ratio between
the so-called refractive indexes n1, n2 of these media:
n1=n2 ¼ sin θ2=sin θ1:
The measured refractive indexes of different media were found to increase with
the density of the media, but no further explanation for why this law obtained
was apparent.11
If we follow Kitcher, then we should adopt an argument pattern as explanatory
if it permits one to treat reﬂection and refraction together.12 One such argument
pattern deploys Fermat’s principle that a light ray will travel between two points on
the path that minimizes the time of the trip. Both the law of refraction and Snell’s
law can be derived in a uniform fashion from Fermat’s principle. The derivations
take the endpoints of the light ray’s path to be ﬁxed and vary the point O at which
θr
θi
Figure 3 Law of reﬂection.
10 More involved examples of the same kind are used to criticize Kitcher in Morrison (2000). See
also Hafner and Mancosu (2008) for criticisms of Kitcher’s proposal for explanatory proofs.
11 See Nahin (2004) for more on this case.
12 This assumes a set of statements K where there is no way to obtain an explanatory store over
K that lacks this pattern and that scores better on Kitcher’s criteria. Arguably, such a K was
present during Fermat’s time, prior to our current understanding of the nature of light.
10
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the ray strikes the surface. Basic trigonometry then sufﬁces to calculate the time
for each potential path. For any reﬂection, the least-time path is the symmetric path
required by the law of reﬂection. For Snell’s law, one must assume that the speed
of light in some medium, vi, is determined by the ratio between the speed of light in
a vacuum, c, and the refractive index of that medium, ni ðvi ¼ c = niÞ.
Qualitatively, the travel time of the light will be less if it travels longer in the
medium with a higher speed of light. More mathematically, the time for each
potential path can be surveyed by varying the point O where the ray crosses media.
The least-time path can then be identiﬁed and found to ﬁt Snell’s law.
The objection to Kitcher’s uniﬁcation approach to mathematical explanation
is that this uniform derivation does not explain the instances of these laws. One
diagnosis of this failure is that a uniform derivation of the instances of these
laws may not clarify the processes involved. There is no reason to suppose that
the light ray somehow chooses a path that minimizes the travel time.
Minimizing the travel time is not a reason why light travels in this way. As
we might put it, we have arrived at a uniform, mathematical redescription of the
phenomena of reﬂection and refraction, but this is not yet an explanation for
why light follows these laws. It seems that Kitcher’s approach to explanation
ignores this distinction between uniform redescription and explanation.13
One lesson, then, is that many mathematical derivations are not explanations,
but redescriptions. Our principle of the order of explanatory priority also
highlights that many mathematical derivations are not explanations, but merely
predictions. There is a third kind of case to consider, though. We might have
θ1
Air
Water
θ2
Figure 4 Law of refraction.
13 As Reutlinger (2018) notes, Hempel claimed that Fermat’s principle could be used to explain.
I consider Reutlinger’s reasons for endorsing this aspect of Hempel in Section 3.1.
11
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cases where the mathematics is present in a legitimate explanation but the
mathematics itself is not explanatory. One way to parse such cases is that the
mathematics is there functioning merely to represent something else that is
doing the explaining. But there might still be other cases where the mathematics
is doing the explaining. In “Mathematical Explanation by Law” Baron calls this
the “genuineness problem”: “to uphold a meaningful distinction between
explanatory and non-explanatory uses of mathematics in science” (Baron
2019).14 This is our fourth principle for an account of explanation. Baron’s
plan (in this paper) for how to solve the genuineness problem involves building
on Hempel’s and Kitcher’s emphasis on deduction. But, unlike Hempel and
Kitcher, Baron considers the different ways that mathematics can afford deriv-
ations. In one kind of case, the information that the mathematics contributes
concerning the explanatory target is exhausted by how the mathematics is
representing the target. Consider, for example, a case where a mathematical
claim conveys information about a physical system by ﬁrst picking out an
abstract mathematical structure and then relating it to the target by some kind
of structural mapping. Our ﬂagpole case is like this, where different geometric
lines are interpreted in terms of light rays, physical heights of objects, and
lengths of shadows. For such cases, it looks like we have only a mathematical
representation of some nonmathematical explanation. Baron summarizes this
kind of descriptive information this way: “M contains descriptive physical
information relevant to [target] P when M contains information about an aspect
of some mathematical structure that is mapped into the physical structure
corresponding to P” (Baron 2019, p. 709, emphasis added). But Baron argues
that in other cases the mathematical claims provide information about the target
over and above what is represented via these mappings: in such cases
M provides information about P “in virtue of carrying information about an
aspect of a mathematical structure and yet that aspect is not a relatum in
a mapping relation between the mathematical and physical structures at
issue” (Baron 2019, p. 710).
My worry about Baron’s approach is that information can be provided in this
way, and so not be descriptive in Baron’s sense, and yet still fail to be explana-
tory. To help readers appreciate this worry, I will ﬁrst summarize a case where it
looks as if Baron’s test works. Consider the seven bridges that at one time
connected four areas of the city of Königsberg (Figure 5).
It turns out that it is impossible to make a tour of these bridges that crosses
each bridge exactly once. One explanation of this impossibility relates the
bridges to an abstract mathematical graph (Figure 6).
14 See Baker (2005).
12
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This relation is one of the structural mappings that Baron talks about: bridges
are mapped to edges, and areas of land are mapped to nodes. This mapping
associates paths across the bridges with sequences of connected edges. We can
show that this abstract graph has no sequence that proceeds from node to node
along edges such that each edge is included exactly once. This entails that it is
impossible to cross all the bridges exactly once on a tour of the bridges. But this
impossibility is “not a relatum in a mapping relation between the mathematical
and physical structures at issue.” So Baron’s test is met, and we have an
explanatory mathematical derivation of a feature of a physical system. In
these cases, “the structural mappings constitute a point of contact across
which non-descriptive information may be conveyed” (Baron 2019, p. 709).
The problem with Baron’s proposal is that we can specify cases where
Baron’s test is met and yet these derivations are not explanations. That is, we
Figure 5 The bridges of Königsberg.
Figure 6 A graph.
13
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

have a violation of our second principle that distinguishes evidence for the
target and an explanation of the target. Sometimes our evidence allows us to
predict how something will be in advance, but these predictions are not explan-
ations of that outcome. Consider, for example, the predictive model for protein
folding known as AlphaFold (Senior et al. 2020). A protein is a molecule made
up of a sequence of amino acids. Many of the functional features of the protein
are tied to the three-dimensional shape it assumes. The DeepMind research
group developed AlphaFold as a neural network that can efﬁciently solve this
daunting computational problem in a reliable and accurate way. The neural
network contains a large number of elements whose connections transform the
input
information
about
some
given
sequence
of
amino
acids
into
a representation of the three-dimensional structure of the protein. The
researchers trained and reﬁned the network using some of the available data
about protein structures and various algorithms that adjust the connections
between elements. Crucially, though, the elements (besides the input and output
layers) and connections are not assigned any determinate physical interpret-
ation. This means that we have a mathematical structure that is almost com-
pletely
detached
from
any
structural
mappings
to
protein
features.
Unsurprisingly, in their summary of this very successful research, the scientists
do not employ the language of explanation, saying instead that “[h]ere we show
that we can train a neural network to make accurate predictions of the distances
between pairs of residues [of amino acids], which convey more information
about the structure than contact predictions” (Senior et al. 2020, p. 706). The
information about the protein structure is effectively encoded in the mathemat-
ical structure of the network by elements with no clear physical interpretation.
So Baron’s test is met, but this mathematical derivation does not explain why
that protein has that structure. Baron might respond that a derivation of protein
structure using AlphaFold is not an explanation because the derivation lacks
some other necessary features of an explanation. I would agree with Baron on
this point. But this shows that we cannot identify what makes something
a genuine mathematical explanation by focusing on how mathematics affords
derivations.15
2.2 Causation
Already we can see that some approaches to explanation face severe difﬁculties.
I will say that an approach is a monist approach if it supposes that every
explanation involves the very same explanatory relation. I think of these rela-
tions as relations between facts in the world: if A obtains because of B, then
15 See Povich (2021, pp. 516–519) for a similar worry, along with concerns of a different kind.
14
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A stands in some special explanatory relevance relation to B.16 Our genuineness
principle assumes that some cases have mathematics in the explanation, and yet
the mathematics is not standing in the appropriate explanatory relation because
it is representing the explainers. A monist approach makes it hard to see what
the mathematics is doing in such explanations. More importantly, many rela-
tions that monists examine seem to preclude mathematics from standing in that
relation to targets. So, a monist risks ruling out genuine mathematical explan-
ations altogether (Zelcer 2013; Kuorikoski 2021).
This challenge is easy to appreciate for the main versions of a causal account of
explanation. A causal account ﬁrst says what causes are and then clariﬁes how
explanations relate to causes. In broad strokes, the three main approaches to causal
explanation can be traced back to Salmon, Lewis, and Woodward. Salmon argued
that causes are a type of process (Salmon 1984). So we can explain something by
describing a causal process that led up to its occurrence. Salmon had a somewhat
restricted notion of a causal process tied to physics, but more recently the so-called
new mechanists have extended the basic approach so that it is more ﬂexible. One
summary statement of this mechanist approach is “Mechanisms are entities and
activities organized such that they are productive of regular changes from start or
set-up to ﬁnish or termination conditions” (Machamer et al. 2000, p. 3). Our
ﬂagpole case would then involve a mechanism associated with the transmission of
light. Mathematics can function to represent mechanisms, but it is only the
mechanisms themselves that are explanatory. The attempted explanation of the
height of the ﬂagpole via the length of the shadow then fails because there is no
mechanism that is “productive” in this direction.
David Lewis’ inﬂuential work on causal explanation aspires to characterize
causes in terms of counterfactuals. One simple proposal is that event C causes
event E just in case that were C not to have occurred, then E would not have
occurred. However, this simple proposal is vulnerable to a number of counter-
examples. Suppose S throws a rock (C) that breaks a window (E), but that were
S not to have thrown her rock, then B would have thrown his rock (C’) and broken
the window (E). In such a case, C causes E, and yet it is not the case that were
C not to have occurred, then E would not occur, as were C not to have occurred,
the backup C’ would have occurred and brought about E. To handle this worry
and other objections Lewis required that a cause be connected to an effect through
a series of intermediate events in a special way: small counterfactual variations in
the cause go along with small counterfactual variations in some intermediate
events and in the effect (Lewis 2004, p. 91). For example, S’s throwing of the
rock, the actual cause, is connected to the breaking by intermediate events such as
16 See Pincock (2018) for more discussion of this approach.
15
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the rock being halfway to the window. In addition, small changes in S’s throwing
of the rock go along with small changes in how the window breaks. By contrast,
small changes in B’s throwing make little to no difference to how the window
breaks. Lewis’ hope was that we can single out the right events as causes using
these elaborate collections of counterfactuals.
Lewis’ counterfactual approach has no difﬁculties with our ﬂagpole case, as
small changes in the height of the ﬂagpole do go along with small changes in the
length of the shadow. How does Lewis rule out the opposite direction as
noncausal and so nonexplanatory? Consider the claim that were the shadow to
have been shorter, then the ﬂagpole would have been shorter. To evaluate this
counterfactual we consider the possible situation that is most similar to the
actual situation, but where the shadow is shorter. One initial puzzle is whether
we should consider a possible situation where the shadow has been made shorter
through a change in the ﬂagpole. If that situation is appropriately similar to the
actual world, then the counterfactual claim would come out true. This kind of
counterfactual is known as a “backtracking” counterfactual: it becomes true by
considering a situation where the truth of the consequent is the basis for the truth
of the antecedent.17 Other backtracking counterfactuals are tied to predictions
(“If the barometer reading had not fallen, then the storm would not have
occurred”) or identities (“If water was not a liquid at room temperature, then
H2O would not be a liquid at room temperature”). A counterfactual approach to
causal explanation needs to rule out some counterfactuals as explanatory if it is
to satisfy our ﬁrst three principles for description, evidence, and priority.
Lewis argued that backtracking counterfactuals are not the right kind of
counterfactual for an analysis of causation. He eliminated backtracking coun-
terfactuals from his analysis of causation by comparing possible situations to
actual situations in a special way. The counterfactuals needed for causes have
their antecedents made true in a way that involves a special sort of miraculous,
minimal departure from the actual world. This minimal change preserves as
much as possible concerning the intrinsic features of the actual situation along
with the actual physical laws. Given how the world is, one such miraculous,
minimal departure would shorten the length of the shadow by inserting a new
light source that left everything else as it actually is. Such a minimal change in
the length of the shadow would not go along with a change in the height of the
ﬂagpole. That is, the counterfactual “if the shadow were shorter, then the
ﬂagpole would have been shorter,” as Lewis intended it, comes out false. So,
the length of the shadow is not a cause of the height of the ﬂagpole.
17 For a counterfactual of the form “If A were the case, then B would be the case,” A is the
antecedent and B is the consequent.
16
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Woodward also emphasizes the links between causation and counterfac-
tuals, but winds up with a very different account than Lewis (Woodward
2003). One source of disagreement concerns the issue about how to rule out
backtracking counterfactuals. Woodward rejects Lewis’ appeal to miraculous,
minimal departures from the actual world as too metaphysical. First, it is hard
to know how to implement this notion of a minimal departure in actual
scientiﬁc cases, given the central role of the intrinsic character of objects.
Second, scientists do not seem to worry about this issue, which suggests that
there is a scientiﬁc notion of causation that can be developed without Lewis’
apparatus. For Woodward, the best strategy is to make causation relative to
a set of variables. A variable is a family of values, where we suppose that an
object has at most one of these values at a time. In the ﬂagpole case, we
consider a variable set that includes the height of the ﬂagpole H, the angle that
the sun makes θ, and the length of the shadow L. Other variables in the set
might include the ambient temperature, wind speed, and color of the ﬂagpole.
To see if H is a cause of L, we need to consider what Woodward calls an
intervention on H. This is a special sort of causal change in H from its actual
value that holds the value of other potential causal variables in the set ﬁxed. If
an intervention on H brings about a change in L, then we will say that H is
a cause of L. There is no intervention on L that brings about a change in H, for
we are only permitted to make an intervention by changing L using some
outside change, and not by changing H. So, unlike Lewis’ appeals to miracu-
lous changes and similarities between situations, Woodward argues that he
can get the right account of causes by tying being a cause to a choice of
variable set. The appeal to interventions makes Woodward’s account nonre-
ductive: we appeal to a special sort of causation when we talk about interven-
tions, and so there is no way to specify whether or not C is a cause of E without
using causal notions. Woodward argues that the account is still fruitful, as it
clariﬁes the nature of causes in a way that makes clear how evidence for the
existence of causes can be assembled.
One puzzle for these three causal approaches to explanation is to clarify the
importance of the mathematics to the explanation when the mathematics is
merely representing causes.18 All three views of causal explanation can point
to the powerful way that mathematics affords a description of what they take
causes to be. For a mechanist, the mathematics can track how a mechanism
develops over space and time, and so provide a compact and surveyable
18 Perhaps a more signiﬁcant problem for causal approaches is our ﬁfth principle: some mathemat-
ical proofs explain. If we assume that causes are absent from pure mathematics, then a causal
approach is in trouble. Pluralist approaches to explanation that allow for explanatory proofs are
considered in Section 4.
17
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

representation of what is making some target behave in the way it does. For
Lewis and Woodward, the same point holds for the counterfactuals that they
place at the center of an explanation. Woodward often emphasizes the power-
ful way that a mathematical relationship between the values of his variables
can be exploited to present a causal generalization that covers many systems.
This allows a scientist to answer many “what if things had been different”
questions using the right kind of counterfactual. These generalizations differ
in their scope of application and range of invariance. Other things being equal,
Woodward claims that generalizations with a wider scope or range of invari-
ance contribute to better explanations. So the mathematics is not just used to
represent causes, but may be a means to arrive at a better explanation than
would be otherwise available by representing these causes in some other way.
In all these cases what explains some target is causes. No causes are
mathematical in themselves or intrinsically, but for various cognitive pur-
poses we may ﬁnd it convenient to represent those causes using the mathem-
atics we have available. Some mechanists put this point by emphasizing the
ontic or worldly character of explanation. As Craver argues, “Conceived
ontically . . . the term [‘]explanation[’] refers to an objective portion of the
causal structure of the world, to the set of factors that produce, underlie, or
are otherwise responsible for a phenomenon. Ontic explanations are not
texts; they are full-bodied things” (Craver 2014, p. 40). Not all mechanists
are comfortable singling out this ontic notion as basic, and the counterfactual
approaches of Lewis and Woodward also do not need to go as far as Craver
does. But the basic orientation of all these causal approaches is to restrict the
explanatory role of mathematics to the representation of causes, the legitim-
ate explainers.
This brief survey should make it clear why a causal approach to explan-
ation struggles to make sense of genuine, nonrepresentational cases of math-
ematical explanation. For a causal view, if the mathematics is not itself
causing the target phenomenon, then it is not, strictly speaking, explaining.
It is thus very difﬁcult for a causal approach to satisfy our fourth principle that
genuine mathematical explanations exist. If the defender of a causal approach
to explanation wishes to maintain their monism about explanation, then they
must deny the existence of genuine mathematical explanations. I take this to
be a signiﬁcant cost of causal monist views as there certainly seem to be
genuine mathematical explanations like the bridges case discussed in
Section 2.1.19
19 See Woodward (2018) for a discussion of how Woodward’s approach can be generalized to
include noncausal explanations. Lange (2021a) raises some concerns for this approach.
18
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2.3 Conclusion
In this section I have considered six strict monist accounts of explanation that
include mathematics. Hempel, Kitcher, and Baron had difﬁculties with our ﬁrst
three principles tied to description, evidence, or explanatory priority. The causal
monist views of the new mechanists, Lewis and Woodward made all uses of
mathematics in explanation representational. So, if we insist on our fourth
principle that some mathematical explanations are not representational, then
we must adopt a different approach to explanation.
3 Counterfactual Accounts of Mathematical Explanation
A monist about explanation who wants to include both causal explanations and
genuine mathematical explanations must somehow generalize their explanatory
relevance relation so that it covers both sorts of cases. One approach involves
treating a mathematical claim like a causal law: we consider variations to the
actual world and use the mathematical claim, like we would use a causal law, to
indicate what else would change. This is the core idea of Reutlinger’s general-
ization of a causal counterfactual approach to explanation (Section 3.1).
Another approach treats a mathematical fact as more like a cause: we should
consider variations in the mathematical fact itself and what results from this
variation. This is just like how, in the causal case, we consider what would
happen were a potential cause to be different. I consider three versions of this
approach in Section 3.2. The problems with both approaches to generalizing
a counterfactual approach motivate the discussion of pluralist views in
Section 4.20
3.1 Counterfactuals Involving Only Possible Worlds: Reutlinger
In a number of papers Reutlinger has developed a monist “counterfactual theory
of explanation.”21 As he puts it, “A monist holds that causal and non-causal
explanations share a feature that makes them explanatory” (Reutlinger 2018,
p. 77). This leads to a theory that takes an especially simple form: something
counts as an explanation just in case it meets four conditions that Reutlinger
calls Structure, Veridicality, Inference, and Dependency. Structure requires that
the explanation include a “nomic generalization” such as a law and some
additional statements relating to initial or boundary conditions. Veridicality
mandates that these statements be true or at least approximately true. To satisfy
Inference, the statements in question must entail the statement to be
20 See Lange (2021a), Kostić and Khalifa (2021), Lange (2022a), and Kasirzadeh (forthcoming) for
other discussions of the limitations of counterfactual approaches.
21 Reutlinger (2016), Reutlinger (2017), Reutlinger (2018), and Reutlinger et al. (2022).
19
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explained.22 Finally, Dependency requires that the nomic generalization sup-
port a counterfactual with a special form: “if the initial conditions . . . had been
different than they actually are (in at least one speciﬁc way deemed possible in
the light of the nomic generalizations), then E [the target of the explanation] . . .
would have been different as well” (Reutlinger 2018, p. 79). A nomic general-
ization supports a counterfactual when the procedure for evaluating the coun-
terfactual leads to the counterfactual being true, on the assumption that the
nomic generalization is true. Reutlinger helpfully illustrates how this works for
a number of examples, including the bridges case we discussed in Section 2.1.
The nomic generalization in this case is the mathematical theorem that a graph
G has the right sort of path just in case “(i) all the nodes in G are connected to an
even number of edges, or (ii) exactly two nodes in G (one of which we take as
our starting point) are connected to an odd number of edges” (Reutlinger 2018,
p. 84). One counterfactual that is supported by this theorem is “if all parts of
Königsberg had been connected to an even number of bridges, then people
would not have failed to cross all of the bridges exactly once” (Reutlinger 2018,
p. 84). The truth of this counterfactual means that Dependency is satisﬁed. As
the other three conditions that Reutlinger imposes are also satisﬁed, the bridges
case counts as an explanation.
Reutlinger’s counterfactual tests for scientiﬁc explanations do not involve an
alteration of any mathematical fact. We need only consider ordinary changes in
the initial or boundary conditions. In the bridges case, this requires considering
only some physically possible alternative conﬁguration of bridges. One worry
with requiring only these sorts of counterfactuals is that it risks failing our
fourth principle, namely respecting the distinction between genuine mathemat-
ical explanations and explanations where the mathematics is representing non-
mathematical explainers. Reutlinger’s monism effaces this distinction, as his
counterfactual test works in the same way for an ordinary case like the ﬂagpole
case and in a mathematical case like the bridges case. So, if we require our
fourth principle, then we can conclude that Reutlinger’s monism is untenable.
To be fair, it should be clear that Reutlinger does not claim that he can recover
a special sort of genuine mathematical explanation. Instead, Reutlinger focuses
on the contrast between causal and noncausal explanation. Here Reutlinger
breaks from Woodward and argues that causal explanations should not be
identiﬁed in terms of the interventions that Woodward requires. Reutlinger
develops a different approach to causal explanation that he traces back to
22 Reutlinger also allows an entailment of a conditional probability of the target E given the initial/
boundary conditions, provided that this conditional probability is greater than the prior probabil-
ity of the target. I will set this aspect of Reutlinger’s account aside, as it is not relevant to the
objections I will raise.
20
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Russell: if an explanation exhibits four features, then it counts as causal, while if
any of these four features are absent, then the explanation is noncausal. The four
features are asymmetry, time asymmetry, distinctness, and metaphysical con-
tingency (Reutlinger 2018, p. 89). The ﬂagpole case has all four of these
characteristics, so it counts as a causal explanation. By contrast, the bridges
case violates both distinctness and metaphysical contingency. To see why,
suppose someone claimed that the mathematical theorem and mapping caused
the failure to make the right kind of circuit on the bridges. Reutlinger objects
that we have too close a relationship here for one fact to cause the other: “the
explanandum fact that people fail to cross each bridge exactly once supervenes
on (or metaphysically depends on, or is grounded in) the explanans fact that
Königsberg instantiates a particular kind of graph (and the fact that people
actually attempted to cross the bridges)” (Reutlinger 2018, p. 91). However,
causes and effects do not stand in this sort of supervenience relation. So the
mathematics with the mapping is not a cause of the bridge crossing failure.
Similarly, causes are thought to be metaphysically contingent. For example, in
the ﬂagpole case, the causal process could have worked quite differently. But for
the bridges, Reutlinger sees a metaphysical necessity: “It is metaphysically, or
mathematically, impossible (and not merely physically impossible) to cross the
bridges as planned, if Königsberg instantiates an non-Eulerian graph”
(Reutlinger 2018, p. 91). Again the conclusion is that we have a noncausal
explanation.
This negative strategy for identifying noncausal explanations has the same
limitations that we saw earlier for Baron’s 2019 proposal: noncausal explan-
ations are hard to distinguish from predictions (Baron 2019, section 1.1).
Consider again the predictive model for protein folding, AlphaFold, that we
introduced in Section 2.1. As we saw, this model is highly accurate and
sufﬁces to derive a wide range of protein structures. This means that
Reutlinger’s ﬁrst three conditions of Structure, Veridicality, and Inference
are satisﬁed. The only question, then, is whether or not the model provides
nomic generalizations that support the kind of counterfactual that Reutlinger
speciﬁes in his Dependency condition. Consider a particular protein: hemo-
globin. The AlphaFold model is able to predict the shape of hemoglobin in
both the normal case and the case of the genetic variant that produces sickle
cell anemia. At the level of amino acids, these two proteins differ only in one
place, where a “glutamic acid residue” in the normal protein is replaced by
a “valine residue” in the variant responsible for sickle cell anemia (Ingram
1957, p. 326). As the model can predict the shape of both proteins on the basis
of their different amino acid chains, it does support a counterfactual of the
kind that Reutlinger requires. For any instance of a sickle cell anemia
21
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

hemoglobin, the model entails that were this protein to have a glutamic acid
residue in place of the salient valine residue, then it would develop a different
shape, namely the shape of normal hemoglobin. Reutlinger’s additional con-
ditions on causal explanation do not seem to be met, but for Reutlinger this
only means that we have a case of noncausal explanation. I conclude that
Reutlinger has lost the crucial difference between noncausal explanation and
evidence. That is, he has failed to satisfy our second principle.
Reutlinger may embrace this result, as he also endorses a number of controver-
sial claims about explanation, at least for noncausal explanation. For example,
Reutlinger allows violations of explanatory priority: if A is part of an explanation
for B, then B cannot be part of an explanation for A (Section 2.1). Whenever there
is a nomic generalization that is a biconditional of the form “A if and only if B,” it
will support pairs of counterfactuals of the form “Were not-A, then not-B” and
“Were not-B, then not-A.”23 So, in such cases, as long as Reutlinger’s other three
conditions are met, we will have pairs of explanations that violate explanatory
priority. Reutlinger here singles out the bridges case for this sort of symmetry. We
have not only the counterfactual noted earlier, but also this one: “If people were
able to cross all of the bridges exactly once, then all parts of Königsberg would be
connected to an even number of bridges, or exactly two parts of town would be
connected to an odd number of bridges” (Reutlinger 2018, p. 92). Reutlinger is
not troubled by this result. I conclude that, as with Hempel, if we wish to preserve
explanatory priority, then we should not adopt Reutlinger’s counterfactual
approach.
Reutlinger also embraces Hempel’s attitude toward the case of Fermat’s least
time principle explanations (Reutlinger 2018, pp. 82–83). As usual, Structure,
Veridicality, and Inference are clearly satisﬁed, as we may derive both the law of
reﬂection and Snell’s law of refraction using the least time principle, and the
principle (if formulated carefully) is true. Reutlinger notes how various coun-
terfactuals arise from Fermat’s principle that involve what would be the case if
the endpoint of the light ray had been varied. For example, “if the beam had
traveled from point A at t1 to point B* at t3 (in contrast to point B), the beam
would have gone through point C* at t2 (in contrast to point C)” (Reutlinger
2018, p. 83). So, if Reutlinger is right, then Fermat’s derivation does count as an
explanation. It will just be a noncausal explanation. Recall that our reason for
bringing up this case was to show how Kitcher failed our ﬁrst principle that
distinguished between description and explanation. Reutlinger has the same
problem. We can either follow Reutlinger and count a wide range of
23 Reutlinger is clear that the main feature of a nomic generalization is that it supports counterfac-
tuals. See Reutlinger (2018, p. 79, fn. 7).
22
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mathematical descriptions as explanations or else abandon this counterfactual
theory in order to preserve the difference between mathematical description and
explanation.
3.2 Counterfactuals Involving Impossible Worlds
A second strategy for generalizing a counterfactual analysis of causal explanation is
to suppose that mathematical facts stand in the same relation to their targets that
a cause stands to its effect. With this analogy in mind, we should consider
counterfactuals where that very mathematical fact is altered just as we consider
counterfactuals where the actual cause is altered. This requires counterfactuals that
alter the truth of some mathematical claims. As most assume that these truths are
necessary truths, there will be no possible world as usually conceived to consider.
The three proposals we discuss in this section avoid this by invoking “impossible
worlds” so that these mathematical counterfactuals have nontrivial truth-values.
3.2.1 Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley’s Counterfactual Approach
A generalization of Lewis’ counterfactual account of causal explanation has
been pursued along these lines by Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley (BCR) in two
papers, “How Mathematics Can Make a Difference” (Baron et al. 2017) and “A
Counterfactual Approach to Explanation in Mathematics” (Baron et al. 2020).
The same counterfactual approach is pursued in both articles, but the 2017
article focuses on mathematical explanations of physical phenomena, while the
2020 article discusses mathematical explanations that are internal to mathemat-
ics. I will develop their proposal using two examples that we have discussed so
far: the bridges case and the angle bisection case (Section 2.1). For the bridges,
one key mathematical claim is (M1) that if a graph has four nodes and each node
has three or ﬁve edges, then there will not be a sequence of edges that connects
nodes and that includes each edge exactly once. In the angle bisection case,
a central mathematical claim is (M2) that an equilateral triangle can be con-
structed on any line segment. Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley’s proposal is that
these mathematical claims are part of the explanation of their respective targets
just in case a counterfactual with a special character comes out true. The
counterfactual says that were this mathematical claim not to be true, then the
target phenomenon would not occur. That is, were M1 to fail for graphs, then
there would be a circuit of the bridges, and were M2 to fail for line segments,
then there would not be a bisection construction.
These counterfactuals for mathematics raise a number of puzzles concerning
their interpretation and how to evaluate them. Baron, Colyvan, and Ripley
generally follow Lewis in providing a recipe for how to isolate the situation
23
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

involved: there is an account in terms of similarity between the actual and
nonactual scenarios that pins down what to consider. In a case like the bridges
case, they summarize the procedure as follows:
First, hold ﬁxed the morphism [mapping] between the mathematical structure
S that appears in the counterfactual and the physical structure P. Second, make
a change in the mathematics while holding ﬁxed as much as one can without
inducing a contradiction. Finally, consider the ramiﬁcations of the change by
looking at the way(s) in which the physical structure P twists in response to the
twiddling in S in order to preserve the morphism. (Baron et al. 2017, p. 10)
The “twiddling” here is a change in the mathematical structure S, for example
one function is substituted for another function. In the pure mathematics cases,
the mapping between the mathematical structure S and the physical structure
P is no longer relevant. For these cases BCR emphasize the aim of preserving
the intrinsic features of the mathematical entities: “In the mathematical case, as
in the non-mathematical case, this [evaluation procedure] means holding ﬁxed
as much as we can concerning the intrinsic properties of whatever mathematical
features are mentioned in the antecedent of a given counterfactual, compatible
with realising the antecedent itself” (Baron et al. 2020, p. 7). For example, a line
segment’s straightness should be held ﬁxed, although how it intersects other
lines may change.
In the bridges case, then, suppose that M1 is false so that, for some graph with
these nodes and this number of edges, there is a sequence that connects vertices
and that includes each edge exactly once. We cannot visualize this sort of
mathematical impossibility, but BCR claim we are still able to consider what
would be the case in such an “impossible world.” If the mapping between the
graph and the actual bridges is preserved through this change in the character of
the graph, then it seems that the bridges must also be “twisted” or altered in
character by this change in the mathematics. Given that in the world we are
considering there is a sequence that connects nodes and that includes each edge
exactly once, and the mapping that takes edges to bridges is maintained, in this
situation there will be a circuit of the bridges that crosses each bridge exactly
once. So the speciﬁed counterfactual comes out true, and the mathematical
claim is genuinely explanatory.
In the bisection case, suppose that M2 is false, so that it is not in general
possible to construct an equilateral triangle on any line segment. This means
that the crucial step in the construction is not generally available. If we could
establish that in such an impossible mathematical scenario there was no alter-
native available means of bisecting the angle, then that would show that in this
scenario, some angles could not be bisected. For BCR this would then establish
24
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that the claim M2 was genuinely explaining the possibility of bisecting any
angle. One way to specify this scenario would be make the plane “gappy” so that
for some line segments there was no point in the plane that would allow the
equilateral triangle to be constructed.24 In such a plane our construction of the
bisected angle would fail. If no other construction worked, then some angles
would be unbisectable. And arguably we have not changed the intrinsic charac-
ter of the objects mentioned in the mathematical claim, such as line segments
and angles.
3.2.2 Baron’s Counterfactual Schemes
The BCR account should satisfy the monist about explanation because the very
same kind of counterfactual test is applied to determine if either some purported
cause or mathematics is standing in this single explanatory relevance relation.
However, it does not seem that the BCR account is viable. One powerful objec-
tion to the BCR proposal has been developed by Baron himself in a 2020 paper,
“Counterfactual Scheming” (Baron 2020). We can relate this objection back to
Baron’s derivational proposal from 2019 (Section 2.1).25 Baron’s basic worry is
that a simple counterfactual test will not discriminate genuine mathematical
explanations from cases where the mathematics is merely representing some
explanatory subject matter such as a cause. We can appreciate this worry using
our original ﬂagpole case. A central mathematical claim here is (M3) when
a right-angled triangle has an angle z, the length of the side opposite the angle
divided by the length of the side adjacent to the angle is tan z. According to BCR,
this mathematics will explain just in case that were M3 to be false, then the length
of the shadow would be different. Applying the procedure outlined by BCR leads
to the conclusion that this counterfactual is true. For were M3 to be false,
tan z would have to be different than the actual ratio. Enforcing the mapping
originally in place entails that the length of the shadow would be different. In
general, keeping the mapping in place transfers the upshot of the change in the
mathematical structure over to the physical world. But Baron correctly points out
that this transfer is too indiscriminate. It ignores the important contrast between
genuinely explaining and merely representing.
In this 2020 paper Baron does not rely on the derivational test from the 2019
paper that we criticized in Section 2.1. Instead, he proposes a combination of
a counterfactual approach with a uniﬁcation approach inspired by Kitcher.
24 For example, a line segment centered at the origin of the xy-plane with endpoints at (–1,0) and (1,0)
requires a point at either (0,
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
) or (0, 
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
) for the construction of an equilateral triangle. If a
plane lacked these points, then no equilateral triangle could be constructed.
25 Baron also makes this objection to counterfactual accounts of mathematical explanation in an
earlier paper (Baron 2016, p. 11).
25
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

On this combined approach, for a mathematical claim to ﬁgure in an explan-
ation, we need to consider counterfactuals involving mathematics like the ones
identiﬁed by BCR. However, only some of these counterfactuals render the
original mathematical claim genuinely explanatory. Two additional features
must be present. The ﬁrst feature is uniﬁcation: the counterfactual must be an
instance of a “counterfactual scheme” CS1, all of whose instances are true and
where some instances involve physical systems that are governed by different
physical laws. Baron calls such systems “nomically distinct.” The second
feature is used to distinguish genuine from merely representational uses of
mathematics:
this
counterfactual
scheme
CS1
is
not
superseded
by
a nonmathematical counterfactual scheme CS2 that covers all the same cases
at CS1. For CS2 to disqualify CS1’s instances from explaining, CS2 must cover
all these cases by mentioning the very physical features that are changed
through rendering the antecedent of the counterfactual scheme CS1 true.
Using these more demanding requirements, Baron hopes to isolate the genu-
inely explanatory uses of mathematics from the merely representational uses of
mathematics.
To see what Baron has in mind, let us return to the ﬂagpole case. It has
Baron’s ﬁrst feature, as there are many systems that exhibit the triangular
pattern exhibited by the ﬂagpole and its shadow, and many of these systems
are nomically distinct. For example, the length of the base of an inclined plane
stands in the very same ratio to the height of the inclined plane that we have in
the case of the length of the shadow and the height of the ﬂagpole. However,
the second feature is not present: there is a nonmathematical counterfactual
scheme that covers all these cases. Consider a parallel counterfactual scheme
that mentions ratios between lengths instead of numbers. The way that this
nonmathematical counterfactual scheme covers its cases is by bringing about
changes in the ratios between the lengths of the objects making up these
nomically distinct physical systems. The explanatory power of the mathemat-
ical counterfactual scheme is thus undercut by this physical counterfactual
scheme. This gives us the right result for the ﬂagpole case: it is not a case of
genuine mathematical explanation, but only a case where mathematics repre-
sents physical explainers.
Baron calls his latest proposal the “u-counterfactual theory” (Baron 2020,
p. 25). One point to note about this theory is that it distinguishes between
genuine and representational uses of mathematics by abandoning strict monism
about explanation. The genuine mathematical explanations obtain in virtue of
an elaborate relation spelled out in the u-counterfactual theory. But ordinary
causal explanations of physical phenomena involve causes standing in
a different relation to their targets. If Baron’s account is right, then we must
26
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

abandon strict monism in favor of a more ﬂexible kind of monism that requires
only a more generic relation between explanations. Baron himself frequently
expresses the hope for such a generic theory, noting that “a counterfactual
approach to extra-mathematical explanation opens up the enticing possibility
of developing a theory of scientiﬁc explanation that is fully general” (Baron
2020, p. 26).
One worry about Baron’s u-counterfactual theory is that it seems to rule out
all cases of genuine mathematical explanation and so fails our fourth principle.
To make the problem clear, let us suppose what is sometimes called
a supervenience principle: there is some basic physical level for any system
such that a change in any feature of the system will go along with a change in
that basic physical level of the system. If this principle holds, then all features of
the system supervene on this basic level in the sense that there is no change in
the features of the system without a change on this basic level. If we accept this
supervenience principle, then Baron’s second feature for genuine mathematical
explanation will never be present: for any mathematical counterfactual scheme,
there will be a nonmathematical counterfactual scheme that undercuts the
explanatory power of the mathematical one. For all we need to do is consider
what is going on at the basic physical level that makes our supervenience
principle obtain. This will provide a nonmathematical counterfactual scheme
involving just this level that matches the mathematical counterfactual scheme.
So there will be no genuine mathematical explanations of physical phenomena.
Baron might respond that a nonmathematical counterfactual scheme need not
merely cover these systems, but also unify them in some way that matches (or
improves on) the uniﬁcation afforded by the mathematical counterfactual
scheme. This response involves taking the explanatory virtue of unity to be
decisive not just in the quality of an explanation, but in its very existence.
Defending such a strong claim about unity would require arguments that I do not
think Baron has yet provided. We will return to this issue in Section 5. Our
puzzle will be how advocates of mathematical explanation should deal with this
issue. In Section 5.3 I argue that unity is not the right kind of feature to focus on
when considering the legitimacy of an explanation.26
I claim that this supervenience issue raises a serious dilemma for Baron’s
u-counterfactual account. If he accepts supervenience, then there will be no
genuine mathematical explanations. But if he rejects supervenience, he faces
a new worry that is similar to our objection to Kitcher. Recall that Kitcher
struggled to satisfy our ﬁrst principle, namely to respect the difference between
a uniﬁed mathematical redescription of a family of phenomena and the
26 See also Knowles (2021b).
27
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explanation of that family of phenomena (Section 2.1). Our example involved
Fermat’s least time principle. It can be employed to arrive at a uniﬁed derivation
of both the law of reﬂection and the law of refraction. It can also be used to
derive patterns that involve how light behaves due to other physical laws such as
the laws offered by Einstein’s general theory of relativity.27 The least time
principle involves a mathematical formula taking on the least value, given the
constraints on the system, but the character of these constraints varies across
cases. Baron must admit, then, that there is an available counterfactual scheme
that involves the possibility that this mathematical formula has some different
character. Applying Baron’s procedure to this case makes the instances of this
schema true: were this formula to have a different value, then light would not
conform to the laws in question. So, it looks like Baron counts this sort of
mathematical redescription as a legitimate explanation, just as with Kitcher. If
Baron endorsed a supervenience principle, he could, of course, rule out this
case, but only at the cost of ruling out all genuine mathematical explanations.
Alternatively, if Baron gave up supervenience, he could no longer respond that
there was guaranteed to be some level of physical description at which
a nonmathematical counterfactual scheme that covered all these cases could
be speciﬁed. And so he would not be able to rule out this derivation as a case of
genuine explanation. That is, Baron’s u-counterfactual account fails either our
ﬁrst principle or our fourth principle.28
3.2.3 Povich’s Ontic Counterfactual Account
The last monist, counterfactual account that I will discuss has recently been
offered by Povich (2021).29 Povich motivates his proposal by setting out three
features that an account of genuine mathematical explanations should have: we
need to respect the (i) modal import, (ii) distinctiveness, and (iii) directionality
of these explanations. By modal import Povich just means that genuine math-
ematical explanations explain some physical phenomenon by showing it to be
necessary. We saw this in the bridges case, which Povich also emphasizes: it is
impossible for anyone to make this circuit of the bridges in virtue of the relation
that the bridges stand to the mathematical graph. Distinctiveness is Povich’s
27 The least time principle can be used to derive how light will travel near massive bodies and to
describe the resulting phenomena of “gravitational lensing.” As one discussion puts the point,
“This angle [of deﬂection] is usually derived by ﬁnding the shape of a null geodesic in the
Schwarzschild geometry surrounding a spherically symmetric star . . . Here, we have derived the
same result using Fermat’s principle instead, a complementary approach” (Nandor and Helliwell
1996, p. 48).
28 Baron (forthcoming) provides yet another proposal that he calls the “Pythagorean” account. This
account is brieﬂy discussed in Section 5.2.
29 See also Povich (2020; forthcoming).
28
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

term for what is special about genuine mathematical explanations as opposed to
explanations where mathematics represents some other sort of explainer.30
Povich’s directionality requirement is similar in spirit to explanatory priority,
but somewhat more demanding. Recall that priority requires that if A is part of
an explanation of B, then B is not part of an explanation of A. Directionality
involves pairs of putative explanations with a more intricate relationship.
Consider the particular network structure of the actual bridges of Königsberg,
where one node has ﬁve edges and the other three nodes have three edges
(Section 2.1, Figures 5 and 6). Call this network structure P. The explanation
that we want to endorse is that the bridges’ possession of network structure
P explains why there is no circuit of a particular kind that, following Povich, we
will call an Eulerian walk. However, Povich does not want to endorse
a “reversed” companion to this explanation that involves a different situation.
Consider a different town L where their bridges have a network structure Q that
has two vertices with three edges and two vertices with two edges (Figure 7).31
Why do the bridges in town L fail to have network structure P? A proposed
explanation of L’s failure to have bridges with network structure P is that these
bridges permit an Eulerian walk. Povich’s directionality requirement says that if
the ﬁrst explanation targeting Königsberg’s bridges is legitimate, then
this second explanation targeting L’s bridges is illegitimate.
Figure 7 The bridges of town L.
30 Povich uses Lange’s term “distinctively mathematical explanation.” Povich also frames his
proposal as a response to Lange’s modal account of these explanations. I will postpone
a discussion of Lange until Section 4, as Lange is a pluralist about explanation.
31 Povich describes the companion as also involving Königsberg, but I have brought in a different
town for ease of exposition.
29
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I will regiment Povich’s directionality requirement as a principle that restricts
how statements that ascribe related features to different objects can appear in
legitimate explanations. Let “A(x)” and “B(x)” be two sentence types with
a variable x whose tokens have the variable replaced by names. Then direction-
ality says that, for any c, d, if A(c) is part of an explanation of B(c), then it is not
the case that not-B(d) is part of an explanation of not-A(d). In the legitimate
explanation c = Königsberg, A(c) is “The bridges of Königsberg have network
structure P,” and B(c) is “The bridges of Königsberg do not permit an Euler
walk.” In the illegitimate explanation, d ¼ L, not-B(d) is “The bridges of L do
permit an Euler walk,” and not-A(d) is “The bridges of L do not have network
structure P.”32
For this pair of cases, Povich’s directionality principle is very plausible. While
the Königsberg explanation clariﬁes why the Euler walks are impossible, the
proposed L explanation does nothing to clarify why the bridges of L fail to have
network structure P. As Povich puts it, these failed explanations “give quite good
reason to believe their conclusion, but they do not explain it” (Povich 2021, p. 516).
This is the contrast involved in our second principle: evidence for some target does
not explain that target. I agree with Povich that some violations of directionality
lead to violations of our second principle. My main objection to Povich’s proposal
is that his emphasis on counterfactuals also leads to violations of directionality.
Povich calls his proposal a “narrow ontic counterfactual account” or NOCA.
The ofﬁcial version is as follows:
an explanation is a DME [genuine mathematical explanation] just in case
either (a) it shows a natural fact weakly necessarily to depend counterfac-
tually only on a mathematical fact, or (b) it shows a natural event to be
necessitated by a component natural fact that weakly necessarily counter-
factually depends only on a mathematical fact. (Povich 2021, p. 526)
I will restrict my discussion to clause (a), which turns out to be the more basic
case for Povich. Povich’s natural facts are states of affairs involving concrete
objects. In the bridges case, the state of affairs is that the bridges of Königsberg
do not permit an Eulerian walk. The mathematical fact is that network structure
P does not permit an Eulerian walk. This explains what Povich calls the narrow
target of explanation: “Königsberg’s bridges, which have network structure P,
do not permit an Eulerian walk” (Povich 2021, p. 527). This is the narrow target
as opposed to the wide target “Königsberg’s bridges do not permit an Eulerian
walk.” The narrow target includes a speciﬁcation of the structure of the bridges,
and this information is used to pick out the right sort of counterfactual scenario
32 See also Kostić and Khalifa (2021) for a similar analysis of directionality and its implications for
what they call topological explanations.
30
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

when checking for counterfactual dependence. As with BCR and Baron (2020),
Povich mandates that we consider a special counterfactual involving the math-
ematical claim: “Had network structure P permitted an Eulerian walk,
Königsberg’s bridges, which have network structure P, would have permitted
an Eulerian walk” (Povich 2021, p. 527). But unlike BCR and Baron (2020),
Povich imposes a more demanding requirement than just the truth of the
counterfactual. To have an explanation, Povich requires that this counterfactual
holds in every possible world where these bridges exist. That is, the counterfac-
tual is not just true of the actual world, but weakly necessarily true.33 When (and
only when) the counterfactual linking the mathematical fact to the state of
affairs (narrowly construed) is weakly necessarily true, we have a genuine
mathematical explanation of this state of affairs.
Povich claims that his approach is better than other counterfactual accounts,
as his insistence that the counterfactual be weakly necessarily true allows him to
respect directionality. For example, consider the proposed explanation for why
the bridges of L do not have network structure P. It invokes the very same
mathematical fact that network structure P does not permit an Euler walk and
the additional fact that the bridges of L do permit an Euler walk. If we shift to the
narrow target of explanation, we get that the bridges of L, which permit an Euler
walk, do not have network structure P. The mathematical claim that network
structure P does not permit an Euler walk does entail this target, so we can see
right away that Povich’s directionality requirement rules out entailment as
a sufﬁcient condition on explanation.34 However, the salient counterfactual is
not weakly necessarily true: “Had network structure P permitted an Eulerian
walk, [L]’s bridges, which permit an Eulerian walk, would have had network
structure P” (Povich 2021, p. 527). This counterfactual fails to be true in any
world where the mathematical structure is changed, but L’s bridges have some
structure besides P that permits an Eulerian walk. As we have seen, L’s actual
bridge structure is not P, but Q. There is no reason to think that changing the
mathematical structure would alter L’s actual bridge structure. So, plausibly,
this counterfactual is not even true of the actual world. More generally, in cases
that threaten to violate directionality, Povich argues that the counterfactual will
fail to be weakly necessarily true.
The difference between the legitimate case and the illegitimate case is easy to
appreciate once we recall that many network structures permit Euler walks, and
many other network structures do not permit Euler walks. So while appealing to
33 A claim about any contingent object like the bridges is not strongly necessarily true, as the claim
will not come out true in worlds where the object fails to exist.
34 Povich uses this argument to object to Baron’s derivational proposal (Baron 2019) that we
considered back in Section 2.1.
31
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

network structure P is apt to explain a failure to complete an Euler walk,
appealing to the completion of an Euler walk is not apt to explain the absence
of network structure P. Povich’s somewhat intricate proposal is to be credited
for capturing this important contrast in counterfactual terms. However, as
Povich realizes, we can specify cases that satisfy all of Povich’s conditions
and yet violate directionality. I claim that his response to this problem is not
adequate and calls into question his monist counterfactual proposal.
We can obtain violations of directionality for a counterfactual proposal
whenever the mathematical claim used to explain is a biconditional. These
violations involve negating the biconditional and considering the upshot for
the appropriately narrowed target. Such a biconditional is available in the case
of networks that permit an Euler walk: as noted earlier, a network structure
permits an Euler walk just in case either zero or exactly two nodes have an odd
number of edges. This pattern of edges is realized in various different ways in
different graphs, but I will suppose it is a legitimate mathematical property.
I will call this property “being near even.” So our mathematical claim is that
a network structure permits an Euler walk just in case the network is near even.
This entails that a network structure fails to permit an Euler walk just in case the
network is not near even. Using these mathematical biconditionals, we can get
violations of directionality using the bridges of Königsberg and city L. Let A(x)
and B(x) be the same as before except that we replace “having network structure
P” with the more abstract property “not being near even”: c = Königsberg, A(c)
is “The bridges of Königsberg have a network structure that is not near even,”
and B(c) is “The bridges of Königsberg do not permit an Euler walk.” In the
other case, d = L, not-B(d) is “The bridges of L do permit an Euler walk,” and
not-A(d) is “The bridges of L have a network structure that is near even.” For the
Königsberg case, we ﬁrst alter B(c) so it is the narrow target that Povich
emphasizes: “The bridges of Königsberg, which have a network structure that
is not near even, do not permit an Euler walk.” Now consider a counterfactual
that involves our mathematical biconditional and this target: “Had network
structures that are not near even been just those that permitted an Eulerian
walk, Königsberg’s bridges, which have a network structure that is not near
even, would have permitted an Eulerian walk.” This counterfactual is weakly
necessarily true, and so according to Povich’s account we have a genuine math-
ematical explanation of the narrowed target. In addition, we have the narrowed
target for the bridges of city L: “The bridges of L, which do permit an Euler walk,
have a network structure that is near even.” Now the associated counterfactual to
consider is “Had the network structures that do permit Euler walks been just those
that are not near even, the bridges of L, which do permit an Euler walk, would
have had a network structure that is not near even.” This counterfactual is also
32
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

weakly necessarily true, and so according to Povich’s account we have another
genuine mathematical explanation of a narrowed target. But together the two
cases violate directionality, as we have a token of A(x) being part of an explan-
ation of a token of B(x) and also a token of not-B(x) being part of an explanation
of a token of not-A(x).
While Povich does not consider this exact worry, he does realize that he must
place some restrictions on the mathematical claims that can ﬁgure in explanatory
counterfactuals. As he puts the point, “Excluding some reversals [violations of
directionality] . . . requires NOCA ﬁrmly to commit to the idea that some math-
ematical objects exist, and others do not (and cannot). This means that NOCA is
committed to a privileged mathematical ontology – not just anything goes”
(Povich 2021, p. 537). It does seem right to insist that genuine mathematical
explanations will rely on some privileged mathematical ontology.35 However,
Povich’s account mandates ruling out mathematical properties like being near
even simply because they are part of mathematical theorems that have
a biconditional form. By contrast, mathematical practice often takes these prop-
erties to be signiﬁcant, in part because they do explain. To take a simple example,
Euclidean triangles are just those plane ﬁgures whose interior angles sum to 180
degrees. We cannot exclude either of these properties from our mathematical
ontology simply because, if we adopt Povich’s account, it leads to violations of
directionality. Given the ontology that we ﬁnd in mathematical practice, if we
accept directionality, then we must reject Povich’s account.
One could preserve a monist counterfactual account and standard mathemat-
ical ontology by giving up directionality. This is consistent with explanatory
priority, but would involve awkward combinations of explanations that differed
only in the objects involved, as with Königsberg and city L discussed
previously.36
3.3 Conclusion
This chapter has considered four different ﬂexible monist proposals that gener-
alized counterfactual analyses of causal explanation to include some noncausal
cases. The counterfactual theory developed by Reutlinger made do with pos-
sible worlds, but as a result allows for too many noncausal explanations that
violate our principles concerning description, evidence, and priority. Baron,
Colyvan, and Ripley (Baron et al. 2017, 2020; Baron 2020) and Povich (2021)
went further and invoked impossible worlds where some mathematical truths
35 We will return to this point in Section 4.
36 A more thorough investigation of the connections between priority and directionality is not
possible here. See again Kostić and Khalifa (2021) for an analysis of this issue in terms of their
non-ontic approach to topological explanation.
33
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

come out false. Here I objected that the accounts either failed to meet our four
principles or, in the case of Povich, failed Povich’s own directionality con-
straint. The upshot of the limitations of these proposals is the rejection of
monism, even in its more ﬂexible form. While some explanations will turn on
the truth of some sort of counterfactual, other explanations will involve
a different explanatory relevance relation. I consider the prospects for this
kind of pluralism in the next section.
4 Explanatory Pluralism
A pluralist about explanation supposes that the best way to make sense of the
variety of explanations in science and mathematics is to posit two or more
explanatory relevance relations. As noted in Section 2, I take these relations to
connect facts in the world when one fact explains another. The views we will
consider in this section accept a notion of causal explanatory relevance. But
each adds a new kind of explanatory relevance that will aid in the clariﬁcation of
genuinely mathematical explanations. However, we will begin our discussion of
pluralist views by considering explanations from pure mathematics. In these
cases some mathematical facts explain another mathematical fact. The pluralist
expansion of relevance relations avoids the problems that monist views ran into,
but it also raises a new problem. Is there anything that unites explanations if they
involve these very different explanatory relations? In Section 4.3 I will consider
some features that all explanations might have in common, even if pluralism
about explanatory relevance obtains.
4.1 Explanatory Proofs in Mathematics
4.1.1 Steiner on Explanatory Proofs
If we examine mathematical practice, then we ﬁnd that mathematicians value
some proofs because those proofs not only show that a theorem is true, but also
explain why the theorem is true. This is our ﬁfth principle from Section 2.1.
Steiner offered a pioneering analysis of these explanatory proofs.37 As we will
see in Section 4.2.1, Steiner also used this analysis to clarify what we are calling
genuine mathematical explanations in science. The basic assumption of
Steiner’s approach to explanatory proof is that “to explain the behavior of an
entity, one deduces the behavior from the essence or nature of the entity”
37 Another analysis of explanatory proof was offered by Kitcher and considered in Section 2.1
(Kitcher 1989). See Hafner and Mancosu (2008) for a critical examination of Kitcher’s analysis.
See also Mancosu (2001), Pincock (2015b), D’Alessandro (2021), and Ryan (2021) for add-
itional proposals and cases that are too involved to develop here. One attempt to analyze
explanatory proofs in terms of counterfactuals was brieﬂy considered in Section 3.2.1.
34
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Steiner 1978a, p. 143). However, Steiner claims that these essences are not
available for mathematical objects. The next best thing is a “characterizing
property” of that object: “a property unique to a given entity or structure within
a family or domain of such entities or structures” (Steiner 1978a, p. 143), where
the notion of family is taken as basic. We can illustrate characterizing properties
by returning to Euclid’s proof that any angle can be bisected (Section 2.1). As
we saw, this proof can be extended into a family of proofs that any angle can be
divided into n equal parts if, for some m, n = 2m = 2, 4, 8, 16, …. If we are
considering a family of angles divided into equal parts, then a characterizing
property of the objects in this family is how many parts the division has. Then,
one of our proofs shows how a bisected angle is available using a particular
construction, while an angle divided into four equal parts is available using
a closely related construction.
Steiner’s proposal is that an explanatory proof invokes a characterizing
property in a way that allows one to vary that characterizing property to arrive
at other proofs concerning other objects in the domain: “an explanatory proof
depends on a characterizing property of something mentioned in the theorem: if
we ‘deform’ the proof, substituting the characterizing property of a related
entity, we get a related theorem” (Steiner 1978a, p. 147). Deforming a proof
may involve a kind of mechanical manipulation, or it could be something more
creative that preserves the original “proof-idea” (Steiner 1978a, p. 147). Our
collection of angle division proofs satisfy Steiner’s criteria. For we can see how
shifting from a bisected angle to an angle with four equal parts requires an
extended construction. So we have a family of proofs, where appropriate shifts
in the characterizing properties go along with new, successful constructions.
One objection to Steiner’s proposal is that there are nonexplanatory proofs
that meet his tests. The case I will focus on is the classiﬁcation of ﬁnite simple
groups. A group is a type of object from abstract algebra that has found
application throughout mathematics and physics. The ﬁnite simple groups are
(in a sense) the building blocks of all the other ﬁnite groups, just as the prime
numbers are the building blocks of all the other natural numbers. After a great
deal of effort, an exhaustive classiﬁcation of the ﬁnite simple groups was
achieved in the 1980s. The resulting proof of the “Classiﬁcation Theorem”
showed how every ﬁnite simple group was one of 29 identiﬁable types.38 Three
of these types were expected, but the remaining 26 types are called “sporadic”
as they fail to exhibit any clear connections to one another or to the three
expected types. This has led some practitioners to conclude that even though
there is a classiﬁcation of these groups, we do not yet have an explanation for
38 See Solomon (2001, p. 341) for a compact statement of the theorem.
35
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

why the ﬁnite simple groups come in just these kinds. As one mathematician
puts it: “Are the ﬁnite simple groups, like the prime numbers, jewels strung on
an as-yet invisible thread? And will this thread lead us out of the current
labyrinthine proof to a radically new proof of the Classiﬁcation Theorem?”
(Solomon 2001, p. 346).39 I take this to mean that the current proof fails to
explain the Classiﬁcation Theorem. The thought seems to be that the classiﬁca-
tion is haphazard and unilluminating. Lange describes such cases as involving
what he calls a mathematical coincidence (Lange 2017).40 A classiﬁcation will
appear to involve a coincidence when “a salient feature of the result is its
identifying some property common to cases that otherwise seem unrelated”
(Lange 2017, p. 280). As we will discuss later in Section 4.1.2, part of Lange’s
view is that an explanatory proof shows that an apparent coincidence is really
not a coincidence. Our worry, then, is that Steiner must reject this plausible link
between explanations and noncoincidences: classiﬁcations that strike practi-
tioners as involving coincidences can still meet all of Steiner’s tests for math-
ematical explanation.
The root of the problem is that the classiﬁcation allows us to prove, for any
group that is appropriately characterized, whether or not it is a ﬁnite simple
group. A characterizing property of a group would be the structure of the group,
namely the number of objects in the group and the network established by the
group operation. As this structure is varied, we can easily shift to proofs that
establish whether or not the group in question is a ﬁnite simple group. For all we
have to do is check whether or not the group falls into one of the 29 types of
ﬁnite simple groups. So, all of Steiner’s conditions are met. I conclude that
Steiner’s conditions make it too easy to arrive at an explanatory proof.
Another objection to Steiner’s proposal is that there are explanatory proofs that
fail his tests. One sort of problematic case is noted by Steiner at the end of his
article (Steiner 1978a, pp. 148–150).41 Suppose we investigate domain X by
relating the entities in X to the entities in some other domain Y. Mathematicians
often do this by abstracting away from some of the differences in X so that many
objects in X are assigned the same object in Y. Examining the objects in Y can still
explain what is going on in X. But, as Steiner concedes, Y does not afford
characterizing properties of the objects in X, so his ofﬁcial test for explanatory
proof cannot be met. All he says here about the worry is that “the concept of
‘characterization’ will have to be weakened to allow for partial characterization”
39 See also Thompson’s remarks from 1982, given at Solomon (2001, p. 346). Additional history
and discussion may be found in Ronan (2007).
40 See also Baker (2009a).
41 See Hafner and Mancosu (2005) for another kind of case that Steiner’s account misses.
36
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(Steiner 1978a, p. 150). However, if Steiner amends his tests in this way, he will
have to count even more nonexplanatory proofs as explanatory.
To appreciate the problem, I will sketch a case involving Euclidean construc-
tions that is widely viewed as explanatory. It turns out that while any angle can
be bisected using Euclid’s postulates, there are some angles that cannot be
trisected using these postulates. One such angle is the 60-degree angle found
on each corner of an equilateral triangle. More generally, for some n, any angle
can be divided into n parts, while for the remaining n, some angles cannot be
divided into n parts. An explanatory proof of this result should indicate what it is
about these numbers that is responsible for the associated construction being
always available or sometimes impossible.
Here is how the explanatory proof works (Stewart 2004, chapters 6, 7). First,
associate a Euclidean construction with the constructability of points in the
Euclidean plane. The basic idea is that a point is constructable just in case its
coordinates may arise as solutions to a series of a restricted class of polynomial
equations. For example, a point with the coordinates 0;
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p


is constructable
because the square root of 2 is a solution to the equation x2 = 2. If we start with
the ﬁeld of rational numbers, adding the square root of 2 produces what is called
a ﬁeld extension. Each ﬁeld extension can be assigned a degree using the degree
of the polynomial equation required to introduce the new elements to the ﬁeld.
So, in our example the degree of the ﬁeld extension is 2. The key result of the
proof is then that a point is constructable just in case it falls within a ﬁeld
extension whose degree is some power of 2 (Stewart 2004, p. 79). Finally,
we can characterize n such that any angle can be divided into n equal parts.
For n = 2, the ﬁeld extension has the required feature, but for n = 3, the ﬁeld
extension fails to have the right feature. This is why some angles cannot be
trisected.42
The problem for Steiner is that this explanatory proof does not provide
a characterizing property of a given construction. For example, trisecting an
angle can be treated using a ﬁeld extension, but many other constructions may
also be treated in the same way. So, whenever we embed one domain X into
another domain Y using this sort of many–one mapping, we will not get the
characterizing properties of the objects in X that Steiner requires.
The topic of Euclidean constructions suggests, then, that there are at least two
kinds of explanatory proofs. First, we have what could be called pure explana-
tory proofs.43 A pure proof is one that does not go outside the domain mentioned
in the theorem. For example, a pure proof of a theorem about the natural
42 An instance of this case is noted in Reutlinger et al. (2022).
43 See Detlefsen and Arana (2011) for a discussion of purity.
37
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

numbers will involve only claims about the natural numbers. Second, we have
what I will call abstract explanatory proofs. An abstract proof embeds the topic
of the theorem in a different, more abstract domain. This is what we saw with
the appeal to ﬁeld extensions to make sense of Euclidean constructions. Pure
and abstract explanatory proofs seem to have different virtues and vices. A pure
proof clariﬁes the relations between entities in a given domain, but may for that
very reason not clarify what is special about this domain as opposed to some
other domain. One example of a pure proof is Euclid’s bisection of the angle,
where we learn not only that any angle can be bisected, but how to carry out the
bisection in a transparent way. An abstract proof proceeds differently by
factoring out many aspects of its target domain. This may lead one to lose
some control or insight into the details of how that target domain works. For
example, when we relate the possibility of a construction to a given ﬁeld
extension, it is not always clear how to carry out that construction. A famous
instance of this loss of control is the constructability of regular n-sided poly-
gons. Using the features of ﬁeld extensions noted earlier, one can show that
regular n-sided polygons can be constructed for n = 17, n = 257, and n = 65,537.
However, this does not directly indicate how to construct such ﬁgures (Stewart
2004, chapter 19). So, while a great deal is gained by shifting from Euclidean
constructions to ﬁeld extensions, something is lost as well.44
4.1.2 Lange on Explanatory Proofs
Lange’s work on noncausal explanation is the most detailed and innovative
investigation of this topic. In his 2017 book and many papers Lange has
assembled a large number of interesting cases drawn from scientiﬁc and math-
ematical practice (Lange 2017).45 Lange’s approach is also refreshingly plural-
istic, as he does not try to force all explanations into a single structure (Lange
2017, p. 371). When it comes to pure mathematics, though, Lange considers
only one kind of proof to be explanatory: “At least in many cases, what it means
to ask for a proof that explains is to ask for a proof that exploits a certain kind of
feature in the setup – the same kind of feature that is outstanding (i.e., salient) in
the result” (Lange 2017, p. 255).46 The notion of a setup is clearest for a theorem
of the form “All F’s are G” (Lange 2017, p. 232). Some feature of being a G may
44 See also Colyvan et al. (2018) for a similar contrast motivated by a different case from abstract
algebra.
45 Lange (2017) incorporates most of Lange’s earlier work on these topics. See Lange (2018a,
2018b, 2019, 2021a, 2022b) for newer discussions.
46 I take Lange’s ofﬁcial position to be that some explanatory proofs may explain in some other
way, although he often talks as if they all work in the same way. It is also important to note that
Lange discusses explanations in pure mathematics that are not proofs (Lange 2017, section 9.6;
2018b).
38
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

strike mathematicians as salient in the sense that it is puzzling or otherwise
unexpected. One such feature that Lange emphasizes is symmetry. The explana-
tory proof then shows how being an F involves this symmetry. This will then
explain how the setup is responsible for the salient feature of the result. Lange is
somewhat ﬂexible on how this aspect of being an F is cashed out. We may need
to recast what being an F involves to uncover the respects in which it exhibits
the feature in question. Part of the motivation for this proposal is that it respects
the principle that an explanatory proof of a theorem must show that the
theorem’s truth is not a coincidence. When the symmetry of the result is the
salient feature, we can indeed show that this aspect is not a coincidence by
tracing that symmetry back to an aspect of the setup.47
In the following critical examination of Lange’s proposal I am willing to
grant that Lange has identiﬁed one kind of explanatory proof. However, there
are other kinds of explanatory proof that work differently. In these other cases,
I will argue, the explanation will show that the theorem’s truth is not
a coincidence, but will do this by indicating how a salient feature like
symmetry emerges from the setup, even though the setup does not exhibit
that very feature. This suggests that even when an explanatory proof traces
a salient feature of the result back to the very same feature in the setup, the
proof explains in virtue of the way this tracing out occurs, and not simply the
tracing itself.
One case Lange notes that meets his tests involves Varignon’s theorem. This
theorem says that for any quadrilateral, if the midpoints of adjacent sides are
connected, then a parallelogram results. Here the salient feature of the result is
the symmetry of the parallelogram: its opposite sides are parallel. This is
initially puzzling, as many quadrilaterals fail to exhibit any kind of symmetry,
as with the ﬁgure ABCD in Figure 8.
Varignon’s theorem can be proven using the “midpoint theorem” that says
that “for any triangle, the segment connecting the midpoints of two sides is
parallel to the third side” (Lange 2017, p. 254). For example, in Figure 9,
triangle EFG has midpoint H on EF and I on FG. Line HI is parallel to the
third side of the triangle EG.
To apply the midpoint theorem, ﬁrst draw the diagonal AC in quadrilat-
eral ABCD (Figure 10). Then the theorem tells us that the line connecting
the midpoint of AB to the midpoint of CB is parallel to the diagonal AC.
In addition, the line connecting the midpoint of AD to the midpoint of CD
is parallel to the diagonal AC. So, these two midpoint lines are parallel and
give us two of the opposite sides of our desired parallelogram. The other
47 Other features that may be salient for Lange include unity and a contrast.
39
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

two sides can be shown to be parallel by a similar application of the
midpoint theorem to the triangles involving the other diagonal BD.
According to Lange, “the proof works by tracing the parallelism in the
midpoint quadrilateral back to a parallelism in the original ﬁgure’s tri-
angles” (Lange 2017, p. 254). The explanatory proof involves exhibiting
these triangles and illustrating how their symmetry is responsible for the
symmetry of the resulting parallelogram.48
Figure 8 A quadrilateral.
Figure 9 The midpoint theorem.
48 For a classic textbook discussion of this proof, see Coexter and Greitzer (1967).
40
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We can grant that some explanatory proofs work in this way. Still, can a proof
explain a result, and thereby show that the result is not a coincidence, without
tracing the salient feature of the result back to that very feature of the setup? It seems
to me that the answer to this question is “yes.” To motivate this answer I will discuss
another case that Lange invokes right before he reviews Varignon’s theorem. This is
Morley’s theorem (Lange 2017, pp. 252–253). This theorem says that for any
triangle ABC, if we trisect each angle of the triangle using two lines, then these
lines will cross within ABC to produce an equilateral triangle XYZ (see Figure 11).
Lange notes how this theorem is often called “Morley’s Mystery” or
“Morley’s Miracle,” even though it has been proved in many different ways.
For Lange the mystery is tied to there being no explanatory proof. That is, taking
Lange’s account for granted, “no known proof of the theorem works by
uncovering and exploiting a similar symmetry in the setup” (Lange 2017,
p. 252). Unlike in the case of Varignon’s theorem, there is no proof that traces
the symmetry of the equilateral triangle back to something about the setup
involving the arbitrary triangle that we started with. Here Lange also notes that
“[p]roofs of the theorem often proceed ‘backward’: by starting with an equilat-
eral triangle and generating the larger triangle from it” (Lange 2017, p. 253).
One way to clarify what a backward proof is would be to say that it starts with
a new claim that is entailed by the theorem. Suppose also that this new claim
appears unrelated to the setup. As the new claim is not related to the setup, this
proof will fail to trace the salient feature of the theorem back to that feature in
the setup. And so, by Lange’s account, it will not be an explanatory proof.
Figure 10 Varignon’s theorem.
41
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

However, there is a backwards proof of Morley’s theorem that at least one
mathematician deems explanatory. This is Conway’s proof, which Conway
characterizes as involving “ﬁnding a simple idea, so that any fool . . . can
understand the complicated thing” (Conway 2005, p. 1). More recently,
Karamzadeh has used Conway’s proof to claim that “the mystery of Morley’s
Theorem, is indeed, resolved” (Karamzadeh 2018, p. 298).49 In broad strokes,
Conway’s proof involves using the angles α, β, and γ from Figure 11 to specify
the angles of six new triangles. The proof then consists in showing how the
lengths of the sides of these six new triangles can be found so that they ﬁt
together to divide up the area inside any arbitrary triangle so that an equilateral
triangle results. In particular, Conway begins by stipulating that angles 1 and 4
are γ plus 60 degrees, angles 2 and 5 are β plus 60 degrees, and angles 3 and 6 are
α
α
γ
γ
C
Y
4
3
2
1
5
6
Z
A
B
γ
α
β
β
β
Figure 11 Morley’s theorem.
49 See Lange’s methodological principle at (Lange 2017, p. 173).
42
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

α plus 60 degrees. This initially looks unexplanatory, as these six triangles seem
to be unrelated to our starting point of an arbitrary triangle, and so it seems
merely coincidental that they can be ﬁt together as the theorem requires.
Conway’s proof was criticized in something like these terms by Cain. In such
cases the proof involves “an unexplained construction or a calculation of
elements or a deﬁnition or a function that simply ‘happens to work’” (Cain
2010, p. 8). When this happens, “[r]eaders cannot see why this construction or
this calculation or that deﬁnition is being carried out; they cannot perceive
a reason for it that is internal to the proof ” (Cain 2010, p. 8, emphasis added).
In Conway’s proof, “[t]he values for what turn out to be the angles of the seven
smaller triangles . . . simply happen to work” (Cain 2010, p. 9).50 Karamzadeh
responds to these worries by supplementing Conway’s original proof so that the
choice of angles for his six new triangles is well-motivated: “Cain argues that
Conway’s speciﬁcation of the angles is not justiﬁed retrospectively and that it’s
somehow pulled out of a hat. But, as I will show, they are in fact inevitable and
quite explainable and therefore not a deus [ex machina]”, namely not mysteri-
ous (Karamzadeh 2014, p. 4).51 The key addition is the result that the internal
triangle XYZ is equilateral just in case the angles fall into three equal pairs
1 = 4, 2 = 5, and 3 = 6. So we can motivate Conway’s choice of angles as
“natural” (Karamzadeh 2014, p. 5) by showing that they are not only sufﬁ-
cient, but also necessary, for an equilateral triangle to be formed in this
situation.
Once Karamzadeh’s addition is made, we can grasp that the angles chosen by
Conway for his six new triangles are, in fact, intimately related to the theorem’s
setup of an arbitrary triangle. Any triangle can be divided up into the triangles
Conway describes, and conversely an equilateral triangle can be rescaled so that
the six triangles Conway describes will combine to form whatever triangle one
wishes. More generally, we can see how this sort of biconditional allows for
explanatory proofs that target feature X of some theorem and do not involve the
setup exhibiting feature X. Feature X can emerge from a setup that does not
exhibit feature X, and yet still be explained.52
The same point holds for explanatory classiﬁcations like the Euclidean
construction case discussed in Section 4.1.1. Here I suppose that the criterion
articulated in terms of the degree of a ﬁeld extension is explanatory because it
50 Here Cain cites a newsgroup post by Conway from 1997 that presented the proof for the ﬁrst
time. This is the same proof as the one published in Conway (2005) and again in Conway (2014).
51 See also Gorjian et al. (2015).
52 Lange might respond that the symmetry of the equilateral triangle is traced back to the symmetry
of the three equal pairs of angles. However, this seems to involve a different kind of symmetry
than what we ﬁnd in the equilateral triangle.
43
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

can be used to explain the possibility or impossibility of a given construction.
However, as an abstract explanatory proof, this involves some loss of control
over how to actually carry out a given construction. The proof provides
a uniform criterion for possible constructions and yet does not provide any
uniform method for carrying out a given construction. Similarly, there is
a uniform criterion for impossible constructions, but this does not sufﬁce to
prove that a given construction is impossible.
This loss of control creates a problem for Lange: when he discusses this sort of
case, he denies that an explanatory classiﬁcation may treat the objects classiﬁed in
different ways. This is because Lange supposes that the salient feature of an
explanatory classiﬁcation is the unity of the various parts of the classiﬁcation. If
unity is the salient feature, then to be explanatory “the proof must exploit some
other, similar respect in which those cases are alike and must proceed from there
to arrive at the result by treating all of the (classes of) cases in exactly the same
way” (Lange 2017, p. 287). Consider, then, two possible constructions, for
example bisecting an angle and constructing a square on a line segment, and
two impossible constructions, for example trisecting an angle and squaring
a circle. Bisecting an angle and constructing a square are uniﬁed by their
possibility, while trisecting an angle and squaring a circle are uniﬁed by their
impossibility. But our proof of the theorem involving degrees of ﬁeld extensions
does not afford a uniﬁed treatment of the constructions it classiﬁes. We establish
that the possible constructions are possible, but to show how the constructions
work, additional speciﬁc steps need to be carried out. The same point holds for the
other kind of construction: we can establish that the impossible constructions are
impossible, but additional features of the points and their coordinates are needed
to show this impossibility. For example, for trisecting the angle, one proof
involves features of the cosine function. By contrast, to show that we cannot
construct a square with the same area as a circle, we need to investigate the
features of pi. In particular, if we show that pi is not an algebraic number (i.e. not
the solution to any polynomial equation of any degree), then we have shown that
no ﬁeld extension that includes pi has the right degree (Stewart 2004, pp. 81–82).
The upshot is that Lange is not able to endorse our classiﬁcation of ruler-and-
compass constructions as explanatory. He does not allow for explanatory classiﬁ-
cations where there is a generic reason for some outcome across a range of cases,
and yet that generic reason has to be supplemented with case-speciﬁc reasons.53
Lange does allow that explanatory proofs differ in degree in a way that is tied
to how effectively the salient feature of the theorem is traced back to that feature
53 Lange also suggests that explanatory classiﬁcations may have a contrast as the salient feature, but
I do not think this avoids the basic worry I have raised. See Lange (2017, pp. 263–264, fn. 23).
44
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

in the setup. So, Lange might respond that the unity is still exploited here, but
just to a lesser degree than in some other cases. It is not obvious, though, that
these proofs are less explanatory in any sense, or less explanatory for this
reason.
One central feature of Lange’s proposal that we have not yet discussed is his
contrast between natural and artiﬁcial properties. Lange says that natural prop-
erties involve “respects in which things may genuinely resemble each other”
(Lange 2017, p. 335). A paradigm case of a nonnatural or artiﬁcial property is
Goodman’s predicate “grue”: “being green and observed before the year 3000
[to update Goodman’s example] or blue and unobserved before the year 3000”
(Lange 2017, p. 336). We take green, but not grue, to be a natural property.
Similarly, in mathematics, Lange argues that we take only some properties to be
natural. Crucially, for Lange, only natural properties are apt to appear in
explanatory proofs or the targets of explanatory proofs.
It is easy to see that if Lange failed to impose this restriction, then his whole
approach to explanatory proof would count too many proofs as explanatory. To see
why, return to the case of ﬁnite simple groups (Section 4.1.1). We can easily
introduce a predicate “x is Gorensteinish” by deﬁning it disjunctively in terms of
the 29 kinds of ﬁnite simple groups. Then we would have the theorem that a ﬁnite
group is Gorensteinish just in case it is simple. We could then trace back the salient
unity of the ﬁnite simple groups back to their all being Gorensteinish.54 However,
given Lange’s requirement that an explanatory proof involve only natural proper-
ties, he can rule out this case because it involves an artiﬁcial property.
The viability of Lange’s proposal thus turns on this notion of a natural
property.55 Lange offers an interesting holistic proposal for characterizing
natural properties that has both ontic and epistemic dimensions. First, on the
ontic side, the naturalness of some properties and the explanatory character of
some proofs arise together: “What makes a given proof . . . explanatory is, in
part, that it uses natural properties, and what makes those properties natural, in
turn, is that they ﬁgure in other explanatory proofs” (Lange 2017, p. 338). On
the epistemic side, one can use these holistic connections to discover a natural
property or an explanatory proof: “Mathematicians discover that the properties
in a given family are natural by ﬁnding them in many, diverse proofs that
(mathematicians recognize) would be explanatory, if those properties were
natural” (Lange 2017, p. 338). There is no reduction of being a natural property
to something else, but only these robust connections that allow for such
54 And, as Lange emphasizes, even stranger proofs could count as explanatory, for example a proof
of the conjunction of two theorems from two unrelated domains (Lange 2017, p. 336).
55 This is the sense in which everybody, including Lange, needs a restricted notion of mathematical
ontology to make sense of explanatory proof. See the discussion of Povich in Section 3.2.3.
45
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

properties to be (defeasibly) identiﬁed. For example, being a group is a property
that was independently identiﬁed in various mathematical domains. This motiv-
ated mathematicians to take being a group as a natural property, which in turn
generated the desire to identify and explain the range of ﬁnite simple groups.56
To conclude our discussion of Lange’s account of explanatory proofs, I would
like to suggest that once we have natural properties, we can see that the natural
properties that appear in an explanatory proof need not be as closely related to
the target natural property as Lange supposes. In Conway’s proof of Morley’s
theorem, as clariﬁed by Karamzadeh, we have natural properties that explain the
appearance of the equilateral triangle, but in a way that fails to ﬁt Lange’s
account. In the explanatory classiﬁcation of ruler-and-compass constructions,
Lange’s account also proved too stringent. So, it looks like we should adopt an
account that is broader than Lange’s account: a proof is explanatory just in case
its target is characterized in terms of natural properties and the proof turns on
natural properties. We can preserve Lange’s holism and say that natural proper-
ties are just those properties that appear in many explanatory proofs. We have no
reductive, independent characterization of either notion, but we can use this
amended proposal to make sense of the wide variety of proofs that are counted
as explanatory in mathematical practice. Of course, this does not settle what it
means for a proof to turn on natural properties, so there is a residual puzzle for
this proposal. I consider the options for dealing with this puzzle in Section 4.3.
4.2 Pluralist Accounts of Genuine Mathematical Explanations
4.2.1 Steiner on Genuine Mathematical Explanations
In a companion paper to the one discussed in Section 4.1.1, Steiner extends his
account of explanatory proofs to an account of what we are calling genuine
mathematical explanations (Steiner 1978b). Recall from Section 2.1 that these
were initially identiﬁed as scientiﬁc explanations that involve mathematics, but
where the mathematics is not functioning merely to represent some nonmathe-
matical explainers like causes. Steiner proposes a simple test for genuine
mathematical explanation: “when we remove the physics, we remain with
a mathematical explanation – of a mathematical truth!” (Steiner 1978b,
p. 19). This can be seen as an ancestor of Baron’s 2019 thought that we should
consider the mathematics that is not used to represent causes or other physical
explainers (see again Section 2.1): we have explanatory information and yet
“that aspect is not a relatum in a mapping relation between the mathematical and
physical structures at issue” (Baron 2019, p. 710). Then that explanatory
56 Wussing (2007) is a classic discussion of this history.
46
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

information may extend to associated physical structures, but not simply
because the mathematics is representing causes.
In his 2012 article “Science-Driven Mathematical Explanation,” Baker con-
vincingly argues that Steiner’s account of genuine mathematical explanations
does not work (Baker 2012). Baker invokes genuine mathematical explanations
where no proof is judged to explain the relevant theorem. Baker’s main case
here is the fact that bees use hexagons to build their honeycombs. This is
explained using the theorem that hexagons are the most efﬁcient way to tile
a two-dimensional plane while minimizing the tiling materials. While this
explanation seems to be a good one, and also one that qualiﬁes as a genuine
mathematical explanation, there are no explanatory proofs of the theorem
employed. The same point can made with our example of the bridges of
Königsberg: we showed how this amounted to a genuine explanation of the
impossibility of the bridge crossings, and yet no reference was made to the kind
of proof that the mathematical theorem has.
One could also object to Steiner based on nonexplanations that satisfy all of
his conditions. Consider an uncontroversial case of an explanatory proof from
pure mathematics like the proof of Varignon’s theorem sketched in
Section 4.1.2. The theorem says that for any quadrilateral, if the midpoints of
adjacent sides are connected, then a parallelogram results. Consider any
explanatory target that has the same form as the theorem such as that all metal
wires, when connected to a battery, conduct electricity. Then we can interpret
“quadrilateral” as standing for being a metal wire, “connecting adjacent mid-
points” as standing for being connected to a battery, and “resulting in
a parallelogram” as standing for conducting electricity. This interpretation of
the mathematical theorem then transforms the proof of the theorem into
a derivation of the claim that all metal wires, when connected to a battery,
conduct electricity. But nobody would count this as an explanation. Still,
Steiner’s test is met: “when we remove the physics, we remain with
a mathematical explanation – of a mathematical truth.” So it should be clear
that this test is not a good one. One response to this objection is to require a more
demanding kind of embedding than the simple reinterpretation that I have
sketched here. However, it is not clear how to rule out this sort of problematic
case unless these embeddings are characterized in explanatory terms.
4.2.2 Lange on Genuine Mathematical Explanations
In line with his pluralism, Lange allows for a variety of kinds of genuine
mathematical explanations or, as he puts it, “distinctively” mathematical
explanations. The most important kind of genuine explanation for Lange is
47
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

what he calls an “explanation by constraint.”57 Lange starts by supposing that
causal explanations work through the use of causal laws, and that causal laws
have their own modal strength, namely physical necessity. Consider a case
where the explanatory target has a modal strength that is greater than physical
necessity. Many suppose that mathematical truths have a special sort of
necessity that is greater than physical necessity. This means that if
a mathematical truth can be appropriately related to some physical system,
then the mathematics may explain why that physical system exhibits some
features with a modal strength that is greater than physical necessity. This
provides what Lange calls a type-(m) explanation by constraint (Lange 2017,
p. 131).58
One of Lange’s examples involves a double pendulum (Lange 2017, pp. 26–29).
This is a physical system where one pendulum is attached to another, as in
Figure 12. There are at least four equilibrium conﬁgurations for any double pendu-
lum: θ1 is either 0 degrees or 180 degrees, and θ2 is either 0 degree or 180 degrees.
Lange shows how in this case there are two kinds of derivations of the number
of equilibrium conﬁgurations. Both derivations appeal to the system’s potential
energy U. One derivation develops an equation for U as a function of the angles
α ½θ1 and β ½θ2 by considering the laws that govern the forces at work in such
a system in the actual world, for example the force of gravity. However, Lange
outlines another derivation that “exploits merely the fact that by virtue of the
θ2
θ1
Figure 12 A double pendulum.
57 See especially Lange (2017, chapters 1–4). Other sorts are really statistical explanations (chap-
ter 5) and dimensional explanations (chapter 6) that I must set aside for reasons of space.
58 Other types are type-(c), whose targets are themselves constraints, and type-(n), whose targets
arise in part due to contingent facts (Lange 2017, p. 131).
48
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

system’s being a double pendulum, its conﬁguration space is the surface of
a torus – that is, that U is a function of α and β” (Lange 2017, p. 27, emphasis
added). This happens because, for any angle, that angle plus 360 degrees is the
very same angle. So we get a circle of potential angles for α and another circle of
potential angles for β. These possibilities for Uðα; βÞ can be conveniently
associated with the points on the surface of a torus or doughnut, as in Figure 13.
Once this association is carried out, the character of the torus ensures that no
matter how U(α, β) is ﬁxed, namely no matter the force laws at work, there will
be at least four equilibrium conﬁgurations. This is a matter of the topology of the
torus. For Lange, the second derivation that draws on the features of a torus and
relates it to the double pendulum is an example of a genuine mathematical
explanation. This is because it explains why the double pendulum has at least
four equilibrium conﬁgurations in a way that shows that this number is more
than physically necessary.
In general, for Lange, “these explanations work not by describing the world’s
network of causal relations in particular, but rather by describing the framework
that any physical system (whether or not it ﬁgures in causal relations) must
inhabit, where this variety of necessity is stronger than the necessity possessed
by ordinary laws of nature” (Lange 2017, p. 44). This does not mean that the
explanation is completely mathematical. In the double pendulum case, we must
suppose that equilibrium conﬁgurations can be identiﬁed with the so-called
stationary points of Uðα; βÞ, the potential energy function. But Lange argues
that this assumption uses only Newton’s second law, F ¼ ma, and that this law
has greater necessity than an ordinary law of nature like Coulomb’s law or the
law of universal gravitation. If we grant this point, then we can see how every
step in the derivation is either purely mathematical or else involves a law with
β
α
Figure 13 A torus.
49
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a special sort of necessity. This provides the whole derivation with that special
sort of necessity.
Lange has a clear answer, then, to what distinguishes a genuine mathematical
explanation from an explanation where the mathematics is merely representing
causes. The genuine explanations will guarantee the special necessity of the
target. This is not something that a derivation that merely represents causes can
accomplish. For this reason, Lange sometimes argues that when a target has
a genuine mathematical explanation, the causal derivation is not even an
explanation of that target: “certain facts have no causal explanation at all
because any such explanation would mischaracterize these facts as more con-
tingent than they actually are. These facts have only explanations by constraint”
(Lange 2017, p. 47).59
Lange extends his account of genuine mathematical explanations to many
cases, including the bridges case that we introduced in Section 2. To handle
many of these cases, Lange must treat the target as including some contingent
matters of fact. There are thus two ways to obtain a genuine mathematical
explanation: “the facts doing the explaining are eligible to explain [either] by
virtue of being modally more necessary than ordinary laws of nature (as both
mathematical facts and Newton’s second law are) or being understood in the
why question’s context as constitutive of the physical task or arrangement at
issue” (Lange 2017, p. 33). In the bridges case, when we ask why everyone has
failed to complete a certain tour of the bridges, Lange supposes that we
understand the actual arrangement of the bridges to be constitutive of the task.
Of course, this actual arrangement is highly contingent. But its contingency is
discounted. The target is then that, given that the bridges have their actual
arrangement, why have the attempts to complete these circuits failed? The
answer establishes the necessity of this outcome in a way that no causal
explanation could.
Lange’s move to allow some contingent facts to be regarded as constitutive
has generated some concerns that his proposal counts too many derivations as
explanatory. One objection is that every target that may be described in math-
ematical terms is amenable to some genuine mathematical explanation (Pincock
2015a, p. 875; Craver and Povich 2017, pp. 35–36). Consider, for example, the
ﬂagpole case. This involves a mathematical fact, some contingent features of
the situation, and a physical law. So, if we regard the contingent features and law
as constitutive of the situation, then the length of the shadow will be subject to
59 Lange does make clear that some genuine mathematical explanations are what he calls “hybrid
explanations” that combine constraints that are more than physically necessary and causal laws
that are merely physically necessary. See Lange (2017, section 2.3). But I set those cases aside
here, again for reasons of space.
50
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

a genuine mathematical explanation. In this reply to Craver and Povich, Lange
seems willing to accept this point (Lange 2018a, p. 87, citing Lange 2017,
p. 134, fn. 35): the same target, namely the length of the shadow, may or may not
have a genuine mathematical explanation, depending on what we regard as
constitutive of that situation, for example the actual height of the ﬂagpole and
position of the sun.
A related objection to Lange’s proposal is that it is vulnerable to pairs of
derivations that violate explanatory priority. Recall that this is the principle that
if A is part of an explanation of B, then B is not part of an explanation of
A. Consider any biconditional that is mathematically necessary, such as the
theorem deployed in the bridges case: a graph has an Euler path just in case
exactly zero or two nodes have an odd valence. The bridges of Königsberg have
nodes with ﬁve, three, three, and three edges, and so (A) they do not include
exactly zero or two nodes with an odd valence, and so (B) they do not contain an
Euler path. Conversely, the bridges of Königsberg (B) do not contain an Euler
path, and so (A) they do not include exactly zero or two nodes with an odd
valence. When combined with the mathematical theorem, A is part of
a derivation of B, and B is part of a derivation of A. All of Lange’s modal
conditions are met, so Lange’s proposal commits him to counting both as
explanations. This is a violation of explanatory priority. This is all the more
troubling, as Lange has endorsed a version of explanatory priority.60
One response that Lange has to this objection is that we do not, in fact, have
a violation of priority. For the explanation of B must treat certain matters as
constitutive of the situation, and the explanation of A must treat other matters as
constitutive of the situation. So, we only have A being part of an explanation of
B’, and B being part of an explanation of A’, where the primes indicate that
different matters are being treated as constitutive. The apparent violations of
priority are then simply a further manifestation of the point made earlier that any
target can receive a genuine mathematical explanation if the right elements are
treated as constitutive.
Another response that Lange has to priority objections is that there is
a principled barrier to regarding something as constitutive of the explanatory
target. Lange makes this sort of point in his book, and also emphasizes it in his
reply to Craver and Povich (Lange 2018a). Craver and Povich object to this
aspect of Lange’s view using their directionality requirement (Section 3.2.3).
I raise essentially the same worry using our test for explanatory priority.
Consider a city L that, unlike Königsberg, has a network structure Q that permits
60 See Lange (2009, p. 207): “Relations of explanatory priority are asymmetric.” Some qualiﬁca-
tions to this principle seem to be introduced at Lange (2017, p. 298, fn. 20), in line with the
suggestion I develop in the next paragraph.
51
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

an Euler crossing (as in Figure 7), and the proposed explanation that L’s bridges
have that structure because they have been crossed. Lange insists that “having
actually been crossed is no part of what it is for an arrangement of bridges to be
the arrangement at issue” in the explanatory question. This is because the
question “is understood to concern an arrangement of bridges that would still
have been that arrangement even if no one ever crossed it” (Lange 2017, pp. 42–
43; noted at Lange 2018a, p. 86). Here Lange is saying that it is not up to us to
regard this or that feature as constitutive. There is instead a modal test that must
be passed for something to be constitutive: if being crossed is constitutive of
these bridges having this structure, then if no one had ever crossed the bridges,
the bridges would not have had this structure. So, if a scientist makes a mistake
and regards something as constitutive when it is really not, then we do not have
a legitimate explanation. By generalizing this proposal, Lange may hope to
avoid all violations of directionality and even priority.
It is not clear to me that this proposal works for the violation of priority
sketched earlier. For Lange to get the explanation that he counts as legitimate, it
must be appropriate to regard the actual network structure of the bridges of
Königsberg as constitutive. That makes it legitimate to appeal to this structure to
explain the absence of the Euler path. To avoid the violation of priority, Lange
could say that the absence of the Euler path is not constitutive of this system.
However, the absence of the Euler path is necessary and sufﬁcient for the
bridges to not include exactly zero or two nodes of even valence, and this
biconditional obtains by a strong sort of mathematical necessity. So, no modal
test of the sort sketched in the previous paragraph can discriminate these
conditions: in all possible worlds, if one of these properties is constitutive,
then so is the other. I conclude that violations of priority remain even if modal
restrictions are placed on constitutive properties.61
The last sort of objection to Lange that I will consider focuses on modality. Is
the modality of some target really so intimately connected to genuine mathem-
atical explanation? In the pure mathematics cases, we saw in Section 4.1.2 how
Lange does not analyze explanatory proofs in modal terms. This may be
because all mathematical truths are thought to be modally on a par. This
shows that some explanations establish relations among truths that are not
modally distinguished from one another. Perhaps the same relations can obtain
between mathematical truths and contingent facts. To appreciate the issue,
consider again Lange’s double pendulum case. Newton’s second law and
some mathematical truths ensure that a double pendulum has at least four
61 Only something like an essence that is individuated in hyperintensional terms could avoid this
worry. This is consistent with Lange’s discussion in Lange (2021b), which I brieﬂy discuss in
Section 5.2.
52
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

equilibrium conﬁgurations. If a scientist asks why it is necessary that the system
has at least four equilibrium conﬁgurations, then the modality is incorporated
into the target, and so arguably a legitimate explanation must indicate why this
state of affairs is necessary. So, for this kind of why question Lange’s emphasis
on modality is very plausible, as the modality is explicit in the why question.62
However, the situation is not as clear for a scientist who merely asks why the
system has at least four equilibrium conﬁgurations. Lange says that this why
question must also receive an answer in terms of truths with the right kind of
necessity. Otherwise, the proposed answer “would mischaracterize these facts
as more contingent than they actually are” (Lange 2017, p. 44). But if the
modality of the target is not at issue, it is not clear what sort of mischaracteriza-
tion this is.
One clariﬁcation of Lange’s position would be to say that a nonmodal
explanation is illegitimate because it presents a false picture of what the target
depends on: in fact, the target depends on something necessary, so to explain the
target by appeal to something else is just to say something false. Similarly, to
say that no has crossed the bridges of Königsberg exactly once on a tour because
they were just built is to fail to explain the target. To develop this sort of
response, Lange would have to clarify how the modal explanation of the
modal target excludes the nonmodal explanation of the nonmodal target. The
view I am suggesting is that both explanations are legitimate and both present
accurate accounts of what their respective targets depend on. If this is right, then
we could have genuine mathematical explanations that do not explain in virtue
of their mathematical necessity.
This point is even more plausible when we consider a case like the bridges
case where contingencies abound. One sort of explanatory target will include
the modality in target, as with the question “Why is it impossible for anyone to
carry out this sort of tour of the bridges of Königsberg?” It is not absolutely or
metaphysically impossible, as many changes to the bridges would allow the
tour. But it is plausible that a legitimate explanation for this target will account
for this impossibility, in part by clarifying its strength. This can involve regard-
ing various features of the system as constitutive, as Lange emphasizes.
However, I do not see why this implies that an explanation of a nonmodal
explanatory target should proceed in the same way. For example, if the question
is “Why have all these people failed to carry out this sort of tour of the bridges of
Königsberg?,” then an adequate answer is simply that there is no such path. The
modality of this absence does not need to be speciﬁed if it is not part of the
explanatory target.
62 This is an (m)-type case for Lange (2017, p. 131).
53
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

On this reading, Lange has transferred a feature of some genuine mathemat-
ical explanations (his (m)-type) to a feature of all genuine mathematical explan-
ations (including his (n)-type). When the target has a strong form of necessity
included in it, then we get explanations that work as Lange describes. However,
in other cases, where the target does not have that strong form of necessity
included in it, we can have other forms of genuine mathematical explanation.
Lange may object that these other forms have not been suitably circumscribed:
in line with our ﬁrst principle for accounts of explanation, what is the difference
between a mere mathematical description and a genuine mathematical explan-
ation, if we drop the modal tests? We can ask Lange the very same question
when it comes to explanatory proofs. Here, there are no modal tests. Lange’s
account requires that the proof turn on natural properties and that the proof trace
the salient feature of the result back to the setup. This also does not clarify how
this “tracing out” must occur in order for the proof to count as explanatory.
An answer to both of these questions about explanation is that there is no way
to identify the difference in more basic terms. For proofs, there is a difference
between explanatory and nonexplanatory proofs, but we cannot break that
difference down to anything more basic. For genuine mathematical explan-
ations, there is also one or more basic notions of explanatory relevance that link
mathematical facts to nonmathematical facts, but we cannot provide any reduc-
tive analysis of what these relations come to. Instead, we can enumerate the
various relations that we ﬁnd arrayed across these causal and noncausal cases.
This sort of brute pluralism is sometimes defended in terms of an irreducible
variety of dependence relations. For example, Koslicki maintains that “an
explanation, when successful, captures or represents . . . an underlying real-
world relation of dependence of some sort which obtains among the phenomena
cited in the explanation in question” (Koslicki 2012, pp. 212–213; noted at
Pincock 2015a, p. 878). The brute pluralist is committed to there being more
than one type of dependence relation. But they are not committed to there being
any reductive analysis of what these dependence relations amount to. Perhaps
this brute pluralism is the best account of genuine mathematical explanation and
explanatory proof.
4.3 Pluralism and the Value of Explanation
Pluralists about explanation face a problem that monists can avoid: if different
kinds of explanation work differently, then what do all explanations have in
common that make them count as explanations? The brute pluralism sketched at
the end of the last section has difﬁculty giving much of an answer to this
question. On the one hand, the brute pluralist is a pluralist, and so they must
54
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

insist that the different sorts of explanatory relevance relations are different.
A causal explanation will turn on causal relevance, and the different sorts of
noncausal explanations will have special relevance relations that distinguish
them from causal explanations. One model for this sort of relationship is
a genus/species model: objects of various species can be grouped under
a common genus. For example, all regular polygons have an illuminating
common feature, but squares are still different from pentagons in a number of
identiﬁable respects. In other sorts of cases with a genus/species structure there
is not much more to say: some properties are determinates of a common
determinable, and yet the contrasts among determinates are basic. For example,
one shade of blue is different from another shade of blue in an elusive and
primitive way. Similarly, the brute pluralist may insist that one kind of explan-
ation is different from another kind of explanation in a primitive way. We can
perhaps grasp these differences and also see what all cases have in common, but
no further elucidation is possible.
As we have seen, Lange has a more ambitious approach that aims to say
something more informative about explanation. In the ﬁnal chapter of his book,
Lange argues that all varieties of explanation are “species of the same genus”
(Lange 2017, p. 399). This argument turns on the answer to the following
question: how do natural properties ﬁgure into explanations by constraint?
More precisely, Lange asks, for a law L and property P, “When is P natural
enough for its instantiation to be eligible to join with L and other initial
conditions in explaining the outcome?” (Lange 2017, p. 386). The background
assumption here is the same as we saw in Section 4.1.2: explanations require
natural properties. However, in the scientiﬁc case Lange does not endorse the
holist proposal that being an explanatory proof and including natural properties
arise together. Instead, Lange’s view is that when P is a nonfundamental
physical property (Lange 2017, p. 371), “P is natural enough to explain if and
only if there is an explanation of L in which P (that is to say, the combination of
properties to which it reduces) enters as a unit” (Lange 2017, p. 386). So, the
availability of a property to explain in scientiﬁc contexts is ﬁxed by how laws
may be explained. These explanations of laws may be ordinary causal explan-
ations or the more involved explanations by constraint, including genuine
mathematical explanations, that we discussed in Section 4.2.2.
The links between natural properties and explanation in both mathematics
and science highlight how Lange’s pluralism is different from brute pluralism.
Lange here argues that there are features that all explanations have in common,
despite their differences. The most important common feature is that all explan-
ations “are alike in their capacity to render similarities non-coincidental”
(Lange 2017, p. 398). This claim relies on substantial links between
55
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explanation, natural properties, and similarities. For Lange, sharing a natural
property just is being similar in some respect. So when explanations proceed via
natural properties, they involve similarities. In the special case where the salient
feature of a target is itself some similarity that obtains in some domain, the
explanation will account for that similarity and thus render it noncoincidental.
More generally, for any salient feature, the use of natural properties in the
explanation functions to remove the appearance that the feature is coincidental.
As explanations all share at least the common feature of removing apparent
coincidences, Lange concludes that “the property of being an explanation is
a natural property, too” (Lange 2017, p. 399).
Another common feature of explanation, for Lange, is tied to the value of
explanation. According to Lange, explanations have a distinctive, intrinsic
value: “Like science, mathematics values explanatory power as an end in itself,
not merely as a means for discovering techniques that might prove as yet
unproved theorems (or suggest new theorems) and not as a means for ﬁnding
proofs that exhibit other virtues” (Lange 2017, p. 292). Lange does not clarify
how the natural property of removing apparent coincidences is related to this
intrinsic value.
In arguing for substantial common features that unite explanations, Lange’s
pluralism about explanation marks an improvement on a brute pluralism that
simply lists all the kinds of explanations that there are. Notice, though, that
Lange’s arguments that explanations have these common features does not draw
on the aspects of his account of explanation that we have called into question in
Sections 4.1.2 and 4.2.2. All we need is a notion of a natural property and the
principle that explanations and explanatory targets involve natural properties.
We do not even need to suppose, as Lange does for explanatory proofs, that
natural properties arise through their role in explanatory proofs. There may just
be an open-ended list of explanatory relevance relations (or dependencies) that
relate explanations and targets that involve only natural properties. But these
natural properties could arise for any number of reasons that are unconnected to
their role in explanation. Of course, this might reintroduce the sort of brute
emergence that Lange is eager to avoid, but it is not clear why these aspects of
Lange’s proposal count in its favor.63
One common feature that Lange emphasizes is the value of explanations for
mathematicians and scientists: they strive to get these explanations. The efforts
expended to ﬁnd explanations, despite the difﬁculties, show that they are
important. However, this does not require that we agree with Lange and
63 See also Rice and Rohwer (2021) for the proposal that explanations merely exhibit a family
resemblance to one another.
56
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

maintain that the value is intrinsic. Other views of the value of explanation
would emphasize their cognitive or epistemic role. Lange seems to endorse
a derivative value for explanation as well as its intrinsic value: a cognitive value
for explanation is that it removes apparent coincidences. Suppose that coinci-
dences were somehow disturbing or undesirable. Then explanations would have
a derivative cognitive value due to their capacity to render coincidences merely
apparent.
Another proposal is that explanations are epistemically valuable due to their
role in increasing our knowledge. This proposal is sometimes developed by
defenders of what is called “inference to the best explanation” (IBE). According
to IBE, in certain situations, a proposed explanation’s being the best of the
available explanations is some evidence that the proposed explanation is
a legitimate explanation. So an agent who carries out this inference can come
to justiﬁably believe some claims based on this special explanatory evidence. In
cases where this explanation is legitimate, and so these claims are true, this
agent may even come to know something new. As scientists and mathematicians
value knowledge, the way that explanations can increase our knowledge makes
explanations derivatively valuable.
4.4 Conclusion
This section has considered two pluralist proposals for explanatory proofs and
genuine mathematical explanations. Steiner’s work was innovative, but ultim-
ately limited by the tension between his proposals and the cases we considered.
Lange’s account is considerably more developed and plausible. We saw no
reason to deny that some cases work in the way that Lange claims. However,
I argued that Lange’s account is not pluralist enough, as there are cases that
seem to elude his framework. The upshot is an even more pluralist proposal that
posits additional explanatory relevance relations that do not involve modality.
While this brute pluralism is philosophically disappointing, it is consistent with
the genus/species model that Lange develops. It can also be motivated by the
assumption that explanations have distinctive cognitive and epistemic roles in
both mathematics and science.
5 Autonomy, Indispensability, and Inference to the Best
Explanation
Clarifying how mathematical explanations work is an important part of clarify-
ing how the subject matter of mathematics relates to the subject matter of
sciences like physics, psychology, and economics. In this section I consider
how the relationship between mathematics and physics is both similar to and
57
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

different from the relationship between psychology and physics. To start, I will
argue that mathematics is autonomous from physics by comparing mathemat-
ical explanation to psychological explanation (Section 5.1). This is followed by
an examination of some inﬂuential arguments for a platonist interpretation of
mathematics (Section 5.2). A platonist claims that mathematics is about
a special domain of abstract objects. An “indispensability” argument for pla-
tonism relies on mathematical explanations having a certain character. I will try
to identify what this character is and then turn to a brief consideration of how an
appeal to inference to the best explanation (IBE) argument could deliver
a platonist interpretation (Section 5.3).
5.1 Putnam on the Autonomy of the Special Sciences
What sort of autonomy should we claim for pure mathematics? One classic
discussion was offered by Putnam. His “Philosophy and Our Mental Life”
argues for a signiﬁcant analogy between how psychology relates to physics
and how mathematics relates to physics. In the case of both psychology and
mathematics, unlike physics, what is important is that a theory provide
a description of a range of systems that are related by a “functional isomorph-
ism” (Putnam 1975, p. 292). A functional isomorphism obtains when there is
a function that maps the objects, properties, and relations of one system to the
objects, properties, and relations of the other system in such a way that the
structure of the ﬁrst system is preserved in the second system. Putnam develops
this point for mathematics using the example of a cubical peg and a board with
two holes where “the peg passes through the square hole, and it does not pass
through the round hole” (Putnam 1975, p. 295, emphasis removed). Putnam
argues that an explanation of this fact involves the geometrical features of the
peg and the hole: the cubical peg has a height of 15/16″, the circular hole is 1″ in
diameter, and the square has sides that are 1″ long. For Putnam, “The explan-
ation is that the board is rigid, the peg is rigid, and as a matter of geometrical
fact, the round hole is smaller than the peg, the square hole is bigger than the
cross-section of the peg” (Putnam 1975, p. 296). For the peg to ﬁt through the
round hole, the diagonal line connecting two corners of some side of the peg
must be less than the diameter of the hole. But each of these diagonal lines is
about 1.33″ in length (via the Pythagorean theorem). So this is why the peg fails
to go through the round hole. But the square hole is larger than this side of the
square peg, and so it may pass through.
Putnam calls the geometrical explanation of this fact “autonomous”: “The
same explanation will go in any world (whatever the microstructure) in which
those higher-level structural features are present. In that sense this explanation
58
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

is autonomous” (Putnam 1975, p. 296). Crucially, a mathematical description
will pick out such structural features, and it is these very features that will be
preserved in the functional isomorphisms between systems that the description
affords. This makes mathematics into an autonomous science in the sense that it
provides autonomous explanations. Autonomous sciences give explanations
that are different in kind from sciences whose explanations require an appeal
to the microstructure of some target system. A microstructural explanation
would not be preserved across systems with different microstructures. Putnam
is happy to admit that physics often provides microstructural descriptions that
entail that some fact will obtain. For example, in this case Putnam allows that
there is a microstructural physical description of the board and peg that entails
that the peg may pass through the square hole and may not pass through the
round hole. But he questions whether or not this deduction is an explanation:
“What makes you call this deduction an explanation?” (Putnam 1975, p. 296).
Later on the same page, he simply calls this sort of deduction a terrible explan-
ation (Putnam 1975, p. 296).
Putnam’s discussion suggests two versions of autonomy. The strong auton-
omy of some science like geometry or psychology requires that this science
provides explanations of some phenomenon, and physics cannot explain this
phenomenon. By contrast, weak autonomy requires only that this science
provide an explanation of some phenomenon that is better in some respect
than an explanation that physics could provide. Either form of autonomy can be
motivated by focusing on what Putnam calls “higher-level structural features”
such as shapes and functional isomorphisms at this level of description. If such
features turn out be explanatorily relevant to some phenomenon, then a science
that identiﬁes these features and their relationships to one another has a potential
explanatory advantage over physics. Of course, this advantage turns on the
assumption that physics is not well suited to identify or study these higher-level
structural features.
The main aim of Putnam’s paper is to argue that we know enough about the
mind to conclude that any adequate psychological theory will focus on some
higher-level structural features. As a result, we can be assured that psychology
is autonomous with respect to physics. Our focus is on the parallel question for
mathematics: should we say that the mathematical explanations found in sci-
ence provide evidence for the autonomy of mathematics with respect to phys-
ics? This question splits into two versions based on the contrast between strong
and weak autonomy. I will argue here that strong autonomy is not plausible, but
that weak autonomy is well supported.
Strong autonomy requires that there are mathematical explanations for some
phenomena and no physical explanations for at least one of those phenomena.
59
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

One objection to strong autonomy is based on the supervenience principle that
we introduced back in Section 3.2.2: there is some basic physical level for any
system such that a change in any feature of the system will go along with
a change in that basic physical level of the system. Suppose one claimed that the
mathematical explanation of the peg/board pattern is unexplainable by physics.
That is, there is no possibility of completing our physics in a way that would
explain why the square peg passes through the square hole but not through the
round hole. If we accept the supervenience principle, then it seems clear that this
pattern is explainable by physics. For consider the salient higher-level structural
property that we appealed to in explaining why the square peg could not pass
through the round hole. This property is that the length of the diagonal of one
side of the peg is around 1.33″, which is greater than the 1″ diameter of the
round hole. If supervenience holds, then there is some purely physical descrip-
tion of a feature F of the peg that varies with the length of the diagonal: if the
length were different, then F would be different as well. So, it seems that any
explanatory job that the length is doing could be performed by a purely physical
description of F, for example supporting a causal counterfactual. Once we
extend this point to all of the mathematical properties and relations that appear
in the mathematical explanation, we can conclude that there must be, at least in
principle, a physical explanation for this peg/board pattern. Furthermore, we
might insist that this physical explanation is better in some respects than the
mathematical explanation. For the physical explanation can be expanded to
account for features of the peg and board that the mathematical explanation took
for granted. For example, the mathematical explanation simply assumes that the
peg and board are rigid, while the physical explanation could include aspects of
the microstructure that are responsible for this rigidity.
Note that the existence of these physical explanations does not entail that
mathematics is reducible to physics. Such a reduction requires not only the
physical explanations, but also “bridge laws” that link each mathematical
property to physical properties. As a mathematical property like being a cube
is arguably realized by a heterogeneous variety of physical properties, these
linking bridge laws will not have the right character for a reduction. The key
point for my argument against strong autonomy is not the existence of
a reduction, but just the existence of a physical explanation for each target of
a mathematical explanation.
These concerns about strong autonomy do not undermine weak autonomy.
Putnam in particular emphasizes both the generality and the robustness of the
mathematical explanation of the peg/board pattern. There is good reason to
think that the physical explanations required by supervenience will not typically
exhibit these explanatory virtues. So we can conclude that some mathematical
60
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explanations of some phenomena will be better in these respects than the
physical explanations of those phenomena. Consider ﬁrst generality. The math-
ematical explanation of the peg/board pattern deploys the properties of lengths
and rigidity in place of the more basic physical properties that hold for that
particular system. As other systems with other microstructures may exhibit the
same lengths and rigidity, the mathematical explanation applies more generally
than the microstructural physical explanation. These points are closely related
to a second explanatory virtue that I will call robustness. In Putnam’s terms,
attributed to Garﬁnkel, “a good explanation is invariant under small perturba-
tions of the assumptions” (Putnam 1975, p. 301, emphasis removed). Small
changes to the lengths in question or rigidity will not stop the mathematical
explanation from going through. That is, the mathematical explanation of what
is going on in that one system is superior to an explanation that is fragile in the
sense that it fails to apply under small changes. But there is good reason to think
that the microstructural physical explanation is fragile in just this sense. For
some small variations in the microstructure will destroy the rigidity of the peg or
board, and thus alter the situation by, for example, producing a crack in the peg.
I conclude that mathematical explanations that target higher-level structural
features tend to exhibit the virtues of generality and robustness that the corres-
ponding physical explanations of those targets tend to lack. That is, there is good
reason to endorse the weak autonomy of mathematics with respect to physics.64
5.2 Explanatory Indispensability Arguments for Mathematical
Platonism
Many recent discussions of mathematical explanation are motivated by what are
called “enhanced” or explanatory indispensability arguments for platonism.
A platonist says that mathematics is about a special domain of abstract objects.
These objects are outside of space and time and so are causally isolated from
concrete, physical objects. Colyvan and Baker can be credited with advancing these
new indispensability arguments in their strongest form (Colyvan 2001, 2002, 2010,
2012; Baker 2005, 2009b, 2012, 2021). In his 2001 book The Indispensability of
Mathematics, Colyvan presented a general indispensability argument that he traced
back to Quine and Putnam (Colyvan 2001, p. 11). This argument was then reﬁned
by Baker to focus more directly on explanatory considerations:
1. We ought rationally to believe in the existence of any entity that plays an
indispensable explanatory role in our best scientiﬁc theories.
64 There is a vast literature on these arguments that tends to focus on psychology. See Lyon (2012)
for an approach to mathematical explanations that uses Jackson and Pettit (1990) to develop an
account of mathematical explanations in these terms.
61
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2. Mathematical objects play an indispensable explanatory role in science.
3. Hence, we ought rationally to believe in the existence of mathematical
objects (Baker 2009b, p. 613).
The entities that an agent ought to believe in are sometimes termed their
“ontological commitments.” In Quine’s inﬂuential formulation, encoded in
premise 1, the entities that one takes to exist should be identiﬁed through
a regimentation of our best scientiﬁc theories. In the course of this regimenta-
tion, many apparent ontological commitments will be shown to be not genuine,
as with the average household or shadows. But the remaining ontological
commitments that cannot be eliminated or dispensed with are the ones the
agent is stuck with. Otherwise, in Putnam’s apt formulation, one is embracing
“the intellectual dishonesty of denying the existence of what one daily presup-
poses” (Putnam 2010, p. 57).65
Baker adds a new emphasis on mathematical explanation to this traditional
account of ontological commitment. He can allow the existence of nonmathe-
matical versions of our best scientiﬁc theories. To show that premise 2 is true,
one need only argue that these nonmathematical versions afford either no
explanation of what the mathematized theory can explain, or else only worse
explanations of what the mathematized theory can explain. Either way, we have
sufﬁcient reason to include mathematical entities in our ontological commit-
ments. The debate has thus been conducted by focusing on alleged cases of
mathematical explanations of physical phenomena and the potential for non-
mathematical explanations of those phenomena.
Our discussion so far has suggested two different ways of motivating the
explanatory indispensability of mathematical entities. In Section 5.1 I sketched
the argument that mathematics is weakly autonomous with respect to physics.
The weak autonomy of mathematics requires the existence of mathematical
explanations that are better in some respects than any explanation afforded by
physics, for example in terms of generality or robustness. The other approach,
surveyed in Sections 2–4, is to identify a special class of genuine mathematical
explanations, where this genuineness is provisionally characterized in terms of
the mathematics not explaining by merely representing some physical causes.
Our question, then, is whether either of these approaches provides adequate
support for premise 2.
The appeal to weak autonomy has the virtue of being very plausible, but the
vice of failing to make appropriate links to the existence of mathematical entities.
A review of Section 5.1 shows that we made the case for the weak autonomy of
mathematics with respect to physics without taking a stand on the existence or
65 A different motivation for premise 1 is considered in Section 5.3.
62
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

character of any mathematical entities. This suggests that it may be possible to
endorse the mathematical explanations provided by our best scientiﬁc theories
without including any mathematical entities in our ontological commitments.
This seems to be not only a possible attitude, but also the right attitude for cases
like Putnam’s peg/board explanation. For as Hartry Field famously argued, these
sorts of explanations involve an extrinsic relation between the peg/board system,
some real numbers, and some standard unit, for example the inch (Field 1980,
pp. 43–44). We can see how this extrinsic relation can be varied by changing the
units of length without affecting the core of the mathematical explanation. And
this suggests that we should settle our ontological commitments using only the
intrinsic features of the peg/board system. For the intrinsic features are able to
explain the phenomena in question, and any additional ontology seems superﬂu-
ous. This approach commits us to the existence of lengths and their relations, but
bypasses the structural relation to numbers. The same strategy came up in
Section 3.2.2 in our discussion of Baron’s “u-counterfactual theory.” For Baron,
some mathematical explanations will fail to be genuine mathematical explan-
ations when they have this sort of nonmathematical basis. But as noted there,
Baron’s speciﬁc proposal entails that there are no genuine mathematical explan-
ations if the supervenience principle holds.
So, it seems that the existence of mathematical explanations that have virtues
that make them better in terms of generality or robustness than any microstruc-
tural physical explanations is not sufﬁcient to establish the explanatory indis-
pensability of any mathematical entities. For one who denies the existence of
mathematical entities can simply use the mathematics that we have to provide
these mathematical explanations, and yet insist that they are only committed to
the existence of the physical properties or relations, like lengths, that are
involved.66 This is a version of what Colyvan calls “easy road nominalism.”
A nominalist is someone who excludes abstract objects from their ontological
commitments. An easy road nominalist proceeds “by admitting the indispens-
ability of mathematics to our best scientiﬁc theories, but denying that this gives
us any reason to believe in the existence of mathematical entities” (Colyvan
2010, p. 286). Colyvan argues that the easy road nominalist is not actually able
to endorse the mathematical explanations found in our best science without also
countenancing the mathematical entities that are apparently involved. But this
argument has not been very persuasive. One point that Colyvan makes is that the
nominalist owes us a nonmathematical version of the mathematical explan-
ations that they endorse: “when some piece of language is delivering an
explanation, either that piece of language must be interpreted literally or the
66 See especially Leng (2010, 2020, 2021) for a developed version of this approach.
63
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

non-literal reading of the language in question stands proxy for the real explan-
ation” (Colyvan 2010, p. 300). On the literal reading of these mathematical
explanations, they involve abstract objects. If one insists on a nonliteral reading,
then there must be some nonmathematical proxy at work. Colyvan claims that
the only way to restrict one’s ontological commitments to these nonmathema-
tical proxies is to provide a nonmathematical theory that speciﬁes their
character.
This debate helps to clarify why our earlier discussions of genuine mathem-
atical explanations tended to proceed in such negative terms. For Colyvan and
Baker in particular have argued that their genuine mathematical explanations
involve abstract objects playing an explanatory role that is signiﬁcant precisely
because in these cases the mathematics is not functioning to simply represent
nonmathematical explainers. This is hard to maintain for Putnam’s peg/board
case, and so other examples have taken center stage, such as the bridges of
Königsberg case or evolutionary cases involving cicadas or bees. But, unsur-
prisingly, the opponents of explanatory indispensability arguments have not
been convinced by these cases, as they are all amenable to some kind of
nonmathematical reinterpretation. For example, the appeal to graphs in the
bridges case can be undercut by supposing that there are “physical graphs” or
“p-graphs” speciﬁable in purely physical terms. Surely, the argument continues,
by supervenience, there are such physical structures whenever there is
a mapping between a bridge system and an abstract mathematical graph. And
so, even in such cases, there is an available proxy that can be speciﬁed and used
to undercut the explanatory indispensability of any mathematical entities.67
The limitations of explanatory indispensability arguments have been
sharply described by one of their critics, Saatsi, who complains that “what
really matters for the indispensability argument – all that matters! – is whether
or not mathematics plays the kind of explanatory role that we should take as
ontologically committing” (Saatsi 2016, p. 1051).68 Our question, then, is how
we can use the various notions of genuine mathematical explanation con-
sidered in Sections 2–4 to identify this special sort of ontologically commit-
ting explanatory role. We need a notion that allows for the supervenience
principle and yet still provides for a meaningful distinction between genuine
and nongenuine mathematical explanations. In addition, to meet Saatsi’s
challenge, some of the genuine mathematical explanations need to be sufﬁ-
cient to motivate ontological commitment to some abstract objects. This
would be a convincing way to support premise 2.
67 See especially Balaguer (1998) for this sort of argument.
68 See also Knowles and Saatsi (2021) and Knowles (2021a, 2021b).
64
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

None of the monist proposals considered in Sections 2 and 3 seem viable. The
pluralist proposal developed by Lange does seem defensible, at least for the
special case where the target of the explanation is speciﬁed in modal terms.
Recall, then, Lange’s treatment of the double pendulum case, or the bridges of
Königsberg. The mathematical explanation explains why a target must have the
features it has, assuming that various contingencies are held ﬁxed. Lange would
point out that any appeal to a proxy physical property in this case would not be
able to account for the special sort of necessity found in the pendulum or bridge
system. So, even if we were comfortable positing a physical proxy for the torus
or a family of physical graphs to supplant the abstract graphs, these proxies
could not explain the necessity at issue. For, as physical properties, they would
only account for relations that are as contingent as physical causes or physical
laws. The upshot is that we have at least one way for these genuine mathemat-
ical explanations to override the nominalist insistence on avoiding mathemat-
ical commitments.
However, the defender of explanatory indispensability arguments should be
wary of endorsing Lange’s proposal, for it turns out that Lange denies that these
explanations commit one to abstract objects like numbers or graphs. In his 2021
article “What Could Mathematics Be for It to Function in Distinctively
Mathematical Scientiﬁc Explanations?,” Lange uses his modal account of
such explanations to argue against platonism and in favor of what he and others
call an Aristotelian realist interpretation of mathematics (Lange 2021b). The
argument takes for granted that each mathematical explanation at issue is an
“explanation by constraint” that “explains by providing information about how
the explanandum is required by constraints on causal processes and hence is
necessary in a stronger way than causal powers could render it” (Lange 2021b,
p. 46). It might seem like a platonist interpretation of mathematical objects was
consistent with this explanatory role so long as the mathematical facts involving
these abstract mathematical objects had the requisite sort of necessity. However,
Lange argues that the metaphysical gap between the abstract mathematical
objects and the concrete physical systems creates a problem for the platonist.
For no matter how necessary the pure math turns out to be, this necessity can
only apply to the physical system once the physical system is appropriately
related to the abstract objects by some sort of mapping or morphism relation.
So, what makes the physical system have the features that it does must be settled
prior to this mapping relation obtaining. That is, platonic mathematical objects
are not apt to ﬁx how things must be in the physical world.
What we need to make sense of these mathematical explanations, for Lange,
is an alternative understanding of what pure mathematics is about. Here Lange
defends the Aristotelian realist view that “mathematics concerns mathematical
65
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

properties possessed by physical systems” (Lange 2021b, p. 50).69 This
bypasses the need for a mapping relation between abstract objects and
concrete systems. For the Aristotelian realist, mathematical properties are
linked by necessities. This means that if a physical system has some math-
ematical property, then it must also have some other mathematical proper-
ties. So the explanation turns directly on the properties possessed by the
physical systems in question. The key difference between the platonist and
the Aristotelian realist arises with respect to how various counterfactuals are
to be evaluated. For the bridges case, for example, if we ask the platonist
what would happen if the abstract mathematical graph were different, then
Lange argues that the platonist should admit that nothing different would
obtain for the physical bridge system. By contrast, the Aristotelian realist
would take the change in the abstract mathematical graph to be a change in
some of the properties of the physical bridge system. So, at least in some
circumstances, altering a mathematical fact would alter a physical system.
This is the key, for Lange, to making sense of mathematical explanations of
physical phenomena.
We see then that a defender of premise 2 cannot adopt Lange’s account of
genuine mathematical explanations without somehow addressing this antipla-
tonist argument from Lange. More generally, I would argue that the defense of
premise 2 requires an account of genuine mathematical explanations that
connects the explanatory function of the mathematics to the natures of the
mathematical objects involved. Lange’s argument shows that even when these
natures are resolved by the explanations, there is no guarantee that we will get
anything like the platonism the indispensability argument promised.
Interestingly enough, the same point holds for the psychology case that
motivated Putnam’s discussion of autonomy. Recall that for both the psycho-
logical explanations and the mathematical explanations, the acceptance of
a supervenience principle led Putnam to locate the subject matter of these
explanations in the functional organization afforded by the higher-level struc-
tural features of these systems. For psychology, a resolutely functional approach
seems to lose what is most distinctive of our mental life, namely the “what it is
like” of experience or consciousness. Analogously, a structural or functional
approach to mathematical explanations leaves out the intrinsic, nonrelational
features of mathematical objects that the platonist places so much emphasis on.
The platonist cannot use the role of mathematics in these explanations to
conclude more about the nature of mathematics than these explanations would
require. If we side with Lange, then we are led to a certain interpretation of the
69 See also Franklin (2008).
66
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

nature of mathematics, but the intrinsic character that Lange assigns is incon-
sistent with platonism.
There may, of course, be some way to think about mathematical explanations
so that these explanations do involve the intrinsic character of mathematical
entities and mandate the existence of some abstract objects. The plausibility of
an explanatory indispensability argument will thus turn on the plausibility of
thinking of the mathematical explanations in this special way. Baron offers
precisely such a proposal in yet another account of genuine mathematical
explanations in “Mathematical Explanation: A Pythagorean Proposal” (Baron
forthcoming). Baron deﬁnes a Pythagorean as a platonist who believes in the
existence of abstract objects and who also supposes that some intrinsic math-
ematical properties of these objects are also possessed by physical objects. On
the mathematical side, sometimes a mathematical structure will have such an
intrinsic property P that guarantees (or rules out) some mathematical property
Q of some aspect of that structure. This allows for a genuine mathematical
explanation. Consider a physical system that can take on various conﬁgurations
or states. Baron’s Pythagorean proposal supposes that the physical system can
have that intrinsic mathematical property P. Then a state of that system may be
guaranteed to possess the intrinsic mathematical property Q. When this relation
obtains between global and local mathematical properties, we can explain why
the state with property Q is present: this is due to the physical system possessing
the global property P. The same point applies when a global mathematical
property P prohibits a local mathematical property Q: the physical system’s
realization of P explains why its states lack Q.
The contrasts between Baron’s Pythagorean account and Lange’s Aristotelian
realism are instructive. Lange argues that the mappings prized by the platonist
are inadequate to make sense of how the features of abstract mathematical
objects could explain the features of concrete physical objects. So, Lange
concludes that the physical objects must possess special mathematical proper-
ties. At this point, the core difference between these explanatory mathematical
properties and ordinary physical properties is that the mathematical properties
stand in necessary relations of a sort that is absent for physical properties. Baron
proceeds in a different direction. He supposes that the mappings prized by the
platonist do involve shared properties between the abstract mathematical
objects and the concrete physical objects. So Baron concludes that at least
some mathematical properties are shared between the abstract and the concrete.
Still, like Lange, for Baron the relations between the properties are the key to the
explanatory power of the mathematics. But Baron claims that the properties are
intrinsic properties of abstract objects, and so they serve to settle the existence
and much of the character of the abstract mathematical objects.
67
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

What happens if we combine Baron’s Pythagorean proposal with our super-
venience principle? Baron claims that his account is consistent with supervenience:
“It could be that the mathematical properties supervene on physical ones, but it
could also be that some physical properties supervene on mathematical ones. Or
there may be no supervenience relation at all” (Baron forthcoming, p. 11). The point
seems to be that so long as the mathematical properties are distinct from the
physical properties, the existence of genuine mathematical explanations is sufﬁ-
cient for the platonist conclusion. However, Baron is also aware that if super-
venience obtains, “an incompatibility between mathematical properties will
generally correspond to an incompatibility between subvenient physical properties”
(Baron forthcoming, p. 11) and, we might assume, the same correspondence
obtains for entailments between properties. This seems to undermine the inference
to platonism for the reasons noted in Section 5.1: if there are physical properties that
mimic the explanatory relations provided by the mathematical properties, then the
determined nominalist will regiment their explanations so they mention only the
physical properties. So while Baron’s account of genuine mathematical explanation
is consistent with supervenience, supervenience undermines the explanatory indis-
pensability argument that Baron seems to want to defend.
Of course, with Lange’s Aristotelian realist proposal in mind, another obvi-
ous question to ask Baron is why one should posit the existence of abstract
mathematical objects in addition to these intrinsic mathematical properties?
Baron (forthcoming) does not cite Lange (2021b), but Baron does see clearly
how hard it would be for the platonist to use Lange’s analysis of mathematical
explanations as explanations by constraint in a defense of platonism: “how,
exactly, do mathematical objects exert this kind of inﬂuence?” (Baron forth-
coming, p. 6). Notice that if we drop the abstract mathematical objects from
Baron’s Pythagorean proposal, we are left with the Aristotelian realist proper-
ties that Lange claims are the subject matter of mathematics. Baron’s response
to this position is direct: “Structural properties on my account make indispens-
able reference to abstract objects” (Baron forthcoming, p. 25). Baron backs up
this assertion by noting some of the difﬁculties with developing a nominalist
account of structural properties without in some way or other quantifying over
abstract objects. At this point, though, the debate has shifted away from
questions about genuine mathematical explanation to questions about the non-
explanatory indispensability of mathematics to our best science. If Baron’s
Pythagorean proposal is correct, then any nominalist interpretation of mathem-
atics can use that interpretation to provide a reconstruction of the mathematical
explanations found in science. For this nominalist interpretation of mathematics
will introduce the right sort of structural properties and relations between
structural properties.
68
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Looking back, then, at premise 2, we have a better understanding of why it is so
unpersuasive to the determined nominalist. We need to address Saatsi’s challenge
to relate the presence of mathematical explanations to the ontological commit-
ment to abstract mathematical objects. But we have not found an account of these
mathematical explanations that avoids a resolute representational reading while
also clarifying what it is about these explanations that ties them to the existence of
abstract objects. Even if the determined nominalist admits the class of mathemat-
ical explanations endorsed by Lange, they still have available an ontology of
properties that stops short of commitment to abstract objects. It seems, then, that
a platonist interpretation of mathematics in terms of abstract objects is discon-
nected from the explanatory role of mathematics outside of mathematics.
5.3 Inference to the Best Mathematical Explanation
Colyvan and Baker have often emphasized that an explanatory indispensability
argument is directed at scientiﬁc realists. Scientiﬁc realists typically defend
their realism about unobservable entities like atoms and electrons through the
use of inference to the best explanation (IBE). So, it is claimed, the scientiﬁc
realist should also accept the existence of platonic mathematical objects using
the very same sort of IBE argument. As Baker puts the point, “A crucial plank of
the scientiﬁc realist position involves inference to the best explanation (IBE) to
justify the postulation in particular cases of unobservable theoretical entities . . .
the indispensability debate only gets off the ground if both sides take IBE
seriously, which suggests that explanation is of key importance in this debate”
(Baker 2005, p. 225). On this reading, premise 1 reﬂects an endorsement of an
appropriate form of IBE. Then the existence of the genuine mathematical
explanations required for premise 2 gets us the existence of abstract mathemat-
ical objects. For the very same explanatory considerations that speak in favor of
atoms and electrons also speak in favor of numbers and groups.
It turns out to be difﬁcult to articulate and defend a form of IBE that supports
a plausible form of scientiﬁc realism as well as mathematical platonism. To
appreciate the challenges, consider a classic explanatory argument for the
existence of God popular from the beginning of the nineteenth century. What
explains the existence of the universe and the apparent design that we ﬁnd in
some natural objects like living things? The best available explanation of these
facts in 1800 was that God created the universe and is directly responsible for
these features of living things through various acts of special creation. So, if we
accept IBE, then it looks like we should also accept the existence of God. In
schematic form, IBE is a form of inference that can be boiled down to premise
(A) and conclusion (B):
69
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A. For phenomena P1, . . ., Pn, the only available potential explanations are
E1, . . ., Er, and of these E1 is the best.
B. E1.70
The goodness of the potential explanations is established by considering how
well each explanation exhibits explanatory virtues like simplicity, generality,
and depth. The God explanation was superior in these respects to all other
available explanations, and so it looked reasonable to conclude that God exists.
It is a simple explanation that requires only one entity. It is a general explanation
because it covers a number of phenomena. And it is a deep explanation in the
sense that it guarantees the phenomena in question by explaining all their salient
aspects.71
However, the further development of science raises difﬁcult questions about the
use of IBE. One reading of this challenge is that the virtues that seemed sufﬁcient to
activate IBE were actually not sufﬁcient. That is, scientists who argued for the
existence of God in 1800 using IBE were using it incorrectly. Now, with the beneﬁt
of history, we can apply IBE more carefully and in line with a better grasp of the
virtues that are the right ones to appeal to when determining the best explanation.
Consider, ﬁrst, simplicity. Currently, we explain the origin of the universe by appeal
to the Big Bang and we explain the apparent design shown by many living things
using Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection. We can recognize that the
God explanation of these two phenomena is simpler than our combination of these
two explanations, but we do not take this simplicity to establish that the God
explanation is superior in the sense that is relevant to the use of IBE. The same
points hold for generality and depth. A more general explanation is one that covers
more phenomena, and it is hard to deny that the God explanation, were it true,
would cover many more phenomena than our combination of the Big Bang and
evolution. Still, this does not mean that the God explanation is better for the
purposes of IBE. The virtue of depth pertains to the modal force that the explanation
assigns to the target of explanation as well as the level of detail that the explanation
achieves. Our accepted explanations using the Big Bang and evolution grant that
the targets are highly contingent, and also leave many details unexplained. But,
again, this does not call into question our use of IBE in support of these theories,
and our rejection of an IBE argument for the existence of God.
One reaction to this historical episode is that our current use of IBE should take
some explanatory virtues more seriously than others when they guide inference.72
Virtues like simplicity, generality, and depth are pseudo-virtues for the use of IBE,
70 See Lipton (2004) for an extended discussion.
71 This last point assumes a Leibnizian God who always acts for a reason.
72 A consideration of other reactions is not feasible here.
70
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

and we can see this by reﬂecting on various past scientiﬁc failures. Still, this does
not settle how we should use IBE now. My suggestion is that a defense of
scientiﬁc realism requires elevating some explanatory virtues so that they estab-
lish a threshold for the use of IBE. Once these thresholds are met, a potential
explanation is in the running for support through the use of IBE. But if these
special explanatory virtues are not met, then we should refrain from using IBE.
A more detailed discussion of this approach to IBE would involve showing that
the arguments that we accept, such as IBE arguments for the Big Bang or
evolution, conform to these restrictions, while arguments that we now reject,
such as IBE arguments for the existence of God, fail to meet these restrictions.
The special explanatory virtues that I have in mind are what I will call
conservativeness and modesty. The most conservative potential explanation
deploys only entities that we have some prior and independent reason to believe
in. X is a less conservative potential explanation than Y when X posits more
kinds of new entities than Y does. Consider someone who is agnostic about the
existence of God, and yet already believes that the universe has been around for
a ﬁnite amount of time. For this person, the God explanation of the existence of
the universe is less conservative than the Big Bang explanation. This person
already accepts the existence of some event that is the start of the universe, but
does not already accept anything like God. So this person would be entitled to
rank the Big Bang explanation as better than the God explanation in respect of
conservativeness. Other things being equal, they could then apply IBE and
come to a justiﬁed belief in the Big Bang theory.
The second special explanatory virtue to consider is what I am calling
modesty. The most modest potential explanation is one that deploys new entities
only when all the essential features of those new entities are ﬁxed by the
explanation of the phenomena in question. X is a more modest potential
explanation than Y when the new entities that X posits have more of their
essential features ﬁxed by the explanation than the new entities that Y posits. If
we merely consider the existence of the universe, the God explanation and the
Big Bang explanation are not very modest because they ascribe a number of
features to the entities they posit, and few of these features are ﬁxed by the
proposed explanation. For example, as Hume pointed out, for God to create the
universe, he need not be all powerful, but only powerful to a certain extent. So if
the explanation assumes that God is all powerful, we have a violation of
modesty. Similarly, the Big Bang explanation ascribes a very high temperature
to the universe in the moments after it began. But if we consider simply the
existence of the universe, then this very high temperature is unrelated to the
explanation of that existence. So, just as with the all powerful God explanation,
we have a violation of modesty.
71
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The key difference between the God explanation and the Big Bang explan-
ation is that the addition of other phenomena besides the existence of the
universe is sufﬁcient to ﬁx many of the essential features of the Big Bang,
while not ﬁxing the essential features that are traditionally ascribed to God.
Perhaps the most signiﬁcant phenomenon that is used to support the existence of
the Big Bang is the cosmic microwave background radiation. This is the fact
that there is radiation everywhere in the universe that is responsible for
a background temperature of around 2.7 degrees Kelvin. This temperature is
explained by the assumption of a speciﬁc range of temperatures throughout the
universe, from near to its very beginnings up to the present day. So this
explanation serves to ﬁx how much energy was present in the moments right
after the Big Bang. By contrast, at least if we follow Hume, nothing in the
natural world settles whether God must be all powerful or merely very power-
ful, with a wide range left open. So the proposed God explanation violates
modesty to the extent that it assumes an all powerful God, over and above what
is needed to explain the natural phenomena.
I suggest, then, that the best defense of scientiﬁc realism will invoke a highly
restricted form of IBE that requires that a potential explanation meet a threshold
of conservativeness and modesty for it to be a candidate for the use of IBE. If
this is right, then explanatory arguments for platonism that appeal only to
natural phenomena involving the concrete world are in trouble. For consider
an agent A who has identiﬁed a range of phenomena, but who does not yet
believe in the existence of any abstract objects such as the natural numbers.
A platonist B may propose some potential explanation involving the natural
numbers. Let us suppose that the potential explanation counts as a genuine
mathematical explanation according to some viable theory of these explan-
ations. This genuine mathematical explanation will be different from its non-
platonist competitors, which we can assume only posit new physical objects,
properties, or relations. These differences will go along with a difference in
explanatory virtues. Genuine mathematical explanations tend to be simpler,
more general, and deeper than their physicalist competitors. So, the platonist
B concludes that, so long as person A accepts IBE, they should also accept the
genuine mathematical explanation as legitimate and so endorse the correspond-
ing platonist ontology of abstract objects.
The problem with this appeal to IBE is that it ignores the problems from the
history of science that motivated the special status of conservativeness and
modesty. For the platonist B, who already believes in abstract mathematical
objects, there is no issue tied to conservativeness or modesty. There are no new
entities in the explanations they are proposing, and so they can endorse these
new explanations, just as the theist who already believes in God can use God to
72
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

explain the existence of the universe. But for person A, who does not believe in
abstract mathematical objects, the situation is quite different. There is no way to
rationally persuade them to endorse the genuine mathematical explanation
because this explanation will fall below the threshold required by conservative-
ness and modesty. First, in proposing a new sort of object, the mathematical
explanation will be less conservative than its physical competitor. Second, it is
hard to see how the genuine mathematical explanation will satisfy modesty.
Compared at least to the physical explanation, the character of the abstract
objects will not be ﬁxed by what is needed to explain the target physical
phenomena. This is easy to see for a proposed explanation that involves the
natural numbers. It is very unlikely to involve more than a few of the natural
numbers. So the genuine mathematical explanation will not draw on or require
inﬁnitely many numbers. For this reason, a competing physical explanation will
be able to get by using only surrogates that simulate whatever ﬁnite structure is
needed to explain the target phenomena. Unlike in the Big Bang case, then, we
get violations of conservativeness and modesty when we try to use IBE to
justify a new belief in the existence of abstract mathematical objects. The
challenge to the platonist is to try to ﬁnd a defensible version of IBE that is
central to a defense of scientiﬁc realism, while also powerful enough to license
the use of IBE needed to add platonic entities to person A’s ontology. This
challenge has arguably not been met, and this is a way to diagnose why
explanatory indispensability arguments remain unpersuasive.
5.4 Conclusion
Much of the current interest in mathematical explanation is tied to the hope that
a satisfactory account of genuine mathematical explanation would help to settle
the right interpretation of pure mathematics. Our examination of these argu-
ments has been divided into three parts. First, I considered the argument from
Putnam that the special sciences like psychology afford a special kind of
explanation that is not available in physics. I endorsed this argument for what
I called the weak autonomy of mathematics: some mathematical explanations
exhibit explanatory virtues that are absent from their nonmathematical alterna-
tives. Then I turned to explanatory indispensability arguments that try to use the
special character of genuine mathematical explanations to persuade nonplato-
nists to become platonists. I argued that these arguments do not work. Weak
autonomy is not enough to motivate such a platonist interpretation. The attempt
to supplement weak autonomy with a more detailed account of how mathemat-
ical explanations work also turned out to be insufﬁcient for the platonist
conclusion, as becomes clear in Lange (2021b) and Baron (forthcoming).
73
Mathematics and Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Finally, we brieﬂy considered an appeal to IBE in support of platonism. Here
I suggested that a defensible form of IBE should privilege virtues like conser-
vativeness and modesty that restrict when IBE can be used. If the scientiﬁc
realist only endorses this restricted form of IBE, then they have no reason to
accept the platonist interpretation of mathematical explanations of physical
phenomena.
74
The Philosophy of Mathematics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Baker, A. (2005). Are There Genuine Mathematical Explanations of Physical
Phenomena? Mind, 114(454), 223–238.
Baker, A. (2009a). Mathematical Accidents and the End of Explanation. In
O. Bueno and Ø. Linnebo, eds., New Waves in the Philosophy of
Mathematics, Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 137–159.
Baker, A. (2009b). Mathematical Explanation in Science. The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 60(3), 611–633.
Baker, A. (2012). Science-Driven Mathematical Explanation. Mind, 121(482),
243–267.
Baker, A. (2021). Circularity, Indispensability, and Mathematical Explanation
in Science. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 88, 156–163.
Balaguer, M. (1998). Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics, Oxford
University Press.
Baron, S. (2016). Explaining Mathematical Explanation. The Philosophical
Quarterly, 66(264), 458–480.
Baron, S. (2019). Mathematical Explanation by Law. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 70(3), 683–717.
Baron, S. (2020). Counterfactual Scheming. Mind, 129(514), 535–562.
Baron, S. (forthcoming). Mathematical Explanation: A Pythagorean Proposal.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 1–29.
Baron, S., Colyvan, M., and Ripley, D. (2017). How Mathematics Can Make a
Difference. Philosophers’ Imprint, 17(3), 1–19.
Baron, S., Colyvan, M., and Ripley, D. (2020). A Counterfactual Approach to
Explanation in Mathematics. Philosophia Mathematica, 28(1), 1–34.
Cain, A. J. (2010). Deus ex Machina and the Aesthetics of Proof. The
Mathematical Intelligencer, 32, 7–11.
Coexter, H. S. M., and Greitzer, S. L. (1967). Geometry Revisited, Random House.
Colyvan, M. (2001). The Indispensability of Mathematics, Oxford University Press.
Colyvan, M. (2002). Mathematics and Aesthetic Considerations in Science.
Mind, 111(441), 69–74.
Colyvan, M. (2010). There Is No Easy Road to Nominalism. Mind, 119(474),
285–306.
Colyvan, M. (2012). Road Work Ahead: Heavy Machinery on the Easy Road.
Mind, 121(484), 1031–1046.
Colyvan, M., Cusbert, J., and McQueen, K. (2018). Two Flavours of
Mathematical Explanation. In A. Reutlinger and J. Saatsi, eds., Explanation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

beyond Causation: Philosophical Perspectives on Non-causal Explanations,
Oxford University Press, pp. 231–249.
Conway, J. (2005). The Power of Mathematics. In A. Blackwell and
D. MacKay, eds., Power, Cambridge University Press. 71–86
Conway, J. (2014). On Morley’s Trisector Theorem. The Mathematical
Intelligencer, 36, 3. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00283-014-9463-3.
Craver, C. F. (2014). The Ontic Account of Scientiﬁc Explanation. In M. Kaiser and
O. Scholz, eds., Explanation in the Special Sciences, Springer, pp. 27–52.
Craver, C. F., and Povich, M. (2017). The Directionality of Distinctively
Mathematical Explanations. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A, 63, 31–38.
D’Alessandro, W. (2020). Mathematical Explanation beyond Explanatory
Proof. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 71, 581–603.
D’Alessandro, W. (2021). Proving Quadratic Reciprocity: Explanation,
Disagreement, Transparency and Depth. Synthese, 198(9), 8621–8664.
Detlefsen, M., and Arana, A. (2011). Purity of Methods. Philosophers’ Imprint,
11(2), 1–20.
Field, H. (1980). Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism,
Princeton University Press.
Franklin, J. (2008). Aristotelian Realism. In A. Irvine, ed., Handbook of the
Philosophy of Science. Philosophy of Mathematics, Elsevier, pp. 101–153.
Gorjian, I., Karamzadeh, O. A. S., and Namdari, M. (2015). Morley’s Theorem
Is No Longer Mysterious! The Mathematical Intelligencer, 37, 6–7.
Hafner, J., and Mancosu, P. (2005). The Varieties of Mathematical Explanation.
In P. Mancosu et al., eds., Visualization, Explanation and Reasoning Styles in
Mathematics, Springer, pp. 215–250.
Hafner, J., and Mancosu, P. (2008). Beyond Uniﬁcation. In P. Mancosu, ed., The
Philosophy of Mathematical Practice, Oxford University Press, pp. 151–178.
Hempel, C. (1965). Aspects of Scientiﬁc Explanation and Other Essays in the
Philosophy of Science, Free Press.
Ingram, V. M. (1957). Gene Mutations in Human Hæmoglobin: The Chemical
Difference between Normal and Sickle Cell Hæmoglobin. Nature, 180(4581),
326–328.
Jackson, F., and Pettit, P. (1990). Program Explanation: A General Perspective.
Analysis, 50, 107–117.
Karamzadeh, O. A. S. (2014). Is John Conway’s Proof of Morley’s Theorem the
Simplest and Free of a Deus ex Machina? The Mathematical Intelligencer,
36, 4–7.
Karamzadeh, O. A. S. (2018). Is the Mystery of Morley’s Trisector Theorem
Resolved? Forum Geometricorum, 18, 297–306.
76
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Kasirzadeh, A. (forthcoming). Counter Countermathematical Explanations.
Erkenntnis, 1–24.
Kitcher, P. (1989). Explanatory Uniﬁcation and the Causal Structure of the
World. In P. Kitcher and W. Salmon, eds., Scientiﬁc Explanation,
University of Minnesota Press, pp. 410–505.
Knowles, R. (2021a). Platonic Relations and Mathematical Explanations. The
Philosophical Quarterly, 71(3), 623–644.
Knowles, R. (2021b). Uniﬁcation and Mathematical Explanation. Philosophical
Studies, 178(12), 3923–3943.
Knowles, R., and Saatsi, J. (2021). Mathematics and Explanatory Generality:
Nothing but Cognitive Salience. Erkenntnis, 86(5), 1119–1137.
Koslicki, K. (2012). Varieties of Ontological Dependence. In F. Correia and
B. Schnieder, eds., Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the Structure of
Reality, Cambridge University Press, pp. 186–213.
Kostić, D., and Khalifa, K. (2021). The Directionality of Topological
Explanations. Synthese, 199(5), 14143–14165.
Kuorikoski, J. (2021). There Are No Mathematical Explanations. Philosophy of
Science, 88(2), 189–212.
Lange, M. (2009). Why Proofs by Mathematical Induction Are Generally Not
Explanatory. Analysis, 69(2), 203–211.
Lange,
M.
(2013).
What
Makes
a
Scientiﬁc
Explanation
Distinctively
Mathematical? The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 64(3),
485–511.
Lange, M. (2017). Because without Cause: Non-causal Explanation in Science
and Mathematics, Oxford University Press.
Lange, M. (2018a). A Reply to Craver and Povich on the Directionality of
Distinctively Mathematical Explanations. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part A, 67, 85–88.
Lange, M. (2018b). Mathematical Explanations That Are Not Proofs.
Erkenntnis, 83(6), 1285–1302.
Lange, M. (2019). Ground and Explanation in Mathematics. Philosophers’
Imprint, 19(33), 1–18.
Lange, M. (2021a). Asymmetry as a Challenge to Counterfactual Accounts of
Non-causal Explanation. Synthese, 198(4), 3893–3918.
Lange, M. (2021b). What Could Mathematics Be for It to Function in
Distinctively Mathematical Scientiﬁc Explanations? Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part A, 87, 44–53.
Lange, M. (2022a). Challenges Facing Counterfactual Accounts of Explanation
in Mathematics. Philosophia Mathematica, 30(1), 32–58.
77
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Lange, M. (2022b). Inference to the Best Explanation as Supporting the
Expansion of Mathematicians’ Ontological Commitments. Synthese,
200(146), 1–26.
Leng, M. (2010). Mathematics and Reality, Oxford University Press.
Leng, M. (2020). Mathematical Explanation Doesn’t Require Mathematical
Truth. In S. Dasgupta, R. Dotan, and B. Weslake, eds., Current
Controversies in Philosophy of Science, Routledge, pp. 51–59.
Leng, M. (2021). Models, Structures, and the Explanatory Role of Mathematics
in Empirical Science. Synthese, 199(3), 10415–10440.
Lewis, D. (2004). Causation as Inﬂuence. In J. Collins, N. Hall, and L. A. Paul,
eds., Causation and Counterfactuals, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Press, pp. 75–106.
Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the Best Explanation, 2nd ed., Routledge.
Lyon, A. (2012). Mathematical Explanations of Empirical Facts, and
Mathematical Realism. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 90, 559–578.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., and Craver, C. F. (2000). Thinking about
Mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67(1), 1–25.
Mancosu, P. (2000). On Mathematical Explanation. In E. Grosholz and H. Breger,
eds., The Growth of Mathematical Knowledge, Kluwer, pp. 103–119.
Mancosu, P. (2001). Mathematical Explanation: Problems and Prospects. Topoi,
20(1), 97–117.
Mancosu, P. (2008). Mathematical Explanation: Why It Matters. In P. Mancosu,
ed., The Philosophy of Mathematical Practice, Oxford University Press,
pp. 134–150.
Mancosu, P. (2018). Explanation in Mathematics. In E. N. Zalta, ed., The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Summer 2018, Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/math
ematics-explanation.
Morrison, M. (2000). Unifying Scientiﬁc Theories: Physical Concepts and
Mathematical Structures, Cambridge University Press.
Nahin, P. J. (2004). When Least Is Best: How Mathematicians Discovered Many
Clever Ways to Make Things as Small (or as Large) as Possible, Princeton
University Press.
Nandor, M., and Helliwell, T. (1996). Fermat’s Principle and Multiple
Imaging by Gravitational Lenses. American Journal of Physics, 64(1),
45–49.
Pincock, C. (2015a). Abstract Mathematical Explanations in Science. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 66(4), 857–882.
Pincock, C. (2015b). The Unsolvability of the Quintic: A Case Study in
Abstract Mathematical Explanation. Philosopher’s Imprint, 15(3).
78
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Pincock, C. (2018). Accommodating Explanatory Pluralism. In A. Reutlinger
and J. Saatsi, eds., Explanation beyond Causation, Oxford University Press,
pp. 39–56.
Povich, M. (2020). Modality and Constitution in Distinctively Mathematical
Explanations. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 10(3), 1–10.
Povich, M. (2021). The Narrow Ontic Counterfactual Account of Distinctively
Mathematical Explanation. The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 72(2), 511–543.
Povich, M. (forthcoming). A Scheme Foiled: A Critique of Baron’s Account of
Extra-mathematical Explanation. Mind. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/
fzac019.
Putnam, H. (1975). Philosophy and Our Mental Life. In Mind, Language
and Reality: Philosophical Papers, Cambridge University Press, pp.
291–303.
Putnam, H. (2010). Philosophy of Logic, Routledge.
Reutlinger, A. (2016). Is There a Monist Theory of Causal and Noncausal
Explanations? The Counterfactual Theory of Scientiﬁc Explanation.
Philosophy of Science, 83(5), 733–745.
Reutlinger, A. (2017). Does the Counterfactual Theory of Explanation Apply to
Non-causal Explanations in Metaphysics? European Journal for Philosophy
of Science, 7(2), 239–256.
Reutlinger, A. (2018). Extending the Counterfactual Theory of Explanation. In
A.
Reutlinger
and
J.
Saatsi,
eds.,
Explanation
beyond
Causation:
Philosophical Perspectives on Non-causal Explanations, Oxford University
Press, pp. 74–95.
Reutlinger, A., Colyvan, M., and Krzyżanowska, K. (2022). The Prospects for
a Monist Theory of Non-causal Explanation in Science and Mathematics.
Erkenntnis, 87, 1773–1793.
Rice, C., and Rohwer, Y. (2021). How to Reconcile a Uniﬁed Account of
Explanation with Explanatory Diversity. Foundations of Science, 26(4),
1025–1047.
Ronan, M. (2007). Symmetry and the Monster: One of the Greatest Quests of
Mathematics, Oxford University Press.
Ryan, P. J. (2021). Szemerédi’s Theorem: An Exploration of Impurity,
Explanation, and Content. The Review of Symbolic Logic, 1–40. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1755020321000538.
Saatsi, J. (2016). On the “Indispensable Explanatory Role” of Mathematics.
Mind, 125(500), 1045–1070.
Salmon, W. (1984). Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Causal Structure of the
World, Princeton University Press.
79
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Salmon, W. (1989). Four Decades of Scientiﬁc Explanation. In P. Kitcher and
W. Salmon, eds., Scientiﬁc Explanation, University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 3–219.
Senior, A. W., Evans, R., Jumper, J. et al. (2020). Improved Protein Structure
Prediction Using Potentials from Deep Learning. Nature, 577(7792),
706–710.
Solomon, R. (2001). A Brief History of the Classiﬁcation of the Finite Simple
Groups. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 38(3), 315–352.
Steiner, M. (1978a). Mathematical Explanation. Philosophical Studies,
34, 135–151.
Steiner, M. (1978b). Mathematics, Explanation, and Scientiﬁc Knowledge.
Noûs, 12(1), 17.
Stewart, I. (2004). Galois Theory, 3rd ed., Chapman and Hall.
Taylor, E. (forthcoming). Explanatory Distance. The British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 1–33.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making Things Happen: A Theory of Causal Explanation,
Oxford University Press.
Woodward, J. (2018). Some Varieties of Non-Causal Explanation. In
A. Reutlinger and J. Saatsi, eds., Explanation beyond Causation, Oxford
University Press, pp. 117–137.
Wussing, H. (2007). The Genesis of the Abstract Group Concept, Springer.
Zelcer, M. (2013). Against Mathematical Explanation. Journal for General
Philosophy of Science, 44(1), 173–192.
80
References
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
From the time Penny Rush completed her thesis in the philosophy of mathematics (2005),
she has worked continuously on themes around the realism/anti-realism divide
and the nature of mathematics. Her edited collection The Metaphysics of Logic
(Cambridge University Press, 2014), and forthcoming essay ‘Metaphysical Optimism’
(Philosophy Supplement), highlight a particular interest in the idea of reality itself and
curiosity and respect as important philosophical methodologies.
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
Stewart Shapiro is the O’Donnell Professor of Philosophy at The Ohio State University,
a Distinguished Visiting Professor at the University of Connecticut, and a Professorial Fellow
at the University of Oslo. His major works include Foundations without Foundationalism
(1991), Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology (1997), Vagueness in Context
(2006), and Varieties of Logic (2014). He has taught courses in logic, philosophy of
mathematics, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of religion, Jewish philosophy, social
and political philosophy, and medical ethics.
About the Series
This Cambridge Elements series provides an extensive overview of the philosophy
of mathematics in its many and varied forms. Distinguished authors will provide an
up-to-date summary of the results of current research in their ﬁelds and give their own
take on what they believe are the most signiﬁcant debates inﬂuencing research,
drawing original conclusions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Elements in the Series
Mathematical Structuralism
Geoﬀrey Hellman and Stewart Shapiro
A Concise History of Mathematics for Philosophers
John Stillwell
Mathematical Intuitionism
Carl J. Posy
Innovation and Certainty
Mark Wilson
Semantics and the Ontology of Number
Eric Snyder
Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Juliet Floyd
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics: Talking Past Each Other
Penelope Rush
Mathematics and Metaphilosophy
Justin Clarke-Doane
Paraconsistency in Mathematics
Zach Weber
Mathematical Anti-Realism and Modal Nothingism
Mark Balaguer
Plato Was Not a Mathematical Platonist
Elaine Landry
Mathematics and Explanation
Christopher Pincock
A full series listing is available at: www.cambridge.org/EPM
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039154 Published online by Cambridge University Press

