
Mathematics in the World
Plan of the Chapter
This chapter takes a step back and considers mathematics from a diﬀerent
angle: the mathematics closer to day-to-day practice. At the same time, the
chapter brings forward the historical narrative by beginning to consider the
science of the Roman era. The same duality will characterize the following
(longer) chapter on astronomy, and both for a reason: in the centuries
following the two breakout generations of Greek mathematics, most work
in the exact sciences was concentrated on more “applied” mathematics and
in particular on astronomy. It is therefore ﬁtting that we begin with the
author (not a mathematician but a historian) most emblematic of the turn
from Greek to Roman: “Polybius, Introducing Applied Mathematics.”
We then move into a deeper background to the applications of math-
ematics: What did “everyone” know? The ﬁrst section, “Number,”
describes the (considerable) numeracy of the Greek civilization. The
following section, “Education,” touches on the little we know (mostly
based on papyrus ﬁnds) about the dissemination of such knowledge.
With basic mathematical knowledge fairly widespread, we could expect it
to be applied. This is brieﬂy surveyed, and qualiﬁed, in a number of ﬁelds.
The ﬁrst is “Geography,” which is a surprisingly rich area for the display of
mathematical knowledge. The following section, “The Engineering of an
Empire?,” is headed by a question mark: it is not clear that antiquity had a
profession similar to our “engineer” – but it is also clear that the place in
which to look is the Roman Empire. A related ﬁeld is covered in “Tactics” –
that is, the theoretical study of military operations – because whatever
engineering existed in antiquity was primarily military. Indeed, as the fol-
lowing section, “Catapults,” emphasizes, the ancients connected mathemat-
ical knowledge speciﬁcally with a particular problem in mechanics: the
scaling of war engines – and the general scaling of solids, that is, the problem,
so familiar to us now, of ﬁnding four lines in continuous proportion!

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This brings us into the general ﬁeld of “mechanics.” We look at it from
two perspectives. The ﬁrst section, “Machines of Marvel,” considers a
feature of several ancient mechanical treatises: the contemplation of toys,
ludic devices meant to amuse or to impress. The following section,
“Mechanical Theory?,” considers what remains of ancient mechanics, after
we have removed from it both military and ludic applications: Is there
anything such as a science of mechanics? With this in place, the ﬁnal
section, “Mathematics, Real and Symbolic,” concludes by emphasizing the
qualiﬁed sense in which mathematics, in antiquity, was at all “applied.”
Polybius, Introducing Applied Mathematics
Much of the foregoing chapter was about Archimedes. After all, he survives
not merely as the name on the title of abstract works but as a ﬁgure of
historical memory. This was established thanks to Polybius.
Polybius had the ﬁnest gallery seat to Roman history. A Greek general,
ﬁghting for the freedom of his native city Megalopolis, he ended up exiled
to Rome in (a mere forty-ﬁve years after Archimedes’s death).
Once again: we should remember the sociology of ancient friendship.
Ancient aristocrats tended to let bygones be bygones, putting the nexus
between elite members above the enmities between states. For many years,
exiled Polybius would be a protégé of the Scipios – Rome’s most illustrious
family, leaders of its victory over the Carthaginians and of its ascent to
world domination. Polybius was keen to learn from them how Rome took
over the world in the space of two generations.
It is clear what it was about the Romans that impressed Polybius. They
won, after all. But they were impressed by him, too. For generations now,
Romans were aware of the great sophistication of Greek civilization.
Polybius ﬁlled a need: he was a Greek approaching the Romans from a
position of exalted sophistication and yet acknowledging their superiority.
And so, Romans paid attention to him. After all, everyone recognized that
there was Greek knowledge out there to be had – among which, practical
knowledge about politics and war. Romans were the true masters in politics
and in generalship, but Greeks had something crucial to impart about the
theory of politics and about many questions having to do with tactics.
Polybius’s relation to the Romans is, to us, strange, and it is not as easily understood as my brief
outline suggests. For a (more jaundiced) perspective, see A. Erskine, “Polybius among the Romans:
Life in the Cyclops’ Cave,” in C. Smith and L. M. Yarrow (eds.), Imperialism, Cultural Politics and
Polybius (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Which is what Polybius set out to do, by writing a useful history: one
that gave the information required for those wishing to go to war and to
administer a state. This was a massive history – forty books, now extant
only in (very substantial) fragments and epitome.
At the end of Book , Polybius reached a decisive moment in his
narrative: Syracuse fell; Archimedes died. And early at the beginning of
Book – was this proximity intentional? – Polybius went on an interlude
that, in eﬀect, sums up a part of the motivation for his project: generals, he
explained, ought to be knowledgeable (.):
Skill . . . can perhaps be acquired by a general just through military
experience . . . but what depends on scientiﬁc principles requires a theoret-
ical knowledge more especially of astronomy and geometry, which, while
no very deep study of them is required for this purpose at least, are
exceedingly important and capable of rendering the greatest services in
projects such as we are speaking of.
For the following sections, Polybius goes on to identify the mathematical
knowledge required by a general. The scenario involved is mostly that of an
attack upon a walled city – the key theme of Polybius’s world. Why does the
general need astronomy? Above all, to ﬁnd the precise length of days and nights
so as to calculate the timing of marches that are designed to catch a city by
surprise. Why does the general need geometry? This is explained, above all,
through the example of Philip of Macedon, who attempted to scale, by
surprise, the walls of the city of Melitaea in Thessaly. You see – Polybius is
almost spitting with contempt, telling this – the ladders he brought with
him were too short. As a matter of fact, Polybius explains, there is a
technique for measuring the required length of a ladder, based on the
empirically established rule that the ladder should be placed on the ground
so that the distance between its foot and the wall is half the wall’s height.
(Position it farther away, Polybius explains, and it is liable to break under
the soldiers’ weight; position it closer, and it becomes unstable.) And then,
of course, we are supposed to apply – Polybius leaves this implicit –
Pythagoras’s theorem.
And so, Archimedes, a Greek in the city of Syracuse, devising fantasti-
cally eﬀective catapults that almost fend of the Romans, and then another
Greek, Polybius, picking up the story a little later. A captive in the city of
Rome, he weaves together Greek history and Greek knowledge: it is all
useful, you see.
W. R. Paton, Polybius: The Histories, vol. (Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ), p. .
Polybius, Introducing Applied Mathematics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

There are a number of themes we can pull out from this vignette. First, it
appears that – by the second century , at least – many Greeks could see
the exact sciences as part of their cultural patrimony. Second, it appears that
technical knowledge was often valued, in antiquity, in connection with war.
Third, and most important, we note a historical development. With the
failure of Hannibal – exactly, that is, with the death of Archimedes – the
Mediterranean came to be, for many centuries to come, under Roman
control. The inﬂuence of the Romans was much more subtle than the
random killing of a mathematical genius. Rome took over the Greeks
precisely by its accommodation and embrace of the Greek elite. Eager to
join a world deﬁned by Roman patronage, Greek intellectuals refashioned
themselves as masters of Greek wisdom, brokering their culture to a new
audience. From Polybius onward, we see the emphasis on new, creative,
eclectic mixtures produced out of the great variety of the Greek legacy. And
for centuries to come, mathematics would be pursued as one element among
other varieties of the Greek experience, transmitted to Rome.
An eclectic mixture, calling for an eclectic chapter: mathematics was
useful in many ways. We start early, indeed, from even before mathematics
itself: with number.
Number
The generation of Archytas seems to have cared deeply about numbers. The
integer proportions of musical harmony may have been the key inspiration.
They seem to have inspired, in particular, an interaction between the few
mathematicians – and the rather more numerous philosophers. When
Archytas talked about number and music, nonmathematicians could follow.
This, then, tells us something about ancient education. The audience must
have known about both music and number. Indeed, throughout classical
antiquity, the elite youth was brought up by learning the old songs.
Educated Greeks could play the aulos – a double ﬂute – or the lyra, a small
handheld harp. “Tuning,” “harmony” – these were not distant abstractions
but a lived experience. The same, apparently, was true for number, as well.
What did Greeks learn when they learned their numeracy?The ﬁrst
thing to realize is that Greek numbers are diﬀerent from their modern
counterparts. They were more complicated: the Greeks used two separate
methods for manipulating number, both no more than resembling our
I provide here a brief survey of ancient numeracy; a more thorough introduction is provided by
S. Cuomo, “Exploring Ancient Greek and Roman Numeracy,” BSHM Bulletin: Journal of the British
Society for the History of Mathematics (): –.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

own decimal and positional systems. The one we ﬁnd in the papyri – and
then in most of the literary record – is, as to be expected, the more literary.
It is based directly on the alphabet and hews close to natural language. The
letters from A to Θ are used for the numbers to , those from I to Ϟ are
used for the numbers from to , and those from P to Ϡ are used for
the numbers from to . (The Greek alphabet as standardly used has
twenty-four characters, and three extra ones, only rarely used outside of
this context, are utilized in this system: digamma, F, for ; koppa, Ϟ, for
; and sampi, Ϡ, for .) Thus, what we pronounce as “thirty-two” was
written, in this script, as
ΛB,
and what we pronounce as “two hundred and twenty-two” was written, in
this script, as
ΣKB:
I emphasize “pronounce” because the Greek language has specialized
words for “twohundred,” “threehundred,” and so forth (unlike English, in
which “two hundred” is transparently, indeed, just the modiﬁer “two”
preceding the distinct number word “hundred”). Thus, a written form
such as
ΣKB
was, to the Greeks, a fairly transparent abbreviation of spoken language
(“twohundred, thirty, two”; I avoid the complication of word order). We
recall Apollonius playfully considering a line of poetry as if it were a
sequence of numerical values – and then multiplying them all. This, we
note now, is not really so out of bounds, given this standard, literate way of
keeping records of numbers. A line of poetry is made of letters, and to the
Greeks, letters were numbers.
Note that this system is obviously limited to less than a thousand, but a
simple apostrophe-like mark turns each number into a thousand times that
number – an alpha with an apostrophe becomes a thousand instead of a
unit, and so forth – so that the system can easily accommodate numbers
up to a million, which is more than enough for any practical purpose.
(Archimedes and Apollonius, of course, went all-in for the impractical
purposes and so invented their own systems.)
Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Such is the literary system of numerical records. Another system alto-
gether was that of the practice of calculation, and this survives not on
papyri but on inscriptions. It will be, in fact, more familiar to readers today
because it is very similar to what we think of as Roman numerals. In this
epigraphic system, the simplest vertical stroke stands for ; separate sym-
bols, similarly used, stand for , , , and so on:
I – 
Π – (for pente, “ﬁve”)
Δ – (for deka, “ten”)
ΠΔ – (a special symbol combining Π and Δ)
H – (for hekaton, “hundred”)
The archaeological record shows that this system is no more and no less
than a record of the abacus. By this, we should understand not the East Asian,
fairly recent invention with beads moved along strings, but a much simpler
method. Lines are scratched on a surface to mark vertical regions – the ones,
the ﬁves, the tens, the ﬁfties, the hundreds, and so forth. Once the surfaces are
ready, you need small tokens or pebbles (any small, movable piece would do),
which are moved through the board in a kind of backgammon game. The rule
is that any cluster of ﬁve in a “unit-type” row may be removed while a single
pebble is placed instead in the row beyond; any cluster of two in a “ﬁve-type”
row may be removed while a single pebble is placed instead in the row
beyond. Suppose you add to . You start out with the , as follows:
I
Π
Δ
ΠΔ
H
XX
XX
And then you add the :
I
Π
Δ
ΠΔ
H
XX
XX
XXX
XXX
Now you can transpose:
I
Π
Δ
ΠΔ
H
X
X
So, ΔΔII þ ΔΔΔIII ¼ ΠΔΠ.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

If we wish to double this, we just need to add a pebble next to each one
on the board so that we get the following:
I
Π
Δ
ΠΔ
H
X
X
X
X
Which we may immediately transform into
I
Π
Δ
ΠΔ
H
X
X
So, twice ΠΔΠ is HΔ.
This method of calculation is quite straightforward. Everything is based
on the ease with which the human eye identiﬁes small clusters. (This is
known as “subitization” because it happens subito: see a cluster of ﬁve, and
you do not need to pause to count how many members it has; you see the
“ﬁve-hood” directly.) Apparently, this system was widely taught and
employed. Indeed, we can say more: it was widely spread through the
variety of Greek practice with numbers. Here is what I wish to stress. To
us, it is almost the essence of number that it is a written trace. What is “”?
To us, quite close to the core of our conception is the notion that this is a
couple of semicircles vertically juxtaposed. This is, of course, absurd: “” is
an abstract concept that is merely denoted by a particular symbol, but it
is very hard for us to “unsee” the symbol – especially because this script is
shared across most language boundaries, so we do not even think of the
symbol “” as in any way “English.” It is simply the script of number, and
it is how numbers are manipulated in practice: keyed into a computer or
traced on a piece of paper.
Greeks had no such notion of the scripted number. The literate record –
the letter Γ – was a mere convention for abbreviating the spoken word treis
or “three” and was not primarily attached to number, whereas the epi-
graphic record, , was merely a stand-in for the form through which
numbers were universally manipulated. This manipulation, ﬁnally, did not
involve traced symbols but instead involved the transposition of small
tokens on a surface. And it was as such – as clusters of small tokens – that
numbers primarily resided. Numbers, for the Greeks, were not written
traces. They were, instead, the thing held between thumb and index ﬁnger
and moved about.
Number

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And the thing is that the Greeks had plenty of these. In practical, daily
life, the Greeks developed many contexts in which one did calculation –
which meant moving about small pieces between the ﬁngers. Above all,
this happened in the economic sphere. As noted earlier: whereas ancient
Near Eastern kingdoms relied on heavy bars of precious metals, the Greeks
created the coin – a smaller denomination and much more widely circu-
lating. The system through which such coins traded was based on mea-
sures and weights already established in the ancient Near East, ultimately
of Babylonian origins. Thus, the number was key, and in many ways,
Greek coins were not decimal (or “metrical”). But they traded by simple
integer equivalences: six obols would get you a drachma. An obol would
buy you a drink; a drachma would buy you a small book (so Socrates says,
explaining how easy it is to get ahold of the views of Anaxagoras: spend a
drachma and you have them all written in a book!). Six obols for a
drachma, six drinks for an Anaxagoras. Coins, and books, were wide-
spread. Instead of the ancient Near East – with its narrow scribal elite,
experts in calligraphy and complicated counting for the state – the Greeks
had a fairly large literate population that was also familiar with economic
calculations done on a daily basis, as one counted one’s coins. This spread
of literacy and numeracy is indeed obvious in the Athenian constitution,
which is markedly based on various encounters with number. In democ-
racy, one always counts. There were exactly ﬁve hundred members in the
jury, randomly selected on each day of court (through a complicated
process involving, of course, the manipulation of small counters). They
listened to speeches and then voted – by submitting their small voting
counters, which were then assembled and tallied. In many cases, it appears
that Greek democracies relied merely on a show of hands or even acclaim
(most votes were less tightly contested), but when votes really mattered, a
count was made, and so counters were used. It may be that democracy
actively expanded the reach of numeracy, and it was an ancient common-
place that Spartans – with their undemocratic institutions – knew less
about numbers than did the Athenians. But even as democracy was
eroding, coins remained, and the ancient Mediterranean always had a
widespread, working familiarity with number.I started this book with
the ethnomathematical context: what we learn, through anthropological
Indeed, Seraﬁna Cuomo emphasizes the relationship of numeracy not just with democracy but also
with imperialism: S. Cuomo, “Accounts, Numeracy and Democracy in Classical Athens,” in
M. Asper (ed.), Writing Science: Medical and Mathematical Authorship in Ancient Greece (Berlin:
De Gruyter, ), pp. –.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

studies, of the widespread knowledge of mathematics among simple soci-
eties. It should be clear that by the classical era, the Greek-speaking
Mediterranean was not a simple society, and some knowledge of mathe-
matical concepts and practices was shared far wider than just a small group
of experts. Polybius probably had a point: for many practical purposes, one
did know, and use, what is – in cross-cultural comparison – quite
sophisticated mathematics.
Education
The ancient Mediterranean was not a simple society with mere knowledge
of numbers and shapes. Sophisticated, theoretical mathematical knowledge
was fairly widespread. But it was not like the empires of the ancient Near
East, either. Lacking specialized bureaucracy, the Greeks did not develop
any specialized scribal schools. Athens was not Babylon. The city was
organized by a dispersed network of knowledge – many citizens coming
together to pool their experience.
With or without democracy, tools such as the alphabet and the papyrus
roll made literacy more accessible, and the centrality of public performance
to Greek civilization meant that to be a full member of one’s society, one
had to share in its culture. So, many households sought to provide
their children (mostly, their sons) with the education required to make them
good – indeed, prominent – citizens. Our evidence on the contents of such
education, in the early days, is meager. It seems that it mostly took place at
home and that a lot of it – aside, of course, from the obvious emphasis on
sports – was “literary” in character. This, once again, had the typical Greek
preference for public performance. As we noted, in the early days, Greek
education was, above all: learning the songs. (This is the reason, in fact, that so
much early Greek poetry still survives: people made an eﬀort to memorize it
and, eventually, to put it into writing.) But perhaps already throughout the
classical era, and certainly by the Hellenistic era, Greek education would
become much more formally structured around writing. It came to be mostly
about learning the texts of the past literary masters: how to read and perform
Homer, Euripides, Menander, Demosthenes. We actually know this and no
longer have to rely on sheer guesswork. This is because there are plenty
of papyri and other written materials – altogether, about a thousand – used in
the ancient classroom, dug up from the sands of Egypt. Almost all, unfortu-
nately, are from the Roman era, but the few earlier ones are of the same
character as the later ones. Education is a conservative enterprise: in 
or , Greeks probably educated their children the same.
Education

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Among those plentiful papyri dedicated to literary education, we also
have a much smaller group of papyri – about a hundred – dedicated to
mathematical education. Many of those are dedicated to number words
and symbolism and to the simplest operations, such as addition. Several
dozen are more demanding, although even these are often quite elemen-
tary, for instance:
Concerning stones and things needed to build a house, you will measure
the volume according to the rules of the geometer as follows: the stone has
feet everywhere. Make  ! It is . That is the area of the surface.
Make this times concerning the height. It is . The stone will have so
many feet and is called a cube.
Or, at a higher level of complexity, let us look at a relatively early example:
a piece of papyrus from the third century . (This is inscribed not in
Greek but in Demotic, the local language of Egypt; this hardly matters
because the culture of mathematical education seems to have been much
more widely shared, as will be obvious from the example itself ):
A plot of land that [amounts to] square cubits, that is rectangular, the
diagonal [being] cubits. Now how many cubits does it make to a side?
You shall reckon , times: result . You shall reckon , times:
result . You shall add it to : result . Cause that it reduce to its
square root: result . You shall take the excess of against : result
. Cause that it reduce to its square root: result . Subtract it from :
remainder . You shall take to it /: result . It is the width. Subtract
from : remainder . It is the height. You shall say: “Now the plot of
land is cubits by cubits.”
And now, in many ways, we are back in Babylon. The very grammar is the
same as that of the Mesopotamian clay tablets – a second-person imper-
ative, the teacher provides instructions to the pupil as he goes along ﬁnding
a numerical value based on given terms. The basic mathematical arrange-
ment – a rectangle, with area equal to units! – is directly Babylonian, as
well. The key trick here, however, is somewhat closer to Pythagoras’s
theorem than is the case in extant Babylonian mathematics. We are given
the area of the rectangle and its diagonal. Clearly, then, the square on the
K. Vogel, Kleinere Schriften zur Geschichte der Mathematik (Stuttgart: F. Steiner Verlag Wiesbaden,
), p. . This is at the beginning of a papyrus that quickly moves into much more complicated
measurements and volumes.
This is taken from the verso of P. Cairo J.E. -, -. (Why verso? Because the set of
problems from which I cite one example seems to have been produced informally on the back of a
separate document, as a kind of scrap paper – this is not a book but rather something like the
notebook used in a classroom.)

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diagonal together with two times the rectangle ﬁnds the area of the big
square in which the square on the diagonal is inscribed; its side is the root
of that number. This is how we get
13
ð
Þ2 þ 2  60 ¼ 289, √289 ¼ 17:
But then, the inner square inscribed within the square on the diagonal has
as area the diﬀerence between the square and the diagonal and twice the
rectangle, and as side, the root of that:
13Þ
ð
2  2  60 ¼ 49, √49 ¼ 7:
17
5
(49)
169
7
13
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
5
5
60
Figure 
The diﬀerence between the side of the big square and the side of the
small square is two times the width of the rectangle; hence, the width is ,
and the length has to be . (Astute pupils would probably have guessed all
along that the answer must be in such simple integers; presumably, they
had to show their work.) This is the third century ; by the millennium
and a half, mathematical education did, in fact, incorporate Pythagoras’s
theorem. But the key theme is not change but continuity.
Not an impressive piece of mathematics, perhaps, in and of itself – but
very impressive if we think of it as something that many people knew.
Mathematical education had not changed much since Babylon, but it most
deﬁnitely escaped the conﬁnes of the scribal school. Polybius, once again,
provides a useful testimony. In the course of one of his arguments – to
which I will return later on – Polybius refers to right-angled triangles and
Education

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

then applies what we call Pythagoras’s theorem. Remarkably, he refers to
this as the “schoolchild’s measurement.” And so yet another proof, to put
alongside the papyri. By Polybius’s youth, elementary education would be
expected to include – at least for members of the elite – knowledge of basic
geometry, perhaps comparable to results such as the ﬁrst book of Euclid’s
Elements, perhaps capped by Pythagoras’s theorem.
Or did Polybius learn Euclid directly? There are some indications that
Euclid’s Elements became – in some simpliﬁed form – part of this very
mathematical education. Seven fragments related to Euclid’s Elements were
dug up from the sands of Egypt. Two are related to the last book, with its
Platonic solids. Of the remaining ﬁve, four belong to Book , and one
belongs to Book ; this is probably not a sheer accident, and the likelihood
is that if Euclid at all circulated, it was in selections, based mostly on the earlier
parts. One of these fragments must have come from an actual book or text of
Euclid, but the remaining four are all much abbreviated. In fact, what we see
in them is the text of Euclid, reduced to key statements, probably meant to be
memorized. The proofs are entirely omitted. One of those papyri contains the
sequence of Book .–.(even this, however, is fragmentary):
If two triangles have the two sides equal to two sides respectively and also
have the base equal to the base, they will also have the angle contained by
the equal straight lines equal to the angle.
To bisect a given rectilineal angle.
To bisect a given limited straight line.
These papyri have the statements accompanied by rough sketches, repre-
senting the original diagram from Euclid’s text but without the labeling
(which, of course, is only required for the proof ). A more extensive survival,
but still with only statements and rough ﬁgures, is seen in Plate (mostly
Euclid’s Elements I.–).
These are probably the schoolmaster’s tools, and we can readily imagine
him teaching his Euclid much as he taught his Homer. Interpretation was
not the point; the point was to learn the text. As one went along,
presumably, the more sophisticated schoolmasters would actually show
how to produce a construction, explain why a particular statement was
true. But to the extent that Euclid became part of ordinary mathematical
education, this must have been in some ways continuous with the old
This papyrus is P. Berol. inv. . In the Suggestions for Further Reading, I refer to N. Sidoli,
“Mathematics Education,” in W. M. Bloomer (ed.), A Companion to Ancient Education (Chichester:
Wiley-Blackwell, ), pp. –. This includes the best up-to-date discussion of mathematical
papyri. A very engaging discussion is found in D. H. F. Fowler, The Mathematics of Plato’s Academy
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, ), Section ..

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

traditions of Babylonian-like education, in other ways continuous with the
Greek traditions of literate education. Euclid became Babylonian-like, in
that one bothered less about reasons and instead just learned a rule. And
Euclid became literate-like, in that the point became to know him as a text.
It should make sense, on ﬁrst principles, that Euclid would be read in
the same way that Homer was: namely, that the schoolmasters did so
much more Homer. As pointed out, the order of magnitude of papyrus
fragments related to literary education is about a thousand; that of papyrus
fragments related to mathematical education is about a hundred. There is
no indication that some Greeks went, so to speak, to a Realgymnasium
focused on the exact sciences. Wherever you went in the ancient world,
you would have been judged by your cultural reﬁnement, your education
or “paideia.” No upscale parent would omit that, and the strong likeli-
hood, then, is that the evidence we have for mathematical education comes
from within the same setting as that of the literate education. About
percent of the curriculum was dedicated to the literary classics. The
rest of the time included, then, numbers, sums, and ﬁgures, culminating
with a few weeks of mastering a small fraction of the text of Euclid.
Is this a little? Is this a lot? It depends on what comparison we are making.
Most Greeks did not have access even to that education; only about per-
cent of the entire population, perhaps, was literate. Most of those literate
people did have some, at least, of this education, and they had a smattering
not just of the street smarts of converting obols to drachmas but also some
sense of a theoretical science out there, with which one can calculate and
measure – a glimmer, indeed, of the sense that someone had proved it all. The
elite, quite often, at the very least, knew about Euclid. When Polybius
emphasized that one needed to know mathematics, his readers knew,
roughly, what kind of thing one ought to know – even if they knew rather
little of that. And it made sense to them that such knowledge could be
supremely useful. A certain amount of mathematical education was spread
across a fairly wide stratum of Greek society. They were not the master-scribe
calculators of Mesopotamia, but ordinary Greek citizens could count their
coins, tally up votes in the court, and set up camp in a military expedition.
Geography
The “schoolchild’s measurement.” Let us, then, look at the relevant
passage from Polybius. How did one apply one’s youthful, elementary
training?
This passage is taken not from Polybius’s massive historical work but
from a distinct work, a geography. Now, Polybius’s geography is lost; we
Geography

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

are lucky, in that it was cited by a later author, Strabo, a geographer writing
during the reign of Augustus. Strabo often cites previous authorities,
usually to criticize them. So did Polybius, before him. The passage we
have from him, in fact, is a response to several past authors in geography
from the fourth and third centuries – Pytheas, Dicaearchus, and
Eratosthenes. We are by now familiar with all of that: our knowledge of
the Greeks is based on thick webs of criticism. (We know so much about
the Greek tradition not because the Greeks venerated their own tradition
but because they continuously tore it apart.)
The critique of Dicaearchus is cited by Strabo in detail. In fact, in this
particular case, it seems as if Strabo is citing Polybius word by word.
Dicaearchus’s claim was that the length of the western Mediterranean,
from the Peloponnese to the Pillars (our Gibraltar), was ten thousand
stades. The size of the ancient stade is not certain, but perhaps it was about
meters; this is a considerable undermeasure, for which, see the
discussion that follows.
Polybius criticizes Dicaearchus as follows:
The coast-line [of the northwest Mediterranean] is most like an obtuse
angle, standing on both: the strait and the pillars; having Narbo
[¼ Narbonne] as its vertex. So that a triangle is set up, having the line
through the sea as a base, and, as sides, those making the said angle, of
which the one from the strait to Narbo is more than ,Stades, while
the remaining is a little less than ,. And let the depth of the gulf at
Narbo be ,Stades, as a perpendicular from the vertex to the base of the
obtuse-angled [triangle]. Now, it is clear . . . from a schoolchild’s measure-
ment, that . . . if we add [the ,stadia] it would be more than twice
what Dicaearchus said [i.e., more than twice ,or more than ,].
“More than ,. . .” – the real value of the distance from the Pillars
to Ionia (although, of course, we are not sure of the exact positions
Polybius had in mind for his measurement, or even of the length of the
ancient stade) is perhaps about thirteen thousand stades, curiously close to
the midpoint of the two calculations.
Polybius’s point – surely attuned to a Roman and Roman-minded
audience – was that past Greeks badly underestimated the size of the
western Mediterranean. (You will notice that he errs on the other side
from Dicaearchus and roughly in the same ratio.) Polybius’s calculation is
terrible. The perpendicular from Narbonne to the African coast is taken to
be two thousand stades, a very bad undermeasure (more on this to follow).
He then extrapolates the length of the sides of the triangle based,
Strabo, Geography ...–....

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

presumably, on length of travel by sea, and he comes up with very bad
overmeasures, perhaps because his estimate essentially assumes that the
routes are more or less straight (in fact, the coasts are anything but: the
eastern one is very concave; the western one, very convex). I am not even
sure Polybius calculated using Pythagoras’s theorem. The impression from
the text as it is written is that Polybius realized the theorem would be
applicable in principle but also that his real thinking was much more
elementary. I suspect his train of thought went as follows: because the
length of the base would have to be quite near the length of the two sides
added together (because the perpendicular from Narbonne to Africa is
taken to be so small), then it would be at the range of ,, and so, with
an extra ,thrown in from Sicily to the Peloponnese (everyone seems
to agree on that ﬁgure), surely this would add to more than ,.
The one truly scandalous bit here is Polybius’s estimate of the length of
the perpendicular from Narbonne. Polybius had an axe to grind: to get his
very wide western Mediterranean, it helped to make it narrow so that the
length of travel along the shores would be translated more purely into
west–east distances. But the thing is that here – in the north–south
estimate of distances – Polybius really had no excuse. Greeks knew how
to calculate this. We need to anticipate some of the materials of the
following chapter: geography, you see, is intertwined with astronomy.
By looking at the sky, it is possible to determine absolute positions such as
due south. It is thus in principle possible to determine, within reasonable
boundaries, that one’s travel is on a straight line on the south/north direction,
that is, along a longitude or a meridian. And here is the thing: suppose you ﬁx
observers at two positions on the same meridian and ask them to look at the
sky. Compare their observations. Both will see the same stars rising above the
Figure 
Polybius describes the coastline of the northwest Mediterranean as being like
an obtuse angle, standing on the strait and the Pillars and having Narbonne as its vertex.
Geography

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

horizon at the same exact moment. Both will see the shadows at their shortest
at the same exact moment. In short, we can synchronize their observations
because – as we will return to explain in the next chapter – the sky simply is an
outstanding time-keeping device. And so, looking at the sky from two
diﬀerent positions along the same meridian, one can ﬁnd the angles at which
the same object is viewed at the same exact moment. (I simplify by consid-
ering the case where we know the two observations on the same meridian;
little precision is lost if this assumption is dropped.)
So let us get back to an author already mentioned several times in this
book: Eratosthenes. He wrote a study of the ﬁnding of two mean propor-
tional lines. He was the recipient of Archimedes’s Method. And he also
made the most famous geographical measurement in antiquity – perhaps
you’ve heard of it. This, too, is recounted by Strabo.
Eratosthenes’s measurement is based on the sun, observed at noon, in the
middle of the summer, from the two positions of Alexandria (of course) and
Aswan. (The two are not exactly on the same meridian, Aswan being a degree
or two – depending on the exact location used by Eratosthenes – to the west
of Alexandria. This does not interfere materially with this particular calcula-
tion.) Aswan lies nearly precisely on the Tropic of Cancer, which means that
in the middle of the summer, the sun is directly above it. This gives rise to a
spectacular and easily detectable eﬀect. At noon in Aswan, in the middle of the
summer, the sun shines all the way down to the bottom of a well. The angle of
the shadow cast by the sun is zero.
RAYS
OF
LIGHT
NO
SHADOW
SHADOW
a
a
Figure 

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In Alexandria, at exactly the same time, the angle is non-zero. In fact,
the angle of the shadow cast by the sun at noon in Alexandria in the
middle of the summer was measured by Eratosthenes to be /th of a
circle or ’. Now, assume that the rays of the sun are all parallel to each
other. (We recall that Diocles made the same assumption in his theoretical
construction of a burning mirror. This is obviously justiﬁed in the small
scale of a man-made mirror but can be justiﬁed for the earth as a whole only
if we believe the sun is very distant – which the Greeks did!) It
is immediately clear, by considering the diagram, that the angle of the
shadow cast at Alexandria at noon in the middle of the summer is the same
as the north–south arc between Alexandria and Aswan (where the shadow, at
the same time, is zero). Now, Eratosthenes further stated that the distance
on the north–south axis between Alexandria and Aswan was ﬁve thousand
stades. (This is, in fact, very diﬃcult to estimate, even for travel by land, and
is clearly meant as no more than a rough estimate.) We thus ﬁnd that the
circumference of the earth is roughly ,stades, which Eratosthenes
transformed to ,so as to get a round ﬁgure for the length of a single
degree of latitude – exactly stades. This is a very good approximation
(surprisingly so, indeed, given the diﬃculty of measuring the precise distance
from Alexandria to Aswan), likely about percent or so above the correct
value – depending on the precise length assumed for a single stade. Greek
mathematical geography was that good!
This calls for a few observations.
First, although there are issues one may raise with Eratosthenes’s calcu-
lation, it is sound in principle, and ancient authors essentially followed
Eratosthenes, sometimes replicating his results (with variations) with dif-
ferent kinds of astronomical observations. Signiﬁcantly, a later author –
Posidonius – chose, for ease of calculation, an even simpler approximation,
with the degree equal to ﬁve hundred rather than seven hundred
stades. This implied a rather smaller circumference of the earth as a whole,
which Christopher Columbus would follow – an error with famous
consequences.
Second, we now see that Polybius eﬀectively assumed that Narbonne is
about three degrees north of the coasts of Africa. This is risibly wrong (the
distance is about seven degrees) and is, in principle, very easy to refute by
simple astronomical observations, easily available to the ancients.
The net result of Posidonius’s value was to have Eurasia signiﬁcantly “stretched” on later maps. See
L. Russo, “Ptolemy’s Longitudes and Eratosthenes’ Measurement of the Earth’s Circumference,”
Mathematics and Mechanics of Complex Systems (): –. For more on Posidonius and
Eratosthenes, read C. M. Taisbak. “Posidonius Vindicated at All Costs? Modern Scholarship versus
the Stoic Earth Measurer,” Centaurus (): –.
Geography

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Third, we should consider a comparandum. In the eighth century,
I Hsing, a Buddhist monk in the service of the Chinese Tang dynasty,
produced a series of measurements along the length of the Chinese empire.
Those were essentially the same as those made by Eratosthenes. (In the
Chinese case, there was no longer an assumption that the earth was
necessarily spherical. Instead, the supposition was more directly that
diﬀerences in the length of shadows at diﬀerent positions correspond
to distances, perhaps precisely because the sun is at a ﬁnite distance so
that its rays are not, in fact, parallel.) The net result of this project was a
fairly precise measurement of distances in central China (where a number
of observations were made) and some glimpses of distances reaching as far
as present-day Siberia, to the north, and present-day Vietnam, to
the south.
What is most striking is that the Romans never did anything similar to
the Tang dynasty. It would have been not just theoretically feasible but
even straightforward to have a group of moderately trained observers fan
out across the Mediterranean and record a few basic observations of the
sun and the stars from various locations so that latitudes could be estab-
lished for many locations. Further, as ancient astronomers pointed out,
observations of synchronized events – best of all, observations of lunar
eclipses – could be used to determine the diﬀerence between longitudes.
(Suppose that the onset of a particular lunar eclipse is observed at the
fourth hour of the night in Rome and at the ﬁfth hour of the night in
Alexandria: we have established, then, that they are “a time zone,” or about
ﬁfteen degrees, apart!) Although this is mentioned by ancient astronomers
as a theoretical possibility, no one did anything of the kind. Speciﬁcally for
the calculation of longitudes: the two mentions of this technique come
from () Hero of Alexandria, who reports a mere made-up observation
proposed for the sake of theoretical calculation (see p. n. ), and ()
Ptolemy – who could ﬁnd historical reference to the timing of a single
lunar eclipse, seen from various positions.Which one was that? The one
immediately preceding the battle of Gaugamela, in , at which
Alexander the Great vanquished Persia: an omen recorded by various
historians. Ptolemy is, in fact, explicit that this was the only such record
See the discussion in J. L. Berggren, and A. Jones, Ptolemy’s Geography: An Annotated Translation of
the Theoretical Chapters (Princeton, : Princeton University Press, ). Berggren and Jones
believe that a single error in this observation entirely transformed the shape of the Mediterranean in
ancient maps. A serious program of observing lunar eclipses would have meaningful consequences!

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

available. The conclusion is clear: no one bothered to record lunar eclipses
for the sake of geographical measurements, even though the theoretical
signiﬁcance of such measurements was well known.
In short, even the Roman Empire did not produce anything like the
Tang court astronomer, carefully measuring the earth. The theory was all
there, and the ancients could have mapped the Mediterranean with
mathematical precision. That they failed to do so should tell us something
signiﬁcant about the limits of their ambition, the limits of the application
of mathematical knowledge.
The Engineering of an Empire?
This lacuna – the Roman Empire, foregoing the survey of its own lands
even though the science for the survey was there for the taking – is made
even more remarkable when we consider that land surveying was a con-
stant of Roman life. There is, in fact, an entire array of ancient treatises in
Latin, almost entirely from the imperial era or later (the “imperial era”
refers to the time that Rome was ruled by emperors, so from Augustus’s
ascension in onward), known as the Corpus Agrimensorum
(“Corpus of the Roman Land-Surveyors”; agrimensores means “land sur-
veyors”). When new towns were set up – and the Roman Empire was often
busy setting up new towns or “colonies” for its veterans – the Romans
followed a precise code. Specialists would ﬁnd the true north – so, a little
astronomy – and lay out streets arranged by a grid with precise measures –
so, a little geometry and calculation.
It used to be asserted that a certain Hippodamus, from Miletus,
invented the gridded city in the ﬁfth century. Historians still repeat this,
but in fact, it is clear from archeological evidence that planned cities
emerge across the Mediterranean much earlier. Already in the eighth
century , Greek sites such as Megara Hyblaea (a city in Sicily, founded
by Megara) are organized by a regular orthogonal system. It seems possible
that the Greek model came ﬁrst – orthogonal planning is typical when new
cities are set up, and this is something the seafaring, expanding Greeks did
much more often than others – but Phoenician settlers followed a similar
path, and one ﬁnds early orthogonal planning among the Etruscans, as
well. (Those, indeed, are likely to have been the proximate inspiration for
the Romans.) What lies behind this town planning is not any mathemat-
ical theory. People of the Mediterranean, arranging their cities along
orthogonal lines, are rather like the ﬁshermen of Mozambique, arranging
their ﬁsh along a circle: reﬂecting a pre-theoretical facility with geometrical
The Engineering of an Empire?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

shapes. What may be distinctive about all those Mediterranean civiliza-
tions – Greek, Phoenician, Etruscan, and Roman – is the culture of the
city-state. Eventually, the Mediterranean would be ruled by larger political
units. But to begin with, even Rome was a city-state. And although
monarchies would end up ruling everywhere, the early city-states were
more self-ruling (whether in the form of democracies or of aristocra-
cies). Because it was the city that governed itself, it was also natural that
it would plan itself. This habit of town planning became entrenched
and so was kept in the foundations of the imperial era.Indeed,
Romans were particularly traditionalist, especially in the matter of
ritual, and to some extent, the practice of land surveyors should be
understood on those terms, of religious practice (they did not merely
survey a land; they did so according to a prescribed and sacred ritual).
One needed to have specialists in this kind of ritual – just like the
Romans had specialist priests, oﬃciating over sacriﬁce, practicing div-
ination, they had specialist land surveyors, conducting the precise
procedure for the setup of a new city.
It is not surprising, then, that the Romans had a specialized profession
of those land surveyors. What is interesting is that in the imperial era,
several land surveyors reached for the status of authors, producing treatises
that presented their skills. This is perhaps typical of a more general
phenomenon we get to see a lot in the imperial era: the quest for status
and patronage. Technical practitioners wish to become technical authors,
in this way expanding the scope of scientiﬁc writing.
And if so – if the point is to assert status – it is less surprising that here
and there, the writings of the land surveyors included a few traces of Greek
mathematical learning. Balbus, for instance, early in the second century
, wrote a treatise for the education of land surveyors. The title,
“Expositio et Ratio Omnium Formarum” (The Account and Calculation
of All Figures), is ambitious enough. But – at least in its current, frag-
mentary form – it is made mostly of deﬁnitions translated from Euclid’s
Elements. (So this is also yet another reﬂection of the way in which Euclid
– in much-abbreviated form – has penetrated general education.) It should
be emphasized that Balbus was the exception, not the rule, and that most
writings in Roman land surveying only brieﬂy touched on geometry and
The best study of geometrical town planning in the Mediterranean is a PhD dissertation: S. D.
Ehrlich, “Greco-Roman Urban Form in Its Global Context” (PhD dissertation, Stanford
University, ).

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

instead emphasized law. After all, land surveying was about landed prop-
erty – the most important form of wealth. Romans may have touched only
superﬁcially on geometry, but jurisprudence was a Roman science par
excellence. The land surveyors should perhaps be understood as ancillary
to the jurisprudence of landed property, a corner of Roman law where
geometry, brieﬂy, could matter.
Whether with their lawyers or with their land surveyors, there is no
doubt that the Roman state, and the Roman peace, gave rise to a certain
specialization and professionalization. The late Digest of Roman law
sums up, in abbreviated form, many earlier precedents, rules, and lists:
the Roman legion, we are told in the Digest, was said by one
Tarruntenus Paternus, of the second century , to possess a panoply
of masters of various professions. Included are surveyors, physicians, and
architects, but also much humbler professions: swordsmiths, wagon
makers, butchers, stoneworkers, and many more – I believe I count
forty-three professions in total.I have mentioned that Mediterranean
city-states often engaged in the foundation of new cities, an act that
involved careful reﬂection concerning the nature and form of the city –
hence the orthogonal grid. More than this: an ancient military campaign,
and in particular the Roman legion, was essentially a city in transit, forever
set up and then transported again. The constitution of the legion involved
a reﬂection on the practical needs of the city, and so it had something of a
permanent engineering corps (although never conceptualized as such).
There was a speciﬁc military role – the praefectus fabrum, “master of the
works” – responsible for the construction needs of the legion (setting up
the camp; making sure supplies are in place; getting all those surveyors,
butchers, and stoneworkers into action). As was typically the case in Rome,
this role was essentially political, an early stepping-stone in a career that
might lead to military command in battle and to civic duties in the city of
Rome. And so, the entire group of professionals is made of two groups: on
the one hand, craftsmen, trained by apprenticeship; on the other hand,
members of the Roman elite, learning the military profession on the job.
Neither the master of the works nor any of his underlings were trained
engineers. The point remains, though, that the constant practice of mili-
tary life made sure that many Romans did become proﬁcient in the
technical details of management and construction.
Justinian’s Digest, l. ...
The Engineering of an Empire?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

This comes out clearly from Frontinus’s On Aqueducts: an amazing
survival of an extremely technical piece of writing. In , Frontinus,
by that time a leading ﬁgure of the Roman political elite (already a consul,
as well as a past governor of a province), was appointed to one of the most
sensitive positions in the empire: supervisor of the waterworks of the city
of Rome. This he took seriously, producing an account of the entire
aqueduct system. In places, this reads as an ambitious literary work,
proceeding through the history and geographical description of the water
system. In other places, it becomes almost entirely numerical and tech-
nical, indeed, fundamentally a piece of accounting. (Frontinus pays
considerable attention to the way in which water ﬂow can be measured,
which he uses to detect the considerable amount of theft of water along
the route of its transmission.) At almost exactly the same time, we have
Balbus impressing upon his readers that he is not just a practical sur-
veyor: he also knows Euclid. There is real technical knowledge in both
land surveying and the building and measurement of aqueducts, and this
technical knowledge certainly involves a certain understanding of, and
experience with, shape and number. All of this owes something to a
Greek legacy, even if in a polemical way. (Frontinus begins, in fact, with
a proud comparison between Rome’s waterworks and the “the idle
Pyramids or the useless, though famous, works of the Greeks”.) How
much does this Roman, self-conscious practice owe to its Greek, scien-
tiﬁc antecedents?
Polybius’s entire point was that the practical man needed knowledge,
which was why, essentially, the Romans needed the Greeks. The Romans
won – but they did so, according to Polybius, because they were, in their
own way, theoretical. The professionalization of the Roman army was, in
Polybius’s eyes, an example of theory in practice: science, in war. War,
indeed, was what mattered most to Polybius and to his readers, Greek
and Roman.
Tactics
Which brings us, indeed, right back to geography. Polybius’s general
would use astronomy to know how long the night is at a given latitude
at a given time of the year – so as to know how far he can march his
soldiers through the cover of darkness. This is reasonable and correct –
which makes it even more curious, then, that no eﬀort was made to
ground this kind of application in an accurate mapping of the

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mediterranean. Would it not be helpful to have available tables that listed,
for a given location, the length of the day throughout the seasons? And yet,
no Roman emperor gave any resources for accurate, mathematical map-
ping. Nor indeed does it seem that any general really carried with him
an astronomer to calculate the length of the night. You see: people just
knew – roughly, but well enough – how long the night was in diﬀerent
places and at diﬀerent times of the year. It was just like the butchers and
stoneworkers in the Roman legion: they had to be trained, but surely their
training was a matter of apprenticeship, not of technical schools.
But if this is so, what is Polybius doing? Well, this is not so hard to tell.
He is making a correct assertion – there is indeed astronomical under-
standing implicit in the knowledge of the length of the night – and by
putting this to the fore, he establishes the point that animates his project
as a whole. Underneath practice, there is knowledge; this knowledge has
been accurately described by past Greek authors, and it is Polybius’s job
to synthesize it and present it to an audience ruled – and ruling – by
Roman power. He is showing how power and knowledge are inter-
twined. But notice carefully: when we say “underneath practice, there
is knowledge,” we do not describe an educational system, analogous to
the modern engineering school, where one studies theoretical knowledge
and then learns how to apply it – knowledge ﬁrst, practice later. The
knowledge that underlies the practice is discovered by theoretical scholars
who reﬂect upon the practice. It is practice ﬁrst, knowledge later. To the
practitioners themselves, this knowledge is mostly an invisible part of
their daily routines.
Polybius’s most extended excursus is a book-length study of the Roman
constitution: it is dedicated, almost in its entirety, not to Rome’s political
regime but to its military practices, with very precise details, such as the
following (concerning the setting up of the military camp, .):
They now measure a hundred feet from the front of all these tents, and
starting from the line drawn at this distance parallel to the tents of the
tribunes [= military commanders] they begin to encamp the legions,
managing matters as follows. Bisecting the above line, they start from this
spot and along a line drawn at right angles to the ﬁrst, they encamp the
cavalry of each legion facing each other and separated by a distance of ﬁfty
feet, the last-mentioned line being exactly half-way between them.
This is the Roman legion as a city in transit – and quite clearly employing
the language of the Roman surveyors. In Polybius’s words, though, this is
also, quite obviously, intended to evoke Greek mathematical language.
Tactics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Indeed, one ﬁnds a similar quantitative emphasis throughout Polybius’s
account of the Roman constitution. Rome was always an aristocracy, but
perhaps under Greek inﬂuence, perhaps following on a similar logic of a
constitution built for (originally) a small city-state, the Romans had many
functions and roles deﬁned in strict numerical terms: an assembly divided
into precisely voting blocks, of which the wealthier parts had . . . As
Polybius recounts some of these details, it is only a natural transition from
the numbers of consuls and quaestors and military tribunes to the geomet-
rical encampments of the latter. Such was the Greco-Roman Mediterranean:
even if not highly theoretically mathematical, it was awash in number.
It was awash in war, above all. Polybius’s history was a military history
because this was what mattered, politically: the key question debated
throughout ancient politics is one and the same: Who should we ally with
going to war? Having written forty books on military history and then also
a geography, Polybius was also the author of a theoretical book on military
tactics. This is lost, but we have an entire array of Roman-era military
treatises, all so close to each other as to imply a common source, probably
by Posidonius.This author was active in Rhodes in the early ﬁrst century
. At this point, Greeks did not need to be held captive in Rome so as to
care about Roman audiences: Roman presence was everywhere (it was
now, mostly, direct Roman rule). Both Pompey and Cicero came to visit
Posidonius at Rhodes. He wrote precisely on the Polybian themes –
history, geography, war – with the signiﬁcant addition of philosophy:
Posidonius was the leading Stoic philosopher of his generation. Away from
Athens, at places like Rhodes, encouraged by Roman patronage, philoso-
phy and science came together again. A Stoic philosopher – and the author
of a tactical manual?
A surprising combination, made somewhat less surprising when we read
the version probably closest to that of Posidonius himself – written by his
immediate pupil, Asclepiodotus.
The most striking thing about such manuals is how divorced they are
from real, historical war. Unlike Polybius (and most earlier Greek writings
on war), they include no anecdotes, no tales of military success and failure.
Instead, everything is abstract and theoretical.
The ascription is uncertain; see P. A. Stadter, “The Ars Tactica of Arrian: Tradition and
Originality,” Classical Philology (): –.
An English translation is in J. Henderson, Aeneas Tacticus, Asclepiodotus, Onasander (Cambridge,
: Harvard University Press, ).

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Tactics by Asclepiodotus is structured by an overarching conceptual
taxonomy: the arrangements for war are landed or naval (we are to discuss
just the landed), which are then either footed or mounted, each further
subdivided until one reaches such units as the hoplite phalanx. Then, the
author is engaged primarily with the numbers to be deployed within given
units, especially concerned to make sure that the numbers will be divisible
by two; hence, everything is governed by the powers of , and the ideal
phalanx is declared to have ,¼ soldiers. Chapter is almost
entirely given to the various divisions arising out of this number. In
Chapter , the parts of the phalanx are arranged by military valor, and
we are told that the rightmost fourth of the line should be composed of the
best soldiers, the leftmost and second leftmost should be composed of
those who follow, and the worst should stand as the second rightmost
because in this way, the right and the left are balanced (“the geometers
say”) – clearly a reference to a:b::c:d  ! ad ¼ bc. (This is the application
of proportion to geometry we have seen again and again, in the ﬁnding of
two mean proportionals and in the study of conic sections!) Later follows a
very abstruse discussion (Chapter ) of the geometry of cavalry forma-
tions, which are, of course, more complex than the purely rectangular
phalanx. It is in this context that diagrams are added in great profusion,
typically lettered (each letter, in this case, standing for an individual
horseman). This now gains even the look of a mathematical text! Once
again, the author touches brieﬂy on terminology, and then the most
substantial discussion in the treatise (Chapter ) involves motions –
typically rotations, either of each individual separately or of formations
as a whole. Once again, this discussion is carried through extensive
reference to diagrams. This brings in a kind of geometry that is not
typically discussed
in
explicit
terms
in Greek
mathematics, and
Asclepiodotus makes apposite, if trivial, observations: for instance, that
following three forward quarter-rotations, it is more convenient to return
to the original position via one further forward quarter-rotation than by
three backward quarter-rotations (.). Chapter combines, in a sense,
the discussions of formation and of motion to discuss formations in
marching – once again, of course, considered via lettered diagrams.
What is the purpose of all that? In fact, we are puzzled by the purpose of
such treatises as a whole. Asclepiodotus’s (or Posidonius’s) is surely not a
practical manual. It could have some function for the reading of other
military texts, perhaps of a historical character. It is indeed strangely
behind the times, taking the Macedonian phalanx as its primary reference.
Remarkably (and the sure sign this treatise does not go back speciﬁcally to
Tactics

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Polybius), Romans are not in evidence at all. As mentioned earlier, we have
quite a few of those treatises extant from the Roman era: a thriving Greek
genre, written in a world dominated by Roman military might. That it
invokes a past of Greek military greatness suggests a speciﬁc attunement to
a cultural moment. Here are Greek authors invoking a lost military Greek
grandeur while acknowledging Rome’s ascendancy. If we understand such
military manuals in this context, then perhaps the mathematical compo-
nents of the style might be seen as yet another element of speciﬁc
Hellenism. Mathematics is an exotic genre, resonant of Greekness; it
comes naturally in this evocation of the lost, exotic Macedonian phalanx.
And so – the mathematization of war, not because mathematics is really
useful but because it is evocative of the Greek legacy?
Catapults
The Greek word mēchanē – the subject matter of “mechanics” – very often
was used to mean, simply, a device used in war. In practice, nearly all
engineers and authors in antiquity who engaged with mechanics either
wrote about or made catapults. (This includes, indeed, even Archimedes
himself!)
We are still familiar with the bow and arrow. In the simplest form, the
archer has only his or her hand with which to pull the string. Now, devise
an instrument that multiplies this hand power – and you have a war
machine. One way to improve this would be to prevent the string from
premature release: you pull the string and “lock” it in its pulled state. Thus,
the string can store more potential energy than the hand, on its own, can
manage. Another way to make it possible to apply more force to the
pulling of the string (for instance, by allowing the full weight of the
human body to apply pressure that transforms into pulling the string).
Combine these two ideas, and you get the crossbow. There remains a limit
to the amount of potential energy that may be stored simply by pulling a
string – ultimately, a string might break. Such limits can be extended by
the application of torsion: instead of pulling a string, twist it. The idea now
would be to twist strings and block them from unwinding. Then, remove
the block. The string will unwind with a violent motion. Find a way to
harness this to a missile-throwing device – and you have a “ballista” or
“catapult.” (Note that the terms are also used with various other, more
general or more speciﬁc, meanings. Also, I add in passing that there is yet a
superﬁcially similar instrument that stores the energy not of torsion but of

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

gravitation: a device pulls up a weight and blocks it from falling; when the
block is removed, the power of the fall produces energy that, harnessed
into a motion, ﬂings a projectile. This is known as a trebuchet, and
surprisingly, it is not clear that it was even known in Greek antiquity.
The trebuchet was widely used in medieval siegecraft from China to
Europe, and it is the trebuchet, not the catapult, that gunpowder ulti-
mately displaced.)
Even the crossbow can throw sharp projectiles to a distance of hundreds
of yards; add in the torsion of the catapult, and you can throw not merely
light (if deadly) sharp objects but even heavy stones. These, in turn, have
the capacity to break down walls. The tendency of both the crossbow and
the catapult, then, is to make large-scale hand-to-hand combat less signif-
icant. Long-distance projectiles make smaller, professional armies more
eﬀective. Remember that the classical Greek city relied on citizen-soldiers
who, working together, could face equal citizen bodies or, if their luck ran
out, defend their cities from within their walls. Wall-breaking devices
make it harder for armies to hide behind the safety of walls in preparation
for pitched battle. As the battleﬁeld came to be dominated by mechanically
hurled projectiles, more professional armies, relying on more expensive
gadgets, gained the upper hand. The only way to prevent your enemies’
catapults from tearing down your walls was to set up catapults on your
own walls, to drive the enemy away from catapult range. You can’t bring a
knife to a catapult ﬁght. A classic arms race ensued – and its consequence:
war, dominated by mercenaries and machines.
Athens, in the ﬁfth century, created an empire based on hoplites and
sailors. Over the fourth century, the military balance moved to those who
could master the most war instruments (the elephant – a living war
machine – would join in the third century). This military revolution is
perhaps one of the contributing factors to the rise of monarchies, displa-
cing the early city-states. At the end, even the most ingenious engineer –
even Archimedes – would be defeated by those who had more resources at
hand and could simply accumulate more machines. Power told.
But how did ingenuity even matter? Polybius is clear about Archimedes:
his main contribution was the successful ranging of his catapults, leaving
no “blind spots” uncovered by missiles from within the city of Syracuse.
This represents, at the very least, important evidence concerning what
was expected (whether realistically or not) from the application of math-
ematical skill to the making of catapults. In fact, we can say much more
because – remarkably – we have works in mechanics that explicitly discuss
Catapults

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the theory of catapults. The earliest extant – by Biton and by Philo – are,
even more remarkably, roughly from the age of Archimedes himself. There
was, early on, a genre of writings about catapults: precisely because theory
– book knowledge – was understood to be important. Presumably, you
had the better contracts, as a military engineer, if you were known to be
good at writing about your craft!
It is striking, indeed, just how literary Philo is, how much he immerses
catapults within a wider cultural endeavor:
Many who have undertaken the building of engines of the same size, using
the same construction, similar wood, and identical metal, without even
changing its weight, have made some with long range and powerful impact
and others which fall short of these. . . . Thus, the remark made by
Polyclitus, the sculptor, is appropriate for what I am going to say. He
maintained that perfection was achieved gradually in the course of many
calculations. . . . Therefore, I maintain that we must pay strict attention,
when adapting the design of successful engines to our private construction,
especially when one wishes to do this after either increasing or diminishing
the scale. . . .
Engineers drew conclusions from former mistakes, looked exclusively for a
standard factor with subsequent experiments as a guide, and introduced the
basic principle of construction, namely the diameter of the circle that holds
the spring. . . .
The object of artillery-construction is to dispatch the missile at long range,
to strike with powerful impact. . . . Reduce to units the weight of the stone
for which the engine must be constructed. Make the diameter of the hole as
many ﬁnger-breadths as there are units in the cube root of the number
obtained. . . . It is possible, from one number, to determine the remaining
diameters by geometrical construction by the doubling of the cube.
There are many things to unpack here. The key idea in the ﬁrst of the
paragraphs quoted is that even though there is an important theoretical
knowledge – which is the point of Philo’s book – one cannot just rely on
book knowledge because the making of a catapult requires precise know-
how in each of the many measurements. This much is clear, but even this
“craftsmanship” point is made with reference to a special kind of cultural
authority. Philo refers to Polyclitus, a sculptor author. This calls for a
detour: the application of mathematics to art, we will see, is directly
relevant for understanding how it was understood to apply to catapults.
E. W. Marsden, Greek and Roman Artillery: Technical Treatises (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
), p. . This book by Marsden also remains the best general survey of ancient catapults.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Polyclitus was active in the ﬁfth century – roughly, perhaps, a contem-
porary of Hippocrates of Chios. His wonderful statue the Spear-Carrier
(Plate ) (known via many later, Roman-era copies) was accompanied by a
treatise, a kind of an artist-authored self-catalogue.The treatise had a
theoretical point to make. Titled The Canon, it provided numerical rules,
in the form of proportions, for the crafting of perfect beauty. Such rules
were then modiﬁed and contested throughout antiquity, sometimes given
more numerical, sometimes more geometrical form: the famous drawing
by Leonardo called the “Vitruvian Man” is a reﬂection of one of those sets
of rules. There is an idea – that beauty is in number – that continues to
fascinate throughout the centuries. Perhaps this has something to do
speciﬁcally with the kind of inspiration that musical harmony had on
authors such as Plato (as mentioned brieﬂy on p. when we touched on
Silanion, Plato’s portraitist and yet another author on proportion in art).
Polyclitus’s work is probably roughly contemporary with the original
discovery of mathematical musical harmony. By the time we reach
Vitruvius, there is already an enduring tradition, clearly inspired by music,
that monumental architecture should be guided by number. (Vitruvius, an
architect, wrote on the mathematical proportions of the human body; this
is where Leonardo got his inspiration.) For centuries, the education of
architects would be organized by a precise system of numerical proportions
underlying, above all, the various types of columns. In all of them, one
ﬁnds a unit of measurement – the “module” – and then one determines
the various measures based on that. (The three types of columns are called
Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian. In the Doric column, for instance, the
module is half the base’s diameter; the height, for example, is fourteen
times that, although calculations become quickly much more complicated
as we get to the details of the capitals.)
Architecture is already not all that far from engineering, and it turns out
that something similar is proposed by Philo, and by other authors in
mechanics, for the making not of statues or buildings but of catapults.
The idea, once again, is the same: provide a module, and then provide, in
numerical terms, the many module-based measures of the various func-
tioning elements of the catapult. In practice, one takes as a module the
We get a sense of the original statue from its many copies, but the original treatise left only a
handful of traces (in fact, one of the most signiﬁcant testimonies – tantalizing as it is – is the passage
we have just read from Philo). There is a great room for speculation and interpretation; see, for
example, G. M. Warren (ed.), Polykleitus, the Doryphoros, and Tradition (Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press, ).
Catapults

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diameter of the hole through which the torsioned string passes – not unlike
the diameter of the column as used in architecture. The rest of the
machine is described in terms of this measure.
In this sense, the catapult is governed by a system of numerical ratios.
Philo’s emphasis, however, is not on the ratios between the parts inside a
single catapult. His emphasis is on the proportion between diﬀerent
catapults. The central working assumption in all of this is that the range
of a catapult is proportional to its weight, and so, to its volume, and the
result is that transforming the catapult is essentially a special case of scaling
the solid, or “duplicating the cube,” or to be precise, ﬁnding two lines in
continuous proportion between two given lines. If we want to transform
the range of a catapult, we need to transform the module of the catapult –
that innocent-looking diameter, therefore a linear measurement – by the
cubic root of the ratio of the ranges.
The literature of ancient mechanics is dominated, to a surprising extent,
by this point: the making of catapults is somehow intimately related to that
particular problem in advanced mathematics. Not just any problem,
indeed, but the most central one – the one famously ﬁrst solved by
Archytas, the one leading to the discovery of conic sections.
Eratosthenes was a many-faceted scholar: the addressee of Archimedes’s
Method, he was trained as a philosopher, poet, and geographer. He was not
a military engineer. But he did address to King Ptolemy, as noted on pages
–, a certain mechanical solution to the problem of ﬁnding multiple
mean proportionals (his solution is of greater generality), and it is thanks to
him, indeed, that we learn much of the history of the problem. Having
described the solution, he explains how it is important for ﬁnding mea-
sures and then elaborates:
The conception will be useful also for those who wish to enlarge catapults
and stone-throwing machines; for it is required to augment all – the
thicknesses and the magnitudes and the apertures and the boxes for the
strings and the inserted strings – if the throwing-power is to be propor-
tionally augmented, and this cannot be done without ﬁnding the means.
I think we can be conﬁdent that there is something wrong with this
characterization. First of all, it seems clear that the making of catapults
was much more widespread than the knowledge of technical solutions to the
R. Netz, The Works of Archimedes: Translation and Commentary, vol. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ), p. .

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals. Second – and here I reveal my
true colors – I am quite convinced that geometrical solutions to the problem
of the ﬁnding of two mean proportionals would have been quite irrelevant.
If a particular structure required scaling (a signiﬁcant undertaking that one
would take up only rarely), then this indeed required the ﬁnding of a cubic
root. But here is the thing: if I did need to ﬁnd the cubic root of, say, ,
I would not look for complicated geometrical constructions (how would
I even be sure my parabolas and hyperbolas were correctly drawn?). It would
be much simpler just to look, by trial and error, for numbers whose cube
approximated the number . This takes some patience and skill in calcula-
tion, but even so, this is straightforward, and a good calculator would come
up with very precise answers within minutes.
Calculating by trial and error is a matter of skill. It shows that one has
gone through the elementary education of literacy and through the
apprenticeship of a technical profession. This is how one became a maker
of catapults, after all. Of course this involved many numbers! But as one
turned to write about this calculation, one described not calculation, not
craftsman’s knowledge, but something else: the theoretical, book knowl-
edge of famous Greek authors. Greek authors of mechanics frequently turn
to the problem of ﬁnding four lines in mean proportion – in exactly the
same way that the authors of tactics conjure a technical, mathematical
terminology – as a claim to elite, literate sophistication. Is this the major
way in which applied mathematics mattered?
Machines of Marvel
Authors of mechanics wrote about their catapults: apparently, there was an
audience. Machines were something to talk about. Here is Hedylus, a poet
writing in Alexandria, early in the third century :
Come, lovers of strong wine, and behold the rhuton
In the temple of the venerable Arsinoe, dear to the West Wind:
It represents the Egyptian dancer Besas, who trumpets a shrill
Blast when the stream is opened up, allowing the wine to ﬂow.
. . . honor this clever invention of Ctesibius –
Come, young men! – in this temple of Arsinoe.
The poem is quoted many centuries later, perhaps early in the third
century , in a book by Athenaeus, the Deipnosophistae (The Dining
Translation adapted; the context can be read in C. B.Gulick, Athenaeus: The Deipnosophists
(Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ), pp. –.
Machines of Marvel

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Wise Men). This work belongs to the genre of “sympotic literature,”
strange to us but quite common in antiquity. Those are descriptions of
banquets (Plato’s famous Symposium comes to mind) where highly edu-
cated people exchange pleasantries and quote old literature, above all
quoting the literature that is appropriate to a banquet (stories having to
do with wine and food, for instance, are naturally favored). It appears that
this kind of dinner party was always central to ancient culture, and one
wanted to be able to shine in such events. Hence the genre: wise, erudite
men, shining in conversation around wine. And here is a conversation
piece, then. The icebreaker at the cocktail party: a clever mechanical
contraption where, once a certain valve is released and wine begins to
ﬂow, a trumpet sounds.
In this case, we do not know how the device worked because all we have
is a poem quoted in a symposium. But there are still extant from antiquity
sources that describe devices of this sort in a more technical manner. These
are two treatises on pneumatics: one by Philo of Byzantium, whom we
have met already as an author on catapults, the other by Hero of
Alexandria, whom we have already met for his observation that one could
ﬁnd longitudes, in principle, by observing eclipses. (Notably, our sources
begin to circle back to a smaller group: not that many “applied” mathe-
matical authors.) The title of such treatises, Pneumatics, refers to pneuma or
“spirit,” and the subject at hand is the motion of subtle, nonsolid bodies.
Eﬀectively, what is under discussion is devices where liquids are put in
motion. The wine poured, and the trumpet blown. Hero’s very ﬁrst
concrete example is straightforward (which I repeat in paraphrase):
Immerse a vessel with holes at the bottom and at the top within wine.
As it is ﬁlled with wine, close the top hole with your ﬁnger. Lift the vessel,
and the wine will not be poured. (You can try this in your bathtub,
perhaps with water instead of wine, but you’ve probably tried this already
as a kid, with soda and straw. Hero essentially intuits the correct explana-
tion, which is the diﬀerence between air pressure and vacuum.) And now a
further trick: you can let the wine pour, simply by releasing your ﬁnger
from the top hole! Now that’s truly hilarious. It is hard to imagine that
such tricks were not ﬁrst tried at a symposium, and the entire literature
reads as a series of tricks to be performed, or discussed, in sympotic
conversation. Drachmann, who has studied this literature extensively,
sums this up as “parlour-magic”(although remember: this is mostly
A. G. Drachmann, Ktesibios, Philon and Heron: A Study in Ancient Pneumatics (Copenhagen:
Munksgaard, ).

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

wine magic, sympotic magic). Past scholars have been very dismissive of
this literature, in particular because it constitutes such a giant miss. The
ancient tradition of pneumatics used the eﬀects of diﬀerent pressures
applied by liquids, sometimes even heated to produce gas. They proceeded
right next to the key technological breakthrough of all history – the steam
engine! – and completely failed to notice it. (We will, in fact, return to the
steam engine in the epilogue to this book; it does have ancient roots,
although mostly distinct from Hero’s Pneumatics.) It seems that the
ancients did not really care about steam, as such: with very few exceptions,
the pneumatic devices are liquid marvels and, most often, wine marvels.
Liquids are usually a key part of the visible eﬀect of the device, and they are
almost always presented as the driving forces. Even steam is understood in
terms of water, brought to a boil. It is always the liquid that does the
magic. So, Hero’s famous “steam-engine toy” – the one that gets modern
scholars mad. Let water boil inside a sphere with two tubes extending out
of it. As the steam escapes, the sphere begins to turn. The visible marvel is
of water, heated, rotating spheres. But even this is the exception. By far the
more common type of marvel is very directly liquid. Again and again, we
ﬁnd devices that pour libations on an altar, or that dispense wines of
diﬀerent kinds, or that combine (as in Hedylus’s epigram) the ﬂow of wine
with some other observable phenomenon. Why this insistence on liquid
marvels? Because of the function of this entire literature: the sympotic
conversation piece.
Why should we even bring such wine marvels into our own, sober
account of the history of mathematics? Because the ancients did. The
ancient treatises on pneumatics were clearly understood to be integral to
the discipline of “mechanics,” which was clearly understood to be integral
to mathematics. Indeed, the very presentation in those pneumatic works is
mathematical: the objects are described tersely, with a technical language
suggestive of the mathematical genre; most artifacts are presented with
schematic diagrams, labeled by letters. The description of a mechanical
device reads, then, like a geometrical construction. In the symposium, one
merely performed the trick or recalled it; turned into book knowledge, the
devices of pneumatics had to be brought into a speciﬁc, mathematical
form. The same is true for another treatise by Hero, the Automata. The
title, referring to self-moving devices, is correct, but its scope should be
limited immediately. What Hero discusses is the making of a puppetry
device that, pulled by a string, gives rise to a complex series of actions
(essentially, rather like our attractions in amusement parks; Ctesibius’s
blown trumpet at the temple is actually not far from that). What makes
Machines of Marvel

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

this treatise mathematical is the schematic drawing of the arrangement
pulling the puppets, labeled with the letters of a geometrical diagram and
described with the language that is often that of pure geometry: a wheel
OΠ passes at the middle of the side ΓΔ, revolving around the axis ΦX . . .
The device is meant to amuse, as a tableau of puppets, but if it is to be read
seriously, it becomes a geometrical construction. Perhaps this, in and of
itself, is part of the thrill: a magic trick, as it were, where geometry and
puppets are interchangeable.
This is an attractive account, where the application of geometry to
mechanical contrivances is more “ludic,” more in line with the literary
emphasis seen in the mathematics of the generation of Archimedes. When
Diocles contemplates burning mirrors, he eﬀectively engages with just this
kind of equivalence between the theoretical geometry and concrete magic.
But in Diocles’s case, the theoretical geometry is signiﬁcant in and of itself.
The direction with texts such as Hero’s Automata is diﬀerent: a piece of
real-world machinery (whether actually built or just conceived) gets pre-
sented in a mathematical format. It seems reasonable that for Hero’s
readers, mathematical presentation would be of a higher status, and if so,
the move has a natural sociological explanation.
Of all ancient mechanical authors, Hero occupies a unique place: we
ought to get to know him. Not that this is easy! There are essentially no
biographical data (it used to be thought that we could tell his date, but
really, all we can say is “likely from the Roman era”). And indeed, his
corpus – even though it does present serious questions of authenticity,
concerning entire treatises and then within each treatise – seems to project
a clear, consistent persona. This may teach us more about the identity of
ancient mechanics.
First, this corpus contains works engaging with mechanical devices,
sometimes more practical, sometimes more toylike. These include, besides
the Pneumatics and the Automata already mentioned, also the Catoptrics, or
study of mirrors: as is usually the case in ancient studies of mirrors, this
once again belongs in the ﬁeld of the study of marvels, in particular the
fun-house eﬀects of non-ﬂat mirrors. More sober is the Dioptra (a study of
a survey device – which provides the context, incidentally, for Hero’s note
concerning the ﬁnding of longitudes based on eclipses). Hero’s treatise on
As noted previously, Hero made an observation concerning the manner in which eclipses can be
used for ﬁnding longitudes. For this exercise, Hero made up a set of theoretical values for a ﬁctional
eclipse. Neugebauer was pranked, so to speak, and used the values to deduce Hero’s date (, by
Neugebauer’s calculation): clearly, unfounded. N. Sidoli, “Heron of Alexandria’s Date,” Centaurus
(): –.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

another device – the water clock – survives in fragmentary form. Not
surprisingly, Hero wrote also at least two treatises on catapults (one of
which is extant only in fragmentary form) – so, obviously, he provided a
solution to the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals! – and also
about machines in more general terms, in a treatise that might have been
titled Mechanics (and is extant only in Arabic). In all of these works, we see
Hero presenting devices, of more or less remarkable function, through
geometrical principles.
Alongside those works, there is another line of more “pure” mathemat-
ics: a Geometry, a Stereometry, a Metrica (a study, speciﬁcally, of the
measurement of areas and volumes), and also a Deﬁnitions – consisting
mostly of citations from Euclid’s Elements, with additions from later
geometers. We recall how Euclid was stripped, in the classroom, to bare
statements without proofs so that pupils were asked, probably, to learn a
little bit of Euclid, beginning with the deﬁnitions, by heart. This seems to
be the context for the Deﬁnitions and indeed for Hero’s “pure” geometry as
a whole. Throughout his geometrical treatises, Hero uses the same geo-
metrical vocabulary and the same geometrical diagrams as we ﬁnd with
pure geometers, but his emphasis is on measurement, which he eﬀects with
concrete numbers. Those treatises then look very much like the evidence,
provided by papyrus fragments, for mathematical education. This, then,
also explains why we have evidence (through Arabic sources) that Hero
wrote a commentary to Euclid’s Elements (was he the ﬁrst?). He surely
must have taught Euclid, then? There is no direct connection between
craftsmanship and teaching, but in both wings of his work, we see
Hero starting out from a profession – the maker of machines, the school-
teacher – and then seeking, for this relatively modest profession, the higher
status of a more elaborate, bookish science. Is this how we are to under-
stand the mathematization of mechanics in general?
To some extent, this would be to downplay the real ingenuity of ancient
mechanics, which, on some rare occasions, did involve theoretical sophis-
tication. I do not believe that the making of a catapult really involved the
solution, via techniques such as the use of conic sections, of cubic equa-
tions. But mechanical devices could demand the solution of other, genuine
theoretical problems. Perhaps the most spectacular case is that of the
Antikythera mechanism, to which I will turn in more detail in the
following chapter. At its essence, the Antikythera mechanism is a system
of gears whose turning imitates astronomical cycles. I set aside the
ingenuity – in itself, nothing short of amazing – required for the produc-
tion of the precise gears. I do not know how the makers of the mechanism
Machines of Marvel

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

produced a gear with ﬁfty-three nearly precisely equally spaced triangular
teeth. I am sure, however, that they did not solve the theoretical problem
of constructing the -gon. Craftsmanship trumped theory. (Some evi-
dence for this, indeed, is that one of the displays, which is clearly meant to
have a spiral form, is produced as a series of independent circular arcs. The
spiral eﬀect is good enough, and geometrical precision was not the key
point.) What is deeply theoretical about this mechanism, however, is the
basic construction of its train of gears, which requires both astronomical as
well as calculatory theory. One needs to have a model of arithmetic
regularities in the sky – and then to understand that to turn those into
gears, one needs to factorize such regularities in an economical manner,
which then calls for arithmetic ingenuity, similar in spirit to the ﬁnding of
musical ratios. In this case, craftsmanship and science go hand in hand.
Not surprising, after all: the very purpose of the machine was to display a
piece of scientiﬁc theory. In this sense, it is perhaps comparable to a much
simpler astronomical device – the sundial. Even in its very simplest form,
as a single needle casting shadows – together with marks on the ground, to
interpret those shadows cast at diﬀerent times – this instrument encodes
both astronomical as well as geometrical theory: the changing position of
the sun in the sky, along the day and the year. It is signiﬁcant, then, that
there are now hundreds of traces of ancient sundials. (Often, all that
survives is an inscription, letting us know that a sundial was set up.)
Because this is, of course, merely a fragment of all ancient sundials, the
conclusion is that in the High Empire – when most of those inscriptions
can be dated – there must have been many thousands of such sundials
dotting the urban landscape across the entire Mediterranean. We started
by noting the ubiquity of some mathematical education: many members of
the literate, urban class knew how to calculate and how to measure basic
geometrical ﬁgures; perhaps they even remembered a few basic facts from
Euclid up to and including Pythagoras’s theorem. And they lived in a
landscape where scientiﬁc, mechanical devices were not scarce: indeed, in
the minimal form of the sundial, they were ubiquitous. But this perhaps
relates most to the central place of astronomy in the ancient imagination,
and we will therefore need to return to this in the next chapter. With all
the applications to the real world, nothing ranks as far high as the
applications to that most distant slice of the real world – the heavens.
S. L. Gibbs, Greek and Roman Sundials (New Haven, : Yale University Press, ). This study
catalogues the Greco-Roman sundials published at the time; a signiﬁcant number have been
added since.

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mechanical Theory?
The Antikythera mechanism is not a mere symposium conversation piece,
and it continues to amaze. And it circles back to one of the main ﬁgures of
this book. Had you shown it to an ancient Greek, they would likely think
that it was made by Archimedes. In fact, as noted in the preceding chapter,
there is a credible tradition, according to which Archimedes even wrote a
book about this type of device, titled Sphere-Making. This report is from
Pappus, whom we have mentioned several times already: an author of the
fourth century – who quotes, in turn, Carpus of Antioch, who might
perhaps be from the ﬁrst century .
What Pappus quotes is the statement, precisely, that Archimedes wrote
only one book on mechanics – Sphere-Making (because, in general, he
preferred geometry).A couple of observations follow.
First, indeed, the likelihood is that this is true. If so, Archimedes
contributed to and perhaps initiated the tradition of the Antikythera
mechanism. We shall, of course, return to this in the following chapter.
Second, and perhaps more surprising, we ﬁnd that the ancients did not
consider Archimedes’s seminal contributions to mathematical physics –
the study of the statics of the balance, and the hydrostatics of solids
immersed in liquid – as part of “mechanics.”
There was an ancient science the Greeks called “mechanics,” and this
was the study of mēchanē, “machine,” above all the war engine but also
understood to include any other device that might pique a reader’s
curiosity. Then, there was geometry. Geometry was universally seen as
applicable to mechanics, as a matter of genre – mechanics would be
written, to a large extent, in the formulaic geometrical language and with
the aid of the geometrical diagram – and as a matter of a speciﬁc, albeit
very important, piece of theory. This was the problem of ﬁnding two mean
proportionals, correctly said to be relevant to the problem of scaling solid
artifacts (although the practical signiﬁcance of this applicability was wildly
exaggerated).
What was not seen as an application of geometry to mechanics was the
study of the mathematical principles underlying physical force – exactly
the thing that, from Galileo onward, came to deﬁne the discipline.
To see this, let us now sum up our overview of ancient mechanical
writing with yet another table of authors. This table lists all the credibly
attested authors in the ancient genre of mechanics (many of whom I have
Pappus’s Collection, .Hultsch.
Mechanical Theory?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

mentioned already). For each, I report the century; whether or not they are
extant; whether or not they touch, in their writing, upon military
machines; and whether or not their writings include a theoretical element
comparable to Archimedes’s studies in mathematical physics. It often
happens that all we know about a certain ancient mechanician is that they
are credited with a famous device or construction. It may or may not be
that this became famous through their writing; in this list, I only report
such cases where there is some evidence suggesting an actual writing, thus
concentrating on the small but clearly deﬁned group of the ancient authors
on mechanics.
Name
Century
Extant
Military?
Theoretical?
Callistratus

N
?
?
Diades

N
Y
N
Polyidus

N
Y
N
Ps.-Aristotle
/
Y
N
Y
Ctesibius

N
Y
N
Archimedes

Y
N
Y
Daimachus

N
Y
N
Philo

Y
Y
N
Moschion
/
N
Y
N
Biton

Y
Y
N
Agesistratus

N
Y
N
Athenaeus

Y
Y
N
Democles
?
N
?
?
Diphilus
?
N
?
?
Vitruvius

Y
Y
N
Hero
?
Y
Y
N (or slightly Y)
Apollodorus of
Damascus

Y
Y
N
Pappus

Y
Y
Y
Urbicius

Y
Y
N
Marcellus
Late Antiquity?
N
?
?
Quirinus
Late Antiquity?
N
?
?
Once again, we have a list with about twenty ﬁgures. (The numbers could
have been expanded somewhat by including ﬁgures known only for their
famous devices; I also exclude a small group of physicians reported to have
invented various medical devices. Had I expanded the list, its emphasis on
actual mechanical construction would have been more obvious.) It is clear
enough that the ﬁeld is associated mostly with war engines, and indeed one
can glimpse something of a chronological pattern based on this association:

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

First, a signiﬁcant group in the fourth century around the time of the
military revolution of the catapult. (This group is reﬂected even later by
the ﬁgure of the mechanical author as a member of the Hellenistic court.)
Later, we ﬁnd another signiﬁcant group in the moment of Polybian
exchange, as Greek intellectuals present the achievement of their culture
to the Romans, mostly around the ﬁrst century .
Theory is extremely rare and is, as it were, the opposite of mainstream
mechanics: the authors who write on theory are those who do not write on
catapults. They are, quite simply, idiosyncratic. But of course, this does
not take away from their importance!
One idiosyncratic author is Archimedes, whose physical, “mechanical”
science we have seen, in great detail, in the preceding chapter. Even though
he did produce catapults – because he had to? – he did not write
about them.
Let us now turn to Pappus, who is otherwise our main source.
Here is an author who dedicates most of his eﬀorts to compilation and
commentary – an impetus we will return to understand in Chapter . His
Collection, in eight books, surveys a wide variety of sciences: Book is
dedicated to astronomy; Book , to mechanics. Throughout the
Collection, Pappus produces mathematical introductions to the ﬁeld at
hand, usually through comments on important works from the past.
The attitude is sophisticated, intended for a very well-prepared mathemat-
ical reader, so the emphasis is on diﬃcult mathematical proofs. Book 
is not structured through past treatises, but the spirit of an advanced
mathematical introduction is preserved, and so Pappus structures this
treatise according to the requirements for the application of mathematics
to mechanics. (It is in this context, introducing his project, that Pappus
cites Carpus’s observation on Archimedes’s mechanical work.)
Pappus claims there are three applications of theoretical mathematics to
mechanics. As usual, we have the problem of ﬁnding two mean
proportionals, but remarkably, Pappus adds two more problems. One is,
given a toothed cogwheel with a given radius and number of teeth, to ﬁnd
the radius required for another cogwheel, given its desired number of teeth
and the desired ratio of rotations. It is hard to imagine that the second
problem did not arise from a treatise dedicated to a device such as the
Antikythera mechanism, and it is tempting to speculate that it is ultimately
due to Archimedes’s study in Sphere-Making.
The third and ﬁnal one is, given the force required to move a weight
along a horizontal plane, to calculate the force required to lift it along an
inclined plane. Now this is exciting: this is, in fact, as close as ancient
Mechanical Theory?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

science ever gets to what we now understand as the elementary application
of physics to mechanics (and is, in fact, a standard problem of the scientiﬁc
revolution). This is not entirely isolated: even though Hero’s discussions
are mostly tied to concrete machines, his treatise titled Mechanics does
make several comments of a more theoretical character, and Hero, too,
mentions this problem of the force required to move a weight on an
inclined plane. It thus seems that both Hero and Pappus reﬂect a
longer tradition.
This tradition, as far as we can see, is interestingly wrong. The ancient
authors did not develop a correct formula for dealing with the inclined
plane. Pappus’s approach is to conceive of the object, set on the inclined
plane, as if it is a composite made of two segments, one higher and one
lower. The force required to keep the weight in place is that which, added
to the naturally present forces acting on the two segments, makes them
balanced. (The force required to move them, then, would obviously be the
force bigger than the balancing force.) Pappus’s task, then, becomes to
consider the force that the higher segment of the body exerts on the
lower one.
This is all evidently a crude adaptation of Archimedes’s On Floating
Bodies. There, one considers the solid immersed in the liquid as constituted
of two components, the one fully within and the other fully outside the
liquid, stability obtaining when the two precisely counteract each other.
The extension of this approach to the problem of the object, stable on an
inclined plane, is clearly deﬁcient. (What is even the point of dividing the
body into segments, now? The lower part is moved downward, just like the
upper part.) But the main point is not just that this approach, presented by
Pappus, is mistaken. The point is that had there been a robust exchange
and critique surrounding such applications, preceding Pappus, such errors
could have been ﬁltered and corrected. It appears that there were none
because so few even attempted this kind of research. It is not that there
were zero authors on mechanical force, understood mathematically.
Archimedes led the way (albeit in a purely geometrical context); Hero
and Pappus reﬂect a tradition of trying to extend it. But it must have been
a small, negligible sidestream of ancient writing in the exact sciences.
There was no ancient Galileo to pick up from where Archimedes had left
the study of force. The ancient tradition was a false start. (We shall return
to this – antiquity, as the ﬁrst moment when one could have extended
Archimedes, but didn’t – when considering Hipparchus in the following
chapter.)

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Writing about theoretical mechanics (as opposed to concrete machines)
was simply not a recognized genre. One only wrote about it in the rare case
that one explicitly strove – as Pappus, after all, did – to write about
everything. This brings us to our ﬁnal example of ancient theoretical
mechanics, coming from yet another context where an author – or better
put, a group of authors – sought universal scope.
The treatise in question is titled Mechanics and is ascribed, in our
manuscripts, to Aristotle. It is likely that the attribution is not precise
and that the philosopher Aristotle did not write this treatise. (Quite
simply, this treatise does not carry the imprint of Aristotle’s genius; this
view is widely shared, and it is usually said to be by “pseudo-Aristotle.”)
The language and the overall attitude of wide-ranging curiosity are indeed
reminiscent of Aristotle, and the consensus is that this is the work of an
author trained in the Aristotelian school, close in time to the master. An
early text, then, perhaps roughly contemporary with Euclid’s Elements –
and surely preceding Archimedes.
The Aristotelian project was, indeed, universal. A follower of Plato,
Aristotle shared his master’s fascination with the sciences. Unlike Plato,
Aristotle went on to expand this project systematically, striving to survey a
wide array of phenomena and to provide them with rational accounts. The
Aristotelian corpus is like a running commentary to the universe: it
discusses logic, animals, speeds and motions, sense perception, comets,
rainbows, ethics and rhetoric, sleep, the Athenian constitution, tragedy,
chemical mixtures, predicate logic . . . Individual works very often devolve
into nearly unstructured lists of observations, followed by explanations.
(Why is it the case that . . . ? Maybe because . . . ?) The series of observa-
tions and explanations in Ps.-Aristotle’s Mechanics all involve the working
of various human artifacts (notably, including no military devices). They
are mostly accounted for on the model of the lever – no surprise there.
Much more surprising to us, the lever is understood not on the basis of
anything such as Archimedes’s geometrical proportions but, instead, in
terms of the geometry of the circle. The central model of the Aristotelian
mechanics is of a rotation around a fulcrum point, and most of the results
reduce to the fact that longer circles cover greater distances. (This is
supposed to explain, essentially, why the weight further away from the
The question of the authorship of the treatise remains complicated. A recent and nuanced survey of
the evidence is found in I. Bodnár, “The Pseudo-Aristotelian Mechanics,” in M.-L. Desclos and
W. W. Fortenbaugh (eds.), Strato of Lampsacus: Text, Translation and Discussion (New Brunswick,
: Routledge, ), pp. –.
Mechanical Theory?

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

fulcrum exerts the greater force; such texts remind us that Archimedes was
indebted to a tradition – and how much he improved upon it.)
Once again: the Aristotelian Mechanics is, on the whole, more wrong
than right. And once again, it appears to be an isolated text. The latter is
true, in fact, for many other works within the Aristotelian corpus. Aristotle
produces a comparative study of the animal kingdom; a predicate logic; a
theoretical study of poetics. In all such cases, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd any
authors, away from Aristotle’s immediate disciples, who add anything new
to these uniquely Aristotelian projects. This might have been especially
true in the case of mechanics, where Archimedes’s achievement quite
evidently supplanted the eﬀort by Ps.-Aristotle.
Ancient civilization was large, and even the things that happened very
rarely would happen from time to time. The exceptions occurred, and they
mattered: Ps. Aristotle’s mechanics, Archimedes’s works in mathematical
physics, Pappus’s Book – all those works were not merely composed
but were also copied and preserved. In time, they would provide an
important impetus to the scientiﬁc revolution. This is a signiﬁcant per-
spective but also an anachronistic one. In antiquity, the ﬁeld of mechanics
remained, on the whole, the study of mēchanē. Some of the engineers
making catapults chose to present themselves as mathematicians – which
they obtained “on the cheap,” so to speak, simply by inserting a solution to
the problem of ﬁnding two mean proportionals. Indeed, the association
between mechanics and mēchanē was so strong that even the greatest
achievement of the ancient mathematical account of forces – Archimedes’s
mathematical physics – was understood by the ancients to belong not to
mechanics but to pure geometry instead. Which may well have been correct!
Mathematics, Real and Symbolic
This was a many-branched, meandering chapter. Mathematics was embed-
ded in ordinary life: numeracy was widespread, and many members of the
elite were exposed to elementary mathematical education. Mathematics
also features in many technical traditions: geography and land surveying;
engineering, sculpture, and architecture; above all, the practices of war –
the setting of a military camp; tactics; most practically, the making of
catapults. But then again, mechanics also involved the making of various
devices of marvel. I have merely glanced at the most signiﬁcant area of the
application of mathematics to the real world – that of astronomy, which
we will take up in the following chapter. And I have omitted from this
review two of the main areas of such application, simply because we have
noted them already in preceding chapters. The idea that mathematics is

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

applicable to music – because numerical ratios determine harmony – was
crucial to the generation of Archytas and will always remain a chief reason
for philosophers to care about mathematics. And one of the specialized ﬁelds
of mathematics, particularly in the generation of Archimedes, was that of
optics: the analysis of light and vision in mathematical terms. In both music
and optics, what is at stake is not precisely an “applied science”: it is not as if
craftsmen built their stringed instruments, that artists fashioned their mir-
rors, based on theory. Theory was posterior to practice – it added an element
of theoretical understanding to an area of practice, pursued independently of
any such theory. But the same, after all, was the case with almost all the
applications we have discussed in this chapter.
The breadth is signiﬁcant. Mathematics was not marginal in antiquity,
nor was it of low status. To the contrary: it reached across many ﬁelds
where, quite evidently, it brought prestige to those who could claim its
knowledge. And yet, the theme of this chapter is not just breadth but also
superﬁciality. Yes, mathematics was widely applied, but it was applied,
perhaps, in the sense in which lacquer is applied to furniture. This is true
even in the most practical subdivision of ancient mechanics, namely,
catapult making. On the one hand, there is the craftsmanship, and then,
when this comes to be written down, knowledge is handed out with the
thin added layer of advanced mathematics (in the form of the problem of
ﬁnding two mean proportionals). It is exactly like music, where singers
sing, ﬂutists play, instrument makers ply their craft – and then, when it is
all written down, the author would pay homage to number theory.
This seems like a tension in our survey. I do emphasize that mathemat-
ics was fairly widespread. This was not the ancient Near East, with a
handful of professional scribes, masters of abstruse numeracy. Most every-
one could count, and many could even remember Pythagoras’s theorem.
How to square this with the mostly superﬁcial application of any more
advanced mathematics?
But perhaps the two elements – breadth and superﬁciality, the wide
access to numeracy and the symbolic use of advanced mathematics – go
hand in hand. We recall how Philo emphasizes the need for precise
professionalism:
Many who have undertaken the building of engines of the same size, using
the same construction, similar wood, and identical metal, without even
changing its weight, have made some with long range and powerful impact
and others which fall short of these. . . . Thus, the remark made by
Polyclitus, the sculptor, is appropriate for what I am going to say. He
maintained that perfection was achieved gradually in the course of many
calculations.
Mathematics, Real and Symbolic

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

And surely Polyclitus – and Philo after him – were right. It took great skill
to make an individual artifact, and one had to make many precise calcu-
lations. In this sense, then, one had to be a very good practical mathema-
tician so as to become a sculptor or an engineer. But what was at stake here
was to know about bronze, wood, nails, and ropes and to know, mathe-
matically, about the basic properties of number and shape. One deﬁnitely
needed mathematics, but one did not need the ﬁnding of two mean
proportionals; one really needed to know, instead, how to calculate –
one needed to be familiar with the basic properties of geometrical ﬁgures.
And this was exactly what the members of the educated Greek public
were supposed to know from their elementary education. This is how the
widespread reach of basic numeracy goes hand in hand with the superﬁcial
use of advanced mathematics. I suggested that the most practical way to
ﬁnd a cubic root would have been to calculate cube values by trial and
error – certainly a more reliable technique than, say, ﬁnding the intersec-
tion of conic sections. Trial-and-error calculation calls for skill, and even
today, without a calculator, many would fail! But this type of calculation
would have been entirely underwhelming for an educated Greek reader.
The French sociologist Bourdieu emphasized the role that distinction
plays in social life. We all live in the same material world; elites mark
themselves – distinguish themselves – by a certain detached, aesthetic
attitude to material reality. Perhaps one should not rush to generalize:
Bourdieu studied modern and contemporary society, where the distinction
between mass and elite is much more contentious and hence needs to be
marked in various subtle ways. But the fundamental logic is clear and
probably should be extended to our case. The problem of ﬁnding the two
mean proportionals, applied to mechanics, is a case of Bourdieu-like
distinction. Any good craftsman can calculate the required lengths for the
pieces of a catapult. A mechanical author is marked as a true member of
the elite – part of the polite conversation between authors – by being able
to marshal pure geometry. And if so, it is quite natural that applied
mathematics would be posterior to practice: its main function, in truth,
is in the sociology of literary culture, not in the epistemology of
mechanical knowledge.
When we say that advanced mathematics was applied, in antiquity, as a
form of distinction, we do not take away from its value. The point is not
that mathematics was “merely of symbolic value” – for there is nothing
“mere” about symbols. Symbols provide meaning, and what we see is that
mathematics, in antiquity, could endow domains of practice with signif-
icance. One did not just move through geographical space; one moved on

Mathematics in the World
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the surface of a sphere, measurable with the tools of geometry, and this was
important not because, thanks to this knowledge, the ancients had supe-
rior maps but because, thanks to this knowledge, space gained in meaning.
This observation, indeed, is at its most obvious with astronomy. The stars
are, above all, vehicles of meaning. Two thousand years later, Immanuel
Kant’s mind would still be “ﬁlled with admiration and awe, reﬂecting on
the starry heavens above.” To the ancients, the stars were divine; for many
of them, they were also auspicious. Not merely divine, they were also the
key tool for divination. Astronomy, and its sister science, astrology, were
the most important applied sciences in antiquity because they were the
most laden with symbolic meaning: precisely because so far away, in the
ﬁgures of the sky, the concrete and the purely mathematical could most
naturally be joined together.
Suggestions for Further Reading
The chapter touches on many themes, several of which have beneﬁted from
recent scholarship. An essential general reading is S. Cuomo, Technology and
Culture in Greek and Roman Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ). Another recent book approaches mechanical writing as a genre:
C. Roby, Technical Ekphrasis in Greek and Roman Science and Literature: The
Written Machine between Alexandria and Rome (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ). Mechanics is approached from a philosophical
perspective in S. Berryman, The Mechanical Hypothesis in Ancient Greek
Natural Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
Older but very reliable studies are J. G. Landels, Engineering in the
Ancient World (Berkeley: University of California Press, ) and E. W.
Marsden, Greek and Roman Artillery: Historical Development (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, ). Similar in character (but somewhat more
dated) is O. A. W. Dilke, The Roman Land-Surveyors: An Introduction to
the Agrimensores (New York: David & Charles, ). There is now
growing, excellent scholarship on ancient geography, and a good intro-
duction to the ﬁeld is D. Dueck, Geography in Classical Antiquity
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
There is not yet a monograph-length treatment of mathematical education
in antiquity (the author of such a monograph must be not only a good social
historian of mathematics but also a trained papyrologist, as the evidence of the
papyri is yet to be tapped in full). An excellent brief survey is N. Sidoli,
“Mathematics Education,” in W. M. Bloomer (ed.), A Companion to Ancient
Education (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, ), pp. –.
Suggestions for Further Reading

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

