Int. J. Human-Computer Studies (1999) 51, 149-168
Artic1e No. ijhc.1974.0304
Available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on IDE~L®
The Organization of the Living: A Theory of the Living
Organization*
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile,
Santiago, Chile South America
(Received 2 October 1974)
The fundamental feature that characterizes living systems is autonomy, and any
account of their organization as systems that can exist as individual unities
must show what autonomy is as a phenomenon proper to them, and how it
arises in their operation as such unities. Accordingly the following is proposed.
(1) That autonomy in living systems is a feature of self-production (auto-
poiesis), and that a living system is properly characterized only as a network of
processes of production of components that is continuously, and recursively,
generated and realized as a concrete entity (unity) in the physical space, by the
interactions of the same components that it produces as such a network. This or-
ganization 1 call the autopoietic organization, and any system that exhibits it is
an autopoietic system in the space in which its components exist; in this sense
living systems are autopoietic systems in the physical space.
(2) That the basic consequence of the autopoietic organization is that every-
thing that takes place in an autopoietic system is subordinated to the realization
of its autopoiesis, otherwise it disintegrates.
(3) That the fundamental feature that characterizes the nervous system is that
it is a c10sed network of interacting neurons in which every state of neuronal
activity generates other states of neuronal activity. Since the nervous system is a
component subsystem in an autopoietic unity, it operates by generating states
of relative neuronal activity that participate
in the realization of the auto-
poiesis of the organism which it integrates.
(4) That the autopoietic states that an organism adopts are determined by its
structure (the structure of the nervous system included), and that the structure
of the organism (including its nervous system) is at any instant the result of its
evolutionary and ontogenic structural coupling with the medium in which it
is autopoietic, obtained while the autopoiesis is realized.
(5) That language arises as phenomenon proper to living systems from the
reciprocal structural coupling of at least two organisms with nervous systems,
and that self·consciousness arises as an individual phenomenon from the recur-
sive structural coupling of an organism with language with its own structure
through recursive self-description.
·An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Conference on Biologically Moti-
vated Automata Theory, MacLean, Va., U.S.A., 19-21 June 1974.
1071-5819/99/080149 + 20 $30.00/0
© 1999 Academic Press

150
Statemeots
H. R. MATURANA
PURPOSE
My purpose in this article is to present a theory of the organization of living
systems as autonomous entities, and a theory of the organization of the
nervous system as a closed network of interacting neurons structurally
coupled to the living system to whose realization it contributes.
ANTECEDENTS
(a) There is no adequate theory of the organization of living systems as
individual autonomous unities. There are only descriptions of sorne of their
internal states and of their states of interaction as these appear projected
upon the domain of observation and purposeful design of the observer. Thus,
reproduction, processing of information or internal hierarchical relations,
are described as fundamental constitutive features of the living organization.
Yet, at a closer scrutiny, none of these features appears to be exclusive, or
definitory of living systems. In fact, reproduction is trivially non-constitutive,
even though it is necessary for evolution, because living systerns are living
systems, whether in reproduction or not, as long as they are "alive". The
notion of processing of information represents a way of description of the
interactions and changes of state of a sysytem, and as such it is applicable to
any possible dynamic system. Finally, the posession of internal hierarchical
rdations is a featurc that an observer can ascribe to any mechanistic system
to which he assigns an initial and a final state in its sequential-state transi-
tions. The same applies to the nervous system. There is no adequate theory
of the nervous system as a neuronal network embedded in an autonomous
living unity; there are only descriptions of the state transitions of the nervous
system viewed as an input-output system designed for the processing of
environmental information. The result of this view is the treatment of the
nervous system as an organ through which the organism becomes semantic-
ally coupled to its environment, as if the features of the description (semantic
relations) were effective operative components in the changes of state of the
organismo
(b) It is the aim of many scientists who work in automata theory to model
the most unique phenomena generated by living systems such as autonomy,
language and self-consciousness. Such an aim, however, cannot be achieved
in the absence of a theory that shows the nature of these phenomena and how
they arise in biological systems.

ORGANIZATION OF THE LIVING
151
(/
\
PRELIMINARY CONCEPTS
Observer. An observer is a human being, a person; someone who can make
distinctions and specify that which he distinguishes as an entity (a something)
different from himself, and can do this with his own actions and thoughts
recursively, being always able to operate as if external to (distinct from) the
circumstances in which he finds himself. All the distinctions that we handle,
conceptually or concretely, are made by us as observers: everything said is
said by an observer to another observer.
Unity. A unity is any entity (concrete or conceptual) separated from a back-
ground by a concrete of conceptual operation of distinction. A unity may be
treated as an unanalyzable whole endowed with constitutive properties, or as
a composite entity with properties as a unity that are specified by its organiza-
tion and not by the properties of its components.
Interaction. Whenever two unities, specified bytheir properties and as a result
of the interplay of these properties, appear to modify their relative states in
reference to the larger systems in which they are embedded, there is an
interaction.
o
~.
Space. Space is the domain of all the possible relations and interactions of
a collection of elements that the properties of these elements define.
\~
Explanation. An explanation is always addressed by an observer to
another observer. An explanation is an intended reproduction. A system is
explained when the relations which define it as a unity are, either conceptu-
ally or concretely, intentionally reproduced. A phenomenon is explained
when the processes which generate it are, either conceptually or concretely,
intentionally reproduced in a manner that shows that by their operation they
generate the phenomenon to be explained. It follows that there are two basic
problems that must be solved in any explanation, namely: (a) the distinction
and identification of the unity or phemonenon to be explained; and (b) the
conceptual or concrete reproduction, either of the organization of the
unity or of the mechanisms and processes that generate the phenomenon to
be explained.
Organization. This word comes from the Greek term opyavov (organon)
that means instrument, and by making reference to
the instrumental
participation of the components in the constitution of the unity, it refers to
the relations between components which define a system as a unity. So, in
order to define a system as a unity it is necessary and sufficient to point to its
organization. From the cognitive point of view, the organizations of a unity
specifies the concept which defines the class of unities to which it belongs.
Structure. This word comes from the latin verb struere that means to build,
and by making reference to the process of construction as well as to the

152
H. R. MATURANA
components of a construct, it refers to the actual components and to the
actual relations which these must satisfy in their participation in the con-
stitution of a given unity. An observer may recognize a known system by
identifying 'its components, but an unknown system cannot be defined by
pointing to its structure.
Organization and structure, therefore, are not synonyms. The organization
of a composite system constitutes it as a unity and determines its properties
as such a unity, specifying a domain in which it may interact (and be treated)
as an unanalyzable whole. The structure of a composite system determines
the space in which it exists and can be perturbed, but not its properties as
a unity. An unanalyzable unity can be identified by a concept, but it does not
have an organization, nor does it have a structure, it only has properties as
a fundamental element that exists in a space which these properties specify.
It follows that two spatially separated composite unities may have the same
organization but different structures and that a composite unity (system)
remains the same only as long as its organization remains invariant: whenever
the organization of a unity changes the unity changes, it becomes a different
unity; whenever the structure of a unity changes without change in its organi-
zation, the unity remains the same and its identity stays unchanged. It also
follows that when the organization of a unity is to be explained it is a
mistake to reproduce its structure, it is necessary and sufficient to reproduce
its organization and, thus produce one of the kind; yet, when a particular
unity is to be reproduced, both its organization and its structure must be
reproduccd.
Furthermore, since a composite unity interacts through the properties of
its components, and an unanalyzable one through its constitutive properties
as a unity, all interactions between unities, including interactions with the
observer (observation), are necessarily structural interactions in the space of
the components. Therefore, when an observer refers to the organization of
a cornposite unity, he refers to the relations which realize the concept that
defines the c1ass of unities to which the observed composite unity belongs.
J
State-determined system. A state-determined system whose changes of
state, defined as structural changes without loss ofidentity (defining organiza-
tion), are determined by the stIucture of the system and not by an indepen-
dent perturbing agent. This is a universal constitutive feature of dynamic
systems.
Consensual domain. A consensual domain is a dornain of interlocked
í
(intercalated and mutually triggering) sequences of states, established and
.
determined through ontogenic interactions between structurally plastic state-
deterrnined systems. A consensual domain can become established only when

ORGANlZATlON OF THE LIVING
153
the plastic interacting systems are homeostatic systems that maintain con-
stant their essential variables through their mutual interactions. Living
systems do establish consensual domains through the maintenance of their
living organization.
Phenomenological domain. Domain of interactions specified by the proper-
ties of the interacting unities, regardless of whether these unities are simple or
composite. Therefore, when a unity is defined, through the specification of its
organization or by pointing to its properties, a phenomenological domain is
defined.
Purpose
After these preliminary considerations, and given that living systcms exist
and that sorne of them have a nervous system, the two aims of this article can
now be preciseiy stated as follows.
(a) To explain the organization ofliving systems by describing the organiza-
tion that constitutes a system as an autonomous unity that can, in principie,
generate al! the phenomenology proper to living systems if the adequate
historical contingencies are given.
(b) To explain the organization of the nervous system by describing the
organization that makes a neuronal network, integrated as a component
subsystem in an organism, a system that can generate al! the phenomenology
proper to a nervous system.
Tbeory
AUTOPOIESIS (avróa = self; nO/E/V = to make)
Living systems are given and they generate a specific phenomenoiogy, the
phenomenology of living systems. Therefore, in order to explain living
systems it is necessary and sufficient to point to the organization that defines
a class of unities that generates a phenomenology indistinguishable from the
phenomenology proper to living systems. Such an organization can be
described as follows.
There is a c1ass ofmechanistic systems in which each member ofthe c1ass is
a dynamic system defined as a unity by relations that constitute it as a neto
work of processes qf production of components which: (a) recursively
participate through their interactions in the generation and realization of the
network of processes of production of components which produced them;
and (b) constitute this network of processes ofproduction of components as
a unity in the space in which they (the components) exist by realizing its
boundaries.

154
H. R.
MATURANA
Such systems 1 caIl autopoietic systems: the organization of an autopoietic
system is the autopoietic organization. An autopoietic system that exists in the
physical space is a living system (Maturana & Varela, 1973;Varela, Maturana
& Uribe, 1974).
As a result of their organization, autopoietic systems operate as homeostatic
systems that have their own organization as the critical fundamental variable
that they actively maintain constant. In an autopoietic system aH its (dynamic)
states are states in autopoiesis and lead to autopoiesis. In this sense, autopoi-
etic systems are closed systems, and, as a result ofthis, aIl the phenomenology
of autopoietic systems is necessarily subservient to their autopoiesis, and a
given phenomenon is a biological phenomenon only to the extent to which it
involves the autopoiesis of at least one living system.
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system is given as a network of interacting neurons that
generates a phenomenology subservient to the autopoiesis of the organism in
which it is embedded. Therefore, in order to explain the nervous system as a
system, it is necessary and sufficient to point to the organization that defines
a neuronal network that generates a phenomenology indistinguishable from
the phenomenology proper to the nervous system as it exists as a constitutive
component of an autopoietic system. Such organization can be described as
foIlows.
The nervous system is defined as a unity (that is, as a system) by relations
that cOllstitute it as a c10sed network of interacting neurons such that any
change in the state of relative activity of a coIlection of neurons leads to a
change in the state of relative activity of other or the same collection of
neurons: aH states of neuronal activity in the nervous system always lead to
other states of activity in the nervous system.
A closed neuronal network does not have input or output surfaces as
features of its organization, and although it can be perturbed through the
interactions of its components, for it, in its operation as a system, there are
only its own states of relative neuronal activity, regardless of what the obser-
ver may say about their origino Given a closed system, inside and outside
exist only for the observer who beholds it, not for the system. The sensory and
the effector surfaces that an observer can describe in an actual organism, do
not make the nervous system an open neuronal network because the environ-
ment (where the observer stands) acts only as an intervening element through
which the effector and sensory neurons interact completing the closure of the
system.
If the observer, either experimentally or conceptually, were to open the

ORGANIZATION OF THE LIVING
155
nervous system at sorne synaptic surface, and describe the transfer properties
of the system thus obtained in terms of input and output relations, he would
have an open network, but not a nervous system. This is what in fact happens
when the observer describes the organism as a system which has independent
sensory and effector surfaces for its interactions with the environment: he
opens the nervous system and destroys its organization, leaving only an open
neuronal network that can be described in terms of hierarchical transfer
functions which are relevant only for the descriptive system of references
introduced by the observer, who describes the changes of state of the nervous
system by mapping them upon the changes of state of the environment
(observable medium). As a elosed neuronal network, however, the state-
determiued system that the nervous system is operates by generating relations
of neuronal activity determined by its structure, regardless of environmental
circumstances. The observable effectiveness that the relations of neuronal
activity generated by the nervous system have for the realization of the auto-
poiesis of the organism under environmental perturbations results from the
structural correspondence that actual!y exists between nervous system and
organism, and between these and the medium in which the autopoiesis of
the organism is realized.
IMPLICIT REQUIREMENTS
An autopoietic system is a state-determined composite dynamic unity.
Therefore, although the characterization of an autopoietic system does not
require any statement about the characteristics of the medium in which the
autopoiesis is realized, the actual realization of an autopoietic system in the
physical space requires of a medium that provides the physical elements that
permit the processes of production of components to take place. This medium
ineludes al! that is operational!y different from the autopoietic unity, that is,
al! that at sorne instance may constitute a perturbation, even components of
the systern itself. It is, then, an implicit constitutive condition for autopoiesis
that the autopoietic unity exists in a medium within which it interacts, and
within which an observer can see it interchange elements with an environment.
PLASTICITY AND STRUcrURAL COUPLING
The interactions of a composite unity in the space of its components are
interactions through its components, that is, are structural interactions. If as
a result of a structural interaction the components of a unity, or their rela-
tions, change, the structure of the unity changes, and, if these structural
changes occur without a change in the organization of the unity, the identity
of the unity remains invariant. A unity whose structure can change while its

156
H. R.
MATURANA
organization remains invariant is a plastic unity, and the structural inter-
actions under which this invariance can be sustained are perturbations. Since
the changes of state of an autopoietic system are determined by its structure,
the perturbations under which the autopoietic unity undergoes its changes
of state (changes of structure without loss of identity) constitutes only
triggering events that couple the sequence of the changes of state of the
autopoietic unity to the sequence of the changes of state of the medium that
constitute the perturbations. Given that it is a constitutive feature of an
autopoietic unity to homeostatically maintain invariant its organization under
conditions of structural change, the realization of the autopoiesis of a plastic
autopoietic unity under conditions of perturbations generated by a changing
medium, necessarily results either in the establishment in the autopoietic unity
of a structure that can generate specific changes of state that can be trig-
gered by specific perturbing changes of state of the medium, or in its dis-
integration. The result of the establishment of this dynamic structural
correspondance, or structural coupling,
is the effective spatio-temporal
correspondance of changes of state of the organism with the recurrent
changes of state of the medium while the organism remains autopoietic.
The same arguments can be applied to the nervous system whose organiza.
tion must be invariant, but whose structures needs not be so and may be
plastic, with a dynamic of structural change coupled to the dynamic of
structural change of other systems such as the organism which it integrates,
and, through this, to the medium in which this exists. In fact, if the structUle
of the nervous system changes, the domain of the possible states of neuronal
activity of the nervous system, and, hence, the domain of the possible
behavioural states of the organism itself, change too. Therefore, if as a result
of the structural changes of the nervous system the organism can go on in
autopoiesis, the new nervous system's structure obtained may constitute the
basis for a new structural change which may also permit the organism to go
on in autopoiesis. In principie, this process can be recursively repeated
endlessly along the life of an organism, and generate a process of continuous
structural transformation that specifies the relations of neuronal activity
that the nervous system generates in its participation in the autopoiesis. The
consequences of this structural coupling are threefold:
(a) while the autopoiesis lasts, the changing structure ofthe nervous system
is necessarily that which generates the state of relative neuronal activity that
participate in the continued autopoiesis of the organism in the medium in
which it exists;
(b) while the autopoiesis lasts, the nervous system operates as an horneo·
static system that generates relations of neuronal activity that are subordinated

ORGANIZAnON OF THE LIVING
157
to and determined by the actuallealization ofthe autopoiesis ofthe organism
which it integrates;
(c) while the autopoiesis lasts, the structural couplíng of the nervous
system to the organism and medium, revealed as a spatio-temporal corres-
pondance between the changes of state of the organism and the changes of
state of the medium (recursively including the organísm and the nervous
system itself), appear to an observer as a semantic couplíng.
In general, then, the reciprocal structUIal coupling of the organism and
nervous system, and their simuitaneous structural coupling to the medium in
which the autopoiesis is realized, are necessary consequences of the contínued
autopoiesis of the organism when these systems have plastic structures.
ONTOGENY AND EVOLUTION
The history of structural changes without loss of identity in an autopoietíc
unity is its ontogeny. The coupling of the changing structure of an auto-
poietic unity to the changing structure of the medium in which ít exists, is
ontogenic adaptation. The ontogenic adaptation of the nervous system ís
learning; or, in other words, given that the structure of the nervous system
is plastic and that the nervous system ís subservíent to the autopoiesis of the
organism which is íntegrates, the determínatíon through structural coupling
along the ontogeny of the organism of the relatíons of neuronal actívíty that
the nervous system generates or maintains invariant, is the phenomenon of
learning. In general, then, due to the homeostatic nature of the autopoietic
organízation that ensures that this organization is actively maintained con-
stant, while the structure of the organism changes, ontogenic adaptation,
and learning if there is a nervous system, are necessary consequences of
ontogeny: if ontogenic structural coupling of organism, nervous system and
medium do not take place, the autopoietic system disintegrates. The same
argument applies to the history of structural change of reproductively
generated autopoietic activities. Such a history is organic evolution
DESCRIPTIVE FALLACY
The process of structural coupling between two or more state-determined
systems, one of which, at least, is autopoietic, as a historical process leading
to the spatio-temporal coincídence between the changes of state of the
coupled systems, arises as a necessary spontaneous consequence of the mutual
operative restrictions to which the state-determined systems submit to each
other during their interactions without loss of identity. This spatio-temporal
coincidence in the changes of state of the coupled systems, however, is
usually described by the observers as a semantic coupling, that is, as if it were

158
H. R.
MATURANA
the result of the cornputation by the autopoietic systern (the organism) of its
own adequate changes of state after gathering the proper information frorn
the environrnent; in other words, as if the changes of state of the autopoietic
systern were deterrnined by the environment. Such a description, though,
does not reflect any phenomenon actually taking place among state deter-
rnined systerns: (a) because the notion of inforrnation is valid only in the
descriptive domain as an expression of the cognitive uncertainty of the
observer, and does not represent any cornponent actually operant in any
rnechanistic phenornenon in the physical space; and (b), because the changes
of state of a state deterrnined systern, be it autopoietic or not, are deterrnined
by its structure, regardless of whether these changes of state are adequate or
not for sorne purpose that the observer rnay consider applicable. Therefore,
any description which irnplies a sernantic coupling between structurally
coupled state·determined systerns, and which is not intended as a mere
rnetaphor, is intrinsically inadequate and fallacious.
Implications
The fact that, as the previous characterizations show, an autopoietic system
in the physical space, and the nervous system that may be one of its cornpo-
nent subsysterns, are closed systerns, determines the occurrence of three
distinct phenornenologicaJ dornains that can be described as follows:
(a) the domain of the internal changes of state of a systern in which all state
transitions occur without the systern losing its identity;
(b) the domain of perturbations of a systern in which the system can inter-
act through its cornponents in the space in which it exists as a unity and, as
a result, undergoes changes of structure without loss of identity; and,
(c) the dornain of interactions of a systern as a (non-cornposite) unity in
the space which its properties as a unity define, regardless of how these
pi operties arise.
The first phenornenological dornain is the dornain of realization of a systern
as a systern; in the case of an autopoietic systern this domain is the dornain of
its autopoiesis to which everything in it is subordinated as a necessary con-
dition for its existence; in the case of the nervous system this domain is the
dornain of its operation as a closed neuronal network. The second phenomen-
ological dornain is the dornain of structural coupling of the organisrn and the
nervous systern to each other and to the rnediurn in which the autopoiesis of
the organisrn is realized, and, therefore, the domain in which the structural
phenornena that we describe as adaptation and learning occur. The third
phenornenological domain is the dornain where cognition takes place as a

ORGANIZATION OF THE LIVING
159
phenomenon of observable rnanipulations of an environrnent, and where the
observer arises as a systern tha.. can rnake descriptions, and alwaysrernain
external to its circurnstances by treating descriptions as objects of further
descriptions.
The following are sorne general irnplications of this.
(a) If the autopoiesis of an autopoietic unity is realized through a distri-
buted structure that ensures a distributed autopoiesis, a simple rnechanical
fragrnentation of the autopoietic unity (self-division or self-reproduction)
produces at least two new autopoietic unities that rnay have identical or
difIerent structures according to how uniforrn was the cornponent's distri·
bution in the original unity. Heredity of organization and sÍfucture with the
possibility of hereditary structural change is, therefore, a necessary conse-
quence of distributed autopoiesis. If there is difIerential realization of auto-
poiesis arnong structurally difIerent autopoietic unities due to disuniforrnities
in the rnediurn in which they exist, evolution is a necessary consequence if
the autopoietic unities are generated through self-division.
(b) AII the states that an autopoietic systern can adopt are states in auto-
poiesis, and are necessarily deterrnined by its organization and structure, not
by the perturbations arising in the rnediurn in which it exists. Cognition, at
whatever level of concreteness or abstraction, as a phenornenon of operation
of the organisrn (as a unity) in its rnediurn, also necessarily consists at the
level of the internal dynarnics of the unity in the actual realization of its
autopoiesis. Therefore, in a strict sense, for any organisrn its cognitive
dornain is its actual dornain of autopoiesis.
(c) Iftwo plastic autopoietic systerns interact, and their structures becorne
ontogenetically coupled as a result of these interactions, a consensual
dornain of conduct is developed between the two organisrns as a dornain of
conduct in which the participation that the conduct of one organism has for
the realization of the autopoiesis of the other organisrn becornes determined
during the interactions through their structural coupling. Such a consensual
dornain of conduct is a linguistic dornain, and as such it is a dornain of
descriptions in which the conduct of one organisrn can be taken by an obser-
ver as a description of the consensual conduct which it elicits in the other
organisrn.
(d) If an organisrn is capable of consensual conduct and of recursively
interacting with its own states (through internal interactions of its closed
nervous systern), and applies the descriptive operation to itself by developing
a consensual dornain with itself through interactions with its own consensual
states, a new phenornenological dornain is generated that is indistinguishable
from that which we call our dornain of self-consciousness.

160
H. R. MATURANA
Comments
THE OBSERVER
Everything said is said by an observer to another observer; furthermore,
the observer can always recursively be an observer of his observation and
stay external to the description of his circumstances. This he can do because
everything he does is mapped in the same domain: the domain of relative
neuronal activity in his closed nervous system. Interactions of the nervous
system with its own states of neuronal activity allow,
in principIe, for
infinite recursion with continuous behavioural change. The domain of descrip-
tions in which the observer arises when in the course of evolution the nervous
system becomes able to recursively interact with its own states, is also a
closed domain.
THE THEORY
The purpose of this thoery is to give the fundamental set of necessary and
sufficient notions capable of explaining all the phenomenology of living
systems. Therefore, no attempt has been made to explain any particular
biological phenomenon; aH particular phenomena should be explainable by
the theory if the proper contingent circumstances of their realization are
taken into consideration. AIso, 1 have made no attempt to give this theory
a mathematical formalism, first, because 1 am incompetent to do it, and
second, because 1 consider that such formalism is necessarily secondary to the
complete conceptual statement of the theory which 1 have here presented.
Basic requirements that the theory satisfies are as follows.
(a) To use only simple operative concepts of immediate validity to any
observer as a natural and as a scientific persono
(b) To state only necessary conditions that cannot be taken for granted.
Thus, when talking of processes of production of components (such as
molecules, polymers, etc.) no statement is made about their physical or chemi·
cal legality, obviously because in nature there only occur those chemical
reactions or physical processes that can occur. Therefore, if a given set of
components cannot generate the processes that constitute an autopoietic
system, they do not constitute an autopoietic system, without this invali-
dating the notion of autopoiesis. A truism is implicit: autopoiesis takes place
whenever it can take place.
(c) To specify only the conditions which generate phenomena that are
isomorphic with the phenomena to be explained, and not with the description
of the phenomena as they appear to the observer.
(d) To provide a mechanistic explanation for al! biological phenomena,
that is, to show that all biological phenomena arise from the interactions of

ORGANIZAnON OF THE LIVING
161
the proper components, and not as an expression of the properties of sorne
components.
(e) To point to conditions that can be realized through neighbourhood
relations without invoking organizing principIes of any kind which pretend
to subordinate the components to the whole. The unity, the whole, is the
result of the interactions of the components through the reaJization of the
organization that defines it, and not an operant factor in the interaction of the
components that generate it. For the purpose of communication, an observer
that behoIds simultaneousIy the unity and its components may describe the
latter with reference to the former, but this is merely a descriptive metaphor
and not a refiection of the constitution of the unity. A unity if composite, is
fully specified by specifying its organization.
To the extent that these basic requirements have been fulfilled, the theory
reveals living systems as having a fundamentally simple organization which
can arise spontaneousIy, and inevitabIy, in any part of the universe when
certain conditions are given. AII the structural compIexity of present-day
living systems is the result of their evolutionary and ontogenic histories, and,
therefore, irrelevant to the description of their organization.
POINTING TO A UNITY
The basic operation that an observer perforrns (although this operation is
not exclusive to observers) is the operation of distinction; that is, the pointing
to a unity by performing an operation which defines its boundaries and
separates it from a background. The observer, then, aIways specifies the
unity that he observes through sorne expIicit or implicit operation of distinc-
tion, and always implies by his observation an organization in it that is com-
patible with its implied or specified boundaries if it is a composite unity. This
is a fundamental point for three reasons.
(a) Given an operation of distinction that separates a unity by specifying
its boudaries, usually there are many organizations that could define a unity
with such boundaries as partiaI boundaries, but which would strictIy specify
different unities. There is, therefore, a communicative ambiguity in pointing
to a unity if no explicit reference is made to its organization or to its being
indicated through a total distinction, and two observers may disagree because
through unspecified boundaries they may imply different unities, even though
they may perform identical overt operations of partiaI distinction under the
belief that they refer to the same unity.
(b) Different operations of total distinction separate different kinds of
unities because they define different kinds of boundaries and, therefore, imply
different organizations.

162
H. R. MATURANA
(c) The organization and structure of a unity specify al1 the operations of
distinction through which it can be separated from the background.
It fol1ows that it is always the task ofthe observer to specify the organization
ofthe unity that he observes, 01 to imply it unambiguously through a complete
operation of distinction.
THE PHYSICAL SPACE
I have said that living systems are autopoietic systems that exist in the
physical space. Strictly, however, I should say that the physical space is the
space in which living systems exist, and that this determines its singularity.
In fact, since autopoietic systems are c10sed homeostatic systems that maintain
constant their organization, al1 their changes of state are changes of state in
autopoiesis and they can only be perturbed through the interactions of their
components. Therefore, the domain of perturbations of an autopoietic system
is defined by the domain of interactions of its components, and exists as a
domain of perturbations only in the domain in which these components existo
This necessatily applies to us too, and, unless we explicitly suppose something
different, this also applies to our cognitive processes. It fol1ows that ifcognitive
processes are operations in autopoiesis, the space of our components is a
limiting space outside of which we cannot step through cognition.
The physical space defined as the space in which living systems exist, then,
is both ontological1y and epistemologically singular; it is ontologically
singular because it is constitutive to the phenomenology of living systems,
and it i~ epistemologically singular because it defines the operational bound-
aries of our cognitive domain.
STRUCTURAL COUPLING
Two plastic systems become structurally coupled as a result oftheir sequential
interactions when their respective structures undergo sequential changes
without loss of identity. Therefore, the structural coupling of two indepen-
dent structural1y plastic unities is a necessary consequence of their inter-
actions, and is greater the more interactions take place. If one of the plastic
systems is an organism and the other its medium, the result is ontogenic
adaptation of the organism to its medium: the changes of state of the organ-
ism correspond to the changes of state of the medium. If the two plastic
systems are organisms, the result of the ontogenic structural coupling is a
consensual domain, that is, a domain of behaviour in which the structural1y
determined changes of state of the coupled organisms correspond to each
other in interlocked sequences.
To
an
observer,
the
states of adaptation between
organisms
and

ORGANIZAnON OF THE LIVING
163
environment, or between organisms in a consensual domain, appear as states
of correspondance between plastic systems that can be described in terms of
functional relations, that is as semantic couplings. The statements go like
this: the function of such and such a structure in the organism is to cause
such and such a change in the environment; or the meaning of the state of
system A for system B is what determines the state to which system B passes
as a result of the interaction of the two systems. Such a description in terms of
functional relations is a description in terms of a semantic coupling because
the structural correspondance between the interacting systems is considered
without reference to its origin, and the changes of state ofthe coupled systems
are treated as if they were determined externally by the perturbations, and
not internally by the respective present structures of the interacting systems.
If the fact that the mutual perturbations constitute only the historical instances
under which the structurally coupled system undergo internally determined
changes of state is neglected, four fundamental phenomena are ignored.
(a) That the result of the structural coupling of two or more systems is
the structural determination ofan interlocked order in the respective changes
of state of the systems that is realized in the form of ordered sequences of
mutually triggering perturbations.
(b) That if it were not the case that perturbations only constitute trigger-
ing circumstances for internally determined changes of state, inadequate
behaviour, that is behaviour that for an observer appears out of context,
would never take place.
(c) That semantic interactions, that is, interactions in which the perturbing
agent determines the new state attained by the perturbed system, do not
take place in the phenomenological domains of state determined systems,
but only occur in the domain of description.
(d) That the domain of descriptions arises as a metadomain from the
establishment of consensual domains by structurally coupled plastic systems
(Maturana, 1970). Although the structural coupling is a historical process,
that is, each structural innovation arises as a modification of a pre-existing
structure and constitutes the basis for the next one, the structurally coupled
unities always correspond to each other in the present. The history of a
system may reveal how its structure arose, but it does not reveal how it
operates in the present: the operation of a system is always the result of its
present structure, not of its history, however, significant or complex this
operation may seem in a historical perspective.
The nervous system operates in the present as a dosed neuronal network
that maintains constant, under continuous external (changes in the medium)
and internal (its own states of neuronal activity) perturbations, certain

164
H. R. MATURANA
relations of neuronal activity (describable either as internal neuronal corre-
lations or as sensory-effector correlations) that have been specified or become
specified through its structural coupling with the organismo If one considers the
complexity of the things that people are able to do, such as talking, abstract
thinking or ethical and political decisions, such a description of the nervous
system seems insufficient. This insufficiency, however, is only apparent
because the ethical, sociological or philosophical complexity of these human
operations lies in their historical significance, not in the nature of the opera-
tions themselves.
The historical significance and, hence, the contextual complexity of any
behaviour, is put in the descriptions by the observer who defines the domain
of re1evance of the observed behaviour in his domain of description. Re1e-
vance, meaning, function, significance, then, are terms which refer to the
observable domain of interactions of the autopoietic unity as a unity ,and not
to its internal autopoietic changes of state. Therefore, the actual complexity
of the operation of the nervous system is, exclusively, the complexity of an
homeostatic elosed neuronal network that generates, or maintains constant,
relations of neuronal activity that may be continuousiy changing through
the structural coupling of the system to the medium (which may recursively
inelude the nervous system itse1f) in which it exists.
SELF-REPRODUCfION
If the organization of an autopoietic unity and the structure which realizes
it are uniformly distributed across the expanse of the unity through a uniform
distribution of components, self-reproduction is a trivial consequence of a
simple mechanical fragmentation of the autopoietic unity, and heredity a
necessary consequences of the uniform distribution of the components. In
modern cells there are molecular components that are usually not uniformly
distributed across the cell due to its internal compartmentalization, and must
become uniformly distributed (through the dynamics of mitosis) before
cellular fragmentation takes place. However, once the uniform distribution
of components is obtained, everything occurs as stated above. No copying
takes place, and no notion of program, of coding or of transmission of infor-
mation is necessary in order to account for the phenomena of self-reproduc-
tion and heredity.
Since it is the autopoietic organization that determines the unity of a living
system, and since it is its structure that determines its mode of realization,
it is intrisically inadequate to consider anyparticular component as responsible
of the properties of the system, and, least of all, of its hereditary character-
istics. Notions such as program, coding or transmission of information do not

ORGANIZATION OF THE LIVING
165
apply to the operation of state-deterrnined systerns. These notions are useful,
though conceptually rnisleading, as rnetaphors in the dornain of description
in which a rnapping is rnade of the observed phenornenon upon the dornain
of purposeful design of the observer. An autopoietic unity, as is universally
the case with every state-deterrnined systern, undergoes only the changes of
state deterrnined by its structure. The viral DNA that is sornetirnes referred
to as a genetic rnessage, does not specify what the host cell will do; the changes
of state that the cell undergoes are deterrnined by the structure of the cel1
under viral perturbation, but not by the viral DNA.
DESCRIPTIONS
A consensual dornain ontogenically established through the structural
coupling between two or more organisrns appears to an observer as an
interlocked dornain of distinctions, indications or descriptions, according to
how
he
consideI s the
behaviour
of the
observed organisrns.
If the
observer considers every distinguishable behaviour as a representation of the
environmental circurnstances which trigger it, he considers the behaviour as
a description, and the consensual dornain in which this behaviour takes place
as a dornain of interocked descriptions of actual environrnental states. What
we do as observers when we rnake a description is exactly that, we behave in
an interlocked rnanner with other observers in a consensual dornain ontogeni-
cally generated through our direct (rnother-child relation) or indirect
(rnernbership in the sarne society) structural coupling. Yet, if the observer
forgets that the interlocked adequacy ofthe rnutually triggeringchanges of state
ofthe rnutually perturbing systerns in the consensual dornain is the resuit of
their ontogenic structural coupling, he rnay describe the consensual dornain
as if it constituted an intrinsicdescriptive systern in which the descriptive inter-
actions gave inforrnation to the organisrns to compute the ad hoc states
needed to handle the described environrnent.
The establishment ofa dornain of descriptions is not exclusive ofautopoietic
systerns. Any col1ection of systerns that can undergo ontogenic structural
coupling can establish a consensual dornain as a closed dornain of interlocked
interactions and, therefore, can participate in a dornain of descriptions in
which every description is a description only within the consensual dornain.
Futherrnore, if a systern that can rnake descriptions can be perturbed by its
own states within the dornain of descriptions, and thus generate descriptions
of a rnediurn that includes its descriptions, a second-order consensual dornain
is produced through the recursive application of descriptions on descriptions,
and an observer is operationally generated. For this to take place, however,
it is necessary that aH perturbing agents, including the descriptions, should

166
H. R. MATURANA
belong to the same c1ass, so that the operation of description could be recur-
sively applied to the product of its application. This is possible in organisms
with a nervous system because the nervous system is a c10se neuronal network
in which all states of activity are states of relative neuronal activity that only
lead to other states of relative neuronal activity, independentIy of the circum-
stances of interactions of the organism in which these states of activity arise,
a condition which necessarily resuIts in the nervous system becoming
recursively structurally coupl.ed to its own structural changes. Since internally
and externally generated states of relative neuronal activity in the nervous
system are indistinguishable for the dynamics of states of the nervous
system, the interactions of the nervous system with its own states that its
c10sed organization implies, become, in the domain of interactions of the
organism, descriptions of descriptions.
LINGUISTIC DOMAIN
A Iinguistic domain is a domain of consensual behaviour, ontogenically
established between at least two structurally plastic organisms, that is usually
described as a domain of semantic interactions. Yet, the semantic value of
an interaction, in whatever domain, is not a property of the interaction, but a
feature of the description that the observer makes by referring to it as if the
changes of state of the interacting systems were determined by their mutual
perturbations, and not by their respective individual structures. Therefore, the
problem of establishing a Iinguistic domain is not the problem of establishing
an operational semantic coupling, but the problem of establishing an onto-
genic structural coupling that generates a consensual domain in which the
coupled plastic systems can undergo an unending series of interlocked
alternating changes of state. In other words, linguistic behaviour is structur-
ally determined behaviour in ontogenically structurally coupled organisms,
in which the structural coupling determines the sequential order of the
mutually triggering alternating changes of state. Semantics exists only in
a metadomain of descriptions as a property projected upon the interacting
systems by the observer, and valid only for him.
Descriptions as linguistic behaviour are no exception to this. The semantic
value of a description exists only in a recursively-generated metadomain of
descriptions of descriptions, not in the domain of operation in which a
description is realized as an actual behaviour. The same happens with self-
consciousness as a subdomain of self-descriptions in a domain of descriptions
of descriptions (Maturana, 1970). In these circumstances, the changes of state
of the nervous system that lead to self-description would not be different
from other changes of state that lead to other descriptions, but would differ

üRGANIZATIüN üF THE LIVING
167
only in the consensual domain in which the descriptions arose and are applied.
It is the recursive application of descriptions in a domain of self-descrip-
tions as the expression of a recursive structural coupling of the nervous
system with its own structure in the sequential changes of state of a single
system, that gives to self-consciousness its uncanny quality of a process
which transforms a single system into two: the changes of state ol' a single
system appear to an observer as if they were taking place through interactions
with another. Otherwise, as occurs with any other behaviour, the determina-
tion of self-consciousness is structural and not semantic.
Conclusions
Although the fundamental conclusions are already contained in the previous
sections, it may be worthwhile to summarize them in the following formo
(a) The constitutive feature of a living system is autopoiesis in the physical
space; the constitutive feature of the nervous system is its condition of being
a closed neuronal network.
(b) AlI changes of state in the living system and in its nervous system are
subordinated to the realization of the autopoiesis of the living system, if
this does not occur the autopoiesis stops and the living system disintegrates.
(c) If the organism and its nervous system are structurally plastic, the
continuous
realization
of the autopoiesis of the
organism
necessarily
results in a structural coupling of the organism and nervous system to each
other, and to the medium in which the autopoiesis is realized.
(d) The result of this structural coupling is that although the organism
operates only in autopoiesis, and the nervous system operates only in generat-
ing internal relations of neuronal activity, each determined by its own
structure, the changes of state of the organism and the nervous system, and
the changes of state of the medium, mutually trigger each other in a manner
that leads to continued autopoiesis. As a result, if an organism were to be taken
out of the medium to which it is structurally coupled, it would go on in its
structurally determined changes of state regardless of their inadequacy to the
changes of state of the new medium, and, eventually, disintegrate.
(e) Descriptions in terms ofinformation transfer, coding and computations
of adequate states, are fallacious because they only reflect the observer's
domain of purposeful design and not the dynamics of the system as a state-
determined system.
(f) The observable complexities of the domain of interactions of an
autopoietic unity as a unity, are complexities proper to the historical circum-
stances in which the changes of state of the unity take place, not to the

168
H. R. MATURANA
processes that constitute the internal changes of state of the unity itself, the
nervous system included. The organization and structure of an autopoietic
unity do not include operational elements proper to the domain in which it
interacts as a unity.
(g) Any recursive operation in an organism, or in its nervous system, is the
application of the same operation on different states of a structurally changing
system with invariant organization, that can take place only because the
results of the application of the repeated operation belong to the same class
of phenomena as the object on which the operation is applied. This is what
obviously takes place in the nervous system which, as a closed neuronal
network, only adopts states of relative neuronal activity that lead to new
states of relative neuronal activity. Such a recursion in the descriptive domain
is necessary to generate self-consciousness as
a
new phenomenological
domain.
References
MATURANA, H. R. (1970). Neurophysiology of cognition. In Cognition a Multiple
View. Paul Garvin (Ed.) Pp. 3-23. New York: Spartan Books.
MATURANA, H. R. & VARELA, F. G. (1973). De máquinas y seres vivos. Editorial
Universitaria, Santiago, Chile.
VARELA, F. G. & MATURANA, H. R. & URIBE, R. B. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organ-
ization of living systems; its characterization and a model. Biosystems, 5, 185.

