Mechatronic Systems Design
MEC301
Asst. Prof. Dr.Ing.
Mohammed Ahmed
mnahmed@eng.zu.edu.eg
goo.gl/GHZZio
Lecture 2: Mechatronic Design Process
Copyright ©2016 Dr.Ing. Mohammed Nour Abdelgwad Ahmed as part of the course work
and learning material. All Rights Reserved.
Where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Zagazig University | Faculty of Engineering | Computer and Systems Engineering Department | Zagazig, Egypt

Mechatronics:  
Synergetic Integration of Different Disciplines 

Mechanical and Information Processing 

Conventional vs. Mechatronic Design 

Mechatronic System Integration 

Multi-Level Control Architecture 
Level 1 
low level control (feedforward, feedback for damping, 
stabilization, linearization) 
Level 2 
high level control (advanced feedback control strategies) 
Level 3 
supervision, including fault diagnosis 
Level 4 
optimization, coordination (of processes) 
Level 5 
general process management 


Mathematical Models 
Mathematical process models for static and dynamic 
behavior are required for various steps in the design 
of mechatronic systems, such as simulation, control 
design, and reconstruction of variables.  
 
There are two ways to obtain these models: 
Theoretical modeling based on first (physical) principles  
Experimental modeling (identification) with measured input 
and output variables 

Simulation Methods 

Real-Time Simulation 

Hardware-In-the-Loop (HIL) 
The hardware-in-the-loop simulation (HIL) is 
characterized by operating real components in 
connection with real-time simulated components.  
 
Usually, the control system hardware and software is 
the real system, as used for series production. The 
controlled process (consisting of actuators, physical 
processes, and sensors) can either comprise 
simulated components or real components, 

PC-Based Hardware-in-the-Loop Simulation 

Control Prototyping 
For the design and testing of complex control 
systems and their algorithms under real-time 
constraints, a real-time controller simulation 
(emulation) with hardware (e.g., off-the-shelf signal 
processor) other than the final series production 
hardware (e.g., special ASICS) may be performed.  
 
The process, the actuators, and sensors can then be 
real. This is called control prototyping 

Real-Time Simulation 

Integrated Design Issues 
Concurrent engineering of the mechatronics 
approach relies heavily on the use of system 
modeling and simulation throughout the design and 
prototyping stages. 
 
It is especially important that it be programmed in a 
visually intuitive environment.  
block diagrams, flow charts, state transition diagrams, and 
bond graphs. 
 

Integrated Design Issues 
Mechatronics is a design philosophy: an integrating 
approach to engineering design. 
 
Mechatronics makes the combination of actuators, 
sensors, control systems, and computers in the 
design process possible. 
 
Starting with basic design and progressing through 
the manufacturing phase, mechatronic design 
optimizes the parameters at each phase to produce a 
quality product in a short-cycle time 

Modeling vs. Experimental Validation 

Hardware and Software Integration 

Concurrent Engineering 
Concurrent engineering is a design approach in which 
the design and manufacture of a product are merged in a 
special way. 
It is necessary that the knowledge and necessary information be 
coordinated amongst different expert groups. 
 
The characteristics of concurrent engineering are 
Better definition of the product without late changes. 
Design for manufacturing and assembly undertaken in the early 
design stage. 
Process on how the product development is well defined. 
Better cost estimates. 
Decrease in the barriers between design and manufacturing. 

Concurrent Engineering 

Mechatronic System Design (MSD) 
Design is an engineering philosophy that can vary 
between different schools of thought. 
 
MSD should follow a well-defined iterative design 
steps that incorporate synergetic design. It  should 
include the following operations: 
1.
User and system requirements analysis 
2.
Conceptual Design 
3.
Mechanical, software,  electronics, and interface design 
4.
System modeling and simulation 
5.
Prototyping and testing 
 

Mechatronic System Block Diagram 

Design Stages 
•
Stage 1: Define the Objective and Specifications 
 
•
Stage 2: Analyze and Design 
 
•
Stage 3: Build and Test 

Stage 1: Define the Objectives & Specifications 
1.
Identify the problem. 
 
2. Research and literature review 
 
3.
Set the initial system specifications. 

Design Stage 2: Analyze and Design 
4. Establish a general block diagram and a flow chart 

Specify system I/O 

Specify control algorithm to use 
5.
Choose appropriate components 

 Sensors and actuators; Controller 

Drive and signal conditioning circuits 
6. Concurrent/Synergistic Design 

Mechanical structure; Electronic system; 
Software/controller; Interface 
7.
Model and simulate the system 

Stage 3: Build and Test 
8. Emulate the controller hardware 
 
9. Build prototype, test, and evaluate (modify if 
needed) 

Synergistic Design 

Mechatronic Design Process 


Computer-Aided Systems: Important Features 
Modeling:  
Block diagrams for working with understandable multi-disciplinary 
models that represent a physical phenomenon.  
 
Simulation:  
Numerical methods for solving models containing differential, discrete, 
linear, and nonlinear equations. 
 
Project Management: 
Database for maintaining project information and subsystem models 
 
for eventual reuse. 
 
Design: 
Numerical methods for constrained optimization of performance 
functions based on model parameters and signals. 

Computer-Aided Systems: Important Features 
Analysis:  
Frequency-domain and time-domain tools 
 
Real-Time Interface:  
A plug-in card is used to replace part of the model with actual hardware 
by interfacing to it with actuators and sensors.  
 
Code Generator: 
Produces efficient high-level source code (such as C/C++) from the block 
diagram. The control code will be compiled and used on the embedded 
processor.  
 
Embedded Processor Interface:  
Communication between the process and the computer-aided 
prototyping environment. 

Mechatronic Key Elements 
Information Systems 
Modeling and Simulation 
Optimization 
Mechanical Systems 
Electrical Systems 
DC and AC Analysis 
Power 
Sensors and actuators 
Real-Time Interfacing 

Information Systems 
Information systems include all aspects for 
information exchange 
Signal processing, control systems, and analysis techniques 
 
The following are essential for mechatronics 
applications 
Modeling and Simulation 
Automatic control 
Numerical methods for optimization.  

Information Systems: Modeling 
Modeling is the process of representing the behavior of a real 
system by a collection of mathematical equations and logic.  
Models can be static or dynamic 
Static models produce no motion, heat transfer, fluid flow, traveling 
waves, or any other changes.  
Dynamic models have energy transfer which results in power flow. This 
causes motion, heat transfer, and other phenomena that change in time. 
Models are cause-and-effect structures—they accept external 
information and process it with their logic and equations to 
produce one or more outputs.  
Parameter is a fixed-value unit of information 
Signal is a changing-unit of information 
Models can be text-based programming or block diagrams 

Information Systems: Simulation 
Simulation is the process of solving the model and is 
performed on a computer. 
 
Simulation process can be divided into three 
sections: 
Initialization 
Iteration, 
Termination. 

Mechanical Systems 
Mechanical systems are concerned with the behavior of 
matter under the action of forces. 
Such systems are categorized as rigid, deformable, or 
fluid in nature. 
Rigid-bodies assume all bodies and connections in the system to be 
perfectly rigid. (i.e. do not deform) 
Fluid mechanics consists of compressible and incompressible fluids. 
Newtonian mechanics provides the basis for most 
mechanical systems and consists of three independent 
and absolute concepts: 
Space, Time, and Mass.  
Force, is also present but is not independent of the other three 

Electrical Systems 
Electrical systems are concerned with the behavior of three 
fundamental quantities: 
Charge, current, and voltage 
 
Electrical systems consist of two categories: 
Power systems and Communication systems 
 
An electric circuit is a closed network of paths through which 
current flows. 
 
Circuit analysis is the process of calculating all voltages and 
currents in a circuit given as is based on two fundamental laws : 
Kirchhoff ’s current law: The sum of all currents entering a node is zero. 
Kirchhoff ’s voltage law: The sum of all voltage drops around a closed loop is 
zero. 

Electrical Systems: Power 
Energy is the capacity to do work various 
Potential, kinetic, electrical, heat, chemical, nuclear, and 
radiant. 
Power is the rate of energy transfer, and in the SI 
unit system, the unit of energy is the joule and the 
unit of power is the watt (1 watt  1 joule per second). 

Sensors 
Sensors are required to monitor the performance of machines and 
processes 
 
Common variables in mechatronic systems are temperature, speed, 
position, force, torque, and acceleration. 
Important characteristics: the dynamics of the sensor, stability, resolution, 
precision, robustness, size, and signal processing. 
 
Intelligent sensors are available that not only sense information but 
process it well 
Progress in semiconductor manufacturing technology has made it possible to 
integrate sensor and the signal processing on one chip 
Sensors are able to ascertain conditions instantaneously and accurately 
These sensors facilitate operations normally performed by the control algorithm, 
which include automatic noise filtering, linearization sensitivity, and self-
calibration.  

Actuators 
Actuation involves a physical action on a machine or  
process. They can transform electrical inputs into 
mechanical outputs such as force, angle, and 
position.  
 
Actuators can be classified into three general groups. 
1.
Electromagnetic actuators, (e.g., AC and DC electrical 
motors, stepper motors, electromagnets) 
2.
Fluid power actuators, (e.g., hydraulics, pneumatics) 
3.
Unconventional actuators (e.g., piezoelectric, 
magnetostrictive, memory metal) 

Real-Time Interfacing 
Real-time interface provides data acquisition and control 
functions for the computer. 
 
Reconstruct a sensor waveform as a digital sequence and 
make it available to the computer software for processing. 
 
The control function produces an analog approximation as a 
series of small steps.  
 
Real-time interfacing includes: 
A/D and D/A conversions 
Analog signal conditioning circuits 
Sampling theory. 

MECHATRONIC APPLICATIONS 

Automotive Industry 
Vehicle diagnostics and monitoring. Sensors to detect the environment; monitor 
engine coolant, temperature and quality; Engine oil pressure, level, and quality; tire 
pressure; brake pressure. 
 
Pressure, temperature sensing in various engine and power locations; exhaust gas 
analysis and control; Crankshaft positioning; Fuel pump pressure and fuel injection 
control; Transmission force and pressure control. 
 
Airbag safety deployment system. Micro-accelerometers and inertia sensors 
mounted on the chassis of the car measures car deceleration in x or y directions can 
assist in airbag deployment.  
 
Antilock brake system, cruise control. Position sensors to facilitate antilock braking 
system; Displacement and position sensors in suspension systems. 
 
Seat control for comfort and convenience. Displacement sensors and micro 
actuators for seat control; Sensors for air quality, temperature and humidity, 
Sensors for defogging of windshields. 
 

Robots 

Aerospace Industry 
Landing gear systems; Cockpit instrumentation; Pressure 
sensors for oil, fuel, transmission; Air speed monitor; Altitude 
determination and control systems. 
 
Fuel efficiency and safety systems; Propulsion control with 
pressure sensors; Chemical leak detectors; Thermal 
monitoring and control systems. 
 
Inertial guidance systems; Accelerometers; Fiber-optic 
gyroscopes for guidance and monitoring. 
 
Automatic guided vehicles, space application; Use of 
automated navigation system for NASA projects; Use of 
automated systems in under water monitoring and control 
 

Consumer Products 

Consumer Industry 
Consumer products such as auto focus camera, 
video, and CD players; Consumer electronic products 
such as washing machines and dish washers. 
 
Video game entertainment systems; Virtual 
instrumentation in home entertainment. 
 
Home support systems; Garage door opener; Sensors 
with heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning 
system; Home security systems. 

Production Machines 

Industrial Systems and Products 
Monitoring and control of the manufacturing process; 
CNC machine tools; Advanced high speed machining and 
quality monitoring. 
 
Rapid prototyping; Manufacturing cost saving by rapid 
creation of models done by CAD/CAM integration and 
rapid prototyping equipment. 
 
Specialized manufacturing process such as the use of 
welding robots; Procedure for automatically 
programming and controlling a robot from CAD data. 
 

3D Printing 

Health Care Industry 
Medical diagnostic systems, non-invasive probes such as 
ultrasonic probe. Disposable blood pressure transducer; 
 
Pressure sensors in several diagnostic probes. Systems to 
control the intravenous fluids and drug flow; 
 
Endoscopic and orthopedic surgery. Angioplasty 
pressure sensor; Respirators; Lung capacity meters. 
 
Other products such as Kidney dialysis equipment; MRI 
equipment. 

Mechatronic System Example: DC Motor 

Conclusion 
Mechatronics design can lead to high quality and cost 
effective products 
Traditional sequential manner do not possess optimum design 
capabilities. 
 
Concurrent design results in the development of 
intelligent and flexible mechatronic system 
 
Increasing demands on the productivity of machine tools 
and their growing technological complexity call for 
improved methods in future product development 
processes. 

Thanks for your attention.
Questions?
Asst. Prof. Dr.Ing.
Mohammed Ahmed
mnahmed@eng.zu.edu.eg
goo.gl/GHZZio
Robotics Research Interest Group (zuR2IG)
Zagazig University | Faculty of Engineering | Computer
and Systems Engineering Department | Zagazig, Egypt
Copyright ©2016 Dr.Ing. Mohammed Nour Abdelgwad Ahmed as part of the course work and learning material. All Rights Reserved.
Where otherwise noted, this work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
Mohammed Ahmed (Asst. Prof. Dr.Ing.)
Mechatronic Systems Design
2 / 1

