
This page intentionally left blank 

MECHANICAL DESIGN OF 
MACHINE ELEMENTS 
AND MACHINES
Second Edition

This page intentionally left blank 

MECHANICAL DESIGN OF 
MACHINE ELEMENTS 
AND MACHINES
A Failure Prevention Perspective 
Second Edition
Jack A. Collins, Henry R. Busby & George H. Staab
The Ohio State University
John Wiley & Sons

VP & EXECUTIVE PUBLISHER
Don Fowley
ACQUISITIONS EDITOR
Michael McDonald
PRODUCTION MANAGER
Dorothy Sinclair
SENIOR PRODUCTION EDITOR
Sandra Dumas
MARKETING MANAGER
Christopher Ruel
SENIOR DESIGNER
Kevin Murphy
PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT SERVICES
Thomson Digital
EDITORIAL ASSISTANT
Renata Marchione
MEDIA EDITOR
Lauren Sapira
COVER PHOTO
Professor Anthony Luscher
This book was set in Times Roman by Thomson Digital and printed and bound by R.R. Donnelley/Willard.
The cover was printed by Phoenix Color.
This book is printed on acid free paper. ∞
Copyright © 2010, 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976
United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, 
NJ 07030-5774, (201)748-6011, fax (201)748-6008, website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use 
in their courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred 
to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return 
instructions and a free of charge return shipping label are available at www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. Outside
of the United States, please contact your local representative.
ISBN-13
978-0-470-41303-6
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Preface
This new undergraduate book, written primarily to support a Junior-Senior level sequence
of courses in Mechanical Engineering Design, takes the viewpoint that failure prevention
is the cornerstone concept underlying all mechanical design activity. The text is presented
in two parts, Part I—Engineering Principles, containing 7 chapters, and Part II—Design
Applications, containing 13 Chapters. Because of the way the book is organized it also
may be conveniently used as the basis for continuing education courses or short-courses
directed toward graduate engineers, as well as a reference book for mechanical designers
engaged in professional practice.
Organization
Part I
introduces the design viewpoint and provides analytical support for the mechani-
cal engineering design task. Analysis is characterized by known material, known shape,
known dimensions and known loading. The results of analyses usually include the calcu-
lation of stresses, strains or existing safety factors. Techniques are presented for failure
mode assessment, material selection, and safety factor selection. A unique chapter on
geometry determination provides basic principles and guidelines for creating efficient
shapes and sizes. A case is made for integration of manufacturing, maintenance, and crit-
ical point inspection requirements at the design stage, before the machine is built.
Part II
expands on the design viewpoint introduced in Part I. Design is a task char-
acterized by known specifications, and nothing more. The results of design usually 
include picking a material, picking a design safety factor, conceiving a shape, and 
determining dimensions that will safely satisfy the design specifications in the “best”
possible way.
Key Text Features
1.
Comprehensive coverage of failure modes. Basic tools are introduced for recognizing
potential failure modes that may govern in any specific design scenario. At a mini-
mum, the topics of elastic deformation, yielding brittle fracture, fatigue, buckling, and
impact should be considered by the instructor.
v
1Chapter 2 presents a condensed and simplified version of sections of Failure of Materials in Mechanical
Design: Analysis Prediction, Prevention. 2nd ed. Wiley, 1993.

2.
Modern coverage of materials selection (Chapter 3). The materials selection concepts
presented introduce some new ideas and are a virtual necessity for any competent de-
sign engineer.
3.
Failure theories and related topics (Chapter 5). Topics which play a significant role in
identifying failure (multiaxial states of stress and stress concentrations) are presented
as a prelude to static and fatigue failure theories as well as brittle fracture and crack
growth.
4.
Guidelines for creating efficient shapes and sizes for components and machines
(Chapter 6). This important chapter, covering material rarely discussed in other 
design textbooks, is a “must” for any modern course covering the design of machine
elements.
5.
Concurrent engineering and “Design-for-X” ideas (Chapter 7). These are important in
modern manufacturing practice and should be introduced in a well-rounded course in
mechanical engineering design.
6.
Conceptual introductions to machine elements (Chapters 8 through 19). Organized
and designed to be especially helpful to students who may have had little or no expo-
sure to machines, structures, or industrial practice, each chapter in Part II follows a
consistent introductory pattern:
• “Uses and Characteristics”—What does it look like? What does it do? What varia-
tions are available?
• “Probable failure modes”—based on practical experience.
• “Typical materials used for the application”—based on common design practice.
These introductory sections are followed in each chapter by detailed discussions about
analyzing, selecting, or designing the component under consideration.
7.
Inclusion of latest available revisions of applicable codes and standards for well-
standardized elements such as gears, rolling-element bearings, V-belts, precision
roller-chain, and others. Selected up-to-date supporting data have been included for
many commercially available components, such as rolling-element bearings, V-belts,
wire rope, and flexible shafts, Many manufacturers’catalogs have been included in
the reference lists.
8.
Clear sketches and detailed tables to support virtually all of the important design and
selection issues discussed.
9.
Illuminating footnotes, anecdotes, experience-based observations, and contemporary-
event illustrations, to demonstrate the importance of good design decision-making.
Worked Examples and Homework Problems
Nearly 100 worked examples have been integrated with the text. Of these worked exam-
ples, about half are presented from a design viewpoint, including about 1⁄4 of the examples
given in Part I, and about 3⁄4 of the examples given in Part II. The remainder are presented
from the more traditional analysis viewpoint.
End-of-chapter problems have been distilled, in great measure, from real design proj-
ects encountered by the author in consulting, research, and short-course interaction with
engineers in industry, then filtered through more than three decades of student homework
assignments and design-course examinations. It is the author's hope that students (and
instructors) will find the problems interesting, realistic, instructional, challenging, and
solvable.
vi / Preface

To supplement the worked examples, a companion web site at www.wiley.com/
college/collins has been developed to provide more than 100 additional variations and 
extensions of the examples worked in the text. Many of the website variations and exten-
sions require solution techniques based on standard computer codes such as MATLAB® or
Mathcad ®.
Additional instructor and student resources, such as errata listings, also are posted at
the website.
Suggestions for Course Coverage
Although it is presumed that the user has had basic courses in Physics, Materials
Engineering, Statics and Dynamics, and Strength of Materials, most concepts from these
courses that are needed for basic mechanical engineering design activity have been sum-
marized and included in Part I, primarily in Chapters 2,3, 4, and 5. Accordingly, an in-
structor has great flexibility in selecting material to be covered, depending upon the
preparation of students coming in the course. For example, if students are well prepared
in strength-of-materials concepts, only the last half of Chapter 4 needs to be covered.
Sections 4.1 through 4.5 may readily be skipped, yet the material is available for refer-
ence. Sections 4.6 through 4.10 contain important design related material not ordinarily
covered in standard strength-of-materials courses.
The three-part introduction to each “elements” chapter makes it possible to offer a
(superficial) descriptive survey course on machine elements by covering only the first few
sections of each chapter in Part II. Although such an approach would not, by itself, be
especially appropriate in educating a competent designer, it would provide the potential
for remarkable flexibility in tailoring a course sequence that could introduce the student
to all machine elements of importance (by assigning the first few sections of each chapter
of Part II), then covering in depth the chapters selected by the supervisory design-faculty-
group, or the instructor, to fit into the designated curricular time frame.
With few exceptions, the machine element chapters (8 through 19) have been written
as stand-alone units, independent of each other, each resting upon pertinent principles dis-
cussed in Part I. This presentation philosophy affords an instructor great flexibility in for-
mulating a sequence of machine-element topics, in any order, that is compatible with his
or her priorities, philosophy, and experience.
Supplements
An instructor’s solution manual is available, providing comprehensive solutions for all
end-of-chapter problems. Please contact your local Wiley representative for details.
Acknowledgments
As time progresses, it is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish one’s own original
thoughts from the thoughts gathered through reading and discussing the works of others.
For those who find their essence in these pages without specific reference, we wish to ex-
press our appreciation. In particular, Professor Collins expresses deep appreciation to
Professors Walter L. Starkey and the late Professor S. M. Marco, who were his professors
while he was a student. Much of their philosophy has no doubt been adopted by Professor
Collins. Professor Starkey's fertile mind created many of the innovative concepts presented
Preface / vii

in Chapters 2, 3, 6, and 7 of this text. Professor Starkey is held in the highest esteem as an
outstanding engineer, innovative designer, inspirational teacher, gentleman, and friend.
Gratitude is also expressed for colleagues at Ohio State who reviewed and contributed
to various parts of the manuscript. In particular, Professor E. O. Dobelin, Professor D. R.
Houser, Professor R. Parker, and Professor Brian D. Harper.
Reviewers always play an important role in the development of any textbook. We
would like to express our appreciation to those who reviewed the first edition of this text
and made valuable comments and suggestions for the second edition, including Richard E.
Dippery, Jr., Kettering University; Antoinette Maniatty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute;
Eberhard Bamberg, University of Utah; Jonathan Blotter, Brigham Young University;
Vladimir Glozman, California State Polytechnic University, Pomona; John P.H. Steele,
Colorado School of Mines; John K. Schueller, University of Florida; and Ken Youssefi,
University of California, Berkeley.
Thanks are also due to Joseph P. Hayton for seeing the benefit in pursuing a second
edition, and Michael McDonald, Editor for carrying through with the project. In addition,
we wish to thank the many other individuals in the John Wiley & Sons, Inc. organization
who have contributed their talents and energy to the production of this book.
Finally, we wish to express our thanks to our wives. In particular, Professor Collins’wife,
JoAnn, for transforming the hand-written pages into a typed manuscript for the first edition
of this text. Professor Collins wishes to dedicate his contributions in this work to his wife, Jo
Ann, his children Mike, (Julie), Jennifer, (Larry), Joan, Greg, (Heather), and his grandchil-
dren, Michael, Christen, David, Erin, Caden, and Marrec.
Jack A. Collins
Henry R. Busby
George H. Staab
viii / Preface

Contents
PART ONE
ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES
ix
Chapter 1
Keystones of Design: Materials
Selection and Geometry Determination
1
1.1
Some Background Philosophy
1
1.2
The Product Design Team
2
1.3
Function and Form; Aesthetics and 
Ergonomics
5
1.4
Concepts and Definition of Mechanical 
Design
6
1.5
Design Safety Factor
7
1.6
Stages of Design
7
1.7
Steps in the Design Process
9
1.8
Fail Safe and Safe Life Design Concepts
9
1.9
The Virtues of simplicity
10
1.10 Lessons Learned Strategy
12
1.11 Machine Elements, Subassemblies, and 
the Whole Machine
12
1.12 The Role of Codes and Standards in the 
Design Process
13
1.13 Ethics in Engineering Design
13
1.14 Units
14
Chapter 2
The Failure Prevention Perspective
22
2.1
Role of Failure Prevention Analysis in
Mechanical Design
22
2.2
Failure Criteria
22
2.3
Modes of Mechanical Failure
23
2.4
Elastic Deformation, Yielding, and Ductile
Rupture
28
2.5
Elastic Instability and Buckling
34
Buckling of a Simple Pin-Jointed Mechanism
35
Buckling of a Pinned-End Column
36
Columns with Other End Constraints
38
Inelastic Behavior and Initially Crooked 
Columns
39
Column Failure Prediction and Design 
Considerations
40
Buckling of Elements Other Than Columns
43
2.6
Shock and Impact
46
Stress Wave Propagation Under Impact Loading 
Conditions
46
Energy Method of Approximating Stress and 
Deflection Under Impact Loading 
Conditions
47
2.7
Creep and Stress Rupture
52
Predictions of Long-Term Creep Behavior
53
Creep under Uniaxial State of Stress
55
Cumulative Creep Prediction
57
2.8
Wear and Corrosion
59
Wear
59
Corrosion
64
2.9
Fretting, Fretting Fatigue, and Fretting 
Wear
66
Fretting Fatigue
67
Fretting Wear
68
Minimizing or Preventing Fretting Damage
69
2.10 Failure Data and the Design Task
70
2.11 Failure Assessment and Retrospective 
Design
70
2.12 The Role of Safety Factors; Reliability 
Concepts
71
2.13 Selection and Use of a Design Safety 
Factor
72
2.14 Determination of Existing Safety Factors 
in a Completed Design: A Conceptual 
Contrast
74

4.6
Stresses Caused by Curved Surfaces in 
Contact
174
4.7
Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies 
and Structures
179
Machine Elements as Springs
180
4.8
Preloading Concepts
186
4.9
Residual Stresses
189
Estimating Residual Stress
190
4.10 Environmental Effects
194
Chapter 5
Failure Theories
205
5.1
Preliminary Discussions
205
5.2
Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain
205
Principal Stresses
205
Stress Cubic Equation
206
Mohr’s Circle Analogy for Stress
210
Strain Cubic Equation and Principal Strains
213
Mohr’s Circle Analogy for Strain
213
Elastic Stress-Strain Relationships 
(Hooke’s Law)
214
5.3
Stress Concentration
215
Stress Concentration Effects
216
Multiple Notches
217
5.4
Combined Stress Theories of Failure
224
Maximum Normal Stress Theory 
(Rankine’s Theory)
225
Maximum Shearing Stress Theory 
(Tresca–Guest Theory)
226
Distortion Energy Theory 
(Huber–von Mises–Hemcky Theory)
227
Failure Theory Selection
229
5.5
Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; 
Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics
233
5.6
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, 
and Fatigue Life
241
Fluctuating Loads and Stresses
242
Fatigue Strength and Fatigue Limit
244
Estimating S-N Curves
246
Stress-Life (S-N) Approach to Fatigue
248
Factors That May Affect S-N Curves
248
Nonzero-Mean Stress
258
Cumulative Damage Concepts and Cycle 
Counting
266
Multiaxial Cyclic Stress
272
Fracture Mechanics (F-M) Approach to Fatigue
273
Crack Initiation Phase
273
Crack Propagation and Final Fracture Phases
276
x / Contents
2.15 Reliability: Concepts, Definitions, and 
Data
76
System Reliability, Reliability Goals, and 
Reliability Allocation
80
Reliability Data
83
2.16 The Dilemma of Reliability Specification 
versus Design Safety Factor
84
Chapter 3
Materials Selection
93
3.1
Steps in Materials Selection
93
3.2
Analyzing Requirements of the 
Application
93
3.3
Assembling Lists of Responsive 
Materials
94
3.4
Matching Responsive Materials to 
Application Requirements; Rank Ordered 
Data Table Method
105
3.5
Matching Responsive Materials to 
Application Requirements; Ashby chart 
Method
114
Chapter 4
Response of Machine Elements to Loads 
and Environments; Stress, Strain, and 
Energy Parameters
123
4.1
Loads and Geometry
123
4.2
Equilibrium Concepts and Free-Body 
Diagrams
123
4.3
Force Analysis
124
4.4
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns 
for Common Types of Loading
126
Direct Axial Stress
128
Bending; Load, Shear, and Moment 
Diagrams
128
Bending; Straight Beam with Pure Moment
133
Bending; Initially Curved Beams
137
Bending; Straight Beam with Transverse 
Forces
142
Direct Shear Stress and Transverse Shear 
Stress
142
Torsional Shear; Circular Cross Section
150
Torsional Shear; Noncircular Cross Section
152
Torsional Shear; Shear Center in Bending
157
Surface Contact Stress
160
4.5
Deflection Analysis Common Types of 
Loading
161
Stored Strain Energy
162
Castigliano’s Theorem
164

Design Issues in Fatigue Life Prediction
280
Fatigue Stress Concentration Factors and 
Notch Sensitivity Index
280
5.7
Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and 
Multiaxial Fatigue Failure Theories
283
Chapter 6
Geometry Determination
305
6.1
The Contrast in Objectives Between 
Analysis and Design
305
6.2
Basic Principles and Guidelines for 
Creating Shape and Size
306
Direct Load Path Guideline
306
Tailored-Shape Guideline
307
Triangle-Tetrahedron Guideline
308
Buckling Avoidance Guideline
309
Hollow Cylinder and I-Beam Guideline
310
Conforming Surface Guideline
310
Lazy-Material Removal Guideline
311
Merging Shape Guideline
313
Strain Matching Guideline
313
Load Spreading Guideline
314
Contents / xi
6.3
Critical Sections and Critical Points
315
6.4
Transforming Combined Stress Failure 
Theories into Combined Stress Design 
Equations
317
6.5
Simplifying Assumptions: The Need and 
the Risk
318
6.6
Iteration Revisited
319
6.7
Fits, Tolerances, and Finishes
323
Chapter 7
Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing 
and Maintenance Requirements
333
7.1
Concurrent Engineering
333
7.2
Design for Function, Performance, and
Reliability
334
7.3
Selection of the Manufacturing Process
334
7.4
Design for Manufacturing (DFM)
337
7.5
Design for Assembly (DFA)
337
7.6
Design for Critical Point Accessibility,
Inspectability, Disassembly, Maintenance, 
and Recycling
339
Chapter 8
Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, 
Keys, and Splines
341
8.1
Uses and Characteristics of shafting
341
8.2
Potential Failure Modes
343
8.3
Shaft Materials
344
8.4
Design Equations–Strength Based
345
8.5
Design Equations–Deflection Based
353
8.6
Shaft Vibration and Critical Speed
358
8.7
Summary of Suggested Shaft Design 
Procedure; General Guidelines for Shaft 
Design
360
8.8
Couplings, Keys, and Splines
361
Rigid Couplings
361
Flexible Coupling
362
Keys, Splines, and Tapered Fits
365
Chapter 9
Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
382
9.1
Uses and Characteristics of Pressurized
Cylinders
382
9.2
Interference Fit Applications
382
9.3
Potential Failure Modes
383
9.4
Materials for Pressure Vessels
383
9.5
Principles from Elasticity Theory
384
9.6
Thin-Walled Cylinders
385
9.7
Thick-Walled Cylinders
386
9.8
Interference Fits: Pressure and Stress
392
9.9
Design for Proper Interference
396
Chapter 10
Plain Bearings and Lubrication
403
10.1 Types of Bearings
403
10.2 Uses and Characteristics of Plain 
Bearings
403
10.3 Potential Failure Modes
404
10.4 Plain Bearing Materials
405
10.5 Lubrication Concepts
405
10.6 Boundary-Lubricated Bearing Design
406
10.7 Hydrodynamic Bearing Design
409
Lubricant Properties
410
PART TWO
DESIGN APPLICATIONS

Tightening Torque; Fastener Loosening
507
Multiply Bolted Joints; Symmetric and 
Eccentric Loading
509
13.5
Rivets
517
Rivet Materials
517
Critical Points and Stress Analysis
518
13.6
Welds
522
Base Metals, Filler Materials, and Weldability
526
Butt Welds
528
Fillet Welds
529
13.7
Adhesive Bonding
538
Joint Design
538
Structural Adhesive Materials
540
Chapter 14
Springs
546
14.1
Uses and Characteristics of Springs
546
14.2
Types of Springs
546
14.3
Potential Failure Modes
548
14.4
Spring Materials
549
14.5
Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; 
Stress, Deflection, and Spring Rate
552
Deflection and Spring Rate
557
Buckling and Surging
559
14.6
Summary of Suggested Helical-Coil 
Spring Design Procedure, and General
Guidelines for Spring Design
562
14.7
Beam Springs (Leaf Springs)
568
14.8
Summary of Suggested Leaf Spring 
Design Procedure
574
14.9
Torsion Bars and Other Torsion Springs
578
14.10 Belleville (Coned-Disk) Springs
581
14.11 Energy Storage in Springs
582
Chapter 15
Gears and Systems of Gears
594
15.1
Uses and Characteristics of Gears
594
15.2
Types of Gears; Factors in Selection
595
15.3
Gear Trains; Reduction Ratios
600
15.4
Potential failure Modes
605
15.5
Gear Materials
607
15.6
Spur Gears; Tooth Profile and Mesh 
Geometry
608
Involute Profiles and Conjugate Action
609
Gearing Nomenclature; Tooth Shape and 
Size
610
Gear-Tooth Systems
612
Mesh Interactions
614
xii / Contents
Loading, Friction, and Lubricant Flow 
Relationships
410
Thermal Equilibrium and Oil Film Temperature 
Rise
416
Design Criteria and Assumptions
419
Suggested Design Procedure
420
10.8 Hydrostatic Bearing Design
425
Chapter 11
Rolling Element Bearings
429
11.1 Uses and Characteristics of Rolling 
Element Bearings
429
11.2 Types of Rolling Element Bearings
430
11.3 Potential Failure Modes
433
11.4 Bearing Materials
433
11.5 Bearing Selection
434
Basic Load Ratings
435
Reliability Specifications
435
Suggested Selection Procedure for Steady 
Loads
436
Suggested Selection Procedure for Spectrum 
Loading
448
Lubrication
451
11.6 Preloading and Bearing Stiffness
453
11.7 Bearing Mounting and Enclosure
457
Chapter 12
Power Screw Assemblies
462
12.1 Uses and Characteristics of Power 
Screws
462
12.2 Potential Failure Modes
466
12.3 Materials
466
12.4 Power Screw Torque and Efficiency
467
12.5 Suggested Power Screw Design Procedure
473
12.6 Critical Points and Thread Stresses
474
Chapter 13
Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
485
13.1 Uses and Characteristics of Joints in 
Machine Assemblies
485
13.2 Selection of Joint Type and Fastening 
Method
485
13.3 Potential Failure Modes
487
13.4 Threaded Fasteners
488
Screw Thread Standards and Terminology
489
Threaded Fastener Materials
492
Critical Points and Thread Stresses
494
Preloading Effects; Joint Stiffness and Gasketed 
Joints
497

15.7
Gear Manufacturing; Methods, Quality, 
and Cost
618
Gear Cutting
618
Gear Finishing
620
Cutter Path Simulation, Mesh Deflection, 
and Profile Modification
621
Accuracy Requirements, Measurement Factors, 
and Manufacturing Cost Trends
622
15.8
Spur Gears; Force Analysis
624
15.9
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design
626
Tooth Bending: Simplified Approach
626
Tooth Bending: Synopsis of AGMA Refined 
Approach
631
Surface Durability: Hertz Contact Stresses and 
Surface Fatigue Wear
639
Surface Durability: Synopsis of AGMA Refined 
Approach
641
15.10 Lubrication and Heat Dissipation
645
15.11 Spur Gears; Summary of Suggested 
Design Procedure
647
15.12 Helical Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth 
Geometry, and Mesh Interaction
648
15.13 Helical Gears; Force Analysis
653
15.14 Helical Gears; Stress Analysis and 
Design
654
15.15 Helical Gears; Summary of Suggested 
Design Procedure
656
15.16 Bevel Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth 
Geometry, and Mesh Interaction
662
15.17 Bevel Gears; Force Analysis
665
15.18 Bevel Gears; Stress Analysis and Design
666
15.19 Bevel Gears; Summary of Suggested 
Design Procedure
668
15 20 Worm Gears and Worms; Nomenclature, 
Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction
675
15.21 Worm Gears and Worms; Force Analysis 
and Efficiency
679
15.22 Worm Gears and Worms; Stress Analysis 
and Design
682
15.23 Worm Gears and Worms; Suggested 
Design Procedure
684
Chapter 16
Brakes and Clutches
701
16.1
Uses and Characteristics of Brakes 
and Clutches
701
16.2
Types of Brakes and Clutches
702
16.3
Potential Failure Modes
704
16.4
Brake and Clutch Materials
704
Contents / xiii
16.5
Basic Concepts for Design of Brakes 
and Clutches
705
16.6
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes
708
16.7
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes
719
16.8
Band Brakes
727
16.9
Disk Brakes and Clutches
732
Uniform Wear Assumption
733
Uniform Pressure Assumption
735
16.10 Cone Clutches and Brakes
738
Chapter 17
Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible 
Shafts
746
17.1
Uses and Characteristics of Flexible 
Power Transmission Elements
746
17.2
Belt Drives; Potential Failure Modes
750
17.3
Belts; Materials
752
17.4
Belt Drives; Flat Belts
752
17.5
Belt Drives; V-Belts
757
17.6
Belt Drives; Synchronous Belts
769
17.7
Chain Drives; Potential Failure Modes
769
17.8
Chain Drives; Materials
770
17.9
Chain Drives; Precision Roller Chain
771
17.10 Roller Chain Drives; Suggested Selection
Procedure
774
17.11 Chain Drives; Inverted-Tooth Chain
779
17.12 Wire Rope; Potential Failure Modes
779
17.13 Wire Rope; Materials
782
17.14 Wire Rope; Stresses and Strains
782
17.15 Wire Rope; Suggested Selection 
Procedure
786
17.16 Flexible Shafts
791
Chapter 18
Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
798
18.l
Uses and Characteristics of Flywheels
798
18.2
Fluctuating Duty Cycles, Energy 
Management, and Flywheel inertia
799
18.3
Types of Flywheels
804
18.4
Potential Failure Modes
805
18.5
Flywheel Materials
805
18.6
Spoke-and-Rim Flywheels
806
Stresses in a Rotating Free Ring
807
Bending Stresses in Flywheel Rim
808
Spoke-Axial Tensile Stresses
809
18.7
Disk Flywheels of Constant Thickness
809
18.8
Disk Flywheels of Uniform Strength
815

19.5
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft 
Design Procedure
826
Chapter 20
Completing the Machine
843
20.1
Integrating the Components; Bases, 
Frames, and Housings
843
20.2
Safety Issues; Guards, Devices, and 
Warnings
850
20.3
Design Reviews; Releasing the Final 
Design
855
xiv / Contents
18.9
Uniform-Strength Disk Flywheel with 
a Rim
816
18.10 Flywheel-to-Shaft Connections
820
Chapter 19
Cranks and Crankshafts
824
19.1
Uses and Characteristics of Crankshafts
824
19.2
Types of Crankshafts
825
19.3
Potential Failure Modes
826
19.4
Crankshaft Materials
826
Table A-4
Section Properties of Selected S 
(Standard 1) Shapes
870
Table A-5
Section Properties of Selected C 
(Channel) Shapes
871
Table A-6
Section Properties of Selected Equal-Leg 
L (Angle) Shapes
872
NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
859
Table A-1
Coefficients of Friction
864
Table A-2
Mass Moments of Inertia J and Radii of
Gyration k for Selected Homogeneous Solid
Bodies Rotating About Selected Axes, as
Sketched
867
Table A-3
Section Properties of Selected W 
(Wide Flange) Shapes
868
APPENDIX
REFERENCES
873 
PHOTO CREDITS
881 
INDEX
883

MECHANICAL DESIGN OF 
MACHINE ELEMENTS 
AND MACHINES

This page intentionally left blank 

PART
1
ONE
Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and
Geometry Determination
Do not go where the path may lead, 
go instead where there is no path and leave a trail.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Chapter 1
ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES
1.1 Some Background Philosophy
The first objective of any engineering design project is the fulfillment of some human need
or desire. Broadly, engineering may be described as a judicious blend of science and art in
which natural resources, including energy sources, are transformed into useful products,
structures, or machines that benefit humankind. Science may be defined as any organized
body of knowledge. Art may be thought of as a skill or set of skills acquired through a
combination of study, observation, practice, and experience, or by intuitive capability or
creative insight. Thus engineers utilize or apply scientific knowledge together with artistic
capability and experience to produce products or plans for products.
A team approach is nearly always used in modern industrial practice, enabling engi-
neers from many disciplines, together with marketing specialists, industrial designers, and
manufacturing specialists, to integrate their special credentials in a cooperative cross-func-
tional product design team effort.1 Mechanical engineers are almost always included in
these teams, since mechanical engineers have broad training in principles and concepts re-
lating to products, machines, and systems that perform mechanical work or convert energy
into mechanical work.
One of the most important professional functions of mechanical engineers is mechan-
ical design, that is, creating new devices or improving existing devices in an attempt to
provide the “best,” or “optimum” design consistent with the constraints of time, money,
and safety, as dictated by the application and the marketplace. Newcomers to mechanical
1See 1.2.

design activity, even those with well-developed analytical skills, are often at first frustrated
to find that most design problems do not have unique solutions; design tasks typically have
many possible approaches from which an “optimum” must be chosen. Experienced de-
signers, on the other hand, find challenge and excitement in the art of extracting a “best”
choice from among the many potential solutions to a design problem. Transformation of
the frustrations of a newcomer into the excitement experienced by a successful seasoned
designer depends upon the adoption of a broadly based design methodology and practice
in using it. It is the objective of this text to suggest a broadly based design methodology
and demonstrate its application by adapting it to many different important engineering de-
sign scenarios. Practice in using it must be supplied by the reader.
1.2 The Product Design Team
Before any of the engineering design methods, concepts, or practices described in this text-
book can be put to productive use, it is necessary to first translate customer needs or de-
sires, often vague or subjective, into quantitative, objective engineering specifications.
After clear specifications have been written, the methods presented in this text provide
solid guidelines for selecting materials, establishing geometries, and integrating parts and
subassemblies into a whole machine configuration that will safely and reliably meet both
engineering and marketing goals. The task of translating marketing ideas into well-defined
engineering specifications typically involves interaction, communication, and understand-
ing among marketing specialists, industrial designers, financial specialists, engineering de-
signers, and customers,2 cooperatively participating in a cross-functional product design
team.3 For smaller companies, or smaller projects, the team functions just listed may be
vested in fewer team members by assigning multiple-function responsibility to one or more
participants.
The first steps in translating customer needs or marketplace opportunities into engi-
neering design specifications are usually managed by marketing specialists and industrial
designers. Marketing specialists on the product design team typically work directly with
customers to bring a sharper focus to perceived needs, to establish marketing goals, to sup-
ply supportive research and business decision-making data, and to develop customer con-
fidence that their needs can be efficiently met on schedule.
Industrial designers on the team are responsible for creating an initial broad-based
functional description of a proposed product design, together with the essentials of a visual
2 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
2It has become common practice to include customers in product design teams. The argument for doing so is
the belief that products should be designed to reflect customers’ desires and tastes, so it is efficient to interac-
tively incorporate customer perceptions from the beginning (see ref. 1). On the other hand, an argument has
been made that customers do not lead companies to innovation, but rather into refining existing products. Since
technical innovation often wins the marketplace in today’s business world, companies that concentrate solely
on following customer perceptions and desires, rather than leading customers to innovative new ideas, are at
risk.
3An interesting side issue related to the formation of a product design team lies in the task of choosing a team
leader without generating interpersonal conflicts among the team members. It has been argued that choosing a
team leader is the most important decision that management will make when setting up a product design team
(see ref. 1, p. 50). Others have observed that good followership is as important to team success as good leader-
ship (see ref. 2). The qualities that typically characterize good leaders are, in great measure, the same qualities
found in effective followers: intelligence, initiative, self-control, commitment, talent, honesty, credibility, and
courage. Followership is not a person but a role. Recognition that leaders and followers are equally important
in the activities of an effective cross-functional product design team avoids many of the counterproductive 
conflicts that arise in teams of diverse participants.

concept that embodies appealing external form, size, shape, color, and texture.4 Artistic ren-
derings and physical models5 are nearly always developed as a part of this process. In de-
veloping an initial product design proposal, industrial designers must consider not only
broad functional requirements and marketing goals, but also aesthetics, style, ergonomics,6
company image, and corporate identity. The result of this effort is usually termed a product
marketing concept.
A good product marketing concept contains all pertinent information about the pro-
posed product that is essential to its marketing, but as little information as possible about
details of engineering design and manufacturing, so as not to artificially constrain the en-
suing engineering decision-making processes. This policy, sometimes called the policy of
least commitment, is recommended for application throughout the engineering design and
manufacturing stages as well, to allow as much freedom as possible for making down-
stream decisions without imposing unnecessary constraints.
Engineering designers on the product design team have the responsibility of identify-
ing the engineering characteristics that are directly related to customer perceptions and
desires. Describing the potential influences of engineering characteristics on the market-
ing goals, and evaluating the product design proposal in measurable terms, is also an en-
gineering design function. Ultimately, engineering specifications for designing a practical,
manufacturable product that is safe, cost-effective, and reliable are primarily the responsi-
bility of the engineering designer on the team.
To implement the work of a cross-functional product design team, it is usually neces-
sary to establish a set of planning and communication routines that focus and coordinate
skills and experience within the company. These routines are formulated to stimulate design,
manufacturing, and marketing departments to propose products that customers want to pur-
chase, and will continue to purchase. One matrix-based model for interfunctional planning,
communication, and evaluation is called the house of quality.7 The principles underlying the
house of quality paradigm apply to any effort toward establishing clear relationships be-
tween manufacturing functions and customer satisfaction that are not easy to visualize di-
rectly. Figure 1.1 illustrates a fraction of one subchart8 that embodies many of the house of
quality concepts, and provides a sequence of steps for answering the following questions:
1.
What do customers want?
2.
Are all customer preferences equally important?
3.
Will delivering perceived needs yield a competitive advantage?
4.
How can the product be effectively changed?
5.
How much do engineering proposals influence customer-perceived needs?
6.
How does an engineering change affect other characteristics?
Building a house of quality matrix to answer these questions begins with customer
perceptions, called customer attributes (CAs). Customer attributes are a collection of cus-
tomer phrases describing product characteristics deemed to be important. For the car door
example of Figure 1.1, the CAs shown at the left boundary include “easy to close,” “stays
4See ref. 1, p. 8.
5At this conceptual stage, models are usually crude and nonfunctional, although some may have a few moving
parts.
6Ergonomics is the study of how tools and machines can best be fitted to human capabilities and limitations.
The terms human factors engineering and human-machine systems have also been used in this context.
7See ref. 1. The house of quality concepts presented here are extensively paraphrased or quoted from ref. 3.
8Extracted from ref. 3.
The Product Design Team 3

open on a hill,” “doesn’t leak in rain,” and “allows no road noise.” Typical product appli-
cations would define 30 to 100 CAs. The relative importance of each attribute, as evalu-
ated by the customer, is also included, as shown in Figure 1.1. The importance-weighting
numbers, shown next to each attribute, are usually expressed as percentages, where the
complete list of all attributes totals 100 percent.
Customer evaluations of how the proposed product (car door) compares with compet-
itive products are listed at the right side of the matrix. These evaluations, ideally based on
scientific surveys of customers, identify opportunities for improvement and ways to gain
competitive advantage.
To integrate pertinent engineering characteristics (ECs) into the house of quality, the
product design team lists across the top side of the matrix the ECs that are thought likely
to affect one or more of the CAs. Engineering characteristics should describe the product
in calculable or measurable terms, and should be related directly to one or more customer
perceptions.
The cross-functional design team next fills in the body of the house (the relationship
matrix), reaching a consensus about how much each engineering characteristic affects each
of the customer attributes. Semiquantitative symbols or numerical values are inserted into
the matrix to establish the strengths of the relationships. In Figure 1.1 the semiquantitative
symbols represent the relationships as “strong positive,” “medium positive,” “medium neg-
ative,” or “strong negative.”
Once the product design team has established the relationship strengths linking
engineering characteristics to customer attributes, governing variables and objective
measures are listed, and target values are established. Compromises in target values are
4 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
– Energy to close door
+ Check force on level ground
+ Check force on 10% slope
+Door seal resistance
+ Road noise reduction
Relative importance
ENGINEERING
CHARACTERISTICS
OPEN-CLOSE
EFFORT
SEALING-
INSULATION
...
...
...
...
...
...
... ... ...
...
7
5
3
2
11
9
9.5
12
12
11
6
6
7
3
2
2
9
lb/ft
ftlb lb
Measurement units
lb
db
5
6
EASY TO OPEN
& CLOSE DOOR
ISOLA-
TION
Objective
measures
CUSTOMER
ATTRIBUTES
                         Relationships
Strong positive
Medium positive
Medium negative
Strong negative
Our car
A's car
B's car
Customer perceptions
1     2     3      4    5
Easy to close from outside
Stays open on a hill
Our car door
A's car door
B's car door
Doesn't leak in rain
No road noise
Figure 1.1
Example of a house of
quality matrix related to
the redesign of an auto-
motive door. (Reprinted
by permission of Harvard
Business Review. Exhibit
from ref. 3. Copyright ©
1998 by the Harvard
Business School Publish-
ing Corporation; all
rights reserved.)

commonplace because all target values cannot usually be reached at the same time in any
real machine.
Finally, the team consensus on quantitative target values is summarized and compiled
into initial engineering specifications. As noted throughout this textbook, engineering
specifications provide the basis for in-depth engineering design tasks required to produce
a practical, manufacturable product that is safe, cost-effective, reliable, and responsive to
customer needs and desires.
1.3 Function and Form; Aesthetics and Ergonomics
Traditionally, the connection between function and form has been direct; the form of a
product need only suit its function. Historically, standardized simple geometry, without
ornamentation, was nearly always chosen to accommodate the engineering design and
production of reliable, durable, cost-effective products that would meet the engineering
specifications. More recently, however, it has been recognized that the demand for a
new or revised product depends heavily upon customer perceptions and marketplace
acceptance, as well as technical functionality. This recognition has led many contem-
porary companies to organize cross-functional product design teams9 that include mar-
keting specialists and industrial designers as well as design and manufacturing
engineers, to bring the marketing aspects more to the foreground. This approach seems
to result in enhanced customer appeal engendered by integrating aesthetic appearance,
perspective, proportion, and style at an early design stage; the attractive shell of a prod-
uct often plays an important marketing role. To implement decisions on appearance and
style, three-dimensional-graphics computer programs now make it possible to simulate
a proposed product’s appearance on the screen and rapidly make desired changes with
vivid clarity.
In addition to assuring that technical performance specifications are met, and that the
product has customer appeal, it is also necessary for a designer to make sure that the pro-
posed machine configuration and control features are well matched to human operator per-
formance capabilities.
The activity of designing user-friendly machines for safe, easy, productive use is
called ergonomics or human factors engineering. A key concept in ergonomic design is
that human operators exhibit a wide variation in stature, weight, physical strength, visual
acuity, hearing ability, intelligence, education, judgment, endurance, and other human at-
tributes. It becomes necessary, therefore, to provide machine system features that match
potential user attributes, and protect operators against injury resulting from operator error
or machine malfunction. Because most products and systems are designed for use by an
array of people, rather than for use by one specific individual, it becomes necessary to ac-
commodate the whole range of strengths and weaknesses of the potential user population.
To accomplish this objective, a designer must be well informed about anthropometrics,10
about the psychology of human behavior,11 and about how to integrate these factors with
technical requirements in order to achieve a safe, productive machine.
Anthropometric constraints upon the configuration of products or systems are widely
discussed in the literature.12 Typically, to properly design a machine for efficient human
Function and Form; Aesthetics and Ergonomics 5
9See 1.2.
10The study, definition, and measurement of human body dimensions, motions, and limitations.
11Few engineers are trained in the concepts of industrial psychology. Designers are well advised to consult 
industrial psychology specialists to help with this task.
12See, for example, ref. 1 or ref. 4.

interaction, anthropometric data on human body size, posture, reach, mobility, force,
power, foot strength, hand strength, whole-body strength, response speed, and/or response
accuracy may be required. Quantitative information on most of these human attributes is
available. In some cases, computer simulation models have been developed13 to help eval-
uate the physical demands placed upon the operator by a proposed design scenario, and to
supply the necessary anthropometric data to evaluate the proposed design (and possible
redesigns).
Anticipating potential operator errors, and designing a machine or system to accom-
modate them without serious consequences, is also an important part of effective
ergonomic design. Guidelines for avoiding serious consequences resulting from operator
errors include:
1.
Survey the machine system to identify potential hazards, then design the hazards out
of the product. Be vigilant in prototype testing in order to uncover and correct any
overlooked hazards.
2.
Design equipment so that it is easier to use safely than unsafely.
3.
Make design decisions that are compatible with stereotypical human expectations. For
example,
a. Clockwise rotation of rotary control knobs should correspond to increased output.
b. Moving a control lever forward, upward, or to the right should correspond to in-
creased output.
4.
Locate and orient controls in such a way that the operator is unlikely to accidentally
strike them, or inadvertently move them, in a normal operational sequence.
5.
Where needed, recess or shield controls, or provide physical barriers to avoid inad-
vertent actuation.
6.
Provide extra resistance when a control reaches a hazardous range of operation, so that
an unusual human effort is required for further actuation.
7.
Provide interlocks between or among controls so that prior operation of a related con-
trol is required before the critical control can be activated.
8.
When consequences of inadvertent actuation are potentially grave, provide covers,
guards, pins, or locks that must be removed or broken before the control can be
operated.14
1.4 Concepts and Definitions of Mechanical Design
Mechanical design may be defined as an iterative decision-making process that has as its
objective the creation and optimization of a new or improved mechanical engineering sys-
tem or device for the fulfillment of a human need or desire, with due regard for conserva-
tion of resources and environmental impact. The definition just given includes several key
ideas that characterize all mechanical design activity. The essence of engineering, espe-
cially mechanical design, is the fulfillment of human (customer) needs and desires.
Whether a design team is creating a new device or improving an existing design, the
6 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
13See, for example, ref. 4.
14For example, provide a padlock feature on an electrical power switchbox so a maintenance person may 
install a personal lock to assure that it cannot be changed from the off position by someone else. Also, integral
warning tags should advise that the personal lock must be removed by the same maintenance person who 
installed it before power is restored.

objective is always to provide the “best,” or optimum, combination of materials and geom-
etry. Unfortunately, an absolute optimum design can rarely be realized because the cri-
teria of performance, life, weight, cost, safety, and so on place counter-opposing
requirements upon the materials and geometry proposed by the designer. Yet competition
often demands that performance be enhanced, life be extended, weight be reduced, cost be
lowered, or safety be improved. Not only must a design team compete in the marketplace
by optimizing the design with respect to the criteria just noted, but it must respond re-
sponsibly to the clear and growing obligation of the global technical community to con-
serve resources and preserve the earth’s environment.
Iteration pervades design methodology. The keystone objectives of all mechanical de-
sign activity are (1) selection of the best possible material and (2) determination of the best
possible geometry for each part. During the first iteration, engineering designers concen-
trate on meeting functional performance specifications15 by selecting potential materials
and geometric arrangements that will provide strength and life adequate for the loads, en-
vironment, and potential failure modes governing the application. A reasonable design
safety factor is typically chosen at this stage to account for uncertainties (see 1.5).
Preliminary considerations of manufacturing methods are also included in the first itera-
tion. The second iteration usually establishes all nominal dimensions and detailed material
specifications to safely satisfy performance, strength, and life requirements. The third it-
eration audits the second-iteration design from the perspectives of fabrication, assembly,
inspection, maintenance, and cost. The fourth iteration includes careful establishment of
fits and tolerances, modifications resulting from the third-iteration audits, and a final check
on the safety factor to assure that strength and life are suitable for the application, but that
materials and resources are not being wasted.
1.5 Design Safety Factor
Uncertainties and variabilities always exist in design predictions. Loads are often variable
and inaccurately known, strengths are variable and sometimes inaccurately known for cer-
tain failure modes or certain states of stress, calculation models embody assumptions that
may introduce inaccuracies in determining dimensions, and other uncertainties may result
from variations in quality of manufacture, operating conditions, inspection procedures, and
maintenance practices. To provide safe, reliable operation in the face of these variations
and uncertainties, it is common practice to utilize a design safety factor to assure that the
minimum strength or capacity safely exceeds the maximum stress or load for all foresee-
able operating conditions.16 Design safety factors, always greater than 1, are usually cho-
sen to have values that lie in the range from about 1.15 to about 4 or 5, depending on
particular details of the application, as discussed in Chapter 2.
1.6 Stages of Design
Mechanical design activity in an industrial setting embodies a continuum effort from ini-
tial concept to development and field service. For discussion, the continuum of design ac-
tivity may be subdivided into four stages, arbitrarily designated here as (1) preliminary
Stages of Design 7
15Translating perceived customer needs or desires into quantitative engineering performance specifications is a
responsibility of the product design team. See 1.1 and 1.2.
16As discussed in Chapter 2, statistical methods (reliability methods) may be used in some cases to achieve the
same goal.

design, (2) intermediate design, (3) detail design, and (4) development and field service.
Although some might argue that stage (4), development and field service, goes beyond de-
sign activity, it is clear that in the total life cycle of a product, development and field ser-
vice data play important roles in product improvement, and therefore become an important
part of the iterative design procedure.
Preliminary design, or conceptual design, is primarily concerned with synthesis, eval-
uation, and comparison of proposed machines or system concepts. A “black-box” approach
is often used, in which reasonable experience-based performance characteristics are as-
signed to components or elements of the machine or system, followed by an investigation
of integrated system behavior, without much regard for the details within the “black boxes.”
Gross simplifying assumptions and sound experience-based engineering judgments are usu-
ally necessary to complete preliminary design analyses in an acceptably short period of
time. Overall system analyses, including force analysis, deflection analysis, thermodynamic
analysis, fluid mechanic analysis, heat transfer analysis, electromechanic analysis, or con-
trol system analysis may be required at the preliminary design stage. Configurational draw-
ings, or perhaps just free-hand sketches, are usually sufficient to communicate preliminary
design concepts. Proprietary software has been developed by many organizations to imple-
ment the preliminary design and proposal presentation stage, especially for cases in which
existing product lines need only be modified to meet new specifications. The result of the
preliminary design stage is the proposal of a likely-successful concept to be designed in
depth to meet specified criteria of performance, life, weight, cost, safety, or others.
Intermediate design, or embodiment design, embraces the spectrum of in-depth engi-
neering design of individual components and subsystems for the already preselected ma-
chine or system. Intermediate design is vitally concerned with the internal workings of the
black boxes, and must make them work as well or better than assumed in the preliminary
design proposal. Material selection, geometry determination, and component arrangement
are important elements of the intermediate design effort, and appropriate consideration
must be given to fabrication, assembly, inspection, maintenance, safety, and cost factors as
well. Gross simplifying assumptions cannot be tolerated at this stage. Good engineering
assumptions are required to produce a good design and careful attention must be paid to
performance, reliability, and life requirements, utilizing basic principles of heat transfer,
dynamics, stress and deflection analysis, and failure prevention analysis. Either a carefully
chosen safety factor must be incorporated into the design at this stage or, if data are avail-
able for doing so, properly established reliability specifications may be quantitatively re-
flected in the selection of materials and dimensions. Engineering drawings made to scale
are an integral part of intermediate design. They may be made with instruments or by uti-
lizing a computer-aided drafting system. Computer codes are widely used to implement
all aspects of intermediate design activity. The result of the intermediate design stage is
establishment of all critical specifications relating to function, manufacturing, inspection,
maintenance, and safety.
Detail design is concerned mainly with configuration, arrangement, form, dimen-
sional compatibility and completeness, fits and tolerances, standardization, meeting spec-
ifications, joints, attachment and retention details, fabrication methods, assemblability,
producibility, inspectability, maintainability, safety, and establishing bills of material and
purchased parts. The activities of detail design usually support the critical intermediate de-
sign decisions, but detail design does not usually involve making critical simplifying as-
sumptions or selecting materials or dimensions that are critical in terms of strength,
deflection, or life of a component. Although detail design is done largely by nonengineers,
it is important that the engineering designer remain informed and vigilant throughout the
detail design phase. The result of the detail design stage is a complete set of drawings and
specifications, including detail drawings of all parts, or an electronic CAD file, approved
8 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination

by engineering design, production, marketing, and any other interacting departments,
ready for production of a prototype machine or system.
Development and field service activities follow in sequence after the production of a
prototype machine or system. Development of the prototype from a first model to an ap-
proved production article may involve many iterations to achieve a product suitable for
marketing. The product design team should remain fully engaged with all design modifi-
cations required during the development phase, to achieve an optimum production article.
Field service information, especially warranty service data on failure modes, failure rates,
maintenance problems, safety problems, or other user-experience performance data,
should be channeled back to the product design team for future use in product improve-
ment and enhancement of life cycle performance. The lessons-learned strategy discussed
in 1.10 should be made an integral part of the life cycle product improvement effort.
1.7 Steps in the Design Process
Another perspective on design methodology may be gained by examining the steps an en-
gineering designer might take in designing a machine, a machine part, or a mechanical sys-
tem. Although the sequence of steps presented will be found suitable for many design
scenarios, the order may change, depending upon the details of the design task. The real
usefulness of the list of basic design steps presented in Table 1.1 lies in the suggestion of
a generalized methodology that may be used to implement the design process. In follow-
ing through the list of steps in Table 1.1, it becomes clear that step VII has special signif-
icance, since it must be completely repeated for each and every part of a machine. Step
VII, therefore, is outlined in greater detail in Table 1.2.
1.8 Fail Safe and Safe Life Design Concepts
Catastrophic failures of machines or systems that result in loss of life, destruction of prop-
erty, or serious environmental degradation are simply unacceptable to the human commu-
nity, and, in particular, unacceptable to the designers of such failed machines or systems.
Yet it is evident from studying the probability distributions of material strengths corre-
sponding to all failure modes, of loading spectra in all real applications, of environmental
interactions, and of many other possible uncertain influences that a designer can never
provide a design of 100 percent reliability, that is, she or he can never provide a design ab-
solutely guaranteed not to fail. There is always a finite probability of failure. To address
this frustrating paradox the design community has developed two important design con-
cepts, both of which depend heavily upon regular inspection of critical points in a machine
or structure. These design concepts are called fail safe design and safe life design.
The fail safe design technique provides redundant load paths in the structure so that if
failure of a primary structural member occurs, a secondary member is capable of carrying
the load on an emergency basis until failure of the primary structure is detected and a re-
pair can be made.
The safe life design technique is to carefully select a large enough safety factor and
establish inspection intervals to assure that the stress levels, the potential flaw sizes, and
the governing failure strength levels of the material combine to give such a slow crack
growth rate that the growing crack will be detected before reaching a critical size for
failure.
Both fail safe and safe life design depend upon inspectability, the ability to inspect crit-
ical points in a machine after it is fully assembled and placed in service. It is imperative that
Fail Safe and Safe Life Design Concepts 9

designers consider inspectability at all stages of design, starting with machine component
design, carrying through subassembly design, and design of the whole machine.
1.9 The Virtues of Simplicity
Beginning the design of a machine, a subassembly, or an individual part requires a clear
understanding of the intended function of the device to be designed. Typically, the func-
tion of an individual part is not identical to the function of the machine as a whole; indi-
vidual parts, with their inherent special functions, combine to produce the desired overall
function of their assembly or machine. Each part in a machine is important to the whole,
but each part also has a life (functionality) of its own.
Before determining the numerical dimensions of a part, its configuration must be
established qualitatively. The configuration of a part is usually visualized by making a
10 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
TABLE 1.1 Fundamental Steps in the Design of a Machine
I.
Determine precisely the function to be performed by the
machine, and, in turn, by each subassembly and part.
II.
Select the energy source best suited to driving the ma-
chine, giving special attention to availability and cost.
III.
Invent or select suitable mechanisms and control systems
capable of providing the functions defined, utilizing the
selected energy source.
IV.
Perform pertinent supporting engineering analyses, as re-
quired, including thermodynamics, heat transfer, fluid me-
chanics, electromechanics, control systems, and others.
V.
Undertake kinematic and dynamic analyses to determine
the important displacements, velocities, and accelerations
throughout the machine and all of its parts.
VI.
Conduct a global force analysis to determine or estimate
all forces acting on the machine, so that subsequent local
force analyses may be undertaken, as needed, in the de-
sign of the component parts.
VII.
Carry through the design of each of the individual parts
required to make up the complete machine. Remember
that the iterative nature of the design process implies that,
for each part, several tries and changes are usually neces-
sary before determining final specifications for the best
material and geometry. The important aspects of design-
ing each part are shown in Table 1.2.
VIII. Prepare layout drawings of the entire machine by incor-
porating all parts as designed and sketched in step VII.
This task requires attention not only to function and form,
but careful attention as well to potential fabrication, as-
sembly, maintenance, and inspection problems; also de-
tails of bases, mountings, isolation, shielding,
interlocking, and other safety considerations.
IX.
Complete the detailed drawings to be used as working
drawings, for each individual part in the machine. These
detail drawings are developed from the sketches of step
VII by incorporating the changes generated during prepa-
ration of the layout drawings. Specifications for all fits,
tolerances, finishes, environmental protection, heat treat-
ment, special processing, imposition of company stan-
dards or industry standards, and code requirements are
also incorporated.
X.
Prepare assembly drawings of the entire machine by up-
dating the layout drawings to include final-version detail
drawing information from step IX. Subassembly draw-
ings, casting drawings, forging drawings, or other spe-
cial-purpose drawings are prepared as necessary to be
included in the assembly drawing package.
XI.
Conduct a comprehensive design review in which the
product design team and all supporting departments care-
fully scrutinize the proposed design as depicted by the as-
sembly drawings and detail drawings. Participation by
engineering, production, foundry, industrial design, mar-
keting, sales, and maintenance departments is usual.
Modify the drawings as required.
XII.
Carefully follow prototype construction and development
to eliminate the problems that appear in experimental
testing and evaluation of the machine. Redesign is typi-
cally necessary to develop the prototype machine into an
acceptable product suitable for production and delivery.
XIII. Monitor field service and maintenance records, failure
rate and failure mode data, warranty maintenance and
field inspection data, and customer service complaints to
identify significant design problems, and if necessary, de-
sign modification or retrofit packages to solve serious
problems or eliminate design defects.
XIV. Communicate all significant field data on failure modes,
failure rates, design defects, or other pertinent design fac-
tors back to engineering management and, in particular,
the preliminary design department. The lessons-learned
strategy discussed in 1.10 should be integrated into this
communication process.

sketch,17 approximately to scale, that embodies the proposed geometric features,18 and
suggests location and retention means within its host assembly.
At this early conceptual stage, a guiding principle should be to keep it simple.19
Unnecessary complexity usually leads to increased effort and time, more difficult and
more costly manufacturing, slower and more costly assembly, and more difficult and more
costly maintenance of the product. Limiting the functions of a part (or a machine) to those
actually required by the specifications is a good first step in keeping a configuration sim-
ple. There is often a built-in desire on the part of the designer, especially an inexperienced
designer, to keep adding seemingly desirable functions beyond those specified. Each of
these add-on functions generates the need for a “small” increase in size, strength, or com-
plexity of the part under consideration. Unfortunately, such noble efforts usually translate
into longer times-to-market, cost overruns, increased difficulty in manufacturing and
maintenance, and, in some cases, loss of market share to a competitor that delivers a reli-
able product to the marketplace earlier, even though it “only” meets the product specifica-
tions. The virtues of simplicity, therefore, potentially include on-time, on-budget delivery
of a product to the marketplace, improved manufacturability, easier maintenance, gain in
market share, and enhanced company reputation.
Design simplicity usually implies simple no-frills geometry, minimum number of
individual parts, use of standard parts and components, and ease-of-assembly alignment
The Virtues of Simplicity 11
TABLE 1.2 Steps in the Design of Each Individual Part
1. Conceive a tentative geometrical shape for the part. (See
Chapter 6.)
2. Determine the local forces and moments on the part,
based on global force analysis results from step VI. (See
Chapter 4.)
3. Identify probable governing failure modes based on the
function of the part, forces and moments on the part, shape
of the part, and operational environment. (See Chapter 2.)
4. Select a tentative material for the part that seems to be best
suited to the application. (See Chapter 3.)
5. Select a tentative manufacturing process that seems to be
best suited to the part and its material. (See Chapter 7.)
6. Select potential critical sections and critical points for de-
tailed analysis. Critical points are those points in the part
that have a high probability of failure because of high
stresses or strains, low strength, or a critical combination
of these. (See Chapter 6.)
7. Select appropriate equations of mechanics that properly re-
late forces or moments to stresses or deflections, and calcu-
late the stresses or deflections at each critical point
considered. The selection of a particular force-stress or
force-deflection relationship will be greatly influenced by
the shape of the part, the orientation of forces and moments
on the part, and the choice of pertinent simplifying assump-
tions. In later design iterations, more powerful analyses may
be involved (such as finite element analyses) if the precision
is needed and the cost warranted. (See Chapter 4.)
8. Determine the dimensions of the part at each critical point
by assuring that the operating stress is always safely be-
low the failure strength at each of these points. The safety
margin between operating stress levels and failure
strength levels may be established either by determining
an appropriate design safety factor or by giving a proper
reliability specification. (See Chapter 2.)
9. Review the material selection, the shape, and the dimen-
sions of the designed part from the standpoints of manu-
facturing processes required, potential assembly problems,
potential maintenance problems, and access of critical
points to scheduled inspections intended to detect and
eliminate incipient failures before they occur.
10. Generate a sketch or drawing of the designed part, em-
bodying all of the results from the nine design aspects just
listed, supplying the numerous minor decisions about size
and shape required to complete a coherent drawing of the
part. Such sketches or drawings may be generated either by
neat free-hand sketching, by manual drafting using instru-
ments, by using a computer-aided drafting system, or by
some combination of these techniques.
17This may be accomplished either by hand sketching on paper or using a CAD system.
18See Chapter 6.
19In training sessions sponsored by the Boy Scouts of America, the KISS method is often promoted as a tool
for preparing demonstrations and learning experiences. KISS is an acronym for Keep It Simple, Stupid.
Designers could benefit from the same strategy.

features that allow assembly maneuvers from a single direction.20 Finally, fits, tolerances,
and finishes should be no more restrictive than necessary for properly meeting specifica-
tion requirements.21
1.10 Lessons-Learned Strategy
Most designers would agree that “reinventing the wheel” is a waste of time, yet failure to
capitalize on experience is a pervasive problem. In the past decade the U.S. Army has for-
mulated a “lessons-learned system” for improving combat effectiveness by implementing
an organized effort to observe in-action problems, analyze them in after-action reviews,
distill the reviews into lessons learned, and disseminate the lessons learned so the same
mistakes are not repeated.22 The system has proved to be an efficient process for correct-
ing mistakes and sustaining successes through application of the lessons learned.
While the concept of “learning from experience” is not new, organized efforts in this
direction are rare in most companies. Effective assessment of service failures, an impor-
tant part of any design-oriented lesson-learned strategy, usually requires the intense inter-
active scrutiny of a team of specialists, including at least a mechanical designer and a
materials engineer, both trained in failure analysis techniques, and often a manufacturing
engineer and a field service engineer as well. The mission of the failure-response team is
to discover the initiating cause of failure, identify the best solution, and redesign the prod-
uct to prevent future failures. As undesirable as service failures may be, the results of a
well-executed failure analysis may be transformed directly into improved product quality
by designers who capitalize on service data and failure analysis results. The ultimate chal-
lenge is to assure that the lessons learned are applied. The lessons-learned strategy cannot
succeed unless the information generated by the failure-response team is compiled and dis-
seminated. No project is complete until systematically reviewed and its lessons communi-
cated, especially to the preliminary design department.
1.11 Machine Elements, Subassemblies, and the 
Whole Machine
A well-designed machine is much more than an interconnected group of individual ma-
chine elements. Not only must the individual parts be carefully designed to function effi-
ciently and safely for the specified design lifetime without failure, but parts must be
effectively clustered into subassemblies. Each subassembly must function without internal
interference, should permit easy disassembly for maintenance and repair, should allow
easy critical point inspection without extensive downtime or hazard to inspectors, and
should interface effectively with other subassemblies to provide the best possible inte-
grated system configuration to fulfill the function of the whole machine. Completing the
assembly of the whole machine always requires a frame or supporting structure into or
upon which all subassemblies and support systems are mounted. Although design of the
machine frame may be based upon either strength requirements or deflection require-
ments, the need for rigidity to prevent unacceptable changes in dimensions between one
subassembly and another is a more usual design criterion for a machine frame. As in the
case for proper subassembly design, frames and structures must be designed to allow easy
12 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
20See also 7.2 through 7.6.
21See 6.7.
22See ref. 5.

access for critical point inspection, maintenance, and repair procedures, as well as shield-
ing and interlocks for safety of personnel. The basic principles for designing machine
frames or structures are no different from the principles for designing any other machine
part, and the methodology of Table 1.2 is valid.
Although the emphasis in this text is upon the design of machine elements (the tradi-
tional approach by most engineering design textbooks), recognition is given to the growing
need for integration of manufacturing, assembly, and inspection requirements into the design
process at an early stage, a philosophy widely referred to as “simultaneous engineering.”
1.12 The Role of Codes and Standards in the Design Process
No matter how astute a designer may be, and no matter how much experience she or he
may have, familiarity with the codes and standards pertinent to a particular design project
is essential. Adherence to applicable codes and standards can provide experience-based
guidance for the designer as to what constitutes good practice in that field, and assures that
the product conforms to applicable legal requirements.
Standards are consensus-based documents, formulated through a cooperative effort
among industrial organizations and other interested parties, that define good practice in a
particular field. The basic objective in developing a standard is to assure interchangeabil-
ity, compatibility, and acceptable performance within a company (company standard),
within a country (national standard), or among many cooperating countries (international
standard). Standards usually represent a minimum level of acceptance by the formulating
group, and are usually regarded as recommendations to the user for how to do the task cov-
ered by the standard. Standards are prepared, compiled, and distributed by ANSI,23 ISO,24
and other similar organizations.
Codes are usually legally binding documents, compiled by a governmental agency,
that are aimed at protecting the general welfare of its constituents and preventing property
damage, injury, or loss of life. The objectives of a code are accomplished by requiring the
application of accumulated knowledge and experience to the task of avoiding, eliminating,
or reducing definable hazards. Codes are usually regarded as mandatory requirements that
tell the user what to do and when to do it. Codes often incorporate one or more standards,
giving them the force of law.
A designer’s responsibility includes seeking out all applicable codes and standards re-
lating to her or his particular design project. Failure of a designer to acquire a complete
and comprehensive collection of applicable documents is extremely risky in today’s liti-
gious environment. Since customers, and the general public, expect that all marketed prod-
ucts will be safe for intended use (as well as unintended use, or even misuse), a designer,
and his or her company, who does not follow code requirements, may be accused of pro-
fessional malpractice,25 and may be subject to litigation.
1.13 Ethics in Engineering Design
Like all professionals, engineers have a profound obligation to protect the public welfare by
bringing the highest standards of honesty and integrity to their practice. That is, engineers
must be bound by adherence to the highest principles of ethical or moral conduct. Ethics
Ethics in Engineering Design 13
23The American National Standards Institute (see ref. 6).
24The International Organization for Standardization (see ref. 7).
25See also 1.13.

and morality are formulations of what we ought to do and how we ought to behave as we
practice engineering. Engineering designers have a special responsibility for ethical behav-
ior because the health and welfare of the public often hang on the quality, reliability, and
safety of their designs.
In the broadest sense, ethics are concerned with belief systems about good and bad,
right and wrong, or appropriate and inappropriate behavior.26 As simple as these concepts
may seem, ethical dilemmas often arise because moral reasons can be offered to support
two or more opposing courses of action. It is sometimes a difficult task to decide which
competing moral viewpoint is the most compelling or most correct.27
To address ethical issues in the workplace, ethics committees are often formed to study
and resolve ethical dilemmas within a company. Ethics committee consensus opinions and
recommendations are usually tendered only after formulating the dilemma, collecting all
relevant facts, and then examining the competing moral considerations. Such committee
opinions usually disclose the level of consensus within the committee.
To help engineers practice their profession ethically, principles and rules of ethical be-
havior have been formulated and distributed by most engineering professional societies.
The Model Guide for Professional Conduct28 and the Code of Ethics for Engineers29 are
two good examples.
The code developed by NSPE includes a Preamble, six Fundamental Canons, five
lengthy Rules of Practice, and nine Professional Obligations. The Preamble and the
Fundamental Canons are shown in Figure 1.2.30 In the end, however, ethical behavior
translates into a combination of common sense and responsible engineering practice.
1.14 Units
In engineering design, numerical calculations must be made carefully, and any given set of
calculations must employ a consistent system of units.31 The systems of units commonly
used in the United States are the inch-pound-second (ips) system, foot-pound-second (fps)
system, and the Système International d’Unités or the International System (SI).32 All sys-
tems of units derive from Newton’s second law
(1-1)
F = mL
t 2
14 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
26See ref. 8.
27For engineers (and others) engaged in competing in the international marketplace, the task of adhering to
ethical behavior may be especially troublesome. This is true because certain practices that are legal and consid-
ered proper in some countries are considered to be unacceptable and illegal in the United States. An example is
the locally acceptable business practice of giving “gifts” (bribes) to secure contracts in some countries. Without
the “gift,” no contract is awarded. Such practices are considered unethical and illegal in the United States.
28Developed by the American Association of Engineering Societies (see ref. 9).
29Developed by the National Society of Professional Engineers (see ref. 10).
30The more extensive details of the Rules of Practice and Professional Obligations are available from NSPE,
and are reproduced in the appendix of this textbook.
31Any doubts about this should have been erased by the loss of NASA’s $125 million Mars Climate Orbiter in
September 1999. Two separate engineering teams, each involved in determining the spacecraft’s course, failed
to communicate that one team was using U.S. units while the other team was using metric units. The result was,
apparently, that thrust calculations made using U.S. units were substituted into metric-based thrust equations
without converting units, and the error was embedded in the orbiter’s software. As a consequence, the space-
craft veered too close to the Martian surface, where it either landed hard, broke up, or burned (see ref. 11).
32See ref. 12.

in which any three of the four quantities F (force), m (mass), L (length), and t (time) may
be chosen as base units, determining the fourth, called, therefore, a derived unit. When
force, length, and time are chosen as the base units, making mass the derived unit, the sys-
tem is called a gravitational system, because the magnitude of the mass depends on the
local gravitational acceleration, g. Both the ips and fps systems are gravitational systems.
When m, L, and t are chosen as base units, making force F the derived unit, the system is
called an absolute system, because the mass, a base unit, is not dependent upon local grav-
ity. In the ips gravitational system the base units are force in pounds (more properly
pounds-force, but in this text lb
lbf), length in inches, and time in seconds, making the
derived mass unit, which is given no special name, lb-sec2/in since (1-1) yields
(1-2)
Similarly, for the fps gravitational system
(1-3)
m = Ft 2
L
lb - sec2
ft
m = Ft 2
L
lb - sec2
in
K
Units 15
Figure 1.2
Preamble and
Fundamental Canons of
the NSPE Code of Ethics
for Engineers (reproduced
with permission of the
National Society of
Professional Engineers).
NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
Preamble
Engineering is an important and learned profession. As members of this pro-
fession, engineers are expected to exhibit the highest standards of honesty and
integrity. Engineering has a direct and vital impact on the quality of life for all
people. Accordingly, the services provided by engineers require honesty, im-
partiality, fairness and equity, and must be dedicated to the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare. Engineers must perform under a standard of
professional behavior that requires adherence to the highest principles of ethi-
cal conduct. 
I. Fundamental Canons
Engineers, in the fulfillment of their professional duties, shall:
1. Hold paramount the safety, health and welfare of the public.
2. Perform services only in areas of their competence.
3. Issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner.
4. Act for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees.
5. Avoid deceptive acts.
6. Conduct themselves honorably, responsibly, ethically, and lawfully so as to
enhance the honor, reputation, and usefulness of the profession.

16 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
For the fps system, the mass unit is given the special name slug, where
(1-4)
For the SI absolute system, the base units are mass in kilograms, length in meters, and time
in seconds, making the derived force unit, from (1-1),
(1-5)
By definition, the force unit is given the special name newton (N), where
(1-6)
The weight W of an object is defined as the force exerted on it by gravity. Thus,
(1-7)
or
(1-8)
where g is the acceleration due to gravity. On earth at sea level, the value of g is approxi-
mately 386 in/sec2 in the ips system, 32.17 ft/sec2 in the fps system, and 9.81 m/sec2 in the
SI system.
Thus, when using Newton’s second law to determine acceleration forces in a dynamic
system, the equation may be expressed as
(1-9)
If using the ips system, F  force in lb, m  mass in lb-sec2/in, a  acceleration in in/sec2,
g  386 in/sec2, and W  weight in lb; if using the fps system, F  force in lb, m  mass
in slugs, a  acceleration in ft/sec2, g  32.17 ft/sec2, and W  weight in lb; if using the SI
system, F  force in newtons, m  mass in kg, a  acceleration in m/sec2, g  9.81 m/sec2,
and W  weight in newtons.
When using the SI system, several rules and recommendations of the international
standardizing agency33 should be followed to eliminate confusion among differing cus-
toms used in various countries of the world. These include:
1. Numbers having four or more digits should be placed in groups of three, counting
from the decimal marker toward the left and the right, separated by spaces rather than com-
mas. (The space may be omitted in four-digit numbers.)
2. A period should be used as a decimal point. (Centered periods and commas should
not be used.)
3. The decimal point should be preceded by a zero for numbers less than unity.
4. Unit prefixes designating multiples or submultiples in steps of 1000 are recom-
mended; for example, one millimeter equals 103 meter, or one kilometer equals 103 meters.
F = ma = W
g a
m = W
g
W = mg
kg - m
sec2
K N
F = mL
t 2
kg - m
sec2
lb - sec2
ft
K slug
33International Bureau of Weights and Measures.

Units 17
TABLE 1.3 A Truncated List of Standard
SI Prefixes1
Name
Symbol
Factor
giga
G
109
mega
M
106
kilo
k
103
centi
c
102
mili
m
103
micro
106
nano
n
109
1Other standard prefixes exist, but this list covers most
engineering design cases. See ref. 2 for complete list.
m
Prefixes should not be used in the denominators of derived units. For example, N/mm2
should not be used; N/m2, Pa (pascals), or MPa should be used instead. Prefixes should be
chosen to make numerical values manageable. For example, using MPa (megapascals) for
stress or GPa (gigapascals) for modulus of elasticity, rather than using Pa, gives more com-
pact numerical results. A limited list of prefixes is given in Table 1.3. Table 1.4 lists the vari-
ables commonly used in engineering design practice, showing their units in the ips, fps, and
SI systems. Table 1.5 gives a short list of conversion factors among the three systems of units.
These various systems of units are used in this text as the need arises.
TABLE 1.4 Commonly Used Engineering Design Variables and Their Units 
(Base Units are shown in boldface)
Variable
Symbol
ips Units
fps Units
SI Units
Force
F
lb (pounds)
lb
N (newtons)
Length
l
in (inches)
ft (feet)
m (meters)
Time
t
sec (seconds)
sec
sec
Mass
m
lb-sec2/in
slugs (lb-sec2/ft)
kg (kilograms)
Weight
W
lb
lb
N
Pressure
p
psi
psf
Pa (pascals)
Stress
psi
—
Mpa
Velocity
v
in/sec
ft/sec
m/sec
Acceleration
a
in/sec2
ft/sec2
m/sec2
Angle
rad (radians)
rad
rad
Angular velocity
rad/sec
rad/sec
rad/sec
Angular acceleration
rad/sec2
rad/sec2
rad/sec2
Moment or torque
M, T
in-lb
ft-lb
N-m
Area
A
in2
ft2
m2
Volume
V
in3
ft3
m3
Area moment of inertia
I
in4
—
m4
Mass moment of inertia
I
in-lb-sec2
ft-lb-sec2
kg  m2
Specific weight
w
lb/in3
lb/ft3
N/m3
Energy
E
in-lb
ft-lb
N-m  J (joule)
Power
P
in-lb/sec
ft-lb/sec
N-m/sec (watt)
Spring rate
k
lb/in
lb/ft
N/m
Stress intensity
K
ksi
—
MPa1m
1in
a
v
u
s, t

18 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
Example 1.1 Hitch Pin Bending: ips Units
A clevis-to-cable connection embodies a one-inch diameter hitch pin to be used for tow-
ing a large log from the backyard to the street. As illustrated in Figure E1.1, the pin may
be modeled as a simply support beam of circular cross section, loaded by a concentrated
mid-span load of 10,000 lb. Calculate the maximum bending stress in the pin if the maxi-
mum mid-span load is estimated to be 10,000 lb, and the pin is 2.0 inches long end-to-end
with simple supports 0.25 inch from each end, as shown in Figure E1.1.
Solution
Referring to (4-5) of Chapter 4, the maximum bending stress is given by
smax = Mmaxc
I
TABLE 1.5 Selected Conversion Relationships
Quantity
Conversion
Force
1 lb  4.448 N
Length
1 in  25.4 mm
Area
1 in2  645.16 mm2
Volume
1 in3  16 387.2 mm3
Mass
1 slug  32.17 lb
1 kg  2.21 lb
1 kg  9.81 N
Pressure
1 psi  6895 Pa
1 Pa  1 N/m2
Stress
1 psi  6.895 
MPa
1 ksi  6.895 MPa
Modulus of elasticity
psi  6.895 GPa
Spring rate
1 lb/in  175.126 N/m
Velocity
1 in/sec  0.0254 m/sec
Acceleration
1 in/sec2  0.0254 m/sec2
Work, energy
1 in-lb  0.1138 N-m
Power
1 hp  745.7 W (watts)
Moment, torque
1 in-lb  0.1138 N-m
Stress intensity
1 ksi
 1.10 MPa
Area moment of inertia
1 in4  4.162 
m4
Mass moment of inertia
1 in-lb-sec2  0.1138 N-m-sec2
* 10-7
1m
1in
106
* 10-3
L = 1.5 in.
d = 1.0 in.
c = 0.5 in.
F = 10,000 lb
R = 5000 lb
R = 5000 lb
2.0 in.
0.25 in.
0.25 in.
Figure E1.1
Clevis pin modeled as a simply supported
beam in bending (refer to 4.4). 

Units 19
where Mmax is the maximum bending moment, c  d/2 is the distance from the central axis
(neutral axis of bending) to the top fiber, and I is the area moment inertia of the cross
section. Utilizing Tables 4.1 and 4.2,
and
Hence the maximum stress may be calculated as
Since the data are supplied in terms of inches and pounds, the calculation may be con-
veniently made using the ips system of units. Hence
Example 1.2 Hitch Pin Bending: SI Units
With the same general scenario as given in Example 1.1, the data are as follows:
F  44 480 N
L  38.1 mm
d  25.4 mm
Again, calculate the maximum bending stress.
Solution
The expression for maximum bending stress given in Example 1.1 remains valid. Since the
data are supplied in terms of millimeters and newtons, the calculation may be conveniently
made using the SI system of units. Hence
= 2.63 * 108 Pa = 263 MPa
smax =
8144 480 N2138.1 * 10-3 m2
p125.4 * 10-3 m23
= 2.63 * 108 N
m2
smax =
8110,000  lb211.5  in2
p11.0  in23
= 38,200  psi 
smax =
a FL
4 b d
2
a
1pd 42
64
b
= 8FL
pd 3
I = pd 4
64
Mmax = FL
4
Example 1.3 Units Conversion
It is now suggested that Examples 1.1 and 1.2 may be the same problem framed in two dif-
ferent systems of units. Check to find out if this is the case.
Solution
Using Table 1.5, check the equivalency of the data and the result.

20 Chapter 1 / Keystones of Design: Materials Selection and Geometry Determination
1-1. Define engineering design and elaborate on each impor-
tant concept in the definition.
1-2. List several factors that might be used to judge how well a
proposed design meets its specified objectives.
1-3. Define the term optimum design, and briefly explain why
it is difficult to achieve an optimum solution to a practical de-
sign problem.
1-4. When to stop calculating and start building is an engineer-
ing judgment of critical importance. Write about 250 words dis-
cussing your views on what factors are important in making
such a judgment.
1-5. The stages of design activity have been proposed in 1.6 to
include preliminary design, intermediate design, detail design,
and development and field service. Write a two- or three-sen-
tence descriptive summary of the essence of each of these four
stages of design.
1-6. What conditions must be met to guarantee a reliability of
100 percent?
1-7. Distinguish between fail safe design and safe life design,
and explain the concept of inspectability, upon which they both
depend.
1-8. Iteration often plays a very important role in determining
the material, shape, and size of a proposed machine part. Briefly
explain the concept of iteration, and give an example of a design
scenario that may require an iterative process to find a solution.
1-9. Write a short paragraph defining the term “simultaneous
engineering” or “concurrent engineering.”
1-10. Briefly describe the nature of codes and standards, and
summarize the circumstances under which their use should be
considered by a designer.
1-11. Define what is meant by ethics in the field of engineer-
ing.
1-12. Explain what is meant by an ethical dilemma.
1-13.34 A young engineer, having worked in a multinational
engineering company for about five years, has been assigned
the task of negotiating a large construction contract with a
country where it is generally accepted business practice, and to-
tally legal under the country’s laws, to give substantial gifts to
government officials in order to obtain contracts. In fact, with-
out such a gift, contracts are rarely awarded. This presents an
ethical dilemma for the young engineer because the practice is
illegal in the United States, and clearly violates the NSPE Code
of Ethics for Engineers [see Code Section 5(b) documented in
the appendix]. The dilemma is that while the gift-giving prac-
tice is unacceptable and illegal in the United States, it is totally
proper and legal in the country seeking the services. A friend,
who works for a different firm doing business in the same coun-
try, suggests that the dilemma may be solved by subcontracting
with a local firm based in the country, and letting the local firm
handle gift giving. He reasoned that he and his company were
not party to the practice of gift giving, and therefore were not
acting unethically. The local firm was acting ethically as well,
since they were abiding by the practices and laws of that coun-
try. Is this a way out of the dilemma?
1-14.35 Two young engineering graduate students received
their Ph.D. degrees from a major university at about the same
Problems
The data from Example 1.1, as given in Figure E1.1, are
F  10,000 lb
L  1.5 in
d  1.0 in
Using conversion factors from Table 1.5, these convert to
F  44 480 N
L  38.1 mm
d  25.4 mm
Comparing with data given in Example 1.2, they are found to be identical.
Converting the resulting stress from Example 1.1,
The results are in agreement, as they should be. 
smax = 38,20016.895 * 10-32 = 263 MPa
Example 1.3 
Continues
34The substance of this question and the answer to it have been 
extracted from ref. 8, with permission.
35The substance of this question and the answer to it have been 
extracted from ref. 8, with permission.

Problems 21
time. Both sought faculty positions elsewhere, and they were
successful in receiving faculty appointments at two different
major universities. Both knew that to receive tenure they would
be required to author articles for publication in scholarly and
technical journals.
Engineer A, while a graduate student, had developed a re-
search paper that was never published, but he believed that it
would form a sound basis for an excellent journal article. He
discussed his idea with his friend, Engineer B, and they agreed
to collaborate in developing the article. Engineer A, the princi-
pal author, rewrote the earlier paper, bringing it up to date.
Engineer B’s contributions were minimal. Engineer A agreed to
include Engineer B’s name as co-author of the article as a favor
in order to enhance Engineer B’s chances of obtaining tenure.
The article was ultimately accepted and published in a refereed
journal.
a. Was it ethical for Engineer B to accept credit for devel-
opment of the article?
b. Was it ethical for Engineer A to include Engineer B as
co-author of the article?
1-15. If you were given the responsibility for calculating the
stresses in a newly proposed “Mars Lander,” what system of
units would you probably choose? Explain.
1-16. Explain how the lessons-learned strategy might be ap-
plied to the NASA mission failure experienced while attempt-
ing to land the Mars Climate Orbiter on the Martian surface in
September 1999. The failure event is briefly described in foot-
note 31 to the first paragraph of 1.14.
1-17. A special payload package is to be delivered to the
surface of the moon. A prototype of the package, developed,
constructed, and tested near Boston, has been determined to
have a mass of 23.4 kg.
a. Estimate the weight of the package in newtons, as
measured near Boston.
b. Estimate the weight of the package in newtons on the
surface of the moon, if gmoon  17.0 m/sec2 at the landing
site.
c. Reexpress the weights in pounds.
1-18. Laboratory crash tests of automobiles occupied by instru-
mented anthropomorphic dummies are routinely conducted by
the automotive industry. If you were assigned the task of esti-
mating the force in newtons at the mass center of the dummy, as-
suming it to be a rigid body, what would be your force prediction
if a head-on crash deceleration pulse of 60 g’s (g’s are multiples
of the standard acceleration of gravity) is to be applied to the
dummy? The nominal weight of the dummy is 150 pounds.
1-19. Convert a shaft diameter of 2.25 inches to mm.
1-20. Convert a gear-reducer input torque of 20,000 in-lb to
N-m.
1-21. Convert a tensile bending stress of 876 MPa to psi.
1-22. It is being proposed to use a standard W10  45 (wide-
flange) section for each of four column supports for an elevated
holding tank. (See Appendix Table A.3 for symbol interpreta-
tion and section properties.) What would be the cross-sectional
area in mm2 of such a column cross section?
1-23. What is the smallest standard equal-leg angle-section
that would have a cross-sectional area at least as large as the
W10  45 section of problem 1-22? (From Table A.3, the
W10  45 section has a cross-sectional area of 13.3 in2.)

The Failure Prevention Perspective1
Chapter 2
2.1 Role of Failure Prevention Analysis in Mechanical Design
A primary responsibility of any mechanical designer is to ensure that the proposed design
will function as intended, safely and reliably, for the prescribed design lifetime and, at the
same time, compete successfully in the marketplace. Success in designing competitive
products while averting premature mechanical failures can be consistently achieved only
by recognizing and evaluating all potential modes of failure that might govern the design
of a machine and each individual part within the machine. If a designer is to be prepared
to recognize potential failure modes, he or she must at least be acquainted with the array
of failure modes actually observed in the ﬁeld and with the conditions leading to those fail-
ures. For a designer to be effective in averting failure, he or she must have a good work-
ing knowledge of analytical and/or empirical techniques for predicting potential failures at
the design stage, before the machine is built. These predictions must then be transformed
into selection of a material, determination of a shape, and establishment of the dimensions
for each part to ensure safe, reliable operation throughout the design lifetime. It is clear
that failure analysis, prediction, and prevention perspectives form the basis for successful
design of any machine element or machine.
2.2 Failure Criteria
Any change in the size, shape, or material properties of a machine or machine part that ren-
ders it incapable of performing its intended function must be regarded as a mechanical fail-
ure. It should be carefully noted that the key concept here is that improper functioning of
a machine or machine part constitutes failure. Thus, a shear pin that does not separate into
two or more pieces upon the application of a preselected overload must be regarded as
having failed as surely as a drive shaft has failed if it does separate into two pieces under
normal expected operating loads.
Failure of a machine or machine part to function properly might be brought about by
any one or a combination of many different responses to loads and environments while in
service. For example, too much or too little elastic deformation might produce failure. A
load-carrying member that fractures or a shear pin that does not shear under overload con-
ditions each would constitute failure. Progression of a crack due to ﬂuctuating loads or an
aggressive environment might lead to failure after a period of time if resulting excessive
22
1Chapter 2 is a condensed version of sections of ref. 1, Copyright © 1993, by permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

deﬂection or fracture of the part interferes with proper function. A list of potential me-
chanical failure modes that have been observed in various machine parts and machines is
presented in the next section, followed by a brief description of each one.
2.3 Modes of Mechanical Failure
Failure modes are the physical processes that take  place or combine their effects to pro-
duce failure, as just discussed. The following list2 includes the failure modes most com-
monly observed in machines and machine parts.
Modes of Mechanical Failure 23
2Extracted from ref. 1, with permission.
1.
Force- and/or temperature-induced
elastic deformation
2.
Yielding
3.
Brinnelling
4.
Ductile rupture
5.
Brittle fracture
6.
Fatigue:
a. High-cycle fatigue
b. Low-cycle fatigue
c. Thermal fatigue
d. Surface fatigue
e. Impact fatigue
f. Corrosion fatigue
g. Fretting fatigue
7.
Corrosion:
a. Direct chemical attack
b. Galvanic corrosion
c. Pitting corrosion
d. Intergranular corrosion
e. Selective leaching
f. Erosion corrosion
g. Cavitation corrosion
h. Hydrogen damage
i. Biological corrosion
j. Stress corrosion
8.
Wear:
a. Adhesive wear
b. Abrasive wear
c. Corrosive wear
d. Surface fatigue wear
e. Deformation wear
f. Impact wear
g. Fretting wear
9.
Impact:
a. Impact fracture
b. Impact deformation
c. Impact wear
d. Impact fretting
e. Impact fatigue
10. Fretting:
a. Fretting fatigue
b. Fretting wear
c. Fretting corrosion
11. Creep
12. Thermal relaxation
13. Stress rupture
14. Thermal shock
15. Galling and seizure
16. Spalling
17. Radiation damage
18. Buckling
19. Creep buckling
20. Stress corrosion
21. Corrosion wear
22. Corrosion fatigue
23. Combined creep and fatigue

As these terms are used in this text, and as commonly used in engineering practice,
the failure modes just listed may be defined and described briefly as follows. It should
be emphasized that these potential failure modes only produce failure when they gener-
ate a set of circumstances that interferes with the proper functioning of a machine or
device.
Force- and/or temperature-induced elastic deformation failure occurs whenever the
elastic (recoverable) deformation in a machine member, brought about by the imposed
operational loads or temperatures, becomes great enough to interfere with the ability of the
machine to satisfactorily perform its intended function.
Yielding failure occurs when the plastic (unrecoverable) deformation in a ductile
machine member, brought about by the imposed operational loads or motions, becomes
great enough to interfere with the ability of the machine to satisfactorily perform its
intended function.
Brinnelling failure occurs when the static forces between two curved surfaces in con-
tact result in local yielding of one or both mating members to produce a permanent surface
discontinuity of signiﬁcant size. For example, if a ball bearing is statically loaded so that
a ball is forced to permanently indent the race through local plastic ﬂow, the race is brin-
nelled. Subsequent operation of the bearing might result in intolerably increased vibration,
noise, and heating, and, therefore, failure would have occurred.
Ductile rupture failure occurs when the plastic deformation, in a machine part that
exhibits ductile behavior, is carried to the extreme so that the member separates into two
pieces. Initiation and coalescence of internal voids slowly propagate to failure, leaving a
dull, ﬁbrous rupture surface.
Brittle fracture failure occurs when the elastic deformation, in a machine part which
exhibits brittle behavior, is carried to the extreme so that the primary interatomic bonds are
broken and the member separates into two or more pieces. Preexisting ﬂaws or growing
cracks provide initiation sites for very rapid crack propagation to catastrophic failure, leav-
ing a granular, multifaceted fracture surface.
Fatigue failure is a general term given to the sudden and catastrophic separation of a
machine part into two or more pieces as a result of the application of ﬂuctuating loads or
deformations over a period of time. Failure takes place by the initiation and propagation
of a crack until it becomes unstable and propagates suddenly to failure. The loads and
deformations that cause failure by fatigue are typically far below the static failure levels.
When loads or deformations are of such magnitude that more than about 50,000 cycles are
required to produce failure, the phenomenon is usually termed high-cycle fatigue. When
loads or deformations are of such magnitude that less than about 10,000 cycles are required
to produce failure, the phenomenon is usually termed low-cycle fatigue. When load or strain
cycling is produced by a ﬂuctuating temperature ﬁeld in the machine part, the process is
usually termed thermal fatigue. Surface fatigue failure, usually associated with rolling sur-
faces in contact (but sometimes associated with sliding contact), manifests itself as pitting,
cracking, and spalling of the contacting surfaces as a result of the cyclic Hertz contact
stresses that result in maximum values of cyclic shear stresses slightly below the surface.
The cyclic subsurface shear stresses generate cracks that propagate to the contacting
24 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective

Modes of Mechanical Failure 25
surface, dislodging particles in the process, to produce surface pitting. This phenomenon
is often viewed as a type of wear. Impact fatigue, corrosion fatigue, and fretting fatigue are
described later.
Corrosion failure, a very broad term, implies that a machine part is rendered incapable
of performing its intended function because of the undesired deterioration of the material
as a result of chemical or electrochemical interaction with the environment. Corrosion
often interacts with other failure modes such as wear or fatigue. The many forms of cor-
rosion include the following: Direct chemical attack, perhaps the most common type of
corrosion, involves corrosive attack of the surface of the machine part exposed to the
corrosive medium, more or less uniformly over the entire exposed surface. Galvanic cor-
rosion is an accelerated electrochemical corrosion that occurs when two dissimilar metals
in electrical contact are made  part of a circuit completed by a connecting pool or ﬁlm of
electrolyte or corrosive medium, leading to current ﬂow and ensuing corrosion. Crevice
corrosion is the accelerated corrosion process highly localized within crevices, cracks, or
joints where small volume regions of stagnant solution are trapped in contact with the cor-
roding meal. Pitting corrosion is a very localized attack that leads to the development of
an array of holes or pits that penetrate the metal. Intergranular corrosion is the localized
attack occurring at grain boundaries of certain copper, chromium, nickel, aluminum, mag-
nesium, and zinc alloys when they are improperly heat treated or welded. Formation of
local galvanic cells that precipitate corrosion products at the grain boundaries seriously
degrades the material strength because of the intergranular corrosive process.
Selective leaching is a corrosion process in which one element of a solid alloy is
removed, such as in dezinciﬁcation of brass alloys or graphitization of gray cast irons.
Erosion corrosion is the accelerated chemical attack that results when an abrasive or vis-
cid material ﬂows past a containing surface continuously baring fresh, unprotected mate-
rial to the corrosive medium. Cavitation corrosion is the accelerated chemical corrosion
that results when, because of differences in vapor pressure, certain bubbles and cavities
within a ﬂuid collapse adjacent to the pressure vessel walls, causing particles of the sur-
face to be expelled, baring fresh, unprotected surface to the corrosive medium. Hydrogen
damage, while not considered to be a form of direct corrosion, is induced by corrosion.
Hydrogen damage includes hydrogen blistering, hydrogen embrittlement, hydrogen attack,
and decarburization. Biological corrosion is a corrosion process that results from the
activity of living organisms, usually by virtue of their processes of food ingestion and
waste elimination, in which the waste products are corrosive acids or hydroxides. Stress
corrosion, an extremely important type of corrosion, is described separately later.
Wear is the undesired cumulative change in dimensions brought about by the grad-
ual removal of discrete particles from contacting surfaces in motion, usually sliding, pre-
dominantly as a result of mechanical action. Wear is not a single process, but a number
of different processes that can take place independently or in combination, resulting in
material removal from contacting surfaces through a complex combination of local shear-
ing, plowing, gouging, welding, tearing, and others. Adhesive wear takes place because
of high local pressure and welding at asperity contact sites, followed by motion-induced
plastic deformation and rupture of asperity junctions, with resulting metal removal or
transfer. Abrasive wear takes place when the wear particles are removed from the surface
by plowing, gouging, and cutting action of the asperities of a harder mating surface or by
hard particles entrapped between the mating surfaces. When the conditions for either ad-
hesive wear or abrasive wear coexist with conditions that lead to corrosion, the processes
interact synergistically to produce corrosive wear. As described earlier, surface fatigue

wear is a wear phenomenon associated with curved surfaces in rolling or sliding contact,
in which subsurface cyclic shear stresses initiate microcracks that propagate to the sur-
face to spall out macroscopic particles and form wear pits. Deformation wear arises as a
result of repeated elastic deformation at the wearing surface that produces a matrix of
cracks that grow in accordance with the surface fatigue description just given. Fretting
wear is described later.
Impact failure results when a machine member is subjected to nonstatic loads that pro-
duce in the part stresses or deformations of such magnitude that the member no longer is
capable of performing its function. The failure is brought about by the interaction of stress
or strain waves generated by dynamic or suddenly applied loads, which may induce local
stresses and strains many times greater than would be induced by static application of the
same loads. If the magnitudes of the stresses and strains are sufﬁciently high to cause sep-
aration into two or more parts, the failure is called impact fracture. If the impact produces
intolerable elastic or plastic deformation, the resulting failure is called impact deformation.
If repeated impacts induce cyclic elastic strains that lead to initiation of a matrix of fatigue
cracks, which grow to failure by the surface fatigue phenomenon described eariler, the
process is called impact wear. If fretting action, as described in the next paragraph, is
induced by the small lateral relative displacements between two surfaces as they impact
together, where the small displacements are caused by Poisson strains or small tangential
“glancing” velocity components, the phenomenon is called impact fretting. Impact fatigue
failure occurs when impact loading is repetitively applied to a machine member until fail-
ure occurs by the nucleation and propagation of a fatigue crack.
Fretting action may occur at the interface between any two solid bodies whenever they
are pressed together by a normal force and subjected to small-amplitude cyclic relative
motion with respect to each other. Fretting usually takes place in joints that are not in-
tended to move but, because of vibrational loads or deformations, experience minute cyclic
relative motions. Typically, debris produced by fretting action is trapped between the sur-
faces because of the small motions involved. Fretting fatigue failure is the premature
fatigue fracture of a machine member subjected to ﬂuctuating loads or strains together
with conditions that simultaneously produce fretting action. The surface discontinuities
and microcracks generated by the fretting action act as fatigue crack nuclei that propagate
to failure under conditions of fatigue loading that would otherwise be acceptable. Fretting
fatigue failure is an insidious failure mode because the fretting action is usually hidden
within a joint where it cannot be seen, leading to premature, and often unexpected, fatigue
failure of a sudden and catastrophic nature. Fretting wear failure results when the changes
in dimensions of the mating parts, because of the presence of fretting action, become large
enough to interfere with proper design function or large enough to produce geometrical
stress concentration of such magnitude that failure ensues as a result of excessive local
stress levels. Fretting corrosion failure occurs when a machine part is rendered incapable of
performing its intended function because of the surface degradation of the material from
which the part is made, as a result of fretting action.
Creep failure results whenever the plastic deformation in a machine member accrues
over a period of time under the inﬂuence of stress and temperature until the accumulated
dimensional changes interfere with the ability of the machine part to satisfactorily perform
its intended function. Three stages of creep are often observed: (1) transient or primary
creep, during which time the rate of strain decreases, (2) steady-state or secondary creep,
during which time the rate of strain is virtually constant, and (3) tertiary creep, during
26 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective

which time the creep strain rate increases, often rapidly, until rupture occurs. This termi-
nal rupture is often called creep rupture and may or may not occur, depending on the
stress-time-temperature conditions.
Thermal relaxation or stress relaxation failure occurs when the dimensional changes
due to the creep process result in the relaxation of a prestrained or prestressed member
until it no longer is able to perform its intended function. For example, if the prestressed
ﬂange bolts of a high-temperature pressure vessel relax over a period of time because of
creep in the bolts, so that ﬁnally the peak pressure surges exceed the bolt preload to violate
the ﬂange seal, the bolts will have failed because of thermal relaxation.
Stress rupture failure is intimately related to the creep process except that the combi-
nation of stress, time, and temperature is such that rupture into two parts is assured. In
stress rupture failures the combination of stress and temperature is often such that the
period of steady-state creep is short or nonexistent.
Thermal shock failure occurs when the thermal gradients generated in a machine part
are so pronounced that differential thermal strains exceed the ability of the material to sus-
tain them without yielding or fracture.
Galling failure occurs when two sliding surfaces are subjected to such a combination
of loads, sliding velocities, temperatures, environments, and lubricants that massive sur-
face destruction is caused by welding and tearing, plowing, gouging, signiﬁcant plastic
deformation of surface asperities, and metal transfer between the two surfaces. Galling
may be thought of as a severe extension of the adhesive wear process. When such action
results in signiﬁcant impairment to intended surface sliding, or in seizure, the joint is said
to have failed by galling. Seizure is an extension of the galling process to such a level of
severity that the two parts are virtually welded together, and relative motion is no longer
possible.
Spalling failure occurs whenever a particle is spontaneously dislodged from the sur-
face of a machine part so as to prevent the proper function of the member. Armor plate fails
by spalling, for example, when a striking missile on the exposed side of an armor shield
generates a stress wave that propagates across the plate in such a way as to dislodge or
spall a secondary missile of lethal potential on the protected side. Other examples of
spalling failure are manifested in rolling contact bearings and gear teeth because of the
action of surface fatigue as described earlier.
Radiation damage failure occurs when the changes in material properties induced by
exposure to a nuclear radiation ﬁeld are of such a type and magnitude that the machine part
is no longer able to perform its intended function, usually as a result of the triggering of
some other failure mode, and often related to loss in ductility associated with radiation
exposure. Elastomers and polymers are typically more susceptible to radiation damage
than are metals whose strength properties are sometimes enhanced rather than damaged by
exposure to a radiation ﬁeld, though ductility is usually decreased.
Buckling failure occurs when, because of a critical combination of magnitude and/or
point-of-load application, together with the geometrical conﬁguration of a machine mem-
ber, the deﬂection of the  member suddenly increases greatly with only a slight increase in
load. This nonlinear response results in a buckling failure if the buckled member is no
longer capable of performing its design function.
Modes of Mechanical Failure 27

Creep buckling failure occurs when, after a period of time, the creep process results
in an unstable combination of the loading and geometry of a machine part so that the crit-
ical buckling limit is exceeded and failure ensures.
Stress corrosion failure occurs when the applied stresses on a machine part in a cor-
rosive environment generate a ﬁeld of localized surface cracks, usually along grain bound-
aries, that render the part incapable of performing its function, often because of triggering
some other failure mode. Stress corrosion is a very important type of corrosion failure
mode because so many different metals are susceptible to it. For example, a variety of iron,
steel, stainless steel, copper, and aluminum alloys are subject to stress corrosion cracking
if placed in certain adverse corrosive media.
Corrosion wear failure is a combination failure mode in which corrosion and wear
combine their deleterious effects to incapacitate a machine part. The corrosion process
often produces a hard, abrasive corrosion product that accelerates the wear, while the
wear process constantly removes the protective corrosion layer from the surface, baring
fresh metal to the corrosive medium and thus accelerating the corrosion. The two modes
combine to make the result more serious than the sum of the modes would have been
otherwise.
Corrosion fatigue is a combination failure mode in which corrosion and fatigue com-
bine their deleterious effects to cause failure of a machine part. The corrosion process
often forms pits and surface discontinuities that act as stress raisers that in turn accelerate
fatigue failure. Further, cracks in the usually brittle corrosion layer also act as fatigue crack
nuclei that propagate into the base material. On the other hand, the cyclic loads or strains
cause cracking and ﬂaking of the corrosion layer, which bares fresh metal to the corrosive
medium. Thus, each process accelerates the other, often making the result disproportion-
ately serious.
Combined creep and fatigue failure is a combination failure mode in which all of the
conditions for both creep failure and fatigue failure exist simultaneously, each process
inﬂuencing the other to produce accelerated failure. The interaction of creep and fatigue is
probably synergistic but is not well understood.
Identiﬁcation of the most probable governing failure mode (in many cases there may
be more than one candidate) by a designer is an essential step that should be underaken
early in the design of any machine part. Selection of material and establishment of the
shape and size of the part must then be tailored to provide safe, reliable, cost-effective
operation throughout the design lifetime. The following sections provide some basic con-
cepts and equations useful in designing to avoid failure by the more commonly encoun-
tered failure modes.
2.4 Elastic Deformation, Yielding, and Ductile Rupture
In the seventeenth century it was experimentally established that if a direct axial external
force F is applied to a machine element, whether it is a traditional spring (see Chapter 14) or
a straight cylindrical bar such as the one shown in Figure 2.1, changes in the length of the
machine element are produced. Further, for a broad class of materials, a linear relationship
28 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Figure 2.1
Straight cylindrical bar
loaded by direct axial
force.
A
F
F
y = f
lo
lf
3See Hooke’s Law discussion of 5.2.

exists between the applied force, F, and the induced change in length, y, as long as the ma-
terial is not stressed beyond its elastic range.3 The elastic deﬂection, y, and the corresponding
elastic strain, , produced by the aggregation of small changes in interatomic spacing within
the material, are fully recoverable4 as long the applied forces do not produce stresses that
exceed the yield strength of the material.
For any linear spring, the relationship between force and deﬂection may be plotted as
shown in Figure 2.2, and expressed as
(2-1)
where k is called the spring constant or spring rate.
The change in length induced by the applied force is
(2-2)
where 
is the original bar length with no force applied, 
is the bar length after external
force F has been applied, and 
is force-induced elastic deformation, so deﬁned to distin-
guish it from temperature-induced elastic deformation, discussed later.
If, in a machine element, 
exceeds the design allowable axial deformation, failure
will occur. For example, if the blade-axial deformation of an aircraft gas turbine blade,
caused by the centrifugal force ﬁeld, exceeds the tip clearance gap, failure will occur
because of force-induced elastic deformation.
Based on (2-1), the spring rate, 
, for the uniform bar shown in Figure 2.1 may be
written as
(2-3)
where 
is the spring rate, or stiffness, of the axially loaded bar. It should again be em-
phasized that all real machine parts and structural elements behave as springs because they
all have ﬁnite stiffnesses. Thus the concept of spring rate is important not only when dis-
cussing “traditional” springs, as in Chapter 14, but also when considering potential failure
by force-induced elastic deformation, or when examining the consequences of load shar-
ing, preloading, and/or residual stresses (see Chapter 4).
The uniaxial force-deﬂection plot of Figure 2.2 may be normalized by dividing the
force coordinate by the original cross-sectional area 
and the deﬂection coordinate by
original length 
. The resulting plot, shown in Figure 2.3, is the familiar engineering
stress-strain diagram,5 with slope equal to Young’s modulus of elasticity, E. For the
uniform bar shown in Figure 2.2, the engineering stress, , is
(2-4)
where 
is the original cross-sectional area of the bar.
The engineering strain induced by the applied force is
(2-5)
ef =
df
lo
Ao
s = F
Ao
s
lo
Ao
kax
kax = F
y = F
df
kax
df
df
lf
lo
y = df = lf - lo
F = ky
e
Elastic Deformation, Yielding, and Ductile Rupture 29
4See ref. 2.
5Engineering stress and strain are based on original values of area and length, in contrast with true stress and
true strain, which are based on instantaneous values of area and length.

From the engineering stress-strain curve of Figure 2.3,
(2-6)
where E is Young’s modulus of elasticity and 
is force-induced elastic strain.
Combining (2-3), (2-4), (2-5), and (2-6),
(2-7)
where 
is the axial spring rate, a function of material and geometry. Thus if it were of
interest, the force-induced elastic deformation 
could be easily calculated for the axial
loading case, as
(2-8)
If the limiting or allowable design value of deﬂection, 
, in a particular design sit-
uation were exceeded by 
the design would be unacceptable; hence elastic deformation
failure is predicted to occur if (FIPTOI)
(2-9)
and redesign would be necessary if failure were predicted.
df-max Ú dallow
df,
dallow
df = F
kax
df
kax
kax = AoE
lo
ef
s = Eef
30 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Example 2.1 Force-Induced Elastic Deformation
An axially loaded straight steel bar with a rectangular cross section will fail to perform its
design function if its length increases 0.20 mm or more. It is desired to operate with the stress
level in the bar greater than one-half the yield strength, Syp. The bar, made of 1040 HR steel
(Syp  290 MPa), is 300 mm long.
a.
What is the probable governing failure mode?
b.
Is failure predicted to occur?
k lb
in
Deflection, f (in)
Force, F (lb)
F = kf
E
lb
in2
Engineering strain, f = f /lo (in/in)
 = Ef
Engineering stress,  = F /Ao (psi)
Figure 2.2
Force-deﬂection curve for linear
elastic behavior.
Figure 2.3
Engineering stress-strain diagram for
linear elastic behavior.

Temperature ﬂuctuations may also produce dimensional changes and associated re-
coverable elastic strains in a machine part. If temperature changes are slow enough so that
signiﬁcant gradients are not generated, and if no external constraints are imposed, the ma-
chine part remains stress-free as temperature-induced elastic deformations are produced.
The change in length, , induced by the temperature difference 
, may be calculated as
(2-10)
where 
is the initial length of the part and a is the linear coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
for the material. From (2-10), then, the temperature-induced elastic strain (thermal strain) is
(2-11)
Temperature-induced strains are recoverable (elastic), normal (as opposed to shear),
and usually close to linear functions of temperature over a wide temperature range (often
a few hundred F). The temperature-induced elastic strain in a given direction, i, may be
found from (2-11) as
(2-12)
where 
is the thermal or temperature-induced elastic strain in the ith direction due to tem-
perature change 
, and 
is the thermal expansion coefﬁcient in the ith direction.
ai
¢®
eti
eti = ai¢®
et = dt
lo
= a¢®
lo
dt = loa¢®
¢®
dt
Elastic Deformation, Yielding, and Ductile Rupture 31
Solution
a.
The probable governing mode of failure is force-induced elastic deformation.
b.
From (2-9), FIPTOI (failure is predicted to occur if) 
. Now,
Hence failure is predicted to occur since 0.21  0.20.
df-max = Fmax
kax
= smax Ao
a AoE
lo
b
=
Syplo
2E
=
290 * 106 (0.30)
21207 * 1092
= 0.00021 m(0.21 mm)
df-max Ú dallow
Example 2.2 Temperature-Induced Elastic Deformation
The straight rectangular 1040 HR steel bar of Example 2.1 is to be evaluated for an en-
tirely different application in which there are no applied forces at all but the temperature
is to be increased by 300F. Again, in this new application, the bar will cease to properly
perform its design function if its length increases 0.0060 inch or more. The linear coefﬁ-
cient of thermal expansion for steel is approximately 6.3  106 in/in/F.
a.
What is the governing failure mode?
b.
Is failure predicted to occur?
Solution
a.
The governing failure mode is temperature-induced elastic deformation.
b.
Following the logic leading to (2-9), FIPTOI (failure is predicted to occur if)
From (2-10),
dt-max = loa¢® = 112.0000216.3 * 10-6213002 = 0.0227  inch
dt-max Ú dallow

Hence, FIPTOI
Therefore failure is predicted to occur.
It is worth noting that the change in length of this 12-inch steel bar produced by a 
temperature change is nearly three times the length change produced by an  axial force cor-
responding to a stress equal to half the yield strength of the steel. (Temperature-induced
elastic strains are often large enough to be important design criteria.)
The principle of superposition may be utilized when governing equations are linear.
Since force-induced elastic strain and temperature-induced elastic strain are both linear
functions, the principle of superposition may be used to give the total strain 
in any given
ith direction as
(2-13)
where 
and 
are force- and temperature-induced components of strain in the ith direc-
tion, respectively. This expression may be used to assess the consequences of constraint to
thermal expansion. For example, if a prismatic steel bar of length 
were axially con-
strained between rigid walls so that its total change in length were forced to remain zero,
and the temperature increased by 
, equation (2-13) would require
(2-14)
or
(2-15)
Utilizing the uniaxial Hooke’s Law and (2-12), the temperature-induced stress (thermal
stress), , in this fully constrained bar, would be
(2-16)
a compressive stress induced in the steel bar because it attempts to increase in length as
temperature increases. If the walls are not fully rigid (a more realistic case), the calcula-
tions become more complicated, as discussed later in 4.7.
When the state of stress is more complicated than the uniaxial cases just discussed, it
becomes necessary to calculate the elastic strains  induced by the multiaxial state of stress
in three mutually perpendicular directions, say x, y, z, through the use of the generalized
Hooke’s Law equations given in 5.2. The resulting elastic strains, 
and 
, may be
used to calculate the total force-induced elastic deformation of a member in any of the
coordinate directions by integrating the strain over the member’s length in that direction.
Temperature-induced strains may be included as shown in (2-13). If the change in length
of the member in any direction exceeds the design-allowable deformation in that direction,
elastic deformation failure will occur.
If the externally applied forces produce stresses that exceed the yield strength of a
ductile material, the induced strains are not fully recovered upon release of the loads and
permanent or plastic strains remain. Such permanent deformations usually (but not al-
ways) render a machine part incapable of performing its intended function, whereupon
failure by yielding is said to occur. For example, if the axially loaded bar of Figure 2.1
were to reach a stress , calculated from (2-1), that exceeds the material’s yield strength,
s
efz
efx, efy,
s = -Eai¢®
s
efi = -eti
0 = efi + eti
¢®
lo
eti
efi
ei = efi + eti
ei
300°
0.0227 Ú 0.0060
32 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Example 2.2 
Continues

, the design would be unacceptable; hence yielding failure would be predicted to occur
if (FIPTOI)
(2-17)
and redesign would be necessary.
For the case of uniaxial loadng, the onset of yielding may be accurately predicted to
occur when the uniaxial maximum normal stress reaches a value equal to the yield strength
of the material, as shown in (2-17) and Example 2.3. If the loading is more complicated,
and a multiaxial state of stress is produced by the loads, the onset of yielding may no
longer be predicted by comparing any one of the normal stress components with uniaxial
material yield strength, not even the maximum principal normal stress. Onset of yielding
for multiaxially stressed critical points in a machine or structure is more accurately pre-
dicted through the use of a combined stress theory of failure that has been experimentally
validated for the prediction of yielding. The two most widely accepted theories for pre-
dicting the onset of yielding under multiaxial states of stress are the distortion energy the-
ory (also known as the octahedral shear stress theory, or the Huber– von–Mises–Hencky
theory), and the maximum shearing stress theory. The use of these theories is discussed 
in 5.4.
If the externally applied forces are so large that a ductile material not only experiences
plastic deformation but proceeds to separate into two pieces, the process is called ductile
rupture. In most cases, such a separation renders a machine part incapable of performing
its intended function, and failure by ductile rupture is said to occur. For example, if the
axially loaded bar of Fig. 2.1 reaches a stress , calculated from (2-1), that attempts to
s
s Ú Syp
Syp
Elastic Deformation, Yielding, and Ductile Rupture 33
Example 2.3 Yielding
An axially loaded straight bar of circular cross section will fail to perform its design func-
tion if applied axial loads produce permanent changes in length when the load is removed.
The bar has a diameter of 12 mm, a length of 150 mm, and is made of 1020 HR steel 
(Su  379 MPa, Syp  207 MPa; e  25 percent in 50 mm). The required axial load for
this particular case is 22 kN.
a.
What is the governing failure mode?
b.
Is failure predicted to occur?
Solution
a.
Since the elongation in 50 mm is 25 percent, the material is ductile and the governing 
failure mode is yielding.
b.
From (2-17), FIPTOI 
. Now,
Hence FIPTOI 195  207, Therefore, failure is not predicted to occur. It must be noted,
however, that failure is imminent, and as a practical matter a designer would nearly always
redesign to lower the stress. Typically, a safety factor would be utilized to determine the
properly redesigned dimensions, as discussed in Chapter 6. 
s = F
A0
=
F
a pd2
4 b
= 4F
pd2 =
4(22)
p(0.012)2 = 194522 kN/m2 = 195 MPA
s Ú Syp

exceed the material’s ultimate strength, 
, the design would be unacceptable; hence fail-
ure by ductile rupture would be predicted to occur if (FIPTOI)
(2-18)
and redesign would be necessary.
s Ú Su
Su
34 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Example 2.4 Ductile Rupture
The axially loaded straight cylindrical bar of Example 2.3 is to be used in a different
application for which permanent deformations are acceptable but separation of the bar into
two pieces destroys the ability of the device to perform its function. The required axial load
for this application is to be 11,000 lb.
a.
What is the governing failure mode?
b.
Is failure predicted to occur?
Solution
a.
From material speciﬁcations in Example 2.3, the 1020 HR material is ductile 
(e  25 percent in 2 inches); hence the governing failure mode is ductile rupture.
b.
From (2-18), FIPTOI
Now,
Also, from Example 2.3, 
 55,000 psi, hence FIPTOI
Therefore failure is predicted to occur by ductile rupture, and redesign would be necessary.
56,120 Ú 55,000
Su
s = F
Ao
=
11,000
pc
10.50022
4
d
= 11,000
0.196 = 56,120 psi
s Ú Su
Again, if the loading is more complicated, and a multiaxial state of stress is produced
by the loads, ductile rupture may no longer be accurately predicted by comparing any of
the normal stress components with the uniaxial ultimate strength, not even the maximum
principal normal stress. A combined stress theory of failure is required for prediction of
ductile rupture under multiaxial states of stress. The distortion energy theory is usually
chosen for such cases, as discussed in 4.6.
2.5 Elastic Instability and Buckling
When steady compressive forces are applied to short “fat” members, such as the one
sketched in Figure 2.4(a), they tend to fail by compressive yielding or fracture. However,
when steady compressive forces are applied to long “thin” members, such as the one
sketched in Figure 2.4(b), they sometimes induce sudden major changes in geometry, such
as bowing, wrinkling, twisting, bending, or buckling. For the case of short, fat members,
failure is predicted to occur when the compressive stress 
exceeds the compressive
strength, as formulated in (2-17) and (2-18). However, for the case of long, thin members,
sc
(a)
(b)
c = P
A
P
P
P
A

Figure 2.4
Compressive loads on (a)
a short “fat” member, and
(b) a long “thin” member.

even when the compressive stress levels generated by applied compressive forces are well
within acceptable strength levels, the large deﬂections, , that suddenly occur may destroy
the equilibrium of the structure and produce an unstable conﬁguration that leads to col-
lapse. This type of failure is generally called failure by elastic instability or buckling.
Prediction of the onset of buckling failure is an important task. It is essential to note
at the outset that buckling failure does not depend at all upon the strength of the material,
but only on the dimensions of the structure and the modulus of elasticity of the material.
Thus a high-strength steel member of a given length and cross-sectional size and shape is
no more able to withstand a given buckling load than a low-strength steel member of the
same dimensions.
Buckling of a Simple Pin-Jointed Mechanism
Sidewise buckling of an axially loaded compression member, or column, is a case of great
practical importance. The basic buckling phenomenon may be understood by considering
the perfectly aligned four-bar linkage shown in Figure 2.5, to which auxiliary springs are
attached at joint B. When this “column” is perfectly aligned, the springs exert zero force.
However, if a lateral displacement of joint B develops for any reason, a lateral resisting
force is developed by the springs at B. A lateral deﬂection might develop because of a slight
lateral disturbance, or manufacturing errors might lead to an effective lateral displacement.
In any event, viewing the column as shown in Figure 2.5, if moments are taken about point
C, it may be observed that the axial force, 
, leads to an upsetting moment, 
, whereas
the spring force, , leads to a resisting moment, 
. As long as the resisting moment is
capable of being equal to or greater than the upsetting moment, the linkage is stable. If the
upsetting moment exceeds the resisting moment capability, however, the linkage becomes
unstable and collapses or buckles. At the point where the maximum available resisting
moment exactly equals the upsetting moment, the system is on the verge of buckling and is
said to be critical. The axial load that produces this condition is called the critical buckling
load. Thus, the critical buckling load is the value of 
that satisﬁes the condition
(2-19)
The upsetting moment 
for the linkage of Figure 2.5 is
(2-20)
Mu = a 2dPa
Lcosa b L
2  cosa + Pad = 2Pad
Mu
Mr = Mu
Pa
Mr
Ps
Mu
Pa
d
Elastic Instability and Buckling 35
Pa tan 
(a)
(b)
(c)
A
B
C
E
D
L/2
L/2
L
(L/2) cos 
C
2Pa
 L cos 
Pa tan  =
Ps = k
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Ps
Pa tan 
B





Figure 2.5
Buckling model for a 
simple pin-jointed 
mechanism.

36 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
and the resisting moment 
is
(2-21)
where is the spring rate of the lateral spring system.
Thus, the critical value of axial load 
is given from (2-19) as
(2-22)
or
(2-23)
Any axial load that exceeds 
in magnitude will cause the mechanism to collapse since
the spring is not stiff enough to provide a resisting moment large enough to balance the
upsetting moment caused by applied axial force .
Buckling of a Pinned-End Column
The behavior of perfectly straight, ideal elastic columns is quite analogous to the model of
Figure 2.5 except that in the case of a column the resisting moment must be provided by
the beam itself. Consequently, in the case of column buckling the bending spring rate of
the column will become important and the length, cross-sectional dimensions, and modu-
lus of elasticity will all inﬂuence the buckling resistance.
A sketch of an axisymmetric ideal pinned-end column loaded axially is shown in
Figure 2.6. As long as the axial load P is less than the critical buckling load, the column is
stable and any small lateral disturbing force, say at the midspan of the column, will cause a
small deﬂection at midspan that will disappear upon removal of the disturbing force.
However, if the axial load P exceeds the critical buckling load, the application of a small
lateral disturbing force at midspan leads to large deﬂections and buckling of the column
because the maximum available resisting moment, arising from column stiffness, is not
Pa
kL>4
Pcr = kL
4  cos a L kL
4
kdLcosa
2
= 2d1Pa2cr
Pa
k
Mr = 1kd2 L
2  cosa
Mr
(a)
P
L
y
(b)
Pcr
x
v
m
Figure 2.6
Ideal axisymmetric pinned-end column subjected to
axial buckling load.

Elastic Instability and Buckling 37
large enough to balance the upsetting moment generated by axial load P acting at a moment
arm equal to the midspan column bending deﬂection. As can be seen in Figure 2.6, if
moments are taken about point m, the upsetting moment 
is
(2-24)
where is the lateral midspan deﬂection of the column. Thus, the force 
produces an up-
setting moment that tends to bend the column even further, which in turn produces a larger
eccentricity, , and therefore a still larger upsetting moment. The elastic forces produced
in the column by the bending action tend to resist further bending. When the maximum
available resisting moment exactly equals the upsetting moment, the column is at the point
of incipient buckling and the axial load at this time is called the critical buckling load,
for the column.
The critical buckling load for a column can be calculated by using the basic differen-
tial equation6 for the deﬂection curve of a beam subjected to a bending moment, which is
(2-25)
where 
is the lateral column deflection at any location along the axis, is the mo-
ment of inertia of the cross section about the axis around which bending takes place, and
E is the modulus of elasticity for the material. Referring to Figure 2.6(b) and equation
(2-24), at the time when the critical buckling load is applied, the upsetting moment may
be calculated as
(2-26)
whereupon the governing differential equation of (2-25) becomes
(2-27)
or, deﬁning 
as
(2-28)
(2-29)
The general solution of (2-29) is
(2-30)
where 
and 
are constants of integration that may be determined from the boundary con-
ditions, which are
(2-31)
Evaluating constants and eliminating trivial cases, (2-30) yields
(2-32)
 sin kL = 0
v = 0  at  x = L
v = 0  at  x = 0
B
A
v = A cos kx + B sin kx
d2v
dx2 + k2v = 0
k2 = Pcr
EI
k2
EI d2v
dx2 = -Pcrv
1Mu2cr = Pcrv
I
v1x2
EI d2v
dx2 = -M
Pcr,
v
P
v
Mu = Pv
Mu
6See, for example, ref. 3, 4, or 5.

38 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
P
(a)
(b)
P
P
(c)
P
(d)
L
L
L
L
Figure 2.7
Frequently encountered end con-
straints for columns. (a) Pinned-
pinned Le  L. (b) Fixed-free 
Le  2L. (c) Fixed-ﬁxed 
Le  L/2. (d) Fixed-pinned 
Le
0.7L.
L
The smallest nonzero value of 
that satisﬁes (2-32) is that which makes the argument
equal to ; that is
(2-33)
or, utilizing (2-28),
(2-34)
and, solving for the critical buckling load 
,
(2-35)
This expression for the smallest critical load that will produce buckling in a pinned-
end column is called Euler’s equation for buckling of a pinned-end column, and 
is
called Euler’s critical load for a pinned-end column.
Columns with Other End Constraints
If the column ends are not pinned, the boundary conditions differ from (2-31) and the
resulting critical load is different from (2-35). One convenient way to obtain expressions
for critical buckling loads for columns with various types of end constraint, such as
those shown in Figure 2.7, is to introduce the concept of effective column length into the
Euler buckling equation (2-35). The effective length
of any column is defined as the
length of a pinned-pinned column that would buckle at the same critical load as the ac-
tual column. The direction of the applied column load must remain parallel to the orig-
inal column axis. Using the concept of equivalent length, we can write the critical
buckling load expression for any type of column-end constraint by putting the proper
value of equivalent length into the Euler equation (2-35). Thus, for any elastic column,
buckling load is given by
(2-36)
where the values of 
for several types of end constraint are given in Table 2.1.
For real columns it will often be found that the ends may be partially but not com-
pletely ﬁxed, in which case the equivalent length will lie between the pinned-pinned case
Le
Pcr = p2EI
L2
e
Le
Pcr
Pcr = p2EI
L2
Pcr
A
Pcr
EI L = p
kL = p
p
k

Elastic Instability and Buckling 39
of 
and the ﬁxed-ﬁxed case of 
, depending on the effective rotational
spring rate at the end points.7
Inelastic Behavior and Initially Crooked Columns
To account for inelastic behavior of a column if the induced stress levels exceed the elastic
range, Engesser suggested in 1889 that the Euler expression for critical buckling load be
modiﬁed by using the tangent modulus
, rather than Young’s modulus, E. The tangent mod-
ulus is deﬁned to be the local slope of the engineering stress-strain curve for the material, or
(2-37)
The tangent modulus may be conveniently determined graphically from a scale plot
of the engineering stress-strain diagram or by digital simulation.8 The critical buckling
load equation, often called the tangent modulus equation or the Euler–Engesser equation,
may be written from (2-36) as
(2-38)
or, alternatively,
(2-39)
where 
is the minimum radius of gyration for the cross section of the column, 
is the corresponding area moment of inertia for the cross section, 
is the cross-sectional
area, and the ratio 
is often called the effective slenderness ratio for the column.
Clearly, the critical buckling load is greatly enhanced by designing a column with a low
slenderness ratio.
The Euler–Engesser equation (2-39), a relatively simple expression for determiation
of the critical load for a column, gives good agreement with experimental results in both
the elastic and inelastic range.9
Aside from the Euler–Engesser relationship, a number of empirical column design re-
lationships have been developed to account for the effects of inelastic behavior. Of these,
Le>k
A
I
k = 2I>A
Pcr
A =
p2Et
1Le>k22
Pcr = p2EtI
L2
e
Et = ds
de
Et
Le = 0.5L
Le = L
TABLE 2.1 Effective Lengths for Several Types of Column
End Constraint
Effective Length 
for 
End Constraint
Actual Column Length L
Both ends pinned
One end pinned, one end ﬁxed
One end ﬁxed, one end free
Both ends ﬁxed
Le = 0.5L
Le = 2L
Le L 0.7L
Le = L
Le
7See, for example, ref. 6, p. 256
8Another means of determining the tangent modulus is to differentiate the Ramberg–Osgood equation, an empiri-
cal stress-strain equation that is valid well into the plastic range. See, for example, ref. 6, p. 20, for the Ramberg–
Osgood equation and associated material constants for various steel, aluminum, and magnesium alloys.
9See, for example, ref. 7, p. 585.

the secant formula is of special interest since it allows direct consideration of initial
eccentricity or column crookedness. The secant formula may be expressed as
(2-40)
where 
is the yield strength of the material, 
is the eccentricity of the axial load with
respect to the centroidal axis of the column cross section, c is the distance from the cen-
troidal axis to the outer ﬁber, k is the appropriate radius of gyration, 
is the appropriate
equivalent column length, 
is the tangent modulus, A is the cross-sectional area of the
column, and the ratio 
is deﬁned as the critical unit load for the column. Although
the critical unit load has the dimensions of stress, it should not be treated as a stress
because of its nonlinear character.
Because the derivation of (2-40) is based on the premise that equal couples exist at the
locations of the column end constraints, and that the maximum lateral deﬂection occurs at
midspan, the secant formula is valid only for columns that meet these conditions. For
example, the secant formula is valid for the column shown in Figures 2.7(a), (b) and (c),
but not valid for the column shown in Figure 2.7(d).
The secant formula is not very convenient for calculation purposes since the critical
unit load cannot be explicitly isolated, but with the aid of a computer, or by appropriate
graphical techniques, it can be employed satisfactorily. It should be observed also that 
(2-40) is undeﬁned for zero eccentricity, but for very small eccentricities it approaches the
Euler buckling curve as a limit for long columns and approaches the simple compressive
yielding curve as a limit for short columns. This is shown in Figure 2.8.
Column Failure Prediction and Design Considerations
A designer must be aware that either of two potential failure modes may govern column
failure, namely, (1) compressive yielding or (2) buckling. This may be expressed as 
FIPTOI (failure is predicted to occur if)
(2-41)
Pcr
A Ú Sypc
Pcr>A
Et
Le
e
Syp
Pcr
A =
Syp
1 + ec
k2 secc Le
2kA
Pcr
AEt
d
40 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Critical unit load, (Pcr/A), ksi
Slenderness ratio, Le/k
0
50
100
150
200
Euler's curve
Yield strength, Syp
ec/k2 = 0.1
0.3
0.6
1.0
250
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 2.8
Secant buckling equation plotted for various
eccentricities. Euler’s curve and the compres-
sive yielding curve, as shown, are asymptotes
as the column eccentricity approaches zero.
Modulus of elasticity E  30  106 psi.

or if
(2-42)
Whichever of these expressions gives the lower value of allowable column load P will gov-
ern. If (2-41) governs, the column is said to be “short,” and compressive yielding is the
governing failure mode. If (2-42) governs, the column is said to be “long,” and column
buckling is the governing failure mode. This may be depicted graphically by plotting 
(2-41) and (2-42) as unit load versus slenderness ratio, as shown in Figure 2.9. The inter-
section of the yielding curve with the buckling curve at B represents the slenderness ratio
transition from short to long columns, as indicated. As a practical matter, however, the tran-
sition from short to long columns is blurred by unknown factors, such as load eccentricity,
initial crookedness, local yielding or others, requiring designer judgment when using (2-41)
and (2-42) in the vicinity of B. Column-end constraints are sometimes different in two dif-
ferent planes, as for example in a connecting rod end that is essentially pinned in one prin-
cipal plane and ﬁxed in the other principal plane. It is important to recognize that selection
of the appropriate radius of gyration and appropriate effective column length depends on
which plane of buckling is under consideration. Two separate column analyses might be
required in such a case to deﬁne the more critical buckling condition. Finally, it should be
noted that all the foregoing developments are for primary buckling of the column as a
whole, where the shape of the cross section does not change signiﬁcantly. In certain cases,
usually involving thin-walled sections such as tubes or rolled shapes, local buckling may
occur, in which a signiﬁcant local change in the cross section takes place. Local buckling
must be considered separately, and the ﬁnal design of the column must be based on its abil-
ity to resist both primary buckling and local buckling under the applied loads.
Example 2.5 Critical Column-Buckling Load
The compressive stress-strain curve for 7075-T7351 aluminum alloy is given in Figure
E2.5. A hollow cylindrical bar of this material has a 4-inch outside diameter with a 
-inch
wall thickness. If a 9-ft long column is constructed with one end ﬁxed and one end free [as
in Figure 2.7(b)], calculate the critical buckling load according to
a.
Euler’s equation
b.
The Euler–Engesser equation
18
Pcr
A Ú
p2E
aLe
k b
2
Elastic Instability and Buckling 41
Le
i
2
=
Buckling
Sypc
Pcr
A
=
Pcr
A
Unit load, P/A
Short columns
Long columns
Slenderness
ratio, Le/i
2E
B
Yielding
Safe
                   column
                              design
Figure 2.9
Regions of column behavior.

c.
The secant formula, assuming zero eccentricity
d.
The secant formula, assuming a load eccentricity of 
inch off the axial centerline of
the column
e.
The secant formula, assuming a load eccentricity of 1 inch off the axial centerline of 
the column
Solution
a.
Using Euler’s equation (2-36), and effective length 
 2L from Table 2.1,
b.
Using the Euler–Engesser equation (2-39)
where
so
or
0.657Pcr = 3.97 *  10-4Et
Pcr
p
4 34.02 - 3.7524
=
p2Et
c
219 *  122
1.37
d
2
k = A
I
A =
b
p
64 34.04 - 3.7544
p
4 34.02 - 3.7524
= 1.37
Pcr
A =
p2Et
1Le>k22
Pcr = p2EI
L2
e
=
p2110.5 * 1062c p
64 14.04 - 3.7542d
3219 * 12242
= 6350-lb critical load
Le
18
42 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Example 2.5 
Continues
Compressive tangent modulus, million psi
Strain, in. per in.
Compressive stress, ksi
Critical unit load, ksi
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
80
 Su = 68,000 psi
Syp = 57,000 psi
Stress-strain curve
Tangent
modulus, Et
Figure E2.5
Stress-strain and compressive 
tangent modulus curves for 
7075-T7351 aluminum alloy. 
See ref. 8, p. 3-232.

Solving simultaneously with the 
curve of Figure E2.5 requires an iterative process.
Using 
lb as a starting point, gives 
Next, the critical unit load for 
lb may be calculated as
Reading into Figure E2.5 to the 
curve with a critical unit load of 4170 psi gives
Since both values of Et agree, no further iteration is required, and the compatible solu-
tion is
and
Thus for this case, the Euler solution and Euler–Engesser solution give the same result.
c.
For zero eccentricity 
, the secant formula (2-40) is undeﬁned and furthermore 
(2-40) is not valid for ﬁxed-free end condtions.
d.
The secant formula (2-40) is not valid for ﬁxed-free end conditions.
e.
The secant formula (2-40) is not valid for ﬁxed-free end conditions.
1e = 02
Pcr = 6350-lb critical load
Et = 10.5 * 106 psi
Et = 10.5 * 106 psi
Et
Pcr
A = 0.657163502 = 4170 psi
Pcr = 6350
Et =
0.657163502
3.97 * 10-4 = 10.5 * 106 psi
Pcr = 6350
Et
Elastic Instability and Buckling 43
Buckling of Elements Other Than Columns
Although column buckling is an important case of elastic instability, other machine
elements may also buckle under certain conditions. For example, elastic instability may be
induced when a torsional moment is applied to a long thin rod, when a bending moment is
applied to a thin deep beam, or when a thin-walled tube is subjected to external pressure.
The long thin rod buckles by trying to coil, the thin deep beam buckles by twisting later-
ally, and the externally pressurized thin-walled tube buckles by folding or wrinkling.
The equations for the onset of buckling for these three cases may be written as shown
here, but many other cases are presented in the literature.10
Torsion of a Long Thin Rod
The governing equation for the onset of buckling for the case shown in Figure 2.10(a) is
(2-43)
where
critical torsional buckling moment, in-lb
Young’s modulus, psi
area moment of inertia, in4
length, in
L =
I =
E =
1Mt2cr =
1Mt2cr = 2pEI
L
10See, for example, refs. 5, 7, 9, and 10.

Bending of a Thin Deep Beam
The governing equation for onset of buckling for the case shown in Figure 2.10(b) is
(2-44)
where
critical buckling load, lb
Young’s modulus, psi
area moment of inertia about y-axis, in4
shear modulus, psi
property of cross section relating torque 
to angle of twist 
in
; for a thin rectangle 
beam length, in
beam depth, in
beam thickness (width), in
constant depending on type of loading and type of support (see Table 2.2)
Externally Pressurized Thin-Walled Tube
The governing equation for the onset of buckling for the case shown in Figure 2.10(c) is
(2-45)
valid only for a long tube with free ends, that is, for
(2-46)
where
critical external buckling pressure, psi
length of tube, in
Young’s modulus, psi
wall thickness, in
tube radius, in
Poisson’s ratio
v =
r =
t =
E =
l =
  pcr =
L 7 4.90r A
r
t
pcr =
0.25Et 3
11 - v22r 3
K =
t =
d =
L =
Je = dt 3>3
u = MtL>GJe
u
Mt
Je =
G =
Iy =
E =
  Pcr =
Pcr =
K2GJe EIy
L2
44 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
P
(a) Torsion of a long thin rod
(b) Bending of a deep thin beam
(c) Externally pressurized
thin-walled tube
L
L
y
d
t
x
l
p
r
t
Mt
Figure 2.10
Some potential elastic in-
stability cases other than
columns.

Elastic Instability and Buckling 45
TABLE 2.2 Buckling Constant K for Various Beam Loading
Conditions
Type of Beam
Type of Loading
K
Cantilever
P (lb) concentrated at free end
4.013
Cantilever
q (lb/in) distributed over length L
12.85
Simply supported
P (lb) concentrated at center
16.93
Simply supported
q (lb/in) distributed over length L
28.3
Example 2.6 Buckling of a Beam in Bending
A sheet-steel cantilevered bracket of rectangular cross section 3 mm by 100 mm is ﬁxed at
one end with the 100 mm dimension vertical. The bracket, which is 350 mm long, must sup-
port a vertical load P at the free end. The properties for the steel material are Su  565 MPa,
Syp  310 MPa, and the elongation in 50 mm  16 percent. Determine the maximum load
P that can be placed vertically at the free end without inducing failure, and identify the gov-
erning failure mode.
Solution
Both yielding and buckling are potential failure modes. Both should be checked. For buck-
ling failure, the critical load is given by (2-44) as
where
4.013 (from Table 2.2)
79 MPa
dt3/3  0.1(0.003)3/3  9  104 m4 (for thin rectangles)
207 MPa
dt3/12  0.1(0.003)3/12  2.25  1010 m4
0.35 m
Hence
For yielding failure, assuming no stress concentration effects, the critical point is at the
outer ﬁber at the ﬁxed end, where bending stress is
Setting 
the corresponding critical load 
becomes
Since the critical buckling load Pcr is lower than the critical yielding load Pypcr, buckling
is the governing failure mode and the critical failure load is
Pf = Pcr = 1861 N
Pyp-cr =
Syptd2
6L
= 310 * 106(0.003)(0.10)2
6(0.35)
= 4429 N
Pyp-cr
s = Syp = 310 MPa,
s = Mc
I
= PLc
I
= PL(d/2)
td3/12
= 6PL
td2
Pcr = 4.0132(77 * 109)(9 * 10-10)(207 * 109)(2.25 * 10-10)
(0.35)2
= 1861 N
L =
Iy =
E =
Je =
G =
K =
Pcr =
K2GJeEly
L2

2.6 Shock and Impact
The rapid application of forces or displacements to a structure or a machine part often pro-
duces stress levels and deformations very much larger than would be generated by the
same forces and displacements applied gradually. Such rapidly applied loads or displace-
ments are usually called shock or impact loads. Whether the loading on a structure should
be considered quasistatic or as impact loading is often judged by comparing the time of
application of the load, or rise time, with the longest natural period of the structure. If the
rise time is more than about three times the longest natural period, the loading may usu-
ally be considered as quasistatic. If the rise time is less than about one-half the longest nat-
ural period, it is usually necessary to consider the loading as impact or shock loading. For
quasistatic loading a designer is usually interested only in the maximum value of the load.
For shock loading, not only is the peak load of importance, but also the rise time and the
impulse (area under the force versus time curve).
Impact loading may be generated in machines or structures in various ways. For
example, a rapidly moving load, such as a train moving across a bridge, generates impact
loading. Suddenly applied loads, such as produced during combustion in the power stroke
of an internal combustion engine, and direct impact loads, such as the drop of a forging
hammer, produce shock loads. Inertial loads produced by large accelerations, such as dur-
ing the crashing of an aircraft or automobile, in most cases generate conditions of shock
or impact. When impact loading is repetitive, conditions of impact fatigue, impact wear,
or impact fretting may be induced.11 It is also important to note that material properties,
such as ultimate strength, yield strength, and ductility, may be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by
impact loading conditions.12
Stress Wave Propagation Under Impact Loading Conditions
When a force is rapidly applied to a region of the boundary of an elastic body, the particles
in a thin layer of material directly under the region of application are set into motion; the
remainder of the body, remote from the loading, remains undisturbed for some ﬁnite length
of time. As time passes the thin region of moving particles expands and propagates into the
body in the form of an elastic deformation wave. Behind the wave front the body is
deformed and the particles are in motion. Ahead of the wave front the body remains unde-
formed and at rest. If the geometry of the body is simple and uniform, and if the applied
force is well deﬁned and uniformly applied, classical equations for wave propagation in
elastic media may be utilized to calculate stresses and deformations in the body.13
Complicating factors such as boundary support, material damping, local yielding, irregular
geometry, and nonuniform load application may be accounted for by more advanced meth-
ods. Using the wave propagation model, and considering the inﬂuencing factors just listed,
it has been found that propagating waves reﬂect internally from boundaries of the body and
interact with each other, sometimes canceling and sometimes reinforcing to produce local
regions of high stress or strain due to the impact loading. Although the wave propagation
model provides a good concept of the actual physical behavior of a body under impact con-
ditions, calculation of stresses and deformations using this method is complicated, and
beyond the scope of this text. A simpler method based on conservatiion of energy will be
utilized here to approximate maximum stresses and deﬂections under impact loading.
46 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
11See 2.3.
12See ref. 1, pp. 562–569.
13See, for example, ref. 1, pp. 533–561.

Energy Method of Approximating Stress and Deﬂection Under
Impact Loading Conditions
For simple machine members the maximum stress or deﬂection under impact conditions
may be approximated by utilizing the concept of conservation of energy, wherein the ex-
ternal work done on a structure must be equal to the potential energy of strain stored in the
structure (if losses are assumed to be negligible). To utilize this energy method, a designer
proceeds by equating the external work to the stored strain energy, putting the energy ex-
pressions in terms of stress or deﬂection, and solving for the stress or deﬂection.
For example, in the case of the simple tension member shown in Figure 2.11, the mass
of weight W is allowed to fall through height h before it contacts the pan at the end of the
tension bar. The resistance offered by the bar brings the weight W to a halt, and in the
process it stretches the bar a distance y as shown, storing strain energy in the bar. In using
the energy method to estimate the maximum stress in the bar due to this impact loading, it
is assumed that:
1.
The inertial resistance of tension bar and weight pan is negligible; that is, the mass of
the bar and pan is much smaller than the striking mass.
2.
The deﬂection of the bar is directly proportional to the applied force and is not a func-
tion of time.
3.
The material obeys Hooke’s law, that is, remains in the linear elastic range.
4.
No energy is lost in the impact.
Under these assumptions, the maximum stress may be estimated by the energy method.
The external energy, EE, may be calculated as the change in poential energy of the strik-
ing mass during its fall, whence
(2-47)
Since the bar is assumed to remain in the linear elastic range, Hooke’s Law states that
(2-48)
from which the end deﬂection y may be expressed in terms of stress , length l, and mod-
ulus of elasticity E as
(2-49)
Utilizing this expression for the deﬂection, (2-47) may be written as
(2-50)
The strain energy, 
, stored in the bar at the time of maximum deﬂection 
may be
expressed as the product of the average force applied times the deﬂection, or
(2-51)
However, for this simple tension bar of cross-sectional area 
(2-52)
Fmax = smax A
A
SE = Faveymax = a0 + Fmax
2
b ymax
y
SE
EE = Wah + smaxl
E
b
ymax = smaxl
E
s
smax = Ee = Eymax
l
EE = W1h + ymax2
Shock and Impact 47
A
W
y
h
l
Figure 2.11
Simple tension member
subjected to impact load-
ing caused by a falling
weight.

which may be substituted into (2-51), together with (2-49), to give
(2-53)
Equating the external energy expression of (2-50) to the strain energy expression of (2-53)
then gives
(2-54)
or
(2-55)
Dividing equation (2-55) by 
gives
(2-56)
which may be solved by the quadratic formula to give a maximum value of
(2-57)
This is an energy-method estimate of the maximum stress that will be developed in the
tension bar due to the impact of weight 
falling from rest through height h. A similar
expression for the maximum end deﬂection 
may be written by combining (2-57) with
(2-49) to give
(2-58)
It is interesting to note in (2-57) that under impact loading the maximum stress may be
reduced not only by increasing the cross-sectional area 
but also by decreasing the mod-
ulus of elasticity 
or increasing the length of the bar. Thus, it is apparent that the impact
situation is quite different from the case of static loading in which the stress in the bar is
independent of the modulus of elasticity and the length of the bar. The bracketed expres-
sion of (2-57) and (2-58) is called the impact factor.
It is also interesting to consider the limiting case of (2-57) for which the drop height
is zero. This limiting case, in which the striking mass is held just in contact with the
weight pan and then released from zero height, is called a suddenly applied load. From 
(2-57), with 
, the stress developed in a bar subjected to a suddenly applied load is
(2-59)
Thus, the maximum stress developed by suddenly applying load W to the end of the
bar is twice as large as the maximum stress developed in the bar by slowly applying the
1smax2suddenly
applied
= 2 W
A = 21smax2static
h = 0
h
l
E
A
ymax = Wl
AEc1 + A1 + 2hEA
Wl d
ymax
W
smax = W
A c1 + A1 + 2hEA
Wl d
s2
max - a2W
A b smax - 2WhE
Al
= 0
1Al>2E2
s2
maxa Al
2Eb - smaxaWl
E b - Wh = 0
Wah + smaxl
E
b = s2
max
2E 1Al2
SE = asmaxA
2
b asmaxl
E
b = s2
max
2E 1Al2
48 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective

same load W. Similarly, from (2-58) the maximum deﬂection generated by a suddenly
applied load is twice the deﬂection produced under static loading, whence
(2-60)
If the weight of the bar shown in Figure 2.11 is not negligibly small, as was assumed, the
expressions of (2-57) and (2-58) are somewhat modiﬁed to account for the fact that some of
the energy of the falling weight is used to accelerate the mass of the bar. If the bar is assumed
to have a weight of per unit length of the bar, then (2-57) and (2-58) are modiﬁed to
(2-61)
and
(2-62)
If the stress level generated by the impact exceeds the yield strength of the material,
Hooke’s Law no longer holds and the equations just developed are not valid. However, it
is still possible to estimate stress and deﬂection under such conditions.14
To maximize the resistance of machine or structural members to impact loading, it is
important to distribute the maximum stress as uniformly as possible. To illustrate, the two
specimens shown in Figure 2.12 may be compared under static and impact loading. Note
that both specimens have the same length, have the same minimum cross-sectional area,
and are made of the same material. The effects of stress concentration will be neglected
for this comparison.
Under conditions of static loading, it may be observed that the load 
required to pro-
duce ﬁrst yielding is, for both bars in Figure 2.12,
(2-63)
where 
is the yield strength of the material.
Syp
Pfy = A1Syp
Pfy
ymax = Wl
AE ≥1 +
a
1 + 2hEA
Wl
±
1
1 + ql
3W
≤¥
smax = W
A ≥1 +
a
1 + 2hEA
Wl
±
1
1 + ql
3W
≤¥
q
1ymax2suddenly
applied
= 21ymax2static
Shock and Impact 49
l
(a)
(b)
A1
A1
A2 = 2A1
l/3
l/3
l/3
Figure 2.12
Conﬁguration of two specimens used in comparing
the effects of geometry under static and impact
loading. Conﬁguration (a) is superior because
stress is uniformly distributed throughout.
14See, for example, ref. 1, p. 530 ff.

Next, the total strain energy stored in each of the bars may be calculated at the time
of ﬁrst yielding. This total strain energy stored is, of course, also equal to the external
energy required to initiate yielding in each case. Utilizing (2-53), we may write the total
strain energy 
stored in the bar of Figure 2.12(a) as
(2-64)
In calculating the total strain energy 
stored in the bar of Figure 2.12(b), it must be
recognized that the stress level in the two end segments will be lower than the stress level
in the central segment by the ratio 
. Thus, again utilizing (2-53) in piecewise fashion,
(2-65)
Since the area 
is given in Figure 2.12 to be twice 
, (2-65) becomes
(2-66)
or
(2-67)
Thus,
(2-68)
From this result it is evident that the energy stored in the specimen of Figure 2.12(b)
when yielding begins is only two-thirds of the energy stored in the specimen of Figure
2.12(a) when yielding begins, in spite of the larger total volume in the specimen of Figure
2.12(b). In other words, the impact resistance of design (a), with its smaller total volume,
is signiﬁcantly superior to the impact resistance of design (b) in Figure 2.12. Furthermore,
if stress concentration effects had been considered, design (b) would have been even worse
by comparison.
The key to success in designing members for maximum resistance to impact loading
is to assure that the maximum stress is uniformly distributed throughout the largest possi-
ble volume of material. Grooved and notched members are very poor in impact resistance
because for these conﬁgurations there always exist small, highly stressed volumes of
material. A relatively minor impact load may in such cases produce fracture. Thus, members
that contain holes, ﬁllets, notches, or grooves may be subject to abrupt fracture under
impact or shock loading.
Ub = 2
3 Ua
Ub = 2
3 c
Syp
2
2E 1A1l2d
Ub =
S2
yp
2E aA1l
3 b +
S2
yp
8E a4A1l
3 b
A1
A2
Ub =
S2
yp
2E A1a l
3 b + 2 μ
cSypaA1
A2
b d
2
2E
A2a l
3 b ∂
A1>A2
Ub
Ua =
S 2
yp 
2E  1A1l2
Ua
50 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Example 2.7 Impact Loading on a Beam
A simply supported steel beam is 1.5 meters long and has a rectangular cross section 
25 mm wide by 75 mm deep. A weight of 350 N is dropped from a height h at midspan.
a.
If the yield strength of the material is Syp  275 MPa and if beam mass is neglected,
what drop height would be required to produce ﬁrst evidence of yielding of the beam?
b.
What is the impact factor under these conditions?

Shock and Impact 51
Solution
a.
For a simply supported beam the mid-span deﬂection under quasistatic loading is (see 
Table 4.1, case 1)
and the corresponding maximum normal stress is, at mid-span
Thus,
From (2-51)
Substituting from 
and 
above
Using (2-47)
Equating SE to EE, solving for 
and using the deﬁnition of 
Substituting known numerical values
Equating this to the yield strength and solving for h
275 * 106 = 56 * 105c1 + A1 +
2h
115.9 * 10-6 d
:
h = 0.134 m
= 56 * 105c1 + A1 +
2h
115.9 * 10-6 d
smax =
350(1.5)(0.075/2)
4[(0.025)(0.075)3/12]
c1 + A1 +
2h
115.9 * 10-6 d
smax =
WLc
4I c1 + A1 + 2(48)Elh
WL3
d = WLc
4I c1 + A1 + 2h
yst
d
yst
smax
EE = WAh + ymaxB = Wah + smaxL2
12Ec b
SE = a2Ismax
Lc
b a smaxL2
12Ec b = smax
2
IL
6Ec2
ymax
smax
SE = Faveymax = Wymax>2
ymax = W = a L3
48EIb = a4Ismax
Lc
b a L3
48EIb = smaxL2
12 Ec
smax = s = Mc
I
=
aW
2 b a L
2 bc
I
= WLc
4I
Q W = 4Ismax
Lc
yst = WL3
48EI =
300(1.5)3
48A207 * 109B C(0.025)(0.075)3>12D
= 115.9 * 10-6 m

2.7 Creep and Stress Rupture
Creep in its simplest form is the progressive accumulation of plastic strain in a specimen or
machine part under stress at elevated temperature over a period of time. Creep failure occurs
when the accumulated creep strain results in a deformation of the machine part that exceeds
the design limits. Creep rupture is an extension of the creep process to the limiting condition
where the stressed member actually separates into two parts. Stress rupture is a term used in-
terchangeably by many with creep rupture; however, others reserve the term stress rupture
for the rupture termination of a creep process in which steady-state creep is never reached,
and use the term creep rupture for the rupture termination of a creep process in which a
period of steady-state creep has persisted. Figure 2.13 illustrates these differences.
Creep strains of engineering signiﬁcance are not usually encountered until the operat-
ing temperatures reach a range of approximately 35 to 70 percent of the melting point on
a scale of absolute temperature. The approximate melting temperatures for several sub-
stances are shown in Table 2.3.
Early creep studies were reported by a French engineer who was motivated to study
time-dependent elongations of wire ropes, used for bridge suspension, that exceeded elas-
tic predictions. Not until after World War I, however, did creep failure become important
as a failure mode. Since that time many applications have been identified in which creep
failure may govern the design. Load-carrying members operating in the temperature
range from 1000F to 1600F are found in power plants, refineries, and chemical pro-
cessing plants. Furnace parts are routinely exposed to temperatures of 1600F to 2200F.
52 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Creep strain
Time
Steady-state creep (Stage II)
Transient creep (Stage I)
Creep
rupture
Stress
rupture
Accelerating
creep (Stage III)
Figure 2.13
Illustration of creep and stress rupture.
Thus, a 350 N weight must be dropped from a height of at least 134 mm to produce
initial yielding of the mid-span outer ﬁbers of the beam.
b.
The impact factor for this case is
IF = c1 + A1 +
2(0.134)
115.9 * 10-6 d = 49.1
Example 2.7 
Continues

Creep and Stress Rupture 53
Gas turbine rotor blades are subjected to temperatures of 1200 F to 2200 F, together with
high centrifugal stresses. Rocket nozzles and spacecraft nose cones are subjected to even
higher temperatures for brief periods of time. Skin temperatures of Mach 7 aircraft have
been estimated at about 5000F, with aerodynamic and structural consequences of creep
deformation, creep buckling, and stress rupture becoming critical design considerations.
Creep deformation and rupture are initiated in the grain boundaries and proceed by
sliding and separation. Thus, creep rupture failures are intercrystalline, in contrast, for
example, to the transcrystalline failure topography exhibited by room-temperature fatigue
failures. Although creep is a plastic ﬂow phenomenon, the intercrystalline failure path
gives a rupture surface that has the appearance of brittle fracture. Creep rupture typically
occurs without necking and without warning. Current state-of-the-art knowledge does not
permit a reliable prediction of creep or stress rupture properties on a theoretical basis.
Further, there seems to be little or no correlation between the creep properties of a mate-
rial and its room-temperature mechanical properties. Therefore, test data and empirical
methods of extending these data are relied on heavily for prediction of creep behavior
under anticipated service conditions.
Predictions of Long-Term Creep Behavior
Much time and effort have been expended in attempting to devise good short-time creep
tests for accurate and reliable prediction of long-term creep and stress rupture behavior. It
appears, however, that really reliable creep data can be obtained only be conducting long-
term creep tests that duplicate actual service loading and temperature conditions as nearly
as possible. Unfortunately, designers are unable to wait for years to obtain design data
needed in creep failure analysis. Therefore, certain useful techniques have been developed
for approximating long-term creep behavior based on a series of short-term tests.
Data from creep testing may be cross plotted in a variety of different ways. The basic
variables involved are stress, strain, time, temperature, and perhaps strain rate. Any two of
these basic variables may be selected as plotting coordinates, with the remaining variables
to be treated as parametric constants for a given set of curves. Three commonly used meth-
ods for extrapolating short-time creep data to long-term applications are the abridged
method, the mechanical acceleration method, and the thermal acceleration method. In the
abridged method of creep testing the tests are conducted at several different stress levels
°
°
TABLE 2.3 Melting Temperatures1
Material
Hafnium carbide
7030
3887
Graphite (sublimes)
6330
3500
Tungsten
6100
3370
Tungsten carbide
5190
2867
Titanium
3260
1795
Platinum
3180
1750
Chromium
3000
1650
Iron
2800
1540
Stainless steels
2640
1450
Steel
2550
1400
Aluminum alloys
1220
660
Magnesium alloys
1200
650
Lead alloys
605
320
1From ref. 11.
°C
°F

54 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
and at the contemplated operating temperatures. The data are plotted as creep strain ver-
sus time for a family of stress levels, all run at constant temperature. The curves are plot-
ted out to the laboratory test duration and then extrapolated to the required design life.
In the mechanical acceleration method of creep testing, the stress levels used in the
laboratory tests are signiﬁcantly higher than the contemplated design stress levels, so the
limiting design strains are reached in a much shorter time than in actual service. The data
taken in the mechanical acceleration method are plotted as stress level versus time for a
family of constant strain curves, all at a constant temperature. The stress rupture curve may
also be plotted by this method. The constant strain curves are plotted out to the laboratory
test duration and then extrapolated to the design life.
The thermal acceleration method involves laboratory testing at temperatures much
higher than the actual service temperature expected. The data are plotted as stress versus
time for a family of constant temperatures where the creep strain produced is constant for
the whole plot. Stress rupture data may also be plotted in this way. The data are plotted out
to the laboratory test duration and then extrapolated to the design life.
Creep testing guidelines usually dictate that test periods of less than 1 percent of the
expected life should not be deemed to give signiﬁcant results. Tests extending to at least
10 percent of the expected life are preferred where feasible.
In addition to these graphical data-extrapolation methods for predicting long-term
creep behavior, several prediction theories have been proposed to correlate short-time
elevated temperature tests with long-term service performance at more moderate temper-
atures. The most widely used of these theories is the Larson–Miller theory,15 which
postulates that for each combination of material and stress level there exists a unique value
of a parameter P that is related to temperature and time by the equation
(2-69)
Larson and Miller tested this equation by predicting actual creep and rupture results for
some 28 different materials with good success. By using (2-69) it is a simple matter to ﬁnd
a short-term combination of temperature and time that is equivalent to any desired long-
term service requirement. For example, for any given material at a speciﬁed stress level,
the test conditions listed in Table 2.4 should be equivalent to the corresponding operating
conditions shown.
Good agreement between theory and experiment has been conﬁrmed by other inves-
tigators using the Larson–Miller parameter for a wide variety of materials, including sev-
eral plastics, in predicting long-term creep behavior and stress rupture performance.
t = time in hours to rupture or to reach a specified value of creep strain
C = constant, usually assumed to be 20
® = temperature, °F
where  P = Larson–Miller parameter, constant for a given material and stress level
P = 1® + 46021C + log10t2
15See ref. 12.
TABLE 2.4 Equivalent Conditions Based on Larson–Miller
Parameter
Operating Condition
Equivalent Test Condition
10,000 hours at 
13 hours at 
1000 hours at 
12 hours at 
1000 hours at 
12 hours at 
1000 hours at 
2.2 hours at 400°F (204°C)
300°F (150°C)
1500°F (816°C)
1350°F (732°C)
1350°F (732°C)
1200°F (650°C)
1200°F (650°C)
1000°F (538°C)

Creep under Uniaxial State of Stress
Uniaxial creep and stress rupture tests of 100 hours (4 days), 1000 hours (42 days), and
10,000 hours (420 days) duration are common, with longer-duration testing of 100,000
hours (11.5 years) being performed in a few cases. Certain recent high-performance
applications have given rise to short-term creep testing that measures duration in minutes
rather than hours or years. For example, in some cases creep test durations of 1000 minutes,
100 minutes, 10 minutes, and 1 minute have been used.
It is of interest to note that with an increase in temperature the static ultimate strength,
yield strength, and modulus of elasticity all tend to decrease, whereas the elongation and
reduction in area tend to increase. The stress concentration effect due to a geometrical
notch is also reduced at elevated temperatures.
Many relationships have been proposed to relate stress, strain, time, and temperature
in the creep process. If one investigates experimental creep strain versus time data, it will
be observed that the data are close to linear for a wide variety of materials when plotted
on log-strain versus log-time coordinates. Such a plot is shown in Figure 2.14 for three dif-
ferent materials. An equation describing this type of behavior is
(2-70)
A, a = empirical constants
t = time
where  d = true creep strain
d = At a
Creep and Stress Rupture 55
Time, hours
Creep, in. per in.
Creep, in. per in.
0.1
1
10
100
1000
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.00001
0.00001
0.0001
0.001
0.0001
0.001
b
a
b
a
b
a
Scale
fig. C
Scale
fig. A
Scale
fig. B
A High-purity aluminum wire
B Medium hard-drawn copper wire
Specimen failed
C Sand-cast aluminum-alloy
bar tested at 600° F
Figure 2.14
Creep curves for three materials
plotted on log-log coordinates.
(From ref. 13.)

56 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Differentiating with respect to time and setting 
and 
, gives
(2-71)
This equation represents a variety of different types of creep strain versus time curves,
depending on the magnitude of the exponent n. If n is zero, the behavior is termed constant
creep rate. This type of creep behavior is most commonly found at high temperatures. If
the exponent n is unity, the behavior is termed logarithmic creep. This type of creep
behavior is displayed by rubber, glass, and certain types of concrete, as well as by metals
at lower temperatures. If the exponent n lies between zero and 1, the behavior is termed
parabolic creep. This type of creep behavior occurs at intermediate and high temperatures.
The inﬂuence of stress level 
on creep rate can often be represented by the empirical
expression
(2-72)
Assuming the stress 
to be independent of time, (2-72) may be integrated to yield the
true creep strain
(2-73)
If the constant 
is small compared with 
, as it often is, the result is called the log-
log stress-time creep law, given as 
(2-74)
As long as the instantaneous deformation upon load application and the Stage I tran-
sient creep are small compared to Stage II steady-state creep, (2-74) is useful as a design
tool. With this expression a designer may calculate the stress required at a speciﬁed tem-
perature to hold creep deformation within speciﬁed limits. In Table 2.5 the constants B and
N are evaluated for ﬁve materials and temperatures, where time t is in days.
Methods are also available for calculating true creep strain under multiaxial states of
stress 16 but are beyond the scope of this text.
d = Bts N
Bts N
C¿
d = Bts N + C¿
s
d
#
= BsN
s
d
#
= bt -n
11 - a2 = n
aA = b
TABLE 2.5 Constants for Log-Log Stress-Time Creep Law1
Material
Temperature
B
N
°F
°C
(in2/lb)N per day
(mm2/N)N per day
1030 steel
400
6.9
1040 steel
400
8.6
2Ni-0.8Cr-0.4Mo steel
454
3.0
12Cr steel
454
4.4
12Cr-3W-0.4Mn steel
550
1.9
1See ref. 14, p. 82. 
2175 * 10-16
15 * 10-16
1020
1450 * 10-27
10 * 10-27
850
1450 * 10-20
10 * 10-20
850
2320 * 10-46
16 * 10-46
750
6960 * 10-38
48 * 10-38
750
16See, for example, ref. 1, p. 471 ff.
Example 2.8 Design to Prevent Excessive Creep
It is desired to design a solid cylindrical tension member 5 feet long, made of 1030 steel,
to support a 10,000-lb load for 10 years at 750 F without exceeding 0.1-inch creep de-
formation. What diameter should the bar be made to prevent failure prior to the end of
the 10-year design life?
°

Creep and Stress Rupture 57
Solution
From (2-74), the failure stress, 
, may be calculated as
or
where the constants, 
and , are read from Table 2.5.
The diameter of the bar corresponding to incipient failure in 10 years, , may then be
calculated from
whence
It should be noted that in actual practice a safety factor would typically be incorporated
into the calculation, resulting in a somewhat larger design diameter.
df = A
4F
psf
= A
4110,0002
p123,2002 = 0.74 inch
sf = F
A = 4F
pd2
f
df
N
B
sf = c
0.1>15 * 122
148 * 10-382110 * 3652
d
1>6.9
= 23,200 psi
sf = c d
Bt d
1>N
sf
Cumulative Creep Prediction
There is at the present time no universally accepted method for estimating the creep strain
accumulated as a result of exposure for various periods of time at different temperatures and
stress levels. However, several different techniques for making such estimates have been
proposed. The simplest of these is a linear hypothesis suggested by E. L. Robinson17. A
generalized version of the Robinson hypothesis may be written as follows: If a design limit
of creep strain 
is speciﬁed, it is predicted that the creep strain 
will be reached when
(2-75)
where
time of exposure at the ith combination of stress level and temperature
time required to produce creep strain 
if entire exposure were held constant
at the th combination of stress level and temperature 
Stress rupture may also be predicted by (2-75) if the 
values correspond to stress rup-
ture. This prediction technique gives relatively accurate results if the creep deformation is
dominated by Stage II steady-state creep behavior.
Li
i
dD
Li =
ti =
a
k
i=1
ti
Li
= 1
dD
dD
Example 2.9 Cumulative Creep
A sand-cast aluminum alloy creep tested at 600 F results in the data shown in Figure
2.14(C), curve b, when subjected to a stress level of 10,000 psi. A solid square support
bracket of this material is 1 inch  1 inch  4 inches long and is subjected to a direct
°
17See, ref. 14

58 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
tensile load of 10,000 lb in the 4-inch direction. The ambient temperature cycle is 380 F
for 1200 hours, then 600 F for 2 hours, and then 810 F for 15 seconds. How many of these
cycles would you predict could be survived by the bracket if the design criterion is that the
bracket must not elongate more than 0.10 inch?
Solution
As given, one ambient temperature cycle is
The limiting design elongation is given as
hence the limiting design strain is
Using the Larson–Miller parameter (2-69) to convert (tA) and (tc) to 600
equivalent
times of exposure,
whence, for 
operation, the equivalent time, 
, may be calculated from (2-69) as
or
Likewise,
so,
or
Reading from Figure 2.14(C), curve b, using 
and noting that
for both the test data and the proposed support bracket,
Next, using the Robinson hypothesis (2-75) and setting 
equal to the number of 
repeated temperature cycles required to produce the limiting design strain 
,
or
to produce the limiting elongation.
N = 35 cycles
Nc0.0195
530
+
2
530 + 13.02
530 d = 1
dD
N
L0.025 = 530 hours
s = 10,000 psi
dD = 0.025
tC-eq = 13.02 hours at 600°F
22,382 = 1600 + 4602120 + log10 tC-eq2
PC = 1810 + 4602120 + log10 0.00422 = 22,382
tA-eq = 0.0195 hour at 600°F
19,387 = 1600 + 4602120 + log10 tA-eq2
tA-eq
600°F
PA = 1380 + 460)120 + log10 12002 = 19,387
°F
dD = ¢L
L
= 0.1
4.0 = 0.025 in
in
¢L = 0.10 inch
tC = 15 seconds at 810°F
tB = 2 hours at 600°F
tA = 1200 hours at 380°F
°
°
°
Example 2.9 
Continues

Wear and Corrosion 59
2.8 Wear and Corrosion
Wear and corrosion probably account for a majority of all mechanical failures in the ﬁeld,
and an extensive research literature has built up in both areas. In spite of this, however,
widely accepted quantitative life prediction techniques have not yet been developed.
During the past three decades, substantial progress has been made in quantitative wear-
prediction methods. Some of these prediction models are brieﬂy discussed in the follow-
ing paragraphs. Quantitative corrosion prediction remains a highly specialized area for
which mechanical designers usually seek the help of corrosion engineers.
Wear
Wear may be deﬁned as the undesired cumulative change in dimensions brought about by
the gradual removal of discrete particles from contacting surfaces in motion, due predom-
inantly to mechanical action. Corrosion often interacts with the wear process to change the
character of the surfaces of wear particles through reaction with the environment.
Wear is, in fact, not a single process but a number of different processes that may take
place independently or in combination. It is generally accepted that there are at least ﬁve
major subcategories of wear,18 including adhesive wear, abrasive wear, corrosive wear,
surface fatigue wear, and deformation wear.
The complexity of the wear process may be better appreciated by recognizing that
many variables are involved, including the hardness, toughness, ductility, modulus of
elasticity, yield strength, fatigue properties, and structure and composition of the mating
surfaces, as well as geometry, contact pressure, temperature, state of stress, stress distri-
bution, coefﬁcient of friction, sliding distance, relative velocity, surface ﬁnish, lubricants,
contaminants, and ambient atmosphere at the wearing interface. Clearance versus contact-
time history of the wearing surfaces may also be an important factor in some cases.
Adhesive wear is often characterized as the most basic or fundamental subcategory of
wear since it occurs to some degree whenever two solid surfaces are in rubbing contact,
and remains active even when all other modes of wear have been eliminated. The phe-
nomenon of adhesive wear may be best understood by recalling that all real surfaces, no
matter how carefully prepared and polished, exhibit a general waviness upon which is
superposed a distribution of local protuberances or asperities. As two surfaces are brought
into contact, therefore, only a relatively few asperities actually touch. Thus, even under
very small applied loads the local pressures at the contact sites become high enough to
exceed the yield strength of one or both surfaces, and local plastic ﬂow ensues. If the con-
tacting surfaces are clean and uncorroded, the very intimate contact produced by this local
plastic ﬂow brings the atoms of the two contacting surfaces close enough together to cause
cold welding. Then if the surfaces are subjected to relative sliding motion, the cold-welded
junctions must be broken. Whether they break at the original interface or elsewhere within
the asperity depends upon surface conditions, temperature distribution, strain-hardening
characteristics, local geometry, and stress distribution. If the junction is broken away from
the original interface, a particle of one surface is transferred to the other surface, marking
one event in the adhesive wear process. Later sliding interactions may dislodge the trans-
ferred particle as a loose wear particle, or it may remain attached. If properly controlled,
the adhesive wear rate may be low and self-limiting, often being exploited in the “wear-
in” process to improve mating surfaces such as bearings or gears so that full ﬁlm lubrica-
tion may be effectively used.
18See p. 120 of ref. 15; see also ref. 16.

60 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
One quantitative estimate of the amount of adhesive wear may be made as  follows:19
If 
is the average wear depth, 
the apparent contact area, 
the total sliding dis-
tance, and 
the normal force pressing the surfaces together,
(2-76)
or
(2-77)
where 
is the mean nominal contact pressure between bearing surfaces and
is a wear coefﬁcient that depends on the probability of formation of a trans-
ferred fragment and the yield strength (or hardness) of the softer material. Typical values
of the wear constant (Archard constant) for several material pairs are shown in Table 2.6,
and the inﬂuence of lubrication on the wear constant is indicated in Table 2.7.
Noting from (2-77) that
(2-78)
it may be observed that if the ratio 
is experimentally found to be constant, 
(2-77) should be valid. Experimental evidence has been accumulated20 to conﬁrm that for
dadh>1pmLs2
kadh = dadh
pmLs
k
k
kadh = k>9Syp
pm = W>Aa
dadh = kadh pmLs
dadh = a k
9Syp
b a W
Aa
bLs
W
Ls
Aa
dadh
19See ref. 15 and Chs. 2 and 6 of ref. 17.
20See pp. 124–125 of ref. 15.
TABLE 2.6 Archard Adhesive Wear Constant k for
Various Unlubricated Material Pairs in
Sliding Contact1
Material Pair
Wear Constant k
Zinc on zinc
160  103
Low-carbon steel on low-carbon steel
45  103
Copper on copper
32  103
Stainless steel on stainless steel
21  103
Copper (on low-carbon steel)
1.5  103
Low-carbon steel (on copper)
0.5  103
Bakelite on bakelite
0.02  103
1From Ch. 6 of ref. 17, Copyright © 1966, reprinted by permission of
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
TABLE 2.7 Order of Magnitude Values for Adhesive Wear Constant k
Under Various Conditions of Lubrication1
Lubrication
Metal (on metal)
Nonmetal
Condition
Like
Unlike
(on metal)
Unlubricated
Poor lubrication
Average lubrication
Excellent lubrication
to 
to 
1From Ch. 6 of ref. 17, Copyright © 1966, reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2 * 10-6
10-7
2 * 10-6
10-7
2 * 10-6
5 * 10-6
2 * 10-5
2 * 10-5
5 * 10-6
2 * 10-4
2 * 10-4
5 * 10-6
2 * 10-4
5 * 10-3

Wear and Corrosion 61
a given material pair this ratio is constant up to mean nominal contact pressures approxi-
mately equal to the uniaxial yield strength. Above this level the adhesive wear coefﬁcient
increases rapidly, with attendant severe galling and seizure.
Thus the average wear depth for adhesive wear conditions may be estimated as
(2-79)
Three major wear-control methods have been deﬁned, as follows21: principle of pro-
tective layers, including protection by lubricant, surface ﬁlm, paint, plating, phosphate,
chemical, ﬂame-sprayed, or other types of interfacial layers; principle of conversion, in
which wear is converted from destructive to permissible levels through better choice of
metal pairs, hardness, surface ﬁnish, or contact pressure; and principle of diversion, in
which the wear is diverted to an economical replaceable wear element that is periodically
discarded and replaced as “wearout” occurs. These general wear-control methods pertain
not only to adhesive wear but to abrasive wear as well.
In the case of abrasive wear, the wear particles are removed from the surface by
plowing and gouging action of the asperities of a harder mating surface or by hard parti-
cles entrapped between the rubbing surfaces. This type of wear is manifested by a system
of surface grooves and scratches, often called scoring. The abrasive wear condition in
which the hard asperities of one surface wear away the mating surface is commonly
called two-body wear, and the condition in which hard abrasive particles between the two
surfaces cause the wear is called three-body wear.
If 
is the average wear depth, 
the apparent contact area, 
the total sliding dis-
tance, and W the normal force pressing the surfaces together, the average abrasive wear
depth may be estimated as
(2-80)
or
(2-81)
where 
is mean nominal contact pressure between bearing surfaces, 
is total
sliding distance, and 
is an abrasive wear coefﬁcient that depends on the
roughness characteristics of the surface and the yield strength (or hardness) of the softer
material. Values of 
must be experimentally determined for each material combination
and surface condition of interest, although useful data for approximating 
have been
generated for several cases, some of which are shown in Table 2.8.
In selecting materials for abrasive wear resistance, it has been established that both
hardness and modulus of elasticity are key properties. Increasing wear resistance is asso-
ciated with higher hardness and lower modulus of elasticity since both the amount of elas-
tic deformation and the amount of elastic energy that can be stored at the surface are
increased by higher hardness and lower modulus of elasticity.
When two surfaces operate in rolling contact, the wear phenomenon is quite different
from the wear of sliding surfaces just described. Rolling surfaces in contact result in Hertz
contact stresses that produce maximum values of shear stress slightly below the surface. As
the rolling contact zone moves past a given location on the surface, the subsurface peak
shear stress cycles from zero to a maximum value and back to zero, thus producing a cyclic
stress ﬁeld. Such conditions may lead to fatigue failure by the initiation of a subsurface
kabr
kabr
kabr = k1>9Syp
Ls
pm = W>Aa
dabr = kabrpmLs
dabr = a k1
9Syp
b a W
Aa
b Ls
Ls
Aa
dabr
unstable galling and seizure for pm Ú Syp
dadh = kadhpmLs  for  pm 6 Syp
21See p. 36 of ref. 18.

62 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
crack that propagates under repeated cyclic loading, and that the crack may ultimately prop-
agate to the surface to spall out a macroscopic surface particle to form a wear pit (this will
be discussed more in Chapter 5). This action, called surface fatigue wear, is a common fail-
ure mode in rolling element bearings, gears, cams, and all machine parts that involve rolling
surfaces in contact. Empirical tests by bearing manufacturers have shown the life N in
cycles to be approximately
(2-82)
where 
is the bearing load and C is a constant for a given bearing. It may be noted that
the life is inversely proportional to approximately the cube of the load. The constant C has
been deﬁned by the American Bearing Manufacturer’s Association (ABMA) as the basic
load rating,22 which is the radial load C that a group of identical bearings can sustain for
a rating life of 1 million revolutions of the inner ring, with 90 percent reliability. It must
be noted that since surface fatigue wear is basically a fatigue phenomenon, all the inﬂu-
encing factors of 2.6 must be taken into account.
Surface durability and determination of gear-tooth wear-load criteria must also con-
sider the surface fatigue wear phenomenon. In some types of gearing, such as helical gears
and hypoid gears, a combination of rolling and sliding exists; thus adhesive wear, abrasive
wear, and surface fatigue wear are all potential failure modes. Only through proper design,
good manufacturing practice, and use of a proper lubricant can the desired design life be
attained. Experimental life-testing is essential in complex applications such as these if
proper ﬁeld operation is to be achieved.
Example 2.10 Design to Prevent Excessive Wear
An experiment was performed using a cylindrical 1045 steel slider heat treated to a hard-
ness of Rockwell C-45 
pressed edgewise against a 52100 steel disk with
no lubricant. It was found that for a relative sliding velocity of 0.2 meters per second the
0.8-mm diameter slider, loaded by a 180-N axial force, produced a slider wear volume of
during a test of 40 minutes duration.
If the same material combination is to be used in a slider bearing application at a slid-
ing velocity of 0.9 meters per second under a bearing load of 
, and if the slider
P = 450 N
9.5 * 10-4 mm3
(Syp = 884 MPa)
P
N = aC
P b
3.33
22See 11.5.
TABLE 2.8 Abrasive Wear Constant k1 for Various Materials in Sliding
Contact as Reported by Different Investigators1
Materials
Wear Type
Particle Size 
Wear Constant 
Many
Two-body
—
Many
Two-body
110
Many
Two-body
40–150
Steel
Two-body
260
Many
Two-body
80
Brass
Two-body
70
Steel
Three-body
150
Steel
Three-body
80
Many
Three-body
40
1See p. 169 of ref. 17, Copyright © 1966, reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2 * 10-3
4.5 * 10-3
6 * 10-3
16 * 10-3
24 * 10-3
80 * 10-3
120 * 10-3
150 * 10-3
180 * 10-3
k1
1m2

is to be square, what side dimension, s, should it have to assure a lifetime of 1000 hours,
if a maximum wear depth of 1.25 mm can be tolerated?
Solution
To determine the slider dimensions either (2-79) or (2-81) may be rearranged to give, for
the slider bearing application,
(1)
or
The load 
and the wear depth 
are known design requirements, and
sliding distance may be calculated as
Then
The value of the wear constant 
may be determined from equation (2-78), together
with the experimental data, as
where
Therefore
From above
So the slider would tentatively be made 3.6 mm on a side.
It still remains to verify the limiting conditions in the application of (1). For the equation
to be valid it must be true that 
, or
Therefore the design is valid, and the 3.6 mm slider is adopted as the ﬁnal design.
pm = P
Aa
=
150
(0.0036)2 = 11.5 … 884
pm … Syp
s = 1.08 * 10621.11 * 10-17 = 0.00359 m
kw =
1.89 * 10-6
358 * 106(480)
= 1.11 * 10-17 m2/N
Ls = (0.2 m/s)(60 s/min)(40 min) = 480 m
pm = P
Aa
=
180
p(0.0008)2/4
= 358 Pa
dw = V
Aa
= 9.5 * 10-4
p(0.8)2/4
= 1.89 * 10-3 mm
kw =
dw
pmLs
kw
s = A
450(3.24 * 106)kw
0.00125
= 1.08 * 1062kw
Ls = 1000 hours a0.9 m
s b a3600
s
hourb = 3.24 * 106 m
dw = 1.25
P = 450 N
s2 = PkwLs
dw
Pm = P
Aa
= P
s2 =
dw
kwLs
Wear and Corrosion 63

64 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Corrosion
Corrosion may be deﬁned as the undesired deterioration of a material through chemical or
electrochemical interaction with the environment, or destruction of materials by means
other than purely mechanical action.
Failure by corrosion occurs when the corrosive action renders the corroded device
incapable of performing its design function. Corrosion often interacts synergistically with
another failure mode, such as wear or fatigue, to produce the even more serious combined
failure modes, such as corrosion-wear or corrosion-fatigue. Failure by corrosion and protec-
tion against failure by corrosion have been estimated to cost in excess of $30 billion annu-
ally in the United States alone.23 Although much progress has been made in recent years in
understanding and controlling this important failure mode, much remains to be learned. It is
important for the mechanical engineering designer to become acquainted with the various
types of corrosion so that corrosion-related failures can be avoided.
The complexity of the corrosion process may be better appreciated by recognizing that
many variables are involved, including environmental, electrochemical, and metallurgical
aspects. For example, anodic reactions and rate of oxidation, cathodic reactions and rate of
reduction, corrosion inhibition, polarization or retardation, passivity phenomena, effects of
oxidizers, effects of velocity, temperature, corrosive concentration, galvanic coupling, and
metallurgical structure all inﬂuence the type and rate of the corrosion process.
Corrosion processes have been categorized in many different ways. One convenient
classiﬁcation divides corrosion phenomena into the following types:24 direct chemical
attack, galvanic corrosion, crevice corrosion, pitting corrosion, intergranular corrosion,
selective leaching, erosion corrosion, cavitation corrosion, hydrogen damage, biological
corrosion, and stress corrosion cracking.
Direct chemical attack is probably the most common type of corrosion. Under this
type of corrosive attack the surface of the machine part exposed to the corrosive medium
is attacked more or less uniformly over its entire surface, resulting in a progressive deteri-
oration and dimensional reduction of sound load-carrying net cross section. The rate of cor-
rosion due to direct attack can usually be estimated from relatively simple laboratory tests
in which small specimens of the selected material are exposed to a well-simulated actual
environment, with frequent weight change and dimensional measurements carefully taken.
Direct chemical attack may be prevented or reduced in severity by any one or a com-
bination of several means, including selecting proper materials to suit the environment;
using plating, ﬂame spraying, cladding, hot dipping, vapor deposition, conversion coat-
ings, organic coatings, or paint to protect the base material; changing the environment by
using lower temperature or lower velocity, removing oxygen, changing corrosive concen-
tration, or adding corrosion inhibitors; using cathodic protection in which electrons are
supplied to the metal surface to be protected either by galvanic coupling to a sacriﬁcial
anode or by an external power supply; or adopting other suitable design modiﬁcations.
Galvanic corrosion is an accelerated electrochemical corrosion that occurs when two
dissimilar metals in electrical contact are made part of a circuit completed by a connecting
pool or ﬁlm of electrolyte or corrosive medium. Under these circumstances, the potential
difference between the dissimilar metals produces a current ﬂow through the connecting
electrolyte, which leads to corrosion, concentrated primarily in the more anodic (less noble)
metal of the pair. This type of action is completely analogous to a simple battery cell.
Current must ﬂow to produce galvanic corrosion, and, in general, more current ﬂow means
more serious corrosion.
23See p. 1 of ref. 19.
24See p. 28 of ref. 20.

Wear and Corrosion 65
The accelerated galvanic corrosion is usually most severe near the junction between the
two metals, decreasing in severity at locations farther from the junction. The ratio of cathodic
area to anodic area exposed to the electrolyte has a signiﬁcant effect on corrosion rate. It is
desirable to have a small ratio of cathode area to anode area. For this reason, if only one of
two dissimilar metals in electrical contact is to be  coated for corrosion protection, the more
noble or more corrosion-resistant metal should be coated. Although this at ﬁrst may seem
the wrong metal to coat, the area effect, which produces anodic corrosion rates of 102 to
103 times cathodic corrosion rates for equal areas, provides the logic for this assertion.
Galvanic corrosion may be reduced in severity or prevented by one or a combination
of several steps, including the selection of material pairs as close together as possible in
the galvanic series (see Table 3.14), electrical insulation of one dissimilar metal from the
other as completely as possible; maintaining as small a ratio of cathode area to anode area
as possible; proper use and maintenance of coatings; the use of inhibitors to decrease the
aggressiveness of the corroding medium; and the use of cathodic protection in which a
third metal element anodic to both members of the operating pair is used as a sacriﬁcial
anode that may require periodic replacement.
Crevice corrosion is an accelerated corrosion process highly localized within crevices,
cracks, and other small-volume regions of stagnant solution in contact with the corroding
metal. For example, crevice corrosion may be expected in gasketed joints; clamped inter-
faces; lap joints; rolled joints; under bolt and rivet heads; and under foreign deposits of
dirt, sand, scale, or corrosion product.
To reduce the severity of crevice corrosion, or prevent it, it is necessary to eliminate
the cracks and crevices. This may involve caulking or seal-welding existing lap joints;
redesign to replace riveted or bolted joints by sound, welded joints; ﬁltering foreign mate-
rial from the working ﬂuid; inspection and removal of corrosion deposits; or using nonab-
sorbent gasket materials.
Pitting corrosion is a very localized attack that leads to the development of an array
of holes or pits that penetrate the metal. The pits, which typically are about as deep as they
are across, may be widely scattered or so heavily concentrated that they simply appear as
a rough surface. The mechanism of pit growth is virtually identical to that of crevice
corrosion, except that an existing crevice is not required to initiate pitting corrosion. The
pit is probably initiated by a momentary attack due to a random variation in ﬂuid concen-
tration or a tiny surface scratch or defect.
Measurement and assessment of pitting corrosion damage is difﬁcult because of its
highly local nature. Pit depth varies widely and, as in the case of fatigue damage, a statis-
tical approach must be taken in which the probability of generating a pit of speciﬁed depth
is established in laboratory testing. Unfortunately, a signiﬁcant size effect inﬂuences depth
of pitting, and this must be taken into account when predicting service life of a machine
part based on laboratory pitting corrosion data.
The control or prevention of pitting corrosion consists primarily of the wise selection
of material to resist pitting. However, since pitting is usually the result of stagnant condi-
tions, imparting velocity to the ﬂuid may also decrease pitting corrosion attack.
Because of the atomic mismatch at the grain boundaries of polycrystalline metals, the
stored strain energy is higher in the grain boundary regions than in the grains themselves.
These high-energy grain boundaries are more chemically reactive than the grains. Under
certain conditions, depletion or enrichment of an alloying element or impurity concentra-
tion at the grain boundaries may locally change the composition of a corrosion-resistant
metal, making it susceptible to corrosive attack. Localized attack of this vulnerable region
near the grain boundaries is called intergranular corrosion.
Stress corrosion cracking is an extremely important failure mode because it occurs in
a wide variety of different alloys. This type of failure results from a ﬁeld of cracks produced

66 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
in a metal alloy under the combined inﬂuence of tensile stress and a corrosive environment.
The metal alloy is not attacked over most of its surface, but a system of intergranular or
transgranular cracks propagates through the matrix over a period of time.
Stress levels that produce stress corrosion cracking may be well below the yield
strength of the material, and residual stresses as well as applied stresses may produce fail-
ure. The lower the stress level, the longer is the time required to produce cracking, and
there appears to be a threshold stress level below which stress corrosion cracking does not
occur.25
Prevention of stress corrosion cracking may be attempted by lowering the stress below
the critical threshold level, choice of a better alloy for the environment, changing the
environment to eliminate the critical corrosive element, use of corrosion inhibitors, or use
of cathodic protection. Before cathodic protection is implemented, care must be taken to
ensure that the phenomenon is indeed stress corrosion cracking because hydrogen embrit-
tlement is accelerated by cathodic protection techniques.
The remaining corrosion processes are less common and require speciﬁc techniques
to guard against them.26 A designer would typically seek consulting advice on corrosion
prevention from a qualiﬁed corrosion engineer.
2.9 Fretting, Fretting Fatigue, and Fretting Wear
Service failure of mechanical components due to fretting fatigue has come to be recog-
nized as a failure mode of major importance, in terms of both frequency of occurrence and
seriousness of the failure consequences. Fretting wear has also presented major problems
in certain applications. Both fretting fatigue and fretting wear, as well as fretting corrosion,
are directly attributable to fretting action. Basically, fretting action may be deﬁned as a
combined mechanical and chemical action in which the contacting surfaces of two solid
bodies are pressed together by a normal force and are caused to execute oscillatory sliding
relative motion, wherein the magnitude of normal force is great enough and the amplitude
of the oscillatory sliding motion is small enough to signiﬁcantly restrict the ﬂow of fret-
ting debris away from the originating site.27
Damage to machine parts due to fretting action may be manifested as corrosive sur-
face damage due to fretting corrosion, loss of proper ﬁt or change in dimensions due to
fretting wear, or accelerated fatigue failure due to fretting fatigue. Typical sites of fretting
damage include interference ﬁts; bolted, keyed, splined, and riveted joints; points of con-
tact between wires in wire ropes and flexible shafts; friction clamps; small amplitude-
of-oscillation bearings of all kinds; contacting surfaces between the leaves of leaf springs;
and all other places where the conditions of fretting persist. Thus, the efﬁciency and reli-
ability of the design and operation of a wide range of mechanical systems are related to
the fretting phenomenon.
Although fretting fatigue, fretting wear, and fretting corrosion phenomena are poten-
tial failure modes in a wide variety of mechanical systems, there are very few quantitative
design data available, and no generally applicable design procedure has been established
for predicting failure under fretting conditions. However, signiﬁcant progress has been
made in establishing an understanding of fretting and the variables of importance in the
fretting process.
25See p. 96 of ref. 20.
26See refs. 19 and 20, for example.
27See ref. 1.

Fretting, Fretting Fatigue, and Fretting Wear 67
It has been suggested that there may be more than 50 variables that play some role in
the fretting process.28 Of these, however, there are probably only eight that are of major
importance; they are:
1.
The magnitude of relative motion between the fretting surfaces
2.
The magnitude and distribution of pressure between the surfaces at the fretting inter-
face
3.
The state of stress, including magnitude, direction, and variation with respect to time
in the region of the fretting surfaces
4.
The number of fretting cycles accumulated
5.
The material from which each of the fretting members is fabricated, including surface
condition
6.
Cyclic frequency of relative motion between the two members being fretted
7.
Temperature in the region of the two surfaces being fretted
8.
Atmospheric environment surrounding the surfaces being fretted
These variables interact so that a quantitative prediction of the inﬂuence of any given
variable may be dependent upon one or more of the other variables in any speciﬁc appli-
cation. Also, the combinations of variables that produce a very serious consequence in
terms of fretting fatigue damage may be quite different from the combinations of variables
that produce serious fretting wear damage.
Fretting Fatigue
Fretting fatigue is fatigue damage directly attributable to fretting action. Premature fatigue
nuclei may be generated by fretting through either abrasive pit-digging action, asperity-
contact microcrack initiation, friction-generated cyclic stresses that lead to the formation
of microcracks, or subsurface cyclic shear stresses that lead to surface delamination in the
fretting zone.29 Under abrasive pit-digging action, tiny grooves or elongated pits are pro-
duced at the fretting interface by the asperities and abrasive debris particles moving under
the inﬂuence of oscillatory relative motion. A pattern of tiny grooves is produced in the
fretted region with their longitudinal axes approximately parallel and in the direction of
fretting motion.
The asperity-contact microcrack initiation mechanism proceeds by virtue of the con-
tact force between the tip of an asperity on one surface and another asperity on the mat-
ing surface as they move back and forth. If the initial contact does not shear one or the
other asperity from its base, the repeated contacts at the tips of the asperities give rise to
cyclic or fatigue stresses in the region at the base of each asperity. It has been estimated
that under such conditions the region at the base of each asperity is subjected to large
local stresses that probably lead to the nucleation of fatigue microcracks at these sites.
Such microcracks have longitudinal axes generally perpendicular to the direction of fret-
ting motion.
Friction-generated cyclic-stress fretting action is based on the observation that
when one member is pressed against the other and caused to undergo fretting motion,
the tractive friction force induces a compressive tangential stress component in a volume
of material that lies ahead of the fretting motion, and a tensile tangential stress compo-
nent in a volume of material that lies behind the fretting motion. When the fretting
28See ref. 21.
29See ref. 1, Ch. 14.

68 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
direction is reversed, the tensile and compressive regions change places. Thus, these
regions of material adjacent to the contact zone are subjected to cyclic stresses that gen-
erate fields of micro-cracks whose axes are generally perpendicular to the direction of
fretting motion.
In the delamination theory of fretting, the combination of normal and tangential trac-
tive forces transmitted through the asperity contact sites at the fretting interface produces
a complex multiaxial state of stress, accompanied by a cycling deformation ﬁeld, which
produces subsurface peak shearing stresses and subsurface crack nucleation sites. With
further cycling, the cracks propagate below the surface and approximately parallel to the
surface, ﬁnally branching to the surface to produce a thin wear sheet, which “delaminates”
to become a particle of debris.
Supporting evidence has been generated to indicate that under various circumstances
each of the four mechanisms is active and signiﬁcant in producing fretting damage.
The inﬂuence of the state of stress in the member during the fretting process is shown
for several different cases in Figure 2.15, including the superposition of static tensile or
static compressive mean stresses during fretting. Local compressive stresses are beneﬁcial
in minimizing fretting fatigue damage.
Usually, it is necessary to evaluate the seriousness of fretting fatigue damage in any
speciﬁc design by running simulated service tests on specimens or components. Within the
current state-of-the-art knowledge in the area of fretting fatigue, there is no other safe
course of action open to the designer.
Fretting Wear
Fretting wear is a change in dimensions because of wear directly attributable to the fret-
ting process. It is thought that the abrasive pit-digging mechanism, the asperity-contact
micro-crack initiation mechanism, and the wear-sheet delamination mechanism may all be
Evaluation stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure in completely reversed evaluation test
m = mean stress during fretting
a = stress amplitude during fretting
All fretting tests were "severe fretting"
105
106
107
108
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
m = +70,000 psi, a = 0
m = +70,000 psi, a = 30,000 psi
m = +35,000 psi, a = 0
m = 0, a = 0
m = –35,000 psi, a = 0
m = –70,000 psi, a = 0
m = –70,000 psi, a = 30,000 psi
Nonfretted control data
Figure 2.15
Residual fatigue properties subsequent to
fretting under various states of stress.

active in most fretting wear environments. As in the case of fretting fatigue, there has been
no good model developed to describe the fretting wear phenomenon is a way useful for
design.
Some investigators have suggested that estimates of fretting wear depth may be based
on the classical adhesive or abrasive wear equations, in which wear depth is proportional
to load and total distance slid, where the total distance slid is calculated by multiplying
relative motion per cycle times number of cycles. Although there are some supporting data
for such a procedure,30 more investigation is required before using these estimates as a
general approach.
Prediction of wear depth in an actual design application must in general be based on
simulated service testing.
Minimizing or Preventing Fretting Damage
The minimization or prevention of fretting damage must be carefully considered as a sep-
arate problem in each individual design application because a palliative in one applica-
tion may signiﬁcantly accelerate fretting damage in a different application. For example,
in a joint that is designed to have no relative motion, it is sometimes possible to reduce
or prevent fretting by increasing the normal pressure until all relative motion is arrested.
However, if the increase in normal pressure does not completely arrest the relative motion,
the result may be a nonhomogeneous contact zone in which some regions slip and other
regions do not slip. If partial slip behavior characterizes the contact zone, it may result 
in a signiﬁcant increase in fretting damage instead of preventing it. Recent research
efforts31 have established a fretting test methodology based on fretting maps. Fretting
maps are plots of normal force versus relative displacement amplitude in which either the
running condition or the material response is partitioned into regions of probable fretting
behavior.
For the running condition fretting map (RCFM), the partitioned regions include the
partial slip regime (PSR), the gross slip regime (GSR), and a transition region between
them called the mixed fretting regime (MFR). A fretting test usually starts in the gross slip
regime, then transforms to the partial slip regime as the contacting surfaces change char-
acter during the fretting process.
For the material response fretting map (MRFM), the partitioned regions include the
crack initiation regime, the fretting wear regime, and an indeterminate transition regime
between cracking and wear. Semiquantitative analyses have shown that crack initiation is
more probable in the mixed slip regime, but the mapping technique is conﬁguration speciﬁc,
and, so far, cannot be generalized for use as a quantitative design tool.
Nevertheless, there are several basic principles that are generally effective in minimiz-
ing or preventing fretting. These include:
1.
Complete separation of the contacting surfaces.
2.
Elimination of all relative motion between the contacting surfaces.
3.
If relative motion cannot be eliminated, it is sometimes effective to superpose a large
unidirectional relative motion that allows effective lubrication. For example, the prac-
tice of driving the inner or outer race of an oscillatory pivot bearing may be effective
in eliminating fretting.
4.
Providing compressive residual stresses at the fretting surface; this may be accom-
plished by shot-peening, cold-rolling, or interference ﬁt techniques.
Fretting, Fretting Fatigue, and Fretting Wear 69
30See ref. 22.
31See ref. 23.

70 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
5.
Judicious selection of material pairs.
6.
Use of interposed low shear modulus shim material or plating, such as lead, rubber, or
silver.
7.
Use of surface treatments or coatings as solid lubricants.
8.
Use of surface grooving or roughening to provide debris escape routes and differen-
tial strain matching through elastic action.
Of all these techniques, only the ﬁrst two are completely effective in preventing fret-
ting. The remaining concepts, however, may often be used to minimize fretting damage
and may yield an acceptable design.
2.10 Failure Data and the Design Task
The design task is clear: Create new devices or improve existing devices to provide the
“best” design conﬁguration consistent with the constraints of time, money, and safety, as
dictated by the proposed application and demands of the marketplace. Successful accom-
plishment of the design task depends heavily upon the designer’s ability to recognize and
assess the likelihood that any potential failure mode might jeopardize the proposed
device’s ability to function properly and safely.
Analytical approaches for evaluating the potential seriousness of most failure modes
have been presented in the first 11 sections of this chapter. Success in using these
approaches hinges directly upon the availability of reliable failure strength data specifi-
cally developed for the pertinent failure mode, operating environment, and candidate
material.
Failure strength data are readily available for some failure modes and virtually
nonexistent for others. If reliable data are available, the design task may be accom-
plished with confidence. If data are sparse or unavailable, extrapolations or estimates
must be made, or pertinent experiments completed, before the design task can proceed.
Data or no data, the design task must go forward if the competition is to be met. Thus
the ability to extrapolate or estimate failure strength data is an important design func-
tion, as is the ability of a designer to find access to comprehensive failure strength data-
bases. Professional societies and trade magazines are excellent resources for failure
strength data through handbooks, annual compilations, on-line databases, or CD-ROM
packages. Sources of failure strength data and methods for selecting materials are dis-
cussed in Chapter 3.
2.11 Failure Assessment and Retrospective Design
In spite of all efforts to design and manufacture machines and structures to function
properly without failure, failures do occur. Whether the failure consequences are sim-
ply an annoying inconvenience such as a “binding” support roller on the sliding patio
screen door, or a catastrophic loss of life and property as in the crash of a jumbo jet, it
is the responsibility of the designer to glean all of the information possible from the
failure event so that repeat failures can be avoided in the future. Effective assessment
of service failures usually requires the intense interactive scrutiny of a team of special-
ists, including at least a mechanical designer and a materials engineer trained in failure
analysis techniques. The team often includes a manufacturing engineer and a ﬁeld service
engineer as well. The mission of the failure analysis team is to discover the initiating

cause of failure, identify the best solution, and redesign the product to prevent future
failures.
Techniques utilized in the failure analysis effort include the inspection and documen-
tation of the failure event through direct examination (without touching or altering any fail-
ure surface or other crucial evidence); taking photographs; compilation of eyewitness
reports; preservation of all parts, especially failed parts; and performing pertinent calcula-
tions, analyses, and examinations that may help establish and validate the cause of failure.
The materials engineer may utilize macroscopic examination, low-power magniﬁcation,
microscopic examination, transmission or scanning electron microscopic techniques,
energy-dispersive X-ray techniques, hardness tests, spectrographic analysis, metallo-
graphic examination, or other methods for determining the type of failure, failure location,
any abnormalities in the material, or any other attributes of the failure scenario that may
relate to the potential cause of failure. The designer may perform stress and/or deﬂection
analyses, examine geometry, assess service loading, evaluate potential environmental
inﬂuences, reexamine the kinematics and dynamics of the application, and attempt to
reconstruct the sequence of events leading to failure. Other team members may examine
the quality of manufacture, the quality of maintenance, the possibility of unusual or
unconventional usage by the operator, or other factors that may have played a role in the
service failure. Piecing all of this information together, it is the objective of the failure
analysis team to identify as accurately as possible the probable cause of failure.
As undesirable as service failures may be, the results of a well-executed failure analy-
sis may be transformed directly into improved product reliability by a design team that
capitalizes on service-failure data and failure analysis results. These techniques of retro-
spective design have become important working tools of the profession.
2.12 The Role of Safety Factors; Reliability Concepts
Averting failure of a machine or structure by predicting and correcting potential failure
scenarios at the design stage, before the machine is built, is a key design strategy. By
identifying the probable governing failure mode and tentatively selecting the best avail-
able candidate material, the postulated failure prediction scenarios provide a basis for
choosing shapes and sizes for all parts. Ideally, if loads, environments, and material
properties were perfectly known, the shapes and sizes of machine parts could readily be
determined by simply making sure that pertinent operating loads or stresses never
exceed capacities or strengths at any of the critical points in the machine. Practically,
uncertainties and variabilities always exist in design predictions. Loads are often vari-
able and inaccurately  known, strengths are variable and sometimes inaccurately known
for certain failure modes or certain states of stress, calculation models embody assump-
tions that may introduce inaccuracies in determining dimensions, and other uncertainties
may result from variations in quality of manufacture, operating conditions, inspection,
and maintenance practices. These uncertainties and variabilities clearly complicate the
design task.
Uncertainties in selecting shapes, sizes, and materials that will provide safe, reliable
operation must be directly addressed. To accomplish this failure prevention objective, a
designer has two choices: (1) select a design safety factor that will assure that minimum
strength or capacity safely exceeds maximum stress or load for all foreseeable conditions,
or (2) statistically deﬁne strength or capacity, stress or load, modeling errors, manufactur-
ing variabilities, and variations in operational environment and maintenance, so that the
probability of failure may be kept below a preselected level of acceptability. Because of
The Role of Safety Factors; Reliability Concepts 71

72 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
the difﬁculty and cost of statistically deﬁning many of these variables, a usual ﬁrst choice
is to select an appropriate design safety factor.
2.13 Selection and Use of a Design Safety Factor
In practice, the shapes and sizes of machine parts are usually determined by ﬁrst deﬁning
a design-allowable value for whatever loading severity parameter is selected, whether it
be stress, deﬂection, load, speed, or something else. To determine the design-allowable
value, the critical failure level corresponding to the selected loading severity parameter is
divided by a design safety factor (a number always greater than 1) to account for perceived
uncertainties. Dimensions are then calculated so that maximum operating values of the
selected loading severity parameters are less than design-allowable values. Mathematically,
this may be expressed as
(2-83)
where 
is the design-allowable value of the loading severity parameter, 
is the critical
failure level dictated by the governing failure mode, and 
is the design safety factor cho-
sen by the designer to account for all of the perceived uncertainties and variabilities.
Usually (but not always) the selected loading severity parameter will be stress and the crit-
ical failure level will be critical material strength corresponding to the governing failure
mode. Hence, a more usual form of (2-83) is
(2-84)
where 
is the design-allowable stress, 
is failure strength of the selected material cor-
responding to the governing failure mode, and 
is the selected design safety factor. To
assure a safe design, dimensions are calculated so that maximum operating stress levels are
equal to or less than the design stress.
Selection of a design safety factor must be undertaken with care since there are unac-
ceptable consequences associated with selected values that are either too low or too high.
If the selected value is too small, the probability of failure will be too great. If the selected
value is too large, the size, weight, or cost may be too high. Proper safety factor selection
requires a good working knowledge of the limitations and assumptions in the calculation
models or simulation programs used, the pertinent properties of the proposed materials,
and operational details of the proposed application. Design experience is extremely valu-
able in selection of an appropriate design safety factor, but a rational selection may be
made even with limited experience. The method suggested here breaks the selection down
into a series of semiquantitative smaller decisions that may be weighted and empirically
recombined to calculate an acceptable value for the design safety factor, tailored to the spe-
ciﬁc application. Even experienced designers ﬁnd this approach valuable when faced with
designing a new product or redesigning an existing product for a new application.
To implement the selection of a design safety factor, consider separately each of the
following eight rating factors:
1.
The accuracy with which the loads, forces, deﬂections, or other failure-inducing
agents can be determined
2.
The accuracy with which the stresses or other loading severity parameters can be
determined from the forces or other failure-inducing agents
nd
Sfm
sd
sd =
Sfm
nd
nd
Lfm
Pd
Pd =
Lfm
nd

Selection and Use of a Design Safety Factor 73
3.
The accuracy with which the failure strengths or other measures of failure can be
determined for the selected material in the appropriate failure mode
4.
The need to conserve material, weight, space, or dollars
5.
The seriousness of the consequences of failure in terms of human life and/or property
damage
6.
The quality of workmanship in manufacture
7.
The conditions of operation
8.
The quality of inspection and maintenance available or possible during operation
A semiquantitative assessment of these rating factors may be made by assigning a
rating number, ranging in value from 4 to 4, to each one. These rating numbers (RNs)
have the following meanings:
RN  1
mild need to modify nd
RN  2
moderate need to modify nd
RN  3
strong need to modify nd
RN  4
extreme need to modify nd
Further, if there is a perceived need to increase the safety factor, the selected rating num-
ber is assigned a positive () sign. If the perceived need is to decrease the safety factor,
the selected rating number is assigned a negative () sign.
The next step is to calculate the algebraic sum, , of the eight rating numbers, giving
(2-85)
Using the result from (2-85), the design safety factor, 
, may be empirically estimated
from
(2-86)
or
(2-87)
Using this method, the design safety factor will never be less than 1.15, and rarely larger
than 4 or 5. This range is broadly compatible with the usual list of suggested safety factors
found in most design textbooks or handbooks,32 but 
is speciﬁcally determined for each
application on a more rational basis.
Example 2.11 Determining Design Safety Factor
You have been asked to propose a value for the design safety factor to be used in deter-
mining the dimensions for the main landing gear support for a new executive jet aircraft.
It has been determined that the application may be regarded as “average” in many respects,
but the material properties are known a little better than for the average design case, the
need to conserve weight and space is strong, there is a strong concern about threat to life
and property in the event of a failure, and the quality of inspection and maintenance is
regarded as excellent. What value would you propose for the design safety factor?
nd
nd = 1.15    for t 6 -6
nd = 1 +
110 + t22
100
    for t Ú -6
nd
t = a
8
i=1
1RN2i
t
32See, for example, refs. 24, 25, 26, or 27.

74 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
Solution
Based on the information given, the rating numbers assigned to each of the eight rating
factors might be
Selected Rating 
Rating factor
Number (RN)
1. Accuracy of loads knowledge
0
2. Accuracy of stress calculation
0
3. Accuracy of strength knowledge
1
4. Need to conserve
3
5. Seriousness of failure consequences
3
6. Quality of manufacture
0
7. Conditions of operation
0
8. Quality of inspection/maintenance
4
From (2-85)
and since 
, from (2-86)
The recommended value for a design safety factor appropriate to this application would
be, therefore, nd  1.25. To obtain the design-allowable stress, the material strength corre-
sponding to the governing failure mode, probably fatigue, would be divided by nd  1.25.
Buckling might also be a potential failure mode, in which case the design-allowable axial
load would be determined by dividing the critical buckling load (see 2.5) by nd  1.25.
nd = 1 +
110 - 522
100
= 1.25
t Ú -6
t = 0 + 0 - 1 - 3 + 3 + 0 + 0 - 4 = -5
Example 2.11 
Continues
2.14 Determination of Existing Safety Factor in a Completed
Design: A Conceptual Contrast
To avoid confusion in understanding the term “safety factor” in design deliberations, it is well
to reﬂect upon the dual roles of a designer, one as a synthesist and the other as an analyst. As
a synthesist, the designer must formulate safe, reliable new machines that have not yet been
built. To do this, a design safety factor is selected by the designer, following the guidelines of
2.13, then materials and dimensions are determined in accordance with the chosen design
safety factor. As an analyst, the designer is charged with the task of examining an existing
machine, already built and perhaps in service, to ﬁnd out what existing safety factor has
already been built into the existing machine by someone else. In this case, the designer has no
choice in the existing safety factor; it must be calculated from material properties, dimensions,
and loads that exist. Thus, in contrast to the design safety factor 
, which is selected by a
designer to create a new design, the existing safety factor 
is calculated by a designer based
upon examination of a completed design proposal or a machine already in service.
To calculate an existing safety factor, the critical failure level of the selected loading
severity parameter, 
, is divided by the maximum operating value of the loading sever-
ity parameter, 
, to give
(2-88)
nex =
Lfm
Pmax
Pmax
Lfm
nex
nd

In the more usual context, this may be expressed as
(2-89)
where 
is the critical strength corresponding to the governing failure mode and 
is
the maximum operating stress level at the critical point.
Although 
and 
are clearly related, they are conceptually very different. Keeping
the contrast in mind will help avoid confusion in design discussions.
nd
nex
smax
Sfm
nex =
Sfm
smax
Determination of Existing Safety Factor in a Completed Design: A Conceptual Contrast 75
Example 2.12 Assessment of Probable Failure Mode and Existing Safety Factor
An axially loaded straight cylindrical bar of diameter  0.50 inch is made of 2024-T4
aluminum with ultimate strength 
 68,000 psi, yield strength 
 48,000 psi, and
a fatigue failure strength at 107 cycles of 23,000 psi. The bar is subjected to completely
reversed axial loading of 4000 lb maximum, and has a design life requirement of 107
cycles.
a.
What potential failure modes should be investigated?
b.
What is the existing factor of safety?
Solution
a.
The two most probable candidates for governing failure mode are yielding and fatigue. 
Both should be calculated to determine which one governs.
b.
For yielding,
and
The existing safety factor for yielding then is
For fatigue
Since 
, the existing safety factor for fatigue then is
Since 
, the fatigue failure mode governs; hence the existing safety
factor for this member, as presently designed, is
nex = 1.13
1nex2f 6 1nex2yp
1nex2f = 23,000
20,408 = 1.13
SN=107 = 23,000 psi
1nex2f = SN=107
smax
1nex2yp = 48,000
20,408 = 2.35
smax = Pmax
A
=
4000
p c
10.5022
4
d
= 4000
0.196 = 20,408 psi
1nex2yp =
Syp
smax
Syp
Su
d

2.15 Reliability: Concepts, Deﬁnitions, and Data
A guiding principle followed by effective designers is to utilize as much available quan-
titative information as possible in making design decisions. Therefore, if probabilistic
descriptions are available in the form of statistical data for describing strength distribu-
tions, loading distributions, or variations in environment, manufacturing, inspection,
and/or maintenance practices, these data should be utilized to keep the probability of
failure low, or, to state if differently, to keep the relibility above a prescribed level of
acceptability.
Reliability may be deﬁned as the probability that a machine or machine part will per-
form its intended function without failure for its prescribed design lifetime. If the proba-
bility of failure is denoted by 
, the reliability, or probability of survival, is
. Thus reliability is a quantitative measure of survival success, typically
based on distribution functions veriﬁed by experimental data.
Implementation of the probabilistic design approach requires that the distribution
function (probability density function) be known or assumed for both the stress at the crit-
ical point (and all factors inﬂuencing stress) and the strength at the critical point (and all
factors inﬂuencing strength).
If the probability density function for stress, 
, and the probability density function
for strength, 
, are known, they may be plotted as shown in Figure 2.16. By deﬁnition,
the reliability is the probability that the strength exceeds the stress, or
(2-90)
This corresponds to the area in Figure 5.1 that lies outside the shaded interference area.
The shaded area represents probability of failure, that is, 
. The probability of
failure is sometimes called unreliability.
Three probability density functions of particular interest to a designer are the normal,
the log-normal, and the Weibull distribution functions. Only one of these, the normal dis-
tribution, will be illustrated here, but similar developments are available for the other
two.33 The probability density function 
for the normal distribution is
(2-91)
for  - q
6 x 6
q
f 1x2 =
1
sN 22p
e- 1
2Ax - Nm
Ns B
2
f1x2
P{s Ú S}
R = P{S 7 s} = P{S - s 7 0}
f1S2
f1s2
R = 1-P{failure}
P{failure}
76 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
f(),
f(S)
f()
f(S)

S
Stress
Strength
, S
Interference area (failure region)
Figure 2.16
Probability density functions for stress and
strength, showing interference area (failure
region).
33See, for example, refs. 1, 28, 29, or 30.

Reliability: Concepts, Deﬁnitions, and Data 77
where is a random variable such as stress or strength, 
is the estimated population mean,
and 
is the estimated population standard deviation, where
(2-92)
and
(2-93)
In these expressions, equals the number of items in the population. As a matter of inter-
est, the square of the standard deviation, 
, is deﬁned as the variance. Both variance and
standard deviation are measures of dispersion, or scatter, of a distribution. Conventional
notation for describing a normal distribution is
(2-94)
which is to be read “ is distributed normally with mean 
and standard deviation .” As
shown in Figure 2.17(a), a normal distribution has the well-known bell shape, is symmet-
rical about its mean, and tails off to inﬁnity in both directions. The corresponding normal
cumulative distribution function, 
, is plotted in Figure 2.17(b), where
(2-95)
and
(2-96)
is deﬁned as the standard normal variable, which has a normal distribution with mean of
0 and standard deviation of 1. 
is any speciﬁed value of the random variable . Any nor-
mal distribution with mean 
and standard deviation 
can be transformed into a standard
normal distribution using (2-96). Because all normal distributions can be fully deﬁned by
and , they are called two-parameter distributions. Table 2.9 gives values for the cumu-
lative distribution function 
for the standard normal distribution.
F1X2
sN
mN
sN
mN
X
X0
X = x - mN
sN
F1X2 = P{X … X0} =
L
X
- q
1
22p
e- t 2
2 
dt
F1X2
sN
mN
x
x =
d
N1mN , sN 2
sN 2
n
sN = A
1
n - 1 a
n
i=1
1xi - m22
mN = 1
n a
n
i=1
xi
sN
mN
x
f(x)
f(x) =
F(x)
x
0
(a)
(b)
x
0
1
1
2
1
2
1
2 
e–
x – 

2
; –∞ < x < ∞
Figure 2.17
Plots of the probability density function and the cumulative distribution function for a normal distribu-
tion. (a) Probability density function. (b) Cumulative distribution function.

78 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
TABLE 2.9 Cumulative Distribution Function F(X) for the Standard Normal Distribution, Where 
X
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
.1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
.2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
.3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
.4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
.5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
.6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
.7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7704
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
.8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
.9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
.9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
.9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
.9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
.9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
.9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
.9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
.9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
.9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
.9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
.9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9922
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
.9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
.9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
.9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
.9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
.9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
.9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
.9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
.9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
.9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9998
3.5
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
.9998
3.6
.9998
.9998
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
3.7
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
.9999
3.8
.9428
.9431
.9433
.9436
.9438
.9441
.9443
.9446
.9448
.9450
3.9
.9452
.9454
.9456
.9458
.9459
.9461
.9463
.9464
.9466
.9467
4.0
.9468
.9470
.9471
.9472
.9473
.9474
.9475
.9476
.9477
.9478
4.1
.9479
.9480
.9481
.9482
.9483
.9483
.9484
.9485
.9485
.9486
4.2
.9487
.9487
.9488
.9488
.9489
.9489
.9490
.9500
.9502
.9507
F1X2 
L
X
ˆ
1
22P
e 1t 2>22dt

An important theorem of statistics states that when independent normally distributed
random variables are summed, the resulting sum is itself normally distributed with mean
equal to the sum of the individual distribution means and standard deviation equal to the
square root of the sum of the individual distribution variances. Thus when 
and 
are both normal probability density functions, the random variable 
used in 
(2-90) is also normally distributed with a mean of
(2-97)
and standard deviation
(2-98)
The reliability 
then may be expressed as34
(2-99)
where
(2-100)
is the standard normal variable [see (2-96) and Table 2.9].
t =
y - mN y
sN y
e
-t 2
2  
dt
mN S - mN s
1sN 2
S + s2s
R = P{y 7 0} = P{S - s 7 0} =
1
2p L
q
-
R
sN y = 2sN 2
S + sN 2
s
mN y = mN S - mN s
y = 1S - s2
f1S2
f1s2
Reliability: Concepts, Deﬁnitions, and Data 79
34See, for example, ref. 29.
Example 2.13 Existing Safety Factor and Reliability Level
An axially loaded, straight, cylindrical bar of diameter d  12 mm is made of 2024-T4
aluminum. With experimental data for the material tested under conditions that closely
correspond to actual operating conditions indicate that the yield strength is normally dis-
tributed with a mean value of 330 MPa and standard deviation of 34 MPa. The static load
on the bar has a nominal value of 30 kN, but due to various operational procedures, and
excitations from adjacent equipment, the load has been found to actually be a normally
distributed random variables with standard deviation of 2.2 kN.
a.
Find the existing factor of safety for the bar, based on yielding as a failure mode.
b.
Find the reliability level of the bar, based on yielding as a failure mode.
Solution
a.
Based on yielding, the existing safety factor is 
where
and
whence the existing safety factor is
nex = 330
265 = 1.25
snom = Pnom
A
= 4(30000)
p(0.012)2 = 265 MPa
Syp-nom = 330 MPa
nex = Syp-nom>snom,

System Reliability, Reliability Goals, and Reliability Allocation
Efforts by a designer toward achieving the failure prevention objective at the design stage
often include the tasks of determining the required reliability levels for individual compo-
nents or subsystems that will assure the speciﬁed reliability goal for the whole machine as-
sembly. The process of assigning reliability requirements to individual components to
attain the speciﬁed system reliability goal is called reliability allocation. Although the al-
location problem is complex, the principles may be demonstrated in a straighforward way
by making certain simplifying assumptions.
As a practical matter, designers are well advised to work with a reliability engineer-
ing specialist at this stage. Reliability specialists can provide valuable insights in selecting
distributions that are well suited to the application, data interpretation, experimental de-
sign, reliability allocation, and analytical and simulation techniques for reliability assess-
ment and system optimization.
However, the task of setting appropriate reliability goals lies primarily in the province
of the designer, in cooperation with engineering and company management. The daunting
fact that a reliability of 100 percent can never be achieved forces careful consideration of
potential failure consequences. Choosing reliability levels appropriate and acceptable for
the particular machine application being proposed and selection of reliability goals are
often difﬁcult tasks.35 It is alleged, for example, that engineers seeking an appropriate and
80 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
b.
From given data 
and 
. The estimated 
mean stress may be calculated as
The estimated standard deviation is
hence
These calculations neglect statistical variability in dimensions used to calculate area.
The lower limit of the reliability integral in (2-99) may be calculated as
From Table 2.9, since 
, the reliability corresponding to 
may be 
read as
Thus one would expect that 97.2 percent of all installations would function properly, but 
28 of every 1000 installations would be expected to fail. A decision must be made by 
the designer about the acceptability of this failure rate for this application.
R = 0.9719
X = -1.91
R = 1 - P
X = - mS -
N
ms
N
2 Ns S
2 + Nss
2 = -
330 - 274
2342 + 1.9452 65 = -1.91
s = N(274 MPa, 1.945 MPa)
ss
N
=
2200
113.1 * 10-6 = 1.945 MPa
ms
N
= P
A =
30,000
113.1 * 10-6 = 265 MPa
Syp =d N(330 MPa, 34 MPa)
P =d N(30 kN, 2.2 kN)
Example 2.13 
Continues
35See also 1.8.

acceptable reliability goal during early pioneering efforts in spacecraft design decided that
the probability that a toreador can avoid being gored in a bull ﬁght would also serve as an
acceptable reliability goal for spacecraft design. The aerospace industry speciﬁes a relia-
bility of “ﬁve-nines” (R  0.99999) in many cases, while the “standard” reliability of
rolling element bearings is usually taken to be 
 0.90. Table 2.10 illustrates probability-
of-failure criteria used by some industries. Clearly the selection of an appropriate reliabil-
ity goal depends upon both the consequences of failure and the cost of achieving the
goal.36
For the purpose of making a simpliﬁed reliability analysis at the design stage, the re-
labilities of components and subsystems may be assumed constant over the design life of
the machine. To assess the effects of component or subsystem failure on overall system
performance, a functional block diagram is a helpful tool. For a simpliﬁed analysis, each
block in the diagram represents a “black box” that is assumed to be in one of two states:
failed or functional. Depending upon the arrangement of components in the machine as-
sembly, the failure of a component will have different effects upon the reliability of the
overall machine.
Figure 2.18 illustrates four possible arrangements of components in a machine as-
sembly. The series conﬁguration of Figure 2.18(a), in which all components must function
properly for the system to function, is probably the most common arrangement encoun-
tered in practice. For a series arrangement the system reliability 
is found to be
(2-101)
RS = q
n
i=1
Ri
RS
R
Reliability: Concepts, Deﬁnitions, and Data 81
36For example, in the 1980s Motorola inaugurated the practice of setting allowable failure rates to a very low
value, by design, and named the process Six Sigma. (Six sigma corresponds to a failure rate goal of no more
than about 3.4 failures per million units. By contrast, U.S. industry as a whole operates around three sigma, or
a failure rate of about 66,000 units per million.) Adopting the Six Sigma process, General Electric Company
estimated that spending about $500 million in 1999 on Six Sigma would produce a return of approximately 
$2 billion. See ref. 31.
TABLE 2.10 Reliability-Based Design Goals as a Function of Perceived Hazard
Level1
Suggested Criteria for
Potential Consequences
Designated Hazard
Design-Acceptable 
of Failure
Assessment Category
Probability of Failure
Some reduction in safety margin or
Minor
functional capability.
Signiﬁcant reduction in safety
Major
margin or functional capability.
Device no longer performs its
Hazardous
function properly; small numbers of
serious or fatal injuries may occur.
Complete equipment failure, unable
Catastrophic
to correct the situation; multiple
deaths and/or high collateral
damage may occur.
1Excerpted in part from ref. 11.
… 10-9
10-7-10-9
10-5-10-7
… 10-5

where the right-hand side is the product of the individual component reliabilities. If it is
assumed that the failure probability 
is identical for all components, (2-101) may be rewrit-
ten as
(2-102)
which may be expanded by the binomial theorem to give, neglecting higher-order terms,
(2-103)
From this it may be noted that, for a series arrangement, the system reliability decreases
rapidly as the number 
of series components increases. In general, for series systems, the
system reliability will always be less than or equal to the reliability of the least reliable
component. This is sometimes called the “weakest link” failure model.
The parallel arrangement of Figure 2.18(b), in which the system continues to function
until all components have failed, has a system reliability of
(2-104)
provided that all components are active in the system and that failures do not inﬂuence the
reliabilities of the surviving components. In practice, these assumptions may be invalid if,
for example, a standby redundant component is not activated unless the on-line component
fails, or if the failure rate of surviving components increases as failures occur. If it is as-
sumed that the failure probability is identical for all components, (2-104) may be rewritten as
(2-105)
From (2-105) it may be noted that, for a parallel arrangement, the system reliability
increases as the number of parallel components increases. As a practical matter, however,
designing a parallel system may be difﬁcult and costly, and for a given component relia-
bility, the gain in system reliability slows down rapidly as more parallel components are
added. Nevertheless, the procedure of adding a second component or subsystem in paral-
lel is the basis for the very important fail-safe design concept discussed in 1.8.
Virtually all arrangements of components in a machine assembly may be modeled as
combinations of series and parallel conﬁgurations. Figure 2.18(c), for example, is a series
arrangement of two parallel subsystems, and Figure 2.18(d) shows a parallel arrangement
of two series subsystems. For Figure 2.18(c) there is redundancy at the component level
while for Figure 2.18(d) there is redundancy at the subsystem level. System analysis has
RS = 1 - q p
RS = 1 - q
p
i=1
11 - Ri2
n
RS = 1 - nq
RS = 11 - q2n
q
82 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
…
…
1
1
2
p
2
n
A
B
C
D
(b)
(a)
(c)
A
B
C
D
(d)
Parallel arrangement of p components.
Series arrangement of n components.
Series-parallel arrangement of components
(component level redundancy).
Parallel-series arrangement of components
(subsystem-level redundancy).
Figure 2.18
Block diagrams illustrating var-
ious design arrangements of
components in a machine sys-
tem, from a reliability analysis
point of view.

shown that for a system with a given number of components, component-level redundancy
gives a higher system reliability than subsystem-level redundancy.
The task of simpliﬁed reliability allocation may be accomplished by utilizing a tech-
nique called equal apportionment. This technique models the system reliability as a series
of m subsystems, each having equal reliability . Each subsystem may include one or more
components in series or parallel arrangements. The speciﬁed system reliability then is
(2-106)
and the required component reliability to achieve the speciﬁed system reliability is
(2-107)
1Ri2req’d = c1RS2specified
system
d
1>m
1RS2specified
system
= q
m
i=1
Ri
Ri
Reliability: Concepts, Deﬁnitions, and Data 83
Example 2.14 Component Reliability Required to Meet Speciﬁed Overall Machine-
Reliability Goals
A machine assembly of four components may be modeled as a series-parallel arrangement
similar to that shown in Figure 2.18(c). It has been determined that a system reliability of
95 percent is necessary to meet design objectives.
a.
Considering subsystems A-B and C-D, what subsystem reliability is required to meet 
the speciﬁed 95 percent reliability goal for the machine?
b.
What component reliabilities would be required for A, B, C, and D to meet the 95 per-
cent reliability speciﬁcation for the machine?
Solution
a.
Using (2-107), the required subsystem reliability is
b.
For subsystem A-B, the components A and B are in parallel, hence (2-104) may be 
used to give
or
Hence the system reliability goal of 0.95 can be met only if the subsystem relia-
bilities are at least 0.975. However, because of the redundancy within the subsystems,
components having reliabilities as low as 0.84 can meet the reliability requirements of
the system.
Reliability Data
A designer striving to achieve the failure prevention objective by implementing reliability
methodology at the design stage quickly confronts the need for pertinent, valid, quantita-
tive data relating to both strength and loading. Distributional data deﬁning mean values
Ri = 1 - 21 - RA-B = 1 - 21 - 0.975 = 0.84
RA-B = 1 - 11 - Ri22
Rreq’d = 10.9521>2 = 0.975

and variances in all parameters that affect strength and loading are required. A sufﬁcient
body of pertinent distributional design data rarely exists. Valid and useful new data are
costly and time consuming to collect. At the design stage it is typically necessary to rely
on existing experimental material strength data interpreted statistically, and extrapolated
statistical operational ﬁeld data for loads and environments, gathered from similar service
applications.
Historically, experimental material strength data have often been gathered without re-
porting information now known to be statistically important; in many cases archival infor-
mation, or published histographic information, can be reinterpreted statistically37 to
recover the reliability indices of interest. In addition to probability of failure, other indices
of use might include average time between failures, average duration of system “down-
time,” expected loss of revenue due to failure, or expected loss of manufacturing output
due to failure. In the ﬁnal analysis, to be useful to a designer at the early design stage, prob-
abilistic descriptions of such indices must have the potential to be quantitatively linked to
strength and/or loading distributions. In critical applications, to support design improve-
ment activities, it may become necessary to generate speciﬁc statistical data during the de-
velopment stage or during ﬁeld service monitoring. A review of the fundamental design
steps in Table 1.1 serves to reiterate this concept.
2.16 The Dilemma of Reliability Speciﬁcation versus 
Design Safety Factor
The dilemma for a designer in attempting to implement the “best” failure prevention
strategy often seems to rest upon the choice between the reliability approach and the de-
sign safety factor approach. The spotty availability of pertinent statistical data often
leads a designer to simply ignore the data that are available. Thus the basic principle of
utilizing as much quantitative information as possible when making design decisions is
violated.
Another viewpoint sometimes taken is that when using the probabilistic design ap-
proach (reliability approach), the design safety factor should be abandoned. If, indeed,
probabilistic descriptions were available for strength, load, environment, manufacturing,
inspection, and maintenance practices, there would be no need for a design safety factor.
However, such complete information is rarely, if ever, available to a designer.
Rather than choosing between the two approaches, a more productive viewpoint might
be to combine the best attributes of each in making design decisions. Thus, where well-
deﬁned probabalistic data are available for describing strength, loading, manufacturing
practice, or other design parameters, these quantitative probablistic data might be incor-
porated piecewise in the design safety factor approach. As more precise probabilistic data
are incorporated, the semiquantitative rating numbers (RNs) tend to be driven toward more
negative values, since more precise information in these cases would prompt a perceived
need to lower the design safety factor. The magnitude of the design safety factor calculated
from (2-86) would, in such cases, be driven toward lower values, ultimately approaching
the lower limiting value prescribed by (2-87). Because of using the available probabilistic
information, this approach promotes more precision in making design decisions about ma-
terials and dimensions, and, at the same time, preserves the designer’s ability to account
for uncertainties and variabilities in parameters that are unsupported by statistical data.
The approach has much to recommend it.
84 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
37An excellent example is provided by C. R. Mischke in ref. 30, pp. 1–10.

Example 2.15 Change in Selection of Design Safety Factor as a Result of Higher-
Reliability Strength Data
Since the determination of a design safety factor of 
 1.25 in Example 2.11, an exten-
sive body of experimental data has been discovered for fatigue strength of the material. This
data bank indicates that the fatigue endurance limit 
is normally distributed. Since the
data are extensive, accurate estimates of the mean and standard deviation may be deter-
mined with a high level of conﬁdence. How would this newly discovered body of statistical
data inﬂuence the value of the design safety factor determined in Example 2.11?
Solution
The only change in determining 
from the rating factors would involve reevaluation of
rating number 3, which was chosen as RN 
in Example 2.11. The new, much more
accurate, data might suggest a change in value to RN 
. Thus, from (2.85) for this case
and since 
Using the statistically signiﬁcant new strength data therefore results in a design safety
factor reduction of about 8 percent. It should be cautioned that an 8 percent reduction in de-
sign safety factor does not necessarily correspond to an 8 percent increase in the calculated
design-allowable stress. The reason for this is that the fatigue endurance limit value used in
the calculation of design-allowable stress would (because the probabilistic approach is being
used to deﬁne fatigue strength) now depend upon the choice of an appropriate fatigue
strength reliability level for the application.
nd = 1.15
t 6 -6
t = 0 + 0 - 3 - 3 + 3 + 0 + 0 - 4 = -7
-3
-1
nd
S¿f
nd
Problems 85
2-1. In the context of machine design, explain what is meant by
the terms failure and failure mode.
2-2. Distinguish the difference between high-cycle fatigue and
low-cycle fatigue, giving the characteristics of each.
2-3. Describe the usual consequences of surface fatigue.
2-4. Compare and contrast ductile rupture and brittle fracture.
2-5. Carefully deﬁne the terms creep, creep rupture, and stress
rupture, citing the similarities that relate these three failure modes
and the differences that distinguish them from one another.
2-6. Give a deﬁnition for fretting, and distinguish among the
related failure phenomena of fretting fatigue, fretting wear, and
fretting corrosion.
2-7. Give a deﬁnition of wear failure and list the major subcat-
egories of wear.
2-8. Give a deﬁnition of corrosion failure, and list the major
subcategories of corrosion.
2-9. Describe what is meant by a synergistic failure mode, give
three examples, and for each example describe how the syner-
gistic interaction proceeds.
2-10. Taking a passenger automobile as an example of an en-
gineering system, list all failure modes that you think might be
signiﬁcant, and indicate where in the auto you think each fail-
ure mode might be active.
2-11. For each of the following applications, list three of the
more likely failure modes, describing why each might be ex-
pected: (a) high-performance automotive racing engine, (b)
pressure vessel for commercial power plant, (c) domestic wash-
ing machine, (d) rotary lawn mower, (e) manure spreader, (f)
15-inch oscillating fan.
2-12. In a tension test of a steel specimen having a 6-mm-by-
25-mm rectangular net cross section, a gage length of 20 cm
was used. Test data include the following observations: (1)
load at the onset of yielding was 37.8 kN, (2) ultimate load was
65.4 kN, (3) rupture load was 52 kN, (4) total deformation in
the gage length at 18 kN load was 112 
. Determine the
following:
a. Nominal yield strength
b. Nominal ultimate strength
c. Modulus of elasticity
mm
Problems

86 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
2-13. A tension test on a 0.505-inch diameter specimen of cir-
cular cross section was performed, and the following data were
recorded for the test:
a. Plot an engineering stress-strain curve for this material.
b. Determine the nominal yield strength.
c. Determine the nominal ultimate strength.
d. Determine the approximate modulus of elasticity.
e. Using the available data and the stress-strain curve,
make your best guess as to what type of material the spec-
imen was manufactured from.
f. Estimate the axially applied tensile load that would cor-
respond to yielding of a 2-inch diameter bar of the same
material.
g. Estimate the axially applied tensile load that would be
required to produce ductile rupture of the 2-inch bar.
h. Estimate the axial spring rate of the 2-inch bar if it is 2
feet long.
2-14. An axially loaded straight bar of circular cross section
will fail to perform its design function if the applied static axial
load produces permanent changes in length after the load is 
removed. The bar is 12.5 mm in diameter, has a length of 
180 cm, and is made of Inconel 601.38 The axial load required
for this application is 25 kN. The operating environment is
room-temperature air.
a. What is the probable governing failure mode?
b. Would you predict that failure does take place? Explain
your logic.
2-15. A 1.25-inch diameter round bar of material was found in
the stock room, but it was not clear whether the material was alu-
minum, magnesium, or titanium. When a 10-inch length of this
bar was tensile-tested in the laboratory, the force-deﬂection curve
obtained was as shown in Figure P2.15. It is being proposed
that a vertical deﬂection-critical tensile support rod made of
this material, having a 1.128-inch diameter and 7-foot length, be
used to support a static axial tensile load of 8000 pounds. A total
deﬂection of no more than 0.040 inch can be tolerated.
a. Using your best engineering judgment, and recording
your supporting calculations, what type of material do you
believe this to be?
b. Would you approve the use of this material for the pro-
posed application? Clearly show your analysis supporting
your answer.
2.16. A 304 stainless-steel alloy, annealed, is to be used in a de-
ﬂection-critical application to make the support rod for a test
package that must be suspended near the bottom of a deep
cylindrical cavity. The solid support rod is to have a diameter of
20 mm and a precisely machined length of 5 m. It is to be ver-
tically oriented and ﬁxed at the top. The 30 kN test package is
to be attached at the bottom, placing the vertical rod in axial
tension. During the test, the rod will experience a temperature
increase of 80C. If the total deﬂection at the end of the rod
must be limited to a maximum of 8 mm, would you approve the
design?
2.17. A cylindrical 2024-T3 aluminum bar with a diameter of
25 mm and length of 250 mm is vertically oriented with a static-
axial load of 100 kN attached at the bottom.
a. Neglect stress concentrations and determine the maxi-
mum normal stress in the bar and identify where it occurs.
b. Determine the elongation of the bar.
c. Assume the temperature of the bar is nominally 20°C
when the axial load is applied. Determine the temperature
change that would be required to bring the bar back to its
original 250 mm length.
2-18. A portion of a tracking radar unit to be used in an an-
timissile missile defense system is sketched in Figure P2.18.
TABLE P2.13 Tension Test Data
Load, lb
Elongation,in
1000
0.0003
2000
0.0007
3000
0.0009
4000
0.0012
5000
0.0014
6000
0.002
7000
0.004
8000
0.085
9000
0.150
10,000
0.250
11,000 (maximum load)
0.520 
38See Chapter 3 for material properties data.
Force, F, lb
Deflection, , in.
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
Figure P2.15
Force-deﬂection curve for unknown material.

Problems 87
The radar dish that receives the signals is labeled D and is at-
tached by frame members A, B, C, and E to the tracking struc-
ture S. Tracking structure S may be moved angularly in two
planes of motion (azimuthal and elevational) so that the dish D
can be aimed at an intruder missile and locked on the target to
follow its trajectory.
Due to the presence of electronic equipment inside the box
formed by frame members A, B, C, and E, the approximate
temperature of member E may sometimes reach 
while
the temperature of member B is about 
. At other times,
members B and E will be about the same temperature. If the
temperature difference between members B and E is 
, and
joint resistance to bending is negligible, by how many feet
would the line of sight of the radar tracking unit miss the in-
truder missile if it is 40,000 feet away, and
a. the members are made of steel?
b. the members are made of aluminum?
c. the members are made of magnesium?
2-19. Referring to Figure P2.19, it is absolutely essential that
the assembly slab be precisely level before use. At room tem-
perature, the free unloaded length of the aluminum support bar
is 80 inches, the free unloaded length of the nickel-steel support
bar is 40 inches, and a line through A-B is absolutely level be-
fore attaching slab W. If slab W is then attached, and the tem-
perature of the entire system is slowly and uniformly increased
to 
above room temperature, determine the magnitude
and direction of the vertical adjustment of support “C” that
would be required to return slab surface A-B to a level position.
(For material properties, see Chapter 3.)
150°F
50°F
150°F
200°F
2-20. Referring to the pinned mechanism with a lateral spring
at point B, shown in Figure 2.5, do the following:
a. Repeat the derivation leading to (2-23), using the con-
cepts of upsetting moment and resisting moment, to ﬁnd an
expression for critical load.
b. Use an energy method to again ﬁnd an expression for
critical load in the mechanism of Figure 2.5, by equating
change in the potential energy of vertical force 
to strain
energy stored in the spring. (Hint: Use the ﬁrst two terms
of the series expansion for cos 
to approximate cos .)
c. Compare results of part (a) with results of part (b).
2-21. Verify the value of effective length 
 2L for a column
ﬁxed at one end and free at the other [see Figure 2.7(b)] by writ-
ing and solving the proper differential equation for this case,
then comparing the result with text equation (2-35).
2-22. A solid cylindrical steel bar is 50 mm in diameter and 4
m long. If both ends are pinned, estimate the axial load required
to cause the bar to buckle.
2-23. If the same amount of material used in the steel bar of
problem 2-22 had been formed into a hollow cylindrical bar of
the same length and supported at the ends in the same way, what
would the critical buckling load be if the tube wall thickness
were (a) 6 mm, (b) 3 mm, and (c) 1.5 mm? What conclusion do
you draw from these results?
2-24. If the solid cylindrical bar of problem 2-22 were ﬁxed at
both ends, estimate the axial load required to cause the bar to
buckle.
2-25. A steel pipe 4 inches in outside diameter, and having
0.226-inch wall thickness, is used to support a tank of water
weighing 10,000 pounds when full. The pipe is set vertically in
a heavy, rigid concrete base, as shown in Figure P2.25. The pipe
material is AISI 1060 cold-drawn steel with 
 90,000 psi
and
 70,000 psi. A safety factor of 2 on load is desired.
a. Derive a design equation for the maximum safe height
H above the ground level that should be used for this ap-
plication. (Use the approximation I L pD3t>8.2
Syp
Su
Le
a
a
Pa
20 in.
S
Line of sight
Azimuth
control bearing
Elevation
control bearing
 = elevation angle
	 = azimuth angle
	
D
B
C
E
A

15 in.
(Ambient = 70°F)
(Adjustment)
A
B
C
40 in.
(unloaded)
80 in.
(unloaded)
Nickel steel
0.500 in. D.
round
Aluminum
0.625 in. D.
round
Assembly slab
W = 3000 lb
48 in.
12 in.
12 in.
Figure P2.18
Sketch of radar tracking unit.
Figure P2.19
Assembly slab conﬁguration.

88 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
b. Compute a numerical value for 
.
c. Would compressive yielding be a problem in this de-
sign? Justify your answer.
2-26. Instead of using a steel pipe for supporting the tank of
problem 2-25, it is being proposed to use a W6  25 wide-
ﬂange beam for the support, and a plastic line to carry the wa-
ter. (See Appendix Table A.3 for beam properties.) Compute
the maximum safe height 
above ground level that
this beam could support and compare the result with the height
 145 inches, as determined in problem 2-25(b).
2-27. A steel pipe is to be used to support a water tank using a
conﬁguration similar to the one shown in Figure P2.25. It is be-
ing proposed that the height H be chosen so that failure of the
supporting pipe by yielding and by buckling would be equally
likely. Derive an equation for calculating the height, 
, that
would satisfy the suggested proposal.
Heq
1Hmax2pipe
1Hmax2beam
1Hmax2pipe
2-28. A steel pipe made of AISI 1020 cold-drawn material (see
Table 3.3) is to have an outside diameter of D  15 cm, and is
to support a tank of liquid fertilizer weighing 31 kN when full,
at a height of 11 meters above ground level, as shown in Figure
P2.28. The pipe is set vertically in a heavy, rigid concrete base.
A safety factor of n  2.5 on load is desired.
a. Using the approximation that 
, derive a
design equation, using symbols only, for the minimum
pipe wall thickness that should be used for this application.
Write the equation explicitly for t as a function of H, W, n,
and D, deﬁning all symbols used.
b. Compute a numerical value for thickness t.
c. Would compressive yielding be a problem in this de-
sign? Justify your answer.
2-29. A connecting link for the cutter head of a rotary mining
machine is shown in Figure P2.29. The material is to be AISI
I L 1pD3t2>8
Tank
10,000 lb
D = 4.0 in.
t = 0.226 in.
H
Figure P2.25
Water tank supported by a steel pipe.
Figure P2.28
Liquid fertilizer tank and support.
D = 15 cm
t
H = 11 m
W = 31 kN
Section A-A
0.500 in.
1.00"
0.500 in.
Very low friction
between pins and
connecting link
1.00 in.
Very-high-precision
fits will permit no
deflection or angular
displacement of
's in this plane.
a
a
c
c
A
A
L
C
L
C
L
C
20.0 in.
Figure P2.29
Connecting link for rotary mining machine. (Not to scale.)

Problems 89
1020 steel, annealed. The maximum axial load that will be ap-
plied in service is 
 10,000 pounds (compression) along
the centerline, as indicated in Figure P2.29. If a safety factor of
at least 1.8 is desired, determine whether the link would be ac-
ceptable as shown.
2-30. A steel wire of 2.5-mm diameter is subjected to torsion.
The material has a tensile strength of Syp  690 MPa and the
wire is 3 m long. Determine the torque at which it will fail and
identify the failure mode.
2-31. A sheet-steel cantilevered bracket of rectangular cross
section 0.125 inch by 4.0 inches is ﬁxed at one end with the 4.0-
inch dimension vertical. The bracket, which is 14 inches long,
must support a vertical load, P, at the free end.
a. What is the maximum load that should be placed on the
bracket if a safety factor of 2 is desired? The steel has a
yield strength of 45,000 psi.
b. Identify the governing failure mode.
2-32. A hollow tube is to be subjected to torsion. Derive an
equation that gives the length of this tube for which failure is
equally likely by yielding or by elastic instability.
2-33. A steel cantilever beam 1.5 m long with a rectangular
cross section 25 mm wide by 75 mm deep is made of steel that
has a yield strength of Syp  276 MPa. Neglecting the weight of
the beam, from what height, h, would a 60 N weight have to be
dropped on the free end of the beam to produce yielding.
Neglect stress concentrations.
2-34. A utility cart used to transport hardware from a warehouse
to a loading dock travels along smooth, level rails. At the end of
the line the cart runs into a cylindrical steel bumper bar of 3.0-
inch diameter and 10-inch length, as shown in Figure P2.34.
Assuming a perfectly “square” contact, frictionless wheels, and
negligibly small bar mass, do the following:
a. Use the energy method to derive an expression for max-
imum stress in the bar.
b. Calculate the numerical value of the compressive stress
induced in the bar if the weight of the loaded cart is 1100 lb
and it strikes the bumper bar at a velocity of 5 miles per hour.
Pmax
reduction in stress level that would be experienced by 
the beam of Example 2.7 if it were supported by a spring with
k  390 lb\in at each of the simple supports, instead of being
rigidly supported.
2-36. A tow truck weighing 22 kN is equipped with a 25-mm
nominal diameter tow rope that has a metallic cross-sectional
area of 260 mm2, an elastic modulus of 83 GPa, and an ultimate
strength of Su  1380 MPa. A 7-m long tow rope is attached to
a wrecked vehicle and the driver tries to jerk the wrecked vehi-
cle out of a ditch. If the tow truck is traveling at 8 km/hr when
the slack in the rope is taken up, and the wrecked vehicle does
not move, would you expect the rope to break?
2-37. An automobile that weighs 14.3 kN is traveling toward
a large tree in such a way that the bumper contacts the tree at
the bumper’s midspan between supports that are 1.25 m apart.
If the bumper is made of steel with a rectangular cross section
1.3 cm thick by 13.0 cm deep, and it may be regarded as sim-
ply supported, how fast would the automobile need to be trav-
eling to just reach the 1725 MPa yield strength of the bumper
material?
2-38. a. If there is zero clearance between the bearing and the
journal (at point B in Figure P2.38), ﬁnd the maximum
stress in the steel connecting rod A–B, due to impact, when
the 200-psi pressure is suddenly applied.
b. Find the stress in the same connecting rod due to im-
pact if the bearing at B has a 0.005-inch clearance space
between bearing and journal and the 200-psi pressure is
suddenly applied. Compare the results with part (a) and
draw conclusions.
c.m.
v = 5 mph
W = 1100 lb
d = 3.0"
A = 7.07 in.2
E = 30  106 psi
Syp = 130,000 psi
L = 10 in.
Figure P2.34
Utility cart and bumper bar.
Piston diameter = 3.0 in.
p = 200 psi
A = 1 in.2
20°
A
B
C

7"
Figure P2.38
Sketch of a connecting rod in an internal combustion 
engine.
2-35. If the impact factor, the bracketed expression in (2-57)
and (2-58), is generalized, it may be deduced that for any 
elastic structure the impact factor is given by [1 
]. Using this concept, estimate the
21 + 12h>ymax-static2
2-39. Carefully deﬁne the terms creep, creep rupture, and
stress rupture, citing the similarities that relate these three fail-
ure modes and the differences that distinguish them from one
another.

90 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
2-40. List and describe several methods that have been used for
extrapolating short-time creep data to long-term applications.
What are the potential pitfalls in using these methods?
2-41. A new high-temperature alloy is to be used for a 3-mm
diameter tensile support member for an impact-sensitive instru-
ment weighing 900 N. The instrument and its support are to be
enclosed in a test vessel for 3000 hours at 871C. A laboratory
test on the new alloy used a 3-mm diameter specimen loaded by
a 900 N weight. The specimen failed due to stress rupture after
100 hours at 982C. Based on the test results, determine
whether the tensile support is adequate for the application.
2-42. From the data plotted in Figure P2.42, evaluate the con-
stants B and N of (2-72) for the material tested.
2-43. Give a deﬁnition of wear failure and list the major sub-
categories of wear.
2-44. One part of the mechanism is a new metering device for
a seed-packaging machine is shown in Figure P2.44. Both the
slider shoe and the rotating wheel are to be made of stainless
steel, with a yield strength of 275 MPa. The contact area of the
shoe is 2.5 cm long by 1.3 cm wide. The rotating wheel is 25
cm in diameter and rotates at 30 rpm. The spring is set to exert
a constant normal force at the wearing interface of 70 N.
a. If no more than 1.5-mm wear of the shoe surface can be
tolerated, and no lubricant may be used, estimate the main-
tenance interval in operating hours between shoe replace-
ments. (Assume that adhesive wear predominates.)
b. Would this be an acceptable maintenance interval?
c. If it were possible to use a lubrication system that
would provide “excellent” lubrication to the contact inter-
face, estimate the potential improvement in maintenance
interval, and comment on its acceptability.
d. Suggest other ways to improve the design from the
standpoint of reducing wear rate.
2-45. In a cinder block manufacturing plant the blocks are
transported from the casting machine on rail carts supported by
ball-bearing-equipped wheels. The carts are currently being
stacked six blocks high, and bearings must be replaced on a 
1-year maintenance schedule because of ball-bearing failures.
To increase production, a second casting machine is to be in-
stalled, but it is desired to use the same rail cart transport sys-
tem with the same number of carts, merely stacking the blocks
12 high. What bearing-replacement interval would you predict
might be necessary under this new procedure?
2-46. Give a deﬁnition of corrosion failure and list the major
subcategories of corrosion.
2-47. It is planned to thread a bronze valve body into a cast-
iron pump housing to provide a bleed port.
a. From the corrosion standpoint, would it be better to
make the bronze valve body as large as possible or as small
as possible?
True strain, 
Time, hours
Temperature 700C
7200 psi
6500 psi
5750 psi
5200 psi
4500 psi
3700 psi
20
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
0
0.01
0.02
0,03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Figure P2.42
Creep data. (From ref. 33.)
Slider shoe
Rotating
wheel
Figure P2.44
Seed-packaging mechanism.

Problems 91
b. Would it be more effective to put an anticorrosion coat-
ing on the bronze valve or on the cast-iron housing?
c. What other steps might be taken to minimize corrosion
of the unit?
2-48. Give a deﬁnition for fretting and distinguish among the
failure phenomena of fretting fatigue, fretting wear, and fretting
corrosion.
2-49. List the variables thought to be of primary importance in
fretting-related failure phenomena.
2-50. Fretting corrosion has proved to be a problem in aircraft
splines of steel on steel. Suggest one or more measures that
might be taken to improve the resistance of the splined joint to
fretting corrosion.
2-51. List several basic principles that are generally effective in
minimizing or preventing fretting.
2-52. Deﬁne the term “design-allowable stress,” write an equa-
tion for design-allowable stress, deﬁne each term in the equa-
tion, and tell how or where a designer would ﬁnd values for
each term.
2-53. Your company desires to market a new type of lawn
mower with an “instant-stop” cutting blade. (For more details
about the application, see Example 16.1). You are responsible
for the design of the actuation lever. The application may be re-
garded as “average” in most respects, but the material proper-
ties are known a little better than for the average design case,
the need to consider threat to human health is regarded as
strong, maintenance is probably a little poorer than average, and
it is extremely important to keep the cost low. Calculate a
proper safety factor for this application, clearly showing details
of your calculation.
2-54. You are asked to review the design of the shafts and gears
that are to be used in the drive mechanism for a new stair-climb-
ing wheelchair for quadriplegic users. The wheelchair produc-
tion rate is to be about 1200 per year. From the design
standpoint the application may be regarded as “average” in
many respects, but the need to consider threat to human health
is regarded as extremely important, the loads are known a little
better than for the average design project, there is a strong de-
sire to keep the weight down, and a moderate desire to keep the
cost down. Calculate a proper safety factor for this application,
clearly showing all details of how you arrive at your answer.
2-55. A novel design is being proposed for a new attachment
link for a chair lift at a ski resort. Carefully assessing the po-
tential importance of all pertinent “rating factors,” calculate a
proper safety factor for this application, clearly showing the de-
tails of how you arrive at your answer.
2-56. Stainless-steel alloy AM 350 has been tentatively se-
lected for an application in which a cylindrical tension rod must
support an axial load of 10,000 lb. The ambient temperature is
known to be 800F. If a design safety factor of 1.8 has been se-
lected for the application, what minimum diameter should the
tension rod have? (Hint: Examine “materials properties” charts
given in Chapter 3.)
2-57. It has been discovered that for the application described
in problem 2-56, an additional design constraint must be satis-
ﬁed, namely, the creep strain rate must not exceed 
in/in/hr at the ambient temperature of 800F. To meet the 1.8
safety factor requirement for this case, what minimum diameter
should the tension rod have? (Hint: Examine “material proper-
ties” charts given in Chapter 3.)
2-58. A design stress of d  220 MPa is being suggested by a
colleague for an application in which 2024-T4 aluminum alloy
has tentatively been selected. It is desired to use a design safety
factor of nd  1.5. The application involves a solid cylindrical
shaft continuously rotating at 120 revolutions per hour, simply
supported at the ends, and loaded at midspan, downward, by a
static load P. To meet design objectives, the aluminum shaft
must operate without failure for 10 years. For 2024-T4 alu-
minum Su  469 MPa and Syp  331 MPa. In addition, we know
that at 107 cycles, the fatigue failure strength is SN107  158
MPa. Would you agree with your colleague’s suggestion that d
 220 MPa? Explain.
2-59. A 304 stainless-steel alloy, annealed, has been used in a
deﬂection-critical application to make the support rod for a test
package suspended near the bottom of a deep cylindrical cav-
ity. The solid stainless-steel support rod has a diameter of
0.750 inch and a precisely manufactured length of 16.000 feet.
It is oriented vertically and ﬁxed at the top end. The 6000-
pound test package is attached at the bottom, placing the verti-
cal bar in axial tension. The vertical deﬂection at the end of the
bar must not exceed a maximum of 0.250 inch. Calculate the
existing safety factor.
2-60. A very wide sheet of aluminum is found to have a single-
edge crack of length a  25 mm. The material has a critical
stress intensity factor (a fracture mechanics measure of the ma-
terial’s strength) of KIc  27 
. For the sheet in ques-
tion, the stress intensity factor is deﬁned as KI  1.122
,
where the expected stress is   70 MPa. Estimate the existing
factor of safety, deﬁned as ne  KIc/KI.
2-61. A vertical solid cylindrical steel bar is 50 mm in diame-
ter and 4 m long. Both ends are pinned and the top pinned end
is vertically guided, as for the case shown in Figure 2.7 (a). If a
centered static load of P  22.5 kN must be supported at the top
end of the vertical bar, what is the existing safety factor?
2-62. A supplier of 4340 steel material has shipped enough ma-
terial to fabricate 100 fatigue-critical tension links for an aircraft
application. As required in the purchase contract, the vendor has
conducted uniaxial fatigue tests on random specimens drawn
from the lot of material, and has certiﬁed that the mean fatigue
strength corresponding to a life of 106 cycles is, 470 MPa, that
the standard deviation on strength corresponding to 106 cycles
is, 24 MPa, and that the distribution of strength at a life of 106
cycles is normal.
a. Estimate the number of tension links in the lot of 100
that may be expected to fail when operated for 106 cycles
if the applied operating stress amplitude is less than 
415 MPa.
1pa
MPa1m
1 * 10-6

92 Chapter 2 / The Failure Prevention Perspective
b. Estimate the number of tension links that may be ex-
pected to fail when operated for 106 cycles at stress levels
between 415 MPa and 470 MPa.
2-63. A lot of 4340 steel material has been certiﬁed by the sup-
plier to have a fatigue strength distribution at a life of 107 cycles
of
Experimental data collection over a long period of time indi-
cates that operating stress levels at the critical point of an im-
portant component with a design life of 107 cycles have a stress
distribution of
Estimate the reliability level corresponding to a life of 107 cycles
for this component.
2-64. It is known that a titanium alloy has a standard deviation
on fatigue strength of 20 MPa over a wide range of strength lev-
els and cyclic lives. Also, experimental data have been collected
that indicate that the operating stress levels at the critical point
of an important component with a design life of 5  107 cycles
have a stress distribution of
If a reliability level of “5 times” (i.e., R  0.99999) is desired,
what mean strength would the titanium alloy need to have?
2-65. Using the tabulated normal cumulative distribution func-
tion given in Table 2.9, verify the strength reliability factors
given in Table P2.65, knowing that the Table P2.65 is based on
kr  1  0.08X.
sop =
d
N1345 MPa, 28 MPa2
sop =
d
N160,000 psi, 5000 psi2
SN=107 =
d
N168,000 psi, 2500 psi2
2-66. The main support shaft of a new 90-kN hoist design proj-
ect is under consideration. Clearly, if the shaft fails, the falling
90-kN payload could inﬂict serious injuries, or even fatalities.
Suggest a design-acceptable probability of failure for this po-
tentially hazardous failure scenario.
2-67. A series-parallel arrangement of components consists of
a series of n subsystems, each having p parallel components. If
the probability of failure for each component is q, what would
be the system reliability for the series-parallel arrangement
described?
5-68. A parallel-series arrangement of components consists of p
parallel subsystems, each having n components in series. If the
probability of failure for each component is q, what would be the
system reliability for the parallel-series arrangement described?
2-69. A critical subsystem for an aircraft ﬂap actuation assem-
bly consists of three components in series, each having a com-
ponent reliability of 0.90.
a. What would the subsystem reliability be for this critical
three-component subsystem?
b. If a second (redundant) subsystem of exactly the same
series arrangement were placed in parallel with the ﬁrst
subsystem, would you expect a signiﬁcant improvement in
reliability? How much?
c. If a third redundant subsystem of exactly the same
arrangement as the ﬁrst two were also placed in parallel
with them, would you expect a signiﬁcant additional im-
provement in reliability? Make any comments you think
appropriate.
d. Can you think of any reason why several redundant
subsystems should not be used in this application in order
to improve reliability?
2-70. A machine assembly of four components may be mod-
eled as a parallel-series arrangement similar to that shown in
Figure 2.18(d). It has been determined that a system reliability
of 95 percent is necessary to meet design objectives.
a. Considering subsystems A-C and B-D, what subsystem
reliability is required to meet the 95 percent reliability goal
for the machine?
b. What component reliabilities would be required for A,
B, C, and D to meet the 95 percent reliability speciﬁcation
for the machine?
TABLE P2.65 Strength Reliability Factors
Reliability
Corresponding Standard
Strength Reliability
R (%)
Normal Value X
Factor kr
90
1.282
0.90
95
1.645
0.87
99
2.326
0.81
99.9
3.090
0.75
99.995
3.891
0.69 

Materials Selection
Chapter 3
93
3.1 Steps in Materials Selection
Keystone objectives of mechanical design activity were featured in Chapter 1 as (1) selec-
tion of the best possible material and (2) determination of the best possible geometry for
each part. In contrast with the materials engineer’s task of developing new and better ma-
terials, a mechanical designer must be effective in selecting the best available material for
each application, considering all important design criteria. Although materials engineers
are often key members of a design team, the mechanical designer should also be well
grounded in the types and properties of materials available to meet speciﬁc design needs.
Materials selection is typically carried out as a part of the intermediate design stage,
but in some cases must be considered earlier, during the preliminary design stage. The ba-
sic steps in selection of candidate materials for any given application are:
1.
Analyzing the material-speciﬁc requirements of the application.
2.
Assembling a list of requirement-responsive materials, with pertinent performance
evaluation data, rank-ordered so the “best” material is at the top of the table1 for each
important application requirement.
3.
Matching the lists of materials responsive to the pertinent application requirements in
order to select the “best” candidate materials for the proposed design.
3.2 Analyzing Requirements of the Application
Material-speciﬁc requirements for most applications may be identiﬁed by examining the list
of possibilities given in Table 3.1. This might be accomplished by ﬁrst developing a speci-
ﬁcation statement for the machine part under consideration, based upon the anticipated use
of the device. For example, the speciﬁcation statement for the crankshaft to be used in a pro-
posed new design for a one-cylinder belt-driven air compressor might be written as:
The crankshaft should be short, compact, relatively rigid, fatigue resistant, wear resist-
ant at the bearing sites, and capable of low-cost production.
Clearly, such a statement embodies design insights relating not only to operational and
functional requirements of the device, but to potential failure modes and market-driven
factors as well.
To translate the speciﬁcation statement into material-speciﬁc requirements, for each
entry in Table 3.1 the question may be posed, Is there a special need to consider this re-
quirement in this application? Considered responses of yes, no, and perhaps may be
1An equivalent “graphical” presentation of evaluation data, developed by Ashby, is discussed in 3.5.

94
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
entered in the special need column of Table 3.1. The yes and perhaps responses then iden-
tify the material-speciﬁc requirements that should be addressed in the process of selecting
good candidate materials for the particular part being designed.
3.3 Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials
To assist in assembling lists of materials responsive to each of the speciﬁc needs identiﬁed
from Table 3.1, performance evaluation indices must be available by which candidate ma-
terials may be ranked in order of their ability to respond to any designated application re-
quirement listed in Table 3.1. Such a list of performance evaluation indices is given in
Table 3.2, together with the corresponding material-speciﬁc requirements from Table 3.1.
TABLE 3.1 Potential Material-Speciﬁc Application Requirements
Potential Application Requirement
Special Need?
1. Strength/volume ratio
____________
2. Strength/weight ratio
____________
3. Strength at elevated temperature
____________
4. Long-term dimensional stability at elevated temperature
____________
5. Dimensional stability under temperature ﬂuctuation
____________
6. Stiffness
____________
7. Ductility
____________
8. Ability to store energy elastically
____________
9. Ability to dissipate energy plastically
____________
10. Wear resistance
____________
11. Resistance to chemically reactive environment
____________
12. Resistance to nuclear radiation environment
____________
13. Desire to use speciﬁc manufacturing process
____________
14. Cost constraints
____________
15. Procurement time constraints
____________ 
TABLE 3.2 Requirement-Responsive Material Characteristics and Corresponding
Performance Evaluation Indices
Requirement-Responsive
Performance Evaluation 
Material Characteristic
Index
1. Strength/volume ratio
Ultimate or yield strength
2. Strength/weight ratio
Ultimate or yield strength/density
3. Resistance to thermal weakening
Strength loss/degree temperature
4. Creep resistance
Creep rate at operating temperature
5. Thermal expansion
Strain/degree temperature change
6. Stiffness
Modulus of elasticity
7. Ductility
Percent elongation in 2 inches
8. Resilience
Energy/unit volume at yield
9. Toughness
Energy/unit volume at rupture
10. Wear resistance
Dimensional loss at operating condition; also hardness
11. Corrosion resistance
Dimensional loss in operating environment
12. Susceptibility to radiation damage
Strength or ductility change in operating environment
13. Manufacturability
Suitability for speciﬁc process
14. Cost
Cost/unit weight; also machinability
15. Availability
Procurement time and effort 

Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials 95
For items from Table 3.1 that have been identiﬁed as special needs in any given applica-
tion, Table 3.2 then provides performance evaluation indices that form the basis for com-
parison and selection of candidate materials. The procedure for accomplishing this task is
discussed further in 3.4.
To use the performance evaluation indices for comparing candidate materials, it is
necessary to ﬁnd quantitative materials data for each of the key parameters that comprise
the pertinent evaluation indices. There are many sources for such data.2 To illustrate the
procedure suggested here, a short compilation of selected materials, and their rank-ordered
properties relating to the performance evaluation indices of Table 3.2, are given in Tables
3.3 through 3.20. Each rank-ordered table is arranged with the best material for a given
2See, for example, refs. 1–10 and 16–19.
TABLE 3.3 Strength Properties of Selected Materials1
Ultimate Tensile
Yield Strength, Syp
Strength, Su
Material
Alloy
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340
287
1979
270
1862
Stainless steel (age hardened)
AM 350
206
1420
173
1193
High-carbon steel
AISI 10952
200
1379
138
952
Graphite-epoxy composite
—
200
1379
—
—
Titanium
Ti-6Al-4V
150
1034
128
883
Ceramic
Titanium carbide
134
924
—
— 
(bonded)
Nickel-based alloy
Inconel 601
102
703
35
241
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060 (HR)3
98
676
54
372
AISI 1060 (CD)4
90
621
70
483
Low-carbon, low-alloy steel
AISI 4620 (HR)
87
600
63
434
AISI 4620 (CD)
101
696
85
586
Stainless steel (austenitic)
AISI 304 (annealed)
85
586
35
241
Yellow Brass
C 26800 (hard)
74
510
60
414
Commercial Bronze
C 22000 (hard)
61
421
54
372
Low-carbon (mild) steel
AISI 1020 (CD)
61
421
51
352
AISI 1020 (annealed)
57
393
43
296
AISI 1020 (HR)
55
379
30
207
Phosphor Bronze
C 52100 (annealed)
55
379
24
165
Gray cast iron
ASTM A-48 (class 50)
505
345
—
—
ASTM A-48 (class 40)
40
276
—
—
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3 (heat treated)
70
483
50
345
2024 (annealed)
27
186
11
76
Aluminum (perm. mold cast)
356.0 (solution treated; aged)
38
262
27
186
Magnesium (extruded)
ASTM AZ80A-T5
50
345
35
241
Magnesium (cast)
ASTM AZ63A
29
200
14
97
Thermosetting polymer
Epoxy (glass reinforced)
—
—
10
69
Thermoplastic polymer
Acrylic (cast)
—
—
7
48
1See, for example, ref. 1–10.
2Quenched and drawn to Rockwell C-42.
3Hot rolled
4Cold drawn
5Ultimate compressive strength is 170 ksi, 1172 MPa

96
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
TABLE 3.4 Strength/Weight Ratios for Selected Materials
Approx. Ultimate
Approx. Yield 
Strength/Wt
Strength/Wt
Weight Density, w
Ratio, 
Ratio, 
Material
lb/in3
kN/m3
in  103
m  103
in  103
m  103
Graphite-epoxy composite
0.057
15.47
3500
89.14
—
—
Ultra-high-strength steel
0.283
76.81
1000
25.76
950
24.24
Titanium
0.160
43.42
950
23.81
800
20.34
Stainless steel (age hardened)
0.282
76.53
750
18.55
600
15.59
Aluminum (wrought)
0.100
27.14
700
17.80
500
12.71
Titanium carbide
0.260
70.56
500
14.65
—
—
Aluminum (perm. mold cast)
0.097
26.33
400
9.95
300
7.06
Medium-carbon steel
0.283
76.81
350
8.80
200
4.84
Nickel-based alloy
0.291
78.98
350
8.90
100
3.05
Stainless steel (austenitic)
0.290
78.71
290
7.45
120
3.06
Yellow Brass
0.306
83.05
250
6.14
200
4.99
Low-carbon steel
0.283
76.81
200
5.48
150
4.58
Commercial Bronze
0.318
86.31
200
4.88
150
4.31
Gray cast iron (class 50)
0.270
73.28
200
4.71
—
—
Epoxy (glass reinf.)
0.042
11.40
—
—
250
6.85
Acrylic (cast)
0.043
11.67
—
—
150
4.11
Syp
w
Su
w
TABLE 3.5 Strength at Elevated Temperatures for Selected Materials
Ultimate Tensile
Yield 
Temperature
Strength, 
Strength, 
Material
F
C
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Ultra-high-strength steel (4340)
200
129
313
2158
302
2082
RT1
RT
287
1979
270
1862
400
204
276
1882
235
1620
800
427
221
1524
186
1283
1200
649
103
710
62
428
Stainless steel (AM 350)
RT
RT
206
1420
173
1193
400
204
185
1376
144
993
800
427
179
1234
119
821
1000
538
119
821
83
572
Titanium (Ti-6Al-4V)
200
129
187
1289
155
1069
RT
RT
150
1034
128
883
400
204
126
869
101
696
800
427
90
821
75
517
1000
538
81
559
59
407
Titanium carbide
RT
RT
134
924
—
—
1500
816
94
648
—
—
1800
982
72
496
—
—
Inconle (601)
RT
RT
102
703
35
241
400
204
94
648
31
214
800
427
84
579
28
193
1200
649
66
455
23
159
1600
871
20
138
12
83
1Syp2®
1Su2®
(Continued)

Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials 97
TABLE 3.5 (Continued)
Ultimate Tensile
Yield 
Temperature
Strength, 
Strength, 
Material
F
C
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Low-carbon steel (1020)
200
129
97
669
83
572
RT
RT
61
421
51
352
400
204
61
421
51
352
800
427
45
310
38
262
900
482
29
200
24
166
Aluminum (2024-T3)
200
129
74
510
54
372
RT
RT
70
483
50
345
400
204
52
356
39
269
800
427
4
28
4
28
Magnesium (AZ80A-T5)
200
129
63
434
53
365
RT
RT
50
345
35
241
200
93
43
297
19
131
400
204
22
152
11
76
1Room temperature.
1Syp2®
1Su2®
TABLE 3.6 Stress Rupture Strength Levels Corresponding to Various Rupture Times and Temperatures for
Selected Materials
Rupture Time, t (hr)
Temperature
10
100
600
1000
10,000
Material
Alloy
F
C
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Stainless steel
AM 350
800
427
—
—
184
1269
—
—
182
1255
—
—
Iron-based
A-286
1000
538
120
827
100
590
—
—
80
552
76
524
superalloy
1200
649
78
538
68
469
—
—
50
345
34
234
1350
732
50
345
35
241
—
—
21
145
14
97
1500
816
21
145
11
76
—
—
—
—
Cobalt-base
X-40
1500
816
61
421
56
386
—
—
51
352
—
—
superalloy
Inconel 
601
1200
649
—
—
—
—
—
—
28
193
—
—
1400
760
—
—
—
—
—
—
9.1
63
—
—
1600
871
—
—
—
—
—
—
4.2
29
—
—
1800
982
—
—
—
—
—
—
2
14
—
—
Carbon steel
1050
750
399
—
—
52.5
362
49
338
—
—
—
—
930
499
—
—
22.4
154
18
124
—
—
—
—
Aluminum
Duralumin
300
149
—
—
38
262
32.5
224
—
—
—
—
480
249
—
—
11.2
77
8.3
57
—
—
—
—
660
349
—
—
3.1
21
2.7
19
—
—
—
—
Brass
60/40
300
149
—
—
47
324
42.5
293
—
—
—
—
480
249
—
—
15.7
108
9
62
—
—
—
— 
index at the top, followed in order of decreasing desirability by several other materials.
Although suitable for solving problems in this textbook, real-world design tasks often re-
quire more comprehensive data gleaned from the literature and/or other data banks if the
design is to be competitive.

98
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
TABLE 3.7 Creep Limited Maximum Stress Corresponding to Various Strain Rates and Temperatures 
for Selected Materials
Strain Rate, , 
Temperature
0.4
1
4
10
40
Material
Alloy
F
C
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Stainless steel
AM 350
800
427
—
—
91
627
—
—
—
—
—
—
Chromium steel
13% Cr
840
449
23.5
162
—
—
33.6
232
—
—
41.5
286
(Q&T)
Manganese steel
1.7% Mn
840
449
23.5
162
—
—
27
186
—
—
36
248
Carbon steel
1030
930
499
13
90
—
—
16.3
112
—
—
19
131
(forged)
Stainless steel
304
1000
538
—
—
—
—
—
—
10
69
—
—
1300
704
—
—
—
—
—
—
8
55
—
—
1500
816
—
—
—
—
—
—
5
35
—
—
Phospher Bronze
440
227
10
69
—
—
15.7
108
—
—
21.3
147
Magnesium
HZ32A-T5
400
204
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
10
69
500
260
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
8
55
600
316
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
5
35
Aluminum
Duralumin
440
227
5.6
39
—
—
7.4
51
—
—
9.7
67
Brass
60/40
440
227
1.02
7
—
—
2.7
19
—
—
5.6
39 
me/hr
#e
TABLE 3.8 Coefﬁcients of Thermal Expansion for Selected Materials
Coefﬁcient 
Temperature 
of Thermal
Range of 
Expansion 
Validity
Material
Alloy
106 in/in/F
106 m/m/C
F
C
Ceramic
Titanium carbide (bonded)
4.3–7.5
7.74–13.5
68–1200
20–649
Titanium
Ti-6Al-4V
5.3
9.5
68–1000
20–538
Gray cast iron
ASTM A-48 (class 50)
6.0
10.8
32–212
0–100
Steel
Most
6.3
11.3
0–200
18–93
Stainless steel
AM 350
6.3
11.3
—
—
Nickel-base alloy
Inconel 601
7.6
13.7
80–200
27–93
Inconel 600
9.3
16.7
80–1500
27–816
Cobalt base superalloy
X-40
9.2
16.6
70–1800
21–982
Stainless steel
304
9.6
17.3
32–212
0–100
Graphite-epoxy composite
—
10.0
18.0
—
—
Commercial bronze
C 22000
10.2
18.4
68–572
20–300
Iron-based superalloy
A-286
10.3
18.5
70–1000
21–538
Yellow brass
C 26800
11.3
20.3
68–572
20–300
Aluminum (cast)
356
11.9
21.4
68–212
20–100
(wrought)
2024-T3
12.9
23.2
68–212
20–100
(wrought)
2024-T3
13.7
24.7
68–572
20–300
Magnesium
Most
14.0
25.2
68
20
Magnesium
Most
16.0
28.8
68–750
20–399
Thermosetting polymer
Epoxy (glass reinf.)
10–20
36.0
—
—
Thermoplastic polymer
Acrylic
45
81.0
—
—
a

Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials 99
TABLE 3.10 Ductility of Selected Materials
Percent Elongation, e, in
Material
Alloy
2-in (50 mm) Gage Length
Phosphor bronze C
C 52100
70
Inconel
601
50(RT)
Inconel
601
50 (1000F, 538C)
Inconel
601
75 (1400F, 760C)
Stainless steel
AISI 304
60
Copper
Oxygen-free
50
Silver
48
Gold
45
Aluminum (annealed)
1060
43
Low-carbon low-alloy steel
AISI 4620 (HR)1
28
AISI 4620 (CD)2
22
Low-carbon steel
AISI 1020 (HR)
25
AISI 1020 (CD)
15
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3
22
Stainless steel
AM 350
13
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060 (HR)
12
AISI 1060 (CD)
10
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340
11
TABLE 3.9 Stiffness Properties of Selected Materials
Young’s Modulus of Elasticity, E
Shear Modulus of
Poisson’s 
Elasticity, G
Ratio, v
Material
Msi
GPa
Msi
GPa
Tungsten carbide
95
655
—
—
0.20
Titanium carbide
42–65 (77F)
290–448 (25F)
—
—
0.19
Titanium carbide
33–48
228–331
—
—
(1600–1800F)
(871–982C)
Molybdenum
47 (RT)1
324
—
—
0.29
Molybdenum
33 (1600F)
227.5 (871C)
—
—
—
Molybdenum
20 (2400F)
137.9 (1316C)
—
—
—
Steel (most)
30
207
11.5
79
0.30
Stainless steel
28
193
10.6
73
0.31
Iron based superalloy (A-286)
29.1 (RT)
201
—
—
0.31
23.5 (1000F)
162 (538C)
—
—
—
22.2 (1200F)
153 (649C)
—
—
—
19.8 (1500F)
137 (816C)
—
—
—
Cobalt-base superalloy
29
200
—
—
—
Inconel
31
214
11.0
76
—
Cast iron
13–24
90–166
5.2–8.5
36–89
0.21–0.27
Commercial Bronze (C 22000)
17
117
6.3
43
0.35
Titanium
16
110
6.2
43
0.31
Phospher bronze
16
110
6.0
41
0.35
Aluminum
10.3
71
3.9
27
0.33
Magnesium
6.5
45
—
—
0.29
Graphite-epoxy composite
6.0
41
—
—
—
Acrylic thermoplastic
0.4
2.8
—
—
0.4
1Room temperature.

100
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
TABLE 3.11 Modulus of Resilience R for Selected Materials Under Tensile Loading
Material
Alloy
(in-lb/in3)
kN-m/m3
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340
1220
8410
Stainless steel
AM 350
530
3654
Titanium
Ti-6Al-4V
510
3516
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3 (heat treated)
120
827
Magnesium (extruded)
AZ80A-T5
90
620
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060
80
552
Low-carbon steel
AISI 1020
40
276
Stainless steel
AISI 304
21
145
Nickel-based allow
Inconel 601
20
138
Phosphor bronze 
C 52100 (annealed)
20
138
R =
S2
yp
2E
TABLE 3.12 Toughness Merit Number T for Selected Materials Under Tensile
Loading
Material
Alloy
kip-in/in3
MN-m/m3
Nickel-based allow
Inconel 601
51
352
Stainless steel
AISI 304
51
352
Phosphor bronze 
C 52100 (annealed)
38.5
265
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340
31.6
218
Stainless steel
AM 350
26.8
185
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3 (heat treated)
15.4
106
Low-carbon steel
AISI 1020
15.3
105
Titanium
Ti-6Al-4V
15
103
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060
9
62
Magnesium (extruded)
AZ80A-T5
3
21
T = Sue
TABLE 3.10 (Continued)
Percent Elongation, e, in
Material
Alloy
2-in (50 mm) Gage Length
Titanium
Ti-6Al-4V
10 (RT)
Ti-6Al-4V
18 (800F, 427C)
Cobalt-based superalloy
X-40
9 (RT)
X-40
12 (1200F, 649C)
X-40
22 (1700F, 927C)
Magnesium (forged)
AZ80A-T5
6
Aluminum (perm. mold cast)
356.0 (sol’n treated; aged)
5
Commercial bronze
C 22000 (hard)
5
Gray cast iron
All
nil
1Hot rolled.
2Cold drawn.

Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials 101
TABLE 3.13 Hardness of Selected Materials
Hardness Scale1
Material
BHN
RC
RA
RB
RM
V
Mohs
Diamond
8500
—
—
—
—
—
10
(approx.)2
Sapphire
—
—
—
—
—
—
9
Tungsten carbide
1850
—
93
—
—
—
8–9
(approx.)2
Titanium carbide
1850
—
93
—
—
—
8–9
(approx.)2
Case-hardened low-
650
62
82.5
—
—
—
—
carbon steel
Ultra-high-strength steel
560
56
79
—
—
—
—
Titanium
315
34
67.5
—
—
—
—
Gray cast iron
262
26
—
—
—
—
—
Low-carbon low-
207
15
—
—
—
—
—
alloy steel
Medium-carbon steel (CD)3
183
(9)2
—
89.5
—
—
—
Low-carbon steel (CD)
121
—
—
68
—
127
—
Aluminum (wrought)
120
—
—
67.5
—
126
—
Nickel-base alloy
114
—
—
64
—
120
—
Magnesium (extruded)
82
—
—
49
—
—
—
Commercial bronze
70
—
—
34
—
—
—
Gold (annealed)
—
—
—
—
—
25
—
Epoxy (glass reinforced)
—
—
—
—
105
—
—
Acrylic (cast)
—
—
—
—
85
—
—
1BHN  Brinell hardness number
RM  Rockwell M scale
RC  Rockwell C scale
V  Vickers hardness number
RA  Rockwell A scale
Mohs  Mohs hardness number
RB  Rockwell B scale
2Out of normal range—information only.
3Cold drawn.
TABLE 3.14 Galvanic Corrosion Resistance in Sea Water for Selected Materials1
Platinum
Noble or cathodic
Gold
(protected end)
Graphite
Titanium
Silver
Chlorimet 3 (62 Ni, 18 Cr, 18 Mo)
Hastelloy C (62 Ni, 17 Cr, 15 Mo)
18-8 Mo stainless steel (passive)
18-8 stainless steel (passive)
Chromium stainless steel 11–30% Cr (passive)
Inconel (passive) (80 Ni, 13 Cr, 7 Fe)
Nickel (passive)
Silver solder
Monel (70 Ni, 30 Cu)
Cupronickels (60–90 Cu, 40–10 Ni)
Bronzes (Cu-Sn)
Copper
Brasses (Cu-Zn) 
c

102
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
TABLE 3.14 (Continued)
Chlorimet 2 (66 Ni, 32 Mo, 1 Fe)
Hastelloy B (60 Ni, 30 Mo, 6 Fe, 1 Mn)
Inconel (active)
Nickel (active)
Tin
Lead
Lead-tin solders
18-8 Mo stainless steel (active)
18-8 stainless steel (active)
Ni-Resist (high Ni cast iron)
Chromium stainless steel, 13% Cr (active)
Cast iron
Steel or iron
2024 aluminum (4.5 Cu, 1.5 Mg, 0.6 Mn)
Cadmium
Active or anodic 
Commercially pure aluminum (1100)
(corroded end)
Zinc
Magnesium and magnesium alloys
1See p. 32 of ref. 12. (Reprinted with permission of the McGraw-Hill Companies.)
T
TABLE 3.15 Corrosion-Fatigue Strength of Selected Materials1
Corrosion-Fatigue 
Ultimate Tensile
Fatigue Strength
Strength in 
Strength
in Air
Salt-Spray
Material
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
Cycles to Failure
Beryllium bronze2
94
648
36.5
252
38.8
268
5  107
18 Cr 8 Ni steel
148
1020
53.5
369
35.5
245
5  107
17 Cr. 1 Ni steel
122
841
73.5
507
27.5
190
5  107
Phosphor bronze3
62
428
22
152
26
179
5  107
Aluminum bronze
80
552
32
221
22
152
5  107
15 Cr steel
97
669
55
379
20.5
141
5  107
Carbon steel
142
979
56
386
8.75
60
5  107
Duralumin
63
434
20.5
141
7.6
52
5  107
Mild steel
76
524
38
262
2.5
17
10  107
1See ref. 13.
2The apparent anomaly, that fatigue resistance with salt spray is higher than fatigue resistance in air, is acknowledged by the authors of ref. 13,
but they stand by the values shown, and offer a supporting explanation.
3Ibid.
TABLE 3.16 Nuclear Radiation Exposure to Produce Signiﬁcant (over 10%) Changes in Properties of 
Selected Materials1
Amount of Radiation 
(integrated fast neutron ﬂux) 
Material
(neutrons/cm2)
Property Changes
Zirconium alloys
Little change
Stainless steels
Reduced but not greatly impaired ductility
Aluminum alloys
Reduced but not greatly impaired ductility
Stainless steels
Yield strength tripled
Carbon steels
Increased fracture-transition temperature; 
severe loss of ductility; yield strength doubled
1020
1021
(Continued)

Assembling Lists of Responsive Materials 103
TABLE 3.16 (Continued)
Amount of Radiation 
(integrated fast neutron ﬂux) 
Material
(neutrons/cm2)
Property Changes
All plastics
Unusable as structural materials
Ceramics
Reduced thermal conductivity, density, and 
crystallinity
Polystyrene
Loss of tensile strength
Carbon steel
Reduction of notch-impact strength
Metals
Most show signiﬁcant increase in yield strength
Natural rubber
Large change; hardening
Mineral-ﬁlled phenolic
Loss of tensile strength
Polyethylene
Loss of tensile strength
Butyl rubber
Large change; softening
Natural and butyl rubber
Loss of elasticity
Polymethyl methacrylate
Loss of tensile strength
and cellulosics
Polytetraﬂuroethylene
Loss of tensile strength
1See ref. 14.
1015
1016
1017
1018
1019
TABLE 3.17 Suitability of Selected Materials for Speciﬁc Manufacturing Processes
Material
Alloy
Available Forms1
Fabrication Properties
Ultra-high-strength
AISI 4340
B,b,f,p,S,s,w
Readily machinable (annealed);
steel
readily weldable (post-heat required)
Stainless steel
AM350
b,F,S,s,w,t
Readily machinable; readily weldable
Graphite-epoxy
—
Injection, compression,
—
composite
and transfer molding
Titanium
Ti-6A1-4V
B,b,P,S,s,w,e
Machinable (annealed), formable,
weldable
Nickel-base alloy
Inconel 601
b,P,r,S,s,Sh,t
—
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060
b,r,f
Readily machinable; welding
not recommended
Stainless steel
AISI 304
b,P,f,S,s,t,w
Readily machinable; readily weldable
Commercial bronze
C 22000 (hard)
P,r,S,s,t,w
Machinable; readily weldable
Low-carbon steel
AISI 1020
b,r,f,S,Sh
Readily machinable; readily weldable
Phosphor bronze
C 52100
r,s,w
Machinable; readily weldable
Gray cast iron
ASTM A-48 (class 50)
—
Machinable; weldable
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3
b,P,r,S,Sh,t,w
Easily machinable; weldable
Magnesium (extruded)
AZ80A-T5
b,r,f,Sh
Easily machinable (except
ﬁre hazard); weldable
Thermosetting polymer
Epoxy (glass reinforced)
Injection, compression,
and transfer molding
—
Thermoplastic polymer
Acrylic (cast)
—
Machinable
1B  billets
r  rods
b  bars
S  sheets
e  extrusions
s  strip
F  foil
Sh  shapes
f  forgings
t  tubing
P  plates
w  wire

104
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
TABLE 3.18 Approximate Material Cost for 
Selected Materials1
Material
Approximate cost
(dollars/lb)
Gray cast iron
0.30
Low-carbon steel (HR)2
0.50
Low-carbon steel (CD)3
0.60
Ultra-high-strength steel (HR)
0.65
Zinc alloy
1.50
Acrylic
2.00
Commercial bronze
2.25
Stainless steel
2.75
Epoxy (glass reinforced)
3.00
Aluminum alloy
3.50
Magnesium alloy
5.50
Titanium alloy
9.50
1Material cost varies widely by year of purchase and by quantity
required. Designers should always obtain speciﬁc price quotations.
2Hot-rolled.
3Cold-drawn.
TABLE 3.19 Relative Machinability1 of Selected Materials
Estimated
Material
Alloy
Machinability Index2
Magnesium alloy
—
400
Aluminum alloy
—
300
Free-machining steel
B1112
100
Low-carbon steel
AISI 1020
65
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060 (annealed)
60
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340 (annealed)
50
Stainless steel alloy
(annealed)
50
Gray cast iron
—
40
Commercial bronze
—
30
Titanium alloy
(annealed)
20
1Machinability index is a less-than-exact evaluation of volume of material removal 
per hour, produced at maximum efﬁciency, balanced against a minimum rejection rate
for reasons of surface ﬁnish or tolerance.
2Based on rating of 100 for B1112 resulfurized free-machining steel. 
TABLE 3.20 Thermal Conductivity Ranges for Selected
Materials
Thermal Conductivity k
Material
[Btu/hr/ft/ F (W/m/ C)]
Silver
242 (419)
Copper
112 (194)–226 (391)
Pyrolytic graphite
108 (186.9)–215 (372.1)
Beryllium copper
62 (107)–150 (259)
Brass1
15 (26)–135 (234)
°
°
(Continued)

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method 105
TABLE 3.20 (Continued)
Thermal Conductivity k
Material
[Btu/hr/ft/ F (W/m/ C)]
Aluminum alloys1
93 (161)–125 (216)
Bronze1
20 (35)–120 (207)
Phosphor bronze1
29 (50)–120 (207)
Premium graphite
65 (112)–95 (164)
Carbon graphite
18 (31)–66 (114)
Aluminum bronze1
39 (68)
Cast iron
25 (43)–30 (52)
Carbon steel
27 (46.7)
Silicon carbide
9 (15)–25 (43)
Lead
16 (28)–20 (35)
Stainless steel
15 (26)
Titanium
4 (7)–12 (21)
Glass
1 (1.7)–2 (3.5)
Wood composition board
1 (1.7)–1.5 (2.6)
(tempered hardboard)
Silicon plastics
0.075 (0.13)–0.5 (0.87)
Phenolics
0.116 (0.201)–0.309 (0.535)
Epoxies
0.1 (0.17)–0.3 (0.52)
Teﬂon
0.14 (0.24)
Nylon
0.1 (0.17)–0.14 (0.24)
Plastic foam
0.009 (0.016)–0.077 (0.133)
1For porous metal sintered parts, thermal conductivity values are 35–65%
of values shown.
°
°
Another effective way of presenting rank-ordered materials data involves the use of a
two-parameter graphical format. Ashby materials selection charts, recently published,3 are
two-parameter (two-dimensional) log-log graphs on which important performance evalu-
ation indices (strength, stiffness, density, etc.) are cross plotted as shown, for example, in
Figures 3.1 through 3.6.4 A procedure for utilizing Ashby charts for material selection is
discussed in 3.5.
3.4 Matching Responsive Materials to Application
Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method
One procedure for identifying good candidate materials for any speciﬁc application may
be summarized as follows:
1.
Using Table 3.1 as a guide, together with known requirements imposed by operational
or functional constraints, postulated failure modes, market-driven factors, and/or man-
agement directives, establish a concise speciﬁcation statement as discussed in 3.2. If
information about the application is so sketchy that a speciﬁcation statement cannot
be written, and the remaining steps cannot be executed, it is suggested that 1020 steel
3See ref. 3.
4Many more Ashby charts are presented in ref. 3, as well as a set of charts that are helpful in selecting a 
suitable manufacturing process.

106
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Youngs modulus, E (GPa)
Density,  (Mg/m3)
0.1
0.3
1.0
3
10
30
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
1. MODULUS-DENSITY
YOUNGS MODULUS E
(G = 3E/8; K = E)
CORK
GLASSES
Ge
Be
SiC
B
ALUMINAS
Si3N4
(m/s)
1/2
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
MEL
PC
NYLON
TIN
ALLOYS
ZrO2
STEELS
W-ALLOYS
WC-Co
PU
POLYMERS
FOAMS
Mo ALLOYS
Ti ALLOYS
BeO
SIALONS
Cu ALLOYS
Zn ALLOYS
DIAMOND
Ni ALLOYS
POROUS
CERAMICS
Mg
ALLOYS
Al ALLOYS
KFRP
GFRP
CFRP
HDPE
PTFE
LDPE
POLYESTERS
PP
PS
EPOXIES
WOOD
PRODUCTS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
3  103
3  102
103
104
Lower E limit
for true solids
E

= C
1/2
E
   
= C
E
   
= C
E

Si
CFRP
UNIPLY
FIR
PINE
OAK
ASH
FIR
BALSA
PINE
ASH
OAK
ROCK, STONE
BALSA
SPRUCE
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
LAMINATES   
GFRP
KFRP
PVC
PMMA
HARD
BUTYL
SOFT
BUTYL
SILICONE
PLASTICISED
PVC
CEMENT, CONCRETE
LEAD
    ALLOYS
POTTERY
PERPENDICULAR
TO GRAIN
WOODS
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
1/3
         PARALLEL
TO GRAIN
Guide lines for
minimum weight
design
ELASTOMERS
Figure 3.1
Two-parameter Ashby chart for Young’s modulus of elasticity, E, plotted versus density, . The content of the chart
roughly corresponds to the data included in Tables 3.4 and 3.9. (The chart is taken from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
R
be tentatively selected as the “best” material because of its excellent combination of
strength, stiffness, ductility, toughness, availability, cost, and machinability.
2.
Based on the information from step 1, and the speciﬁcation statement, identify all spe-
cial needs for the application, as discussed in 3.2, by writing a response of yes, no, or
perhaps in the blank following each item in Table 3.1.

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method 107
Strength, S (MPa)
Density,  (Mg/m3)
0.1
0.3
1.0
3
10
30
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10,000
2. STRENGTH-DENSITY
Metal and polymers: yield strength
Ceramics and glasses: compressive strength
Elastomers: tensile tear strength
Composites: tensile failure
Guide lines for
minimum weight
design
= C
S

= C
2/3
1/2
S

= C
S

ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
CERMETS
GLASSES
Si
SiC
ZrO2
Ge
B
SIALONS
MgO
Al2O3
STEELS
Mo
ALLOYS
Ni ALLOYS
Cu ALLOYS
Ti
ALLOYS
CAST
IRONS
Al ALLOYS
STONE,
ROCK
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
PTFE
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
BALSA
HDPE
ELASTOMERS
LDPE
POLYMERS
FOAMS
CORK
PU
SOFT
BUTYL
PS
PP
EPOXIES
MEL
PMMA
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
LEAD
ALLOYS
Zn
ALLOYS
 CFRP
GFRP
KFRP 
Be
DIAMOND
SILICONE
UNIPLY
    KFRP      
CFRP  
POROUS
CERAMICS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
NYLONS
Mg
ALLOYS
WOODS
PVC
BALSA
PERPENDICULAR
TO GRAIN
PARALLEL
TO GRAIN       
WOOD
PRODUCTS
POTTERY
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
W ALLOYS
GFRP
LAMINATES
CEMENT,
CONCRETE
POLYESTERS
Si3N4
Figure 3.2
Two-parameter Ashby chart for failure strength, S, plotted versus density, . For metals, S is yield strength, Syp; for
ceramics and glass, S is compressive crushing strength; for composites, S is tensile strength; for elastomers, S is tearing
strength. The content of the chart roughly corresponds to the data included in Tables 3.3 and 3.4. (The chart is taken
from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
R
3.
For each item receiving a yes or perhaps response, go to Table 3.2 to identify the cor-
responding performance evaluation index, and consult rank-ordered Tables 3.3
through 3.20 for potential material candidates (or similar information from other
sources for speciﬁc materials data). Using these data sources, write a short list of
highly qualiﬁed candidate materials corresponding to each identiﬁed special need.

108
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Fracture toughness, KIc (MPa m1/2)
Density,  (Mg/m3)
0.1
0.3
1.0
3
10
30
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
3. FRACTURE TOUGHNESS-DENSITY
Data for KIc valid below 10 MPa m1/2
Above 10 MPa m1/2 for ranking only
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
Cu
ALLOYS
Ni ALLOYS
CAST
IRONS
SiC
MgO
DIAMOND
GLASSES
POROUS
CERAMICS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
CORK
POLYMER
FOAMS
LDPE
PS
PVC
PP
NYLONS
HDPE
PC
COMMON ROCKS
WC-Co
STEELS
Al2O3
Si3N4
ZrO2
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
GFRP
KFRP 
UNIPLY
Mg
     ALLOYS
Al ALLOYS
  GFRP
KFRP
  CFRP
GFRP
= C
KIc

= C
KIc

= C
KIc

= C
KIc

= C
KIc

SIALONS
EPOXY
MEL
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
PERPENDICULAR
TO GRAIN
BALSA
           PARALLEL
TO GRAIN
LAMINATES
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
Guide lines
for minimum
weight design
Ti
ALLOYS
PMMA
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
BALSA
PLASTER
POTTERY
CEMENT,
CONCRETE
SiO2
W-
ALLOYS
POLYESTER
ICE
WOODS
4/3
4/5
2/3
1/2
Figure 3.3
Two-parameter Ashby chart for plane strain fracture toughness, KIc, plotted versus density, . The content of the chart
roughly corresponds to the data included in Tables 2.1 and 3.4. (The chart is taken from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
R
4.
Comparing all rank-ordered lists written in step 3, establish the two or three better can-
didate materials by ﬁnding those near the tops of all the lists. If a single candidate were
to appear at the top of all lists, it would be the clear choice. As a practical matter, com-
promises are nearly always necessary to identify the two or three better candidates.
5.
From the two or three better candidate materials, make a tentative selection for the mate-
rial to be used. This may require additional data, materials selection software packages,

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method 109
Youngs modulus, E (GPa)
Strength, S (MPa)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10,000
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
4. MODULUS-STRENGTH
Metals and polymers: yield strength
Ceramics and glasses: compressive strength
Elastomers: tear strength
Composites: tensile strength
= C
S
    E
= C
S2
E
= C
S
E
= 0.1
S
E
= 10–4
S
E
= 10–3
S
E
= 10–2
S
E
ZrO2
Al2O3
Si3N4
SiC
MgO
WC
BORON
Mo ALLOYS
CAST IRONS
ASH
OAK
PINE
PMMA
IPS
PP
HDPE
WOODS
    TO
GRAIN
LDPE
PU
CORK
POLYMERS
FOAMS
PINE
EPOXIES
⎪⎪ TO
GRAIN
GFRP
LEAD
Sn
BaO
Ge
W
DIAMOND
Al ALLOYS
COMMON
ROCKS
CFRP
WOOD
PRODUCTS
PVC
MEL
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
ASH
SOFT
BUTYL
Max energy
storage per
unit volume
Buckling
before yield
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
Min. energy
storage per
unit volume
Yield before
buckling
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
BRICK,
ETC.
BALSA
CERMETS
SILICONE
HARD
BUTYL
ELASTOMERS
OAK
POLYESTER
NYLONS
BALSA
POROUS
CERAMICS
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
GLASSES
SILICON
BERYLLIUM
Ni ALLOYS
Cu ALLOYS Zn ALLOYS
CONCRETE
Mg ALLOYS
LAMINATES
3/2
CEMENT
STEELS
Ti ALLOYS
CFRP
UNIPLY
GFRP
PTFE
Design
guide
lines
Figure 3.4
Two-parameter Ashby chart for Young’s modulus of elasticity, E, versus density, . The content of the chart roughly 
corresponds to the data included in Tables 3.9, 3.3, and 3.11. (The chart is taken from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
R
optimization techniques that are more quantitative, discussions with materials specialists,
or additional design calculations to conﬁrm the suitability of the selection.5
In some cases, mathematical optimization procedures may be available to help estab-
lish which of the better candidates should be selected. Such procedures involve writing a
5See, for example refs. 16, 17, 18.

110
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Fracture toughness, KIC (MPa m1/2)
Strength, S (MPa)
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10,000
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
7. FRACTURE TOUGHNESS-STRENGTH
Metals and polymers: yield strength
Ceramics and glasses: compressive strength
Composites: tensile strength
Process zone diameter  KIc /S
Si4M4
KIc
S2
PINE
OAK
ASH
    TO
GRAIN
LDPE
BALSA
EPOXIES
HDPE
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
WOODS
PS
PMMA
PC
ASH
OAK
PINE
ICE
POLYMERS
FOAMS
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
GLASSES
POTTERY,
BRICK, ETC.
DIAMOND
SIC
ZrO2
STEELS
Ti
ALLOYS
Cu ALLOYS
Al ALLOYS
CFRP
W-ALLOYS
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
10
1
10–1
10–2
10–3
10
1
10–1
10–2
10–4 mm
Fracture
before yield
GFRP
GFRP
LAMINATES
CFRP
UNIPY
Mg ALLOYS
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
BALSA
MgO
AL2O3
SIALONS
KIc
 S2
2
(mm)
= C
KIc
 S 
= C
KIc
 S 
Yield before
fracture
100
PP
100
⎪⎪ TO
GRAIN
CAST IRONS
POROUS
CERAMICS
PLASTERS
    CEMENT &
CONCRETE
POLYESTERS
COMMON
ROCKS
WOOD
PRODUCTS
NYLONS
Ni
ALLOYS
PVC
Guide lines
for safe
design
10–3
MEL
2
2
2
Figure 3.5
Two-parameter Ashby chart for plane strain fracture toughness, KIc, plotted versus failure strength, S (see legend of 
Figure 3.2 for deﬁnitions of S for various materials classes). The content of the chart roughly corresponds to the data 
included in Tables 2.1 and 3.4. (The chart is taken from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
merit function, deﬁning performance parameters, documenting application constraints,
and partially differentiating the merit function (within the constraints) to calculate a ﬁgure
of merit for each candidate material. The best ﬁgure of merit then establishes the best ma-
terial choice. These optimization procedures are discussed in the literature6 but are beyond
the scope of this text.
6See, for example refs. 15 and 3.

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method 111
Strength at temperature, S()(MPa)
Temperature,  (K)
200
0
100
200
300
400
Temperature (C)
600
800
1000
1400
300
400
600
800
1000
1400
2000
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10,000
13. STRENGTH-TEMPERATURE
Metals and polymers: yield strength at temperature
Ceramics: compression strength
Composites: Tensile strength at temperature
PC
PF
PVC
PP
Zn
                  ALLOYS
Mg ALLOYS
POLYMIDES
PTFE
Time–
Independent
yield strength
Upper limit
on strength at
temperature
LDPE
SILICONES
WOODS
POLYMER
FOAMS
HDPE
    TO
GRAIN     TO
GRAIN
Al ALLOYS
MULLITES
SiC
MgO
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
POROUS
CERAMICS
Al2O3
ZrO2
Si3N4
Ni ALLOYS
BRICK,
ETC.
STEELS
UNIPLY
KFRP
LAMINATES
GFRP
GFRP
CFRP
PMMA
EPOXIES
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
ELASTOMERS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
ICE
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
NYLONS
POLYESTERS
BUTYLS
 ⎪⎪ TO
GRAIN
COMPRESSION
Ti-
ALLOYS
CFRP
GLASSES
Range typical
of alloy series
Figure 3.6
Two-parameter Ashby chart for failure strength, S (see legend of Figure 3.2 for deﬁnitions of S for various materials
classes), plotted versus ambient temperature, 
. The content of this chart roughly corresponds to the data included in
Table 3.5. (The chart is taken from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.)
®
Computer-aided materials selection systems (CAMSS) are also emerging rapidly as
potentially powerful tools for materials selection. Such expert systems, capable of interfac-
ing with design teams, consist of three integrated parts connected by search and logic de-
duction algorithms: databases, knowledge bases, and modeling or analysis capabilities.

112
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Proprietary in-house databases exist in many companies, and some are commercially avail-
able.7 Computerized knowledge bases are less well developed, requiring a wide range of
formulas, design rules, “if-then” rules, manufacturability information, or company-speciﬁc
“lessons-learned” ﬁles.8
Example 3.1 Materials Selection: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method
It is desired to select a material for a proposed design for the crankshaft to be used in a
new, compact, one-cylinder air compressor. The crankshaft is to be supported on two main
bearings that straddle the connecting rod bearing. A preliminary analysis has indicated that
the most probable failure modes of concern are fatigue, wear, and yielding. Projected pro-
duction rates are high enough so that cost is an important consideration. Select a tentative
material for this application.
Solution
Following the ﬁve-step process of 3.4, a speciﬁcation statement is ﬁrst formulated as follows:
The crankshaft for this application should be short, compact, relatively rigid, fatigue
resistant, wear resistant at the bearing sites, and capable of low cost production.
Using this speciﬁcation statement as a basis, the “special needs” column of Table 3.1
may be ﬁlled in as shown in Table E3.1A.
Surveying these results, special needs have been identiﬁed for items 1, 6, 10, and 14.
For these special needs, Table 3.2 provides the corresponding performance evaluation in-
dices shown in Table E3.1B.
Materials data for these particular performance indices are given in Table 3.3, 3.9,
3.13, 3.18, and 3.19. Making a short list of candidate materials from each of these tables
results in the following array:
TABLE E3.1A Table 3.1 Adapted to Crankshaft Application
Crankshaft Application Requirement
Special Need?
1. Strength/volume ratio
Yes
2. Strength/weight ratio
No
3. Strength at elevated temperature
No
4. Long-term dimensional stability at elevated temperature
No
5. Dimensional stability under temperature ﬂuctuation
No
6. Stiffness
Yes
7. Ductility
No
8. Ability to store energy elastically
No
9. Ability to dissipate energy plastically
No
10. Wear resistance
Yes
11. Resistance to chemically reactive environment
No
12. Resistance to nuclear radiation environment
No
13. Desire to use speciﬁc manufacturing process
No
14. Cost constraints
Yes
15. Procurement time constraints
No
7For example, CMS (see ref. 3) and PERITUS (see ref. 4). CMS implements the Ashby chart selection 
procedure discussed in 3.5, allowing successive application of up to six selection stages. PERITUS supports
the rank-ordered-data table method discussed in 3.4, with selection based on requesting “high,” “medium,” or
“low” values for pertinent properties.
8See 1.10.

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Rank-Ordered-Data Table Method 113
TABLE E3.1B Performance Evaluation Indices for 
Special Needs
Special Need
Performance Evaluation Index
1. Strength/volume ratio
Ultimate or yield strength
6. Stiffness
Modulus of elasticity
10. Wear resistance
Hardness
14. Cost constraints
Cost/unit weight; machinability 
For high-strength/volume (from Table 3.3):
Ultra-high-strength steel
Medium-carbon steel
Stainless steel (age hardenable)
Stainless steel (austenitic)
High-carbon steel
Yellow brass
Graphite-epoxy composite
Commercial bronze
Titanium
Low-carbon steel
Ceramic
Phosphor bronze
Nickel-based alloy
Gray cast iron
For high stiffness (from Table 3.9):
Tungsten carbide
Steel
Titanium carbide
Stainless steel
Molybelenum
Cast iron
For high hardness (from Table 3.13):
Diamond
Case-hardened low-carbon steel
Sapphire
Ultra-high-strength steel
Tungsten carbide
Titanium
Titanium carbide
Gray cast iron
For low material cost (from Table 3.18):
Gray cast iron
Acrylic
Low-carbon steel
Commercial bronze
Ultra-high-strength steel
Stainless steel
Zinc alloy
For good machinability (from Table 3.19):
Magnesium alloy
Medium-carbon steel
Aluminum alloy
Ultra-high-strength steel
Free-machining steel
Stainless-steel alloy
Low-carbon steel
Gray cast iron
Surveying these ﬁve lists, the materials common to all the lists are:
Ultra-high-strength steel
Low-carbon steel (case hardened)
Gray cast iron
For these three candidate materials the speciﬁc data from Tables 3.3, 3.9, 3.13, 3,18
and 3.19 are summarized in Table E3.1C.

114
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Example 3.1 
Continues
Because the speciﬁcation statement emphasizes short and compact design, the signif-
icantly stronger ultra-high-strength steel is probably the best candidate material; however,
the case-hardened low-carbon steel is probably worth a more detailed investigation since
it has a higher surface hardness (better wear resistance), is cheaper, and is more easily ma-
chined prior to heat treatment. If compact design were not an issue, cast iron would prob-
ably be the best choice.
9The complete procedure, as presented by Ashby, is beyond the scope of this text. It involves writing per-
formance indices as a function of performance parameters, geometric parameters, and materials properties;
writing a merit function (objective function); and optimizing the merit function to determine a figure of
merit. Guidance is given in ref. 3 for determining appropriate mathematical expressions for many useful 
performance parameters and merit functions, but since a design nearly always involves optimization with 
respect to many design goals (often contradictory), judgment is frequently required to rank the goals before
selecting the better materials candidates.
TABLE E3.1C Evaluation Data for Candidate Materials
Candidate Material
Ultra-High-
Low-Carbon Steel
Gray 
Evaluation Index
Strength Steel
(case hardened)
Cast Iron
Ultimate strength, 
, psi
287,000
61,000
50,000
Yield strength, 
, psi
270,000
51,000
—
Modulus of elasticity, E, psi
Hardness, BHN
560
650
262
Cost, dollars/lb
0.65
0.50
0.30
Machinability index
50
65
40 
13-24 * 106
30 * 106
30 * 106
Syp
Su
3.5 Matching Responsive Materials to Application
Requirements: Ashby Chart Method
The Ashby chart method presented here is a simpliﬁed version of the complete procedure
discussed in reference 3.9 It is based on using pertinent two-parameter charts, such as those
shown in Figures 3.1 through 3.6, to determine which materials make good candidates. In
these charts, materials within a given subset (metals, polymers, etc.) tend to cluster to-
gether, making it possible to construct a “circumscribing envelope” to delineate each class
of material. The dashed families of parallel “design guidelines” shown on many of the
Ashby charts are presented to help optimize the performance of the component. The slope
of each family of guidelines is tied to the degree of the pertinent performance parameter,
as illustrated in Example 3.2. All materials that lie on a given dashed guideline will per-
form equally well based on the particular performance parameter represented by that line.
Those materials that lie above the line are better; those materials that lie below the line are
worse. The “short-name” identiﬁers used in the Ashby charts are deﬁned in Table 3.21 to-
gether with the members of each material class. Similar to the method of 3.4, the two or
three better material candidates are then selected from an overall evaluation of the results
from all the charts used.
The Ashby procedure for identifying good candidate materials for any speciﬁc appli-
cation may be summarized as follows:
1.
Using Table 3.1 as a guide, together with known requirements imposed by operational
or functional constraints, postulated failure modes, market-driven factors, and/or

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Ashby Chart Method 115
TABLE 3.21 Material Classes and Members of Each Class1
Class
Members
Short Name
Engineering Alloys
Aluminum alloys
Al alloys
(the metals and alloys
Beryllium alloys
Be alloys
of engineering)
Copper alloys
Cu alloys
Lead alloys
Lead alloys
Magnesium alloys
Mg alloys
Molybdenum alloys
Mo alloys
Nickel alloys
Ni alloys
Steels
Steels
Tin alloys
Tin alloys
Titanium alloys
Ti alloys
Tungsten alloys
W alloys
Zinc alloys
Zn alloys
Engineering Polymers
Epoxies
EP
(the thermoplastics and
Melamines
MEL
thermosets of engineering)
Polycarbonate
PC
Polyesters
PEST
Polyethylene, high density
HDPE
Polyethylene, low density
LDPE
Polyformaldehyde
PF
Polymethylmethacrylate
PMMA
Polypropylene
PP
Polytetraﬂuroethylene
PTFE
Polyvinylchloride
PVC
Engineering Ceramics
Alumina
Al2O3
(ﬁne ceramics capable of
Diamond
C
load-bearing application)
Sialons
Sialons
Silicon carbide
SiC
Silicon nitride
Si3N4
Zirconia
ZrO2
Engineering Composites
Carbon-ﬁber-reinforced polymer
CFRP
(the composites of engineering
Glass-ﬁber-reinforced polymer
GFRP
practice) A distinction is
Kevlar-reinforced polymer
KFRP
drawn between the properties
of a ply (UNIPLY) and properties
of a laminate (LAMINATES)
Porous Ceramics
Brick
Brick
(traditional ceramics,
Cement
Cement
cermets, rocks, and
Common rocks
Rocks
minerals)
Concrete
Concrete
Porcelain
Pcln
Pottery
Pot
Glasses
Borosilicate glass
B-glass
(ordinary silicate glass)
Soda glass
Na-glass
Silica
SiO2
Woods
Ash
Ash
(separate envelopes
Balsa
Balsa
describe properties parallel
Fir
Fir
to the grain and normal to
Oak
Oak
it, and wood products)
Pine
Pine
Wood products (ply, etc.)
Wood products

116
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
management directives, establish a concise speciﬁcation statement as discussed in 3.2.
If information about the application is so sketchy that a speciﬁcation statement cannot
be written, and the remaining steps cannot be executed, it is suggested that 1020 steel
be tentatively selected as the “best” material because of its excellent combination of
strength, stiffness, ductility, toughness, availability, cost, and machinability.
2.
Based on the information from step 1, and the speciﬁcation statement, identify all spe-
cial needs for the application, as discussed in 3.2, by writing a response of yes, no, or
perhaps in the blank following each item in Table 3.1.
3.
For each item receiving a yes or perhaps response, go to Table 3.2 to identify the cor-
responding performance evaluation index, and consult the pertinent Ashby charts
shown in Figures 3.1 through 3.6. Using these Ashby charts, identify a short list of
highly qualiﬁed candidate materials corresponding to each selected pair of perform-
ance parameters or application constraints.
4.
Comparing the results from all charts used, establish the two or three better candidate
materials.
5.
From the two or three better candidate materials, make a tentative selection for the
material to be used. This may require additional data, materials selection software
packages, optimization techniques that are more quantitative, discussions with mate-
rials specialists, or additional design calculations in order to conﬁrm the suitability of
the selection.
6.
If a more quantitative optimization technique is desired, consult reference 3.
Example 3.2 Materials Selection: Ashby Chart Method10
A preliminary design is being formulated for a solid cylindrical tension rod of diameter d
and ﬁxed length L. The rod is to be used in a spacecraft application where weight, strength,
and stiffness are all important design considerations. It is to be subjected to a static axial
force, F. A safety factor of 
is desired. The preliminary design analysis has indicated that
the most probable failure modes are force-induced elastic deformation and yielding.
Further, engineering management has directed that ductile materials be used in this appli-
cation. Using the Ashby charts shown in Figures 3.1 through 3.6, select a tentative mate-
rial for this application.
nd
10This example adapted from ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby.
TABLE 3.21 (Continued )
Class
Members
Short Name
Elastomers
Natural rubber
Rubber
(natural and artiﬁcial
Hard butyl rubber
Hard butyl
rubbers)
Polyurethane
PU
Silicone rubber
Silicone
Soft butyl rubber
Soft butyl
Polymer foams
These include:
(foamed polymers of
Cork
Cork
engineering)
Polyester
PEST
Polystyrene
PS
Polyurethane
PU
1From ref. 3, courtesy of M. F. Ashby. 

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Ashby Chart Method 117
Solution
Following the step-by-step procedure of 3.5, a speciﬁcation statement may be formulated
as follows:
The tension rod for this application should be light, stiff, and strong.
Using this speciﬁcation statement as a basis, the special needs column of Table 3.1
may be ﬁlled in as shown in Table E3.2A.
Surveying these results, special needs have been identiﬁed for items 1, 2, and 6. For
these special needs, Table 3.2 provides the corresponding performance evaluation indices
as shown in Table E3.2B.
The performance requirements of the tension rod may be described functionally by an
equation of the form11
p =
J P
requirements,
application
A
Q
,
P
requirements,
geometrical
G
Q
,
P
properties
material
M
Q K
11See ref. 3, p. 58 ff. for a more complete description of this procedure.
12Experience has shown that each of these parameter groups is usually independent of the others and therefore
mathematically “separable.”
TABLE E3.2A Table 3.1 Adapted to Spacecraft Tension Rod Application
Tension Rod Application Requirement
Special Need?
1. Strength/volume ratio
Maybe
2. Strength/weight ratio
Yes
3. Strength at elevated temperature
No
4. Long-term dimensional stability at elevated temperature
No
5. Dimensional stability under temperature ﬂuctuation
No
6. Stiffness
Yes
7. Ductility
No
8. Ability to store energy elastically
No
9. Ability to dissipate energy plastically
No
10. Wear resistance
No
11. Resistance to chemically reactive environment
No
12. Resistance to nuclear radiation environment
No
13. Desire to use speciﬁc manufacturing process
No
14. Cost constraints
No
15. Procurement time constraints
No
TABLE E3.2B Performance Evaluation Indices for 
Special Needs
Special Need
Performance Evaluation Index
1. Strength/volume ratio
Ultimate or yield strength
2. Strength/weight ratio
Ultimate or yield strength/density
6. Stiffness
Modulus of elasticity 

118
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Example 3.2 
Continues
For the tension rod under consideration, it will be assumed that the three groups of pa-
rameters are separable12 and therefore the relation above may be reexpressed as
(1)
Based on this, the optimum subset of materials for the tension rod can be identiﬁed
without solving the entire design problem.
Using the speciﬁcation statement formulated above, the material selected should be
strong, stiff, and light. An expression for the mass of the rod may be written as m  AL
 (d2/4)L, where d is the rod diameter, L is the length of the rod, and  is the mass den-
sity of the material.
The diameter of the cross section must be large enough to carry the load F, without
yielding, and provide a design safety factor of nd. Therefore F/A  Syp/nd. Combining this
with the expression for mass, where A  m/L results in
(2)
It is interesting to note that this expression has the “separable function” format out-
lined in (1) and that the material-based performance index for this case is, therefore f3(M)
 Syp/nd.
A similar expression may be developed based on the need for the rod to be stiff
enough to safety carry the load without excessive elastic deformation and to provide a
safety factor nd. Since the diameter of the rod must be large enough to carry the load, F,
without exceeding the critical elastic deformation, (	L)crit, and provide a design safety 
factor nd,
where E is Young’s modulus of elasticity and 
is the axial strain. Substituting A  m/L
into this expression results in
Like (2), this expression has the function format of (1), so the materials-based per-
formance index for this case is f
3(M)  E/. Materials data for the performance parame-
ters f3(M) and f
3(M) correspond to the Ashby charts of Figures 3.1 and 3.2. These charts
are reproduced again in Figures E3.2A and E3.2B, where each chart has been marked up
to isolate a small region that contains materials having a good combination of properties
for meeting the pertinent performance-parameter requirements.
Since performance parameters f3(M) and f
3(M) are both degree 1, a line constructed
parallel to the dashed lines having a slope of 1 will be used for narrowing the charts rela-
tively small number of candidate materials.
Material candidates common to both lists include:
Steel
Titanium
Aluminum
Ceramics
Composites
Because Engineering management has directed that ductile materials be used for this
application, ceramics are dropped from this list.
m =
(ndF)AL2B
(¢L)crit
a r
Eb
e
F
A = Ee = Ea(¢L)crit
ndL
b
m = (ndF)(L)a r
Syp
b
p = f1(A)f2(G)f3(M)

Matching Responsive Materials to Application Requirements: Ashby Chart Method 119
Surveying Figure E3.2A, the group of better material candidates includes:
Steel
Aluminum
Titanium
Ceramics
Molybdenum
Composites
Tungsten
Youngs modulus, E (GPa)
Density,  (Mg/m3)
0.1
0.3
1.0
3
10
30
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
1. MODULUS-DENSITY
YOUNGS MODULUS E
(G = 3E/8; K = E)
CORK
GLASSES
Be
SiC
B
ALUMINAS
Si3N4
(m/s)
1/2
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
MEL
PC
NYLON
TIN
ALLOYS
ZrO2
WC-Co
PU
POLYMERS
FOAMS
BeO
SIALONS
Cu ALLOYS
Zn ALLOYS
DIAMOND
POROUS
CERAMICS
Mg
ALLOYS
KFRP
GFRP
CFRP
HDPE
PTFE
LDPE
POLYESTERS
PP
PS
EPOXIES
WOOD
PRODUCTS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
3  103
3  102
103
104
Lower E limit
for true solids
E

= C
1/2
E
   
= C
E
   
= C
E

Si
CFRP
UNIPLY
FIR
PINE
OAK
ASH
ROCK, STONE
BALSA
SPRUCE
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
PVC
PMMA
HARD
BUTYL
SOFT
BUTYL
SILICONE
PLASTICISED
PVC
CEMENT, CONCRETE
LEAD
    ALLOYS
POTTERY
PERPENDICULAR
TO GRAIN
WOODS
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
1/3
Guide lines for
minimum weight
design
ELASTOMERS
BALSA
         PARALLEL
TO GRAIN
FIR PINE
ASH
OAK
LAMINATES   
GFRP
KFRP
Ti ALLOYS
Al ALLOYS
Ge
STEELS
W-ALLOYS
Mo ALLOYS
Ni ALLOYS
SEARCH
REGION
Figure E3.2A
Reproduction of Figure 3.1 showing an acceptable subset of engineering alloys for the tension rod application.

120
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Example 3.2 
Continues
Strength, S (MPa)
Density,  (Mg/m3)
0.1
0.3
1.0
3
10
30
0.1
1
10
100
1000
10,000
2. STRENGTH-DENSITY
Metal and polymers: yield strength
Ceramics and glasses: compressive strength
Elastomers: tensile tear strength
Composites: tensile failure
Guide lines for
minimum weight
design
= C
S

= C
2/3
1/2
S

= C
S

ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
CERMETS
GLASSES
Si
SiC
ZrO2
Ge
B
SIALONS
MgO
Al2O3
STEELS
Mo
ALLOYS
Ni ALLOYS
Cu ALLOYS
CAST
IRONS
Al ALLOYS
STONE,
ROCK
ENGINEERING
ALLOYS
PTFE
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
HDPE
ELASTOMERS
LDPE
POLYMERS
FOAMS
CORK
PU
SOFT
BUTYL
PS
PP
EPOXIES
MEL
PMMA
ENGINEERING
COMPOSITES
LEAD
ALLOYS
Zn
ALLOYS
 CFRP
GFRP
KFRP 
Be
DIAMOND
SILICONE
UNIPLY
    KFRP      
CFRP  
POROUS
CERAMICS
ENGINEERING
POLYMERS
WOODS
PVC
BALSA
PERPENDICULAR
TO GRAIN
WOOD
PRODUCTS
POTTERY
ENGINEERING
CERAMICS
W ALLOYS
GFRP
LAMINATES
CEMENT,
CONCRETE
POLYESTERS
Si3N4
Mg
ALLOYS
Ti
ALLOYS
ASH
OAK
PINE
FIR
PARALLEL
TO GRAIN       
NYLONS
SEARCH
REGION
BALSA
Figure E3.2B
Reproduction of Figure 3.2 showing an acceptable subset of engineering alloys for the tension rod application.
Similarly, from Figure E3.2B, the group of better material candidates includes:
Cermets
Aluminum
Steel
Ceramics
Nickel
Composites
Titanium

Problems 121
3-1. A newly graduated mechanical engineer has been hired
to work on a weight-reduction project to redesign the clevis
connection (see Figure 4.1A) used in the rudder-control link-
age of a low-cost high-production surveillance drone. This
“new hire” has recommended the use of titanium as a candi-
date material for this application. As her supervisor, would
you accept the recommendation or suggest that she pursue
other possibilities?
3-2. It is desired to select a material for a back-packable
truss-type bridge to be carried in small segments by a party of
three when hiking over glacial ice fields. The purpose of the
bridge is to allow the hikers to cross over crevasses of up to
12 feet wide. Write a specification statement for such a
bridge.
3-3. A very ﬁne tensile support wire is to be used to suspend a
10-lb sensor package from the “roof” of an experimenal com-
bustion chamber operating at a temperature of 850 F. The sup-
port wire has a diameter of 0.020 inch. Creep of the support
wire is acceptable as long as the creep rate does not exceed 4 
10
in/in/hr. Further, stress rupture must not occur before at
least 1000 hours of operation have elapsed. Propose one or two
candidate materials for the support wire.
3-4. For an application in which ultimate strength-to-weight
ratio is by far the dominant consideration, a colleague is pro-
posing to use aluminum. Do you concur with his selection, or
can you propose a better candidate material for this application?
3-5. You have been assigned the task of making a preliminary
recommendation for the material to be used in the bumper of
a new ultra-safe crash-resistant automobile. It is very impor-
tant that the bumper be able to survive the energy levels asso-
ciated with low-velocity crashes, without damage to the
bumper or the automobile. Even more imporant, for higher en-
ergy levels associated with severe crashes, the bumper should
be capable of deforming plastically over large displacements
without rupture, thereby dissipating crash pulse energy to pro-
tect the vehicle occupants. It is anticipated that these new ve-
hicles will be used throughout North America, and during all
seasons of the year. A 10-year design life is desired. Cost is
also a very important factor. Propose one or a few candidate
materials suitable for this application. (Specific alloys need
not be designated.)
3-6. A rotor disk to support the turbine blades in a newly de-
signed aircraft gas turbine engine is to operate in a ﬂow of
1000 F mixture of air and combustion product. The turbine is
to rotate at a speed of 40,000 rpm. Clearances between rotating
and stationary parts must be kept as small as possible and must
not change very much when the temperature changes. Disk
vibration cannot be tolerated either. Propose one or a few can-
didate materials for this application. (Speciﬁc alloys need not
be designated.)
3-7. A material is to be selected for the main landing-gear sup-
port for a carrier-based navy airplane. Both weight and size of
°
-5
°
the support are important considerations, as well as minimal de-
ﬂection under normal landing conditions. The support must also
be able to handle impact loading, both under normal landing
conditions and under extreme emergency controlled-crash-
landing conditions. Under crash-landing conditions permanent
deformations are acceptable, but separation into pieces is not
acceptable. What candidate materials would you suggest for
this application?
3-8. A job shop manager desires to have a rack built for storing
random lengths of pipe, angle iron, and other structural sec-
tions. No special considerations have been identiﬁed, but the
rack should be safe and the cost should be low. What material
would you suggest?
3-9. The preliminary speciﬁcation statement for a new-concept
automotive spring application has been written as follows:
The spring should be stiff and light.
Using this specification statement as a basis, special
needs have been identified from Table 3.1 as items 2 and 6.
From Table 3.2, the corresponding performance evaluation
indices have been determined to be low density and high
stiffness.
With these two indices identiﬁed, the project manager has
requested a report on materials exhibiting values of Young’s
modulus, E, of more than about 200 GPa, and values of density,
, less than about 2 Mg/m3. Using Figure 3.1, establish a list of
candidate materials that meet these criteria.
3-10. By examining Figure 3.3, determine whether the  plane
strain fracture toughness, 
, of common engineering poly-
mers such as PMMA (Plexiglas) is higher or lower than for en-
gineering ceramics such as silicon carbide (SiC).
3-11. It is desired to design a pressure vessel that will leak be-
fore it breaks . The reason for this is that the leak can be eas-
ily detected before the onset of rapid crack propagation
that
might cause an explosion of the pressure vessel due to brittle
behavior. To accomplish the leak-before-break goal, the vessel
should be designed so that it can tolerate a crack having a
length, a, at least equal to the wall thickness, t, of the pressure
vessel without failure by rapid crack propagation. A speciﬁca-
tion statement for design of this thin-walled pressure vessel has
been written as follows:
The pressure vessel should experience slow through-the-
thickness crack propagation to cause a leak before the onset of
gross yielding of the pressure vessel wall.
From evaluation of this specification statement using
Tables 3.1 and 3.2, the important evaluation indices have been
deduced to be high fracture toughness and high yield strength.
By combining (5-51) and (9-5), keeping in mind the “sep-
arable” quality of the materials parameter 
discussed in
f31M2
14
13
KIc
r
Problems
13In this application, “break” will be interpreted to mean onset of
nominal gross-section yielding of the pressure vessel wall.
14See 2.5.

122
Chapter 3 / Materials Selection
Example 3.2, the materials-based performance index for this
case has been found to be
It is also desired to keep the vessel wall as thin as possible (cor-
responds to selecting materials with yield strength as high as
possible).
f31M2 = Kc
Syp
a. Using the Ashby charts shown in Figures 3.1 through
3.6, select tentative material candidates for this application.
b. Using the rank-ordered-data tables of Table 5.2 and
Tables 3.3 through 3.20, select tentative material candi-
dates for this application.
c. Compare results of parts (a) and (b).

Response of Machine Elements to Loads and
Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Chapter 4
123
4.1 Loads and Geometry
During the ﬁrst design iteration for any machine element, attention must be focused on sat-
isfying functional performance speciﬁcations by selecting the “best” material and devising
the “best” geometry to provide adequate strength and life. Typically, this effort is based on
the loading, environment, and potential failure modes governing the application. A review
of the design steps in Table 1.1 will show that a detailed plan for designing each load-car-
rying machine part is given in step VII. Fundamental to carrying forth the plan is an accu-
rate knowledge of the loads on each machine part, obtained by conducting a careful global
force analysis. The importance of an accurate force analysis cannot be overemphasized;
highly sophisticated stress or deﬂection analyses to determine machine element geometry,
if based on inaccurate loads, are of little value.
Sometimes the operational loads are well known, or can be accurately estimated, es-
pecially if the design task is to improve an existing machine. If a new machine is being de-
signed, or if operating conditions are not well known, however, the accurate determination
of the operating loads may be the most difﬁcult task in the design process. Operating loads,
as well as reaction forces on the machine, may be encountered at the surfaces (surface
forces), in either concentrated or distributed conﬁgurations, or generated within the masses
of the machine parts (body forces) by gravitational, inertial, or magnetic ﬁelds. All signif-
icant surface and body forces and moments must be included in the gobal force analysis if
the design effort is to be successful.
To proceed with the design of each machine part after having completed the global
force analysis, it is usually necessary to determine the local forces and moments on each
of the parts. Successfully ﬁnding the local forces and moments depends on using the ba-
sic concepts and equations of equilibrium.
4.2 Equilibrium Concepts and Free-Body Diagrams
A rigid body is said to be in equilibrium when the system of external forces and moments
acting on it sum to zero. If the body is being accelerated, inertia forces must be included
in the summation. Thus, for a nonaccelerating body the equations of static equilibrium
may be written as
(4-1)
aFz = 0    aMz = 0
aFy = 0    aMy = 0
aFx = 0    aMx = 0

124
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
where x, y, and z are three mutually perpendicular coordinate axes with arbitrarily chosen ori-
gin and orientation. 
denotes a force in the jth direction, and 
denotes a moment about
the jth axis. If the body is accelerating, inertia forces must be accounted for in applying the
principles of dynamic analysis. For a body in static equilibrium, no matter how complicated
the geometry or how many different external forces and moments are being applied, the force
system can always be resolved into three forces along the axes and three moments about the
axes of an arbitrarily chosen x-y-z coordinate system, as described by the equations of (4-1).
When a local force analysis is to be undertaken, it is often advantageous to consider
only a selected portion of the body or structure of interest. This may be implemented by
passing an imaginary cutting plane through the body at a desired location to conceptually
isolate, or free, the selected portion from the rest of the body. (This concept is illustrated
for two simple cases in Figures 4.2 and 4.3.) The internal forces (stresses) that were act-
ing at the cutting plane location before it was cut must be represented by an equivalent sys-
tem of external forces on the cut face, properly placed and distributed to maintain
equilibrium of the selected free body. The isolated portion, together with all forces and mo-
ments acting on it, is called a free-body diagram. The construction and use of accurate
free-body diagrams is absolutely essential in performing good stress and deﬂection analy-
ses in the design of a machine part.
4.3 Force Analysis
To perform a good force analysis as the basis for designing any machine element, a de-
signer must pay attention to how forces and moments are applied, how they are transmit-
ted through the body or the structure, and how they are reacted. Furthermore, it is
important to identify how applied force systems vary as a function of time, and what types
of stress patterns they may induce in the machine part being considered. All of these fac-
tors play a role in determining which failure modes must be considered and in identifying
locations within the machine elements where failure is more likely.
As a practical matter, in real machines there are no concentrated loads, no pure mo-
ments, no simple supports, and no ﬁxed supports. These analytical simpliﬁcations are, nev-
ertheless, essential in modeling force systems so that a designer can calculate the stresses and
deﬂections induced in machine parts with sufﬁcient precision but reasonable effort. As the
design progresses, the consequences of such simpliﬁcations must be reexamined, especially
in the local regions of contact where forces, moments, and reactions are applied. Sometimes,
more sophisticated analyses may be necessary to properly evaluate these local regions.
To implement the construction of valid free-body diagrams it is often useful to follow
the paths along which forces are transmitted through and between parts of a structure. One
way to accomplish this is to visualize continuous lines of force which ﬂow through the ma-
chine from applied loads to supporting structure. Following the lines of force as they ﬂow
through the structure helps identify stress or deﬂection patterns and locations where criti-
cal analyses should be performed to establish suitable geometry and select material prop-
erties to resist failure.
Example 4.1 Force Flow, Free-Body Diagrams, and Failure Mode Assessment
A typical pin-and-clevis joint is sketched in Figure E4.1A. If the joint is subjected to a
static tensile force P, do the following:
a.
By inspection, visualize how the force is transmitted through the joint, and sketch the 
“lines of force ﬂow” from left to right.
Mj
Fj

Force Analysis 125
lc lb
lc
Clevis
Pin
Blade
P
P
P
P
Figure E4.1A
Pin-and-clevis joint under static tensile loading.
b.
Isolate and sketch the pin in a free-body diagram, showing all forces on the free 
body.
c.
Identify potential failure modes that should be considered in designing the pin (i.e., in 
selecting a material and calculating dimensions).
Solution
a.
The lines of force passing through the joint structure shown in Figure E4.1A may be 
sketched as shown in Figure E4.1B as dashed lines.
b.
As shown in Figure E4.1C, a free-body diagram of the pin may be sketched by re-
ferring to the force-ﬂow diagram of Figure E4.1B. Note that the force P is not con-
centrated, but distributed along bearing contact region C on the left and along D and
E on the right. Likewise, it is distributed around the contacting half-circumference in
each of these locations. The nature of the distribution depends upon material, geom-
etry, and loading level.
c.
Since the load is static, only static failure modes need to considered. Further, it may
initially be assumed that environment and temperature are not factors in failure.
Clevis
Pin
Blade
P
P
P
P
P = P1 + P2
P
P
P2
P1
A
A
C
E
D
B
B
Figure E4.1B
Lines of force ﬂow through the pin-and-clevis
joint.
Figure E4.1C
Free-body diagram of pin.

126
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Depending on speciﬁcs of the design requirements then, at least the following failure
modes and locations should be considered:
1. Elastic deformation, if axial displacement between clevis and blade1 is critical.
2. Yielding and/or ductile rupture, along bearing contact regions C, D, and E, and
across shear planes, A-A and B-B, presuming the pin to be made of a ductile ma-
terial. Bending of the pin could also contribute.
3. Brittle fracture, across planes A-A and B-B, due to bending and shear.
If other design information is discovered as the design progresses (e.g., vibrational
excitations, aggressive environment, etc.), other potential failure modes such as fatigue,
corrosion, fretting, and so on, might need to be added to the list.
4.4 Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns 
for Common Types of Loading
When designing a machine part to function without failure, a designer must, at an early
stage, identify the probable failure mode(s), select a suitable parameter by which severity
of loading and environment may be analytically represented, propose a material and geom-
etry for the part, and obtain pertinent critical strength properties related to the probable
failure mode. Next, the magnitude of the loading severity parameter must be calculated
under applicable loading and environmental conditions, and compared with the pertinent
critical strength property. Failure may be averted by assuring that the loading severity pa-
rameter is safely less than the corresponding critical strength property, for each potential
failure mode.
The more useful loading severity parameters are stress, strain, and strain energy per
unit volume. Of these, stress is usually selected for calculation purposes. Strain and
strain energy are often expressed as functions of stress. Stress is the term used to define
the intensity and direction of the internal forces acting across any chosen cutting plane
passed through the solid body of interest. To completely define the state of stress at any
selected point within the solid body, it is necessary to describe the magnitudes and di-
rections of stress vectors on all possible planes that could be passed through the point.
One way of defining the state of stress at a point is to determine all of the components
of stress that can occur on the faces of an infinitesimal cube of material placed at the ori-
gin of an arbitrarily selected right-handed cartesian coordinate system of known orien-
tation. Each of these components of stress may be classiﬁed as either a normal stress, ,
normal to a face of the cube, or a shear stress, , parallel to a face of the cube. Figure
4.1 depicts all of the possible stress components acting on an infinitesimal cubic volume
element of dimensions dx-dy-dz. The conventional subscript notations shown are defined
as follows:
1.
For normal stresses a single subscript is used, corresponding to the direction of the
outward drawn normal to the plane on which it acts.
2.
For shearing stresses two subscripts are used, the ﬁrst of which indicates the direction
of the plane on which it acts and the second of which indicates the direction of the
shear stress in the plane.
t
s
1See Figure E4.1B.
Example 4.1 
Continues

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 127
dx
dz
dy
z
z
zy
zy
xy
xz
zx
zx
yz
yz
yx
yx
xz
xy
y
x
x
z
y
x
y
Figure 4.1
Complete deﬁnition of the state of stress at
a point.
3.
Normal stresses are called positive () when they produce tension and negative ()
when they produce compression.
4.
Shear stresses are called positive () if they are in the direction of an axis whose sign
is the same as the sign of the axis in the direction of the outward drawn normal to the
plane on which the shear stresses act.
Surveying the sketch of Figure 4.1, it may be noted that in general three normal
stresses are active, namely, 
, 
, and 
. It may be further noted that six shear stresses
are active, namely, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. Thus a total of nine components of stress
are apparently necessary to completely define the triaxial state of stress at a point: three
normal stresses and six shear stresses. However, it can be shown, for isotropic materi-
als,2 on the basis of moment equilibrium, that 
and 
are identical, 
and 
are
identical, and 
and 
are identical. Consequently, the complete definition of the most
general state of stress at a point requires the specification of only six components of
stress, three normal stresses, 
, 
, and 
, and three shearing stresses, 
, 
, and 
.
If these six components of stress are known for a particular elemental cube at a given
point of interest, it is possible to compute the stresses on any and all planes passing
through the point, using simple equilibrium concepts. This fact is utilized in determin-
ing principal stresses as discussed in 4.5 and in developing combined stress theories of
failure, discussed in 4.6.
The elemental volume shown in Figure 4.1, with components of stress in all three co-
ordinate directions, deﬁnes the general triaxial state of stress at a point. If the forces on
the body result in an elemental volume at the point of investigation with stress compo-
nents in only two coordinate directions, it is referred to as a biaxial state of stress ( plane
stress) at the point. If there are stress components in only one coordinate direction, it is
called a uniaxial state of stress at the point. Thus simple tension or compression produces
tzx
tyz
txy
sz
sy
sx
txz
tzx
tzy
tyz
tyx
txy
txz
tzx
tzy
tyz
tyx
txy
sz
sy
sx
2Properties are not sensitive to orientation.

a uniaxial state of stress. For reasons of moment equilibrium, shearing stresses are always
biaxial.
Before discussing more complicated states of stress, it may be useful to review sev-
eral common stress patterns encountered in design practice. These include
1.
Direct axial stress (tension or compression)
2.
Bending stress
3.
Direct shear and transverse shear stress
4.
Torsional shear stress
5.
Surface contact stress
The following brief discussions review the most pertinent equations and present sketches
that characterize the loading, geometry, and stress distributions associated with the ﬁve
common stress patterns just listed.
Direct Axial Stress
As discussed in 2.4, if a direct axial force F is applied to a simple member, as shown in
Figure 4.2, the stress 
is uniformly distributed over the area A of the cut surface as shown
in Figure 4.2(b). The magnitude of the uniform stress is
(4-2)
If the force is tensile, 
is a uniformly distributed tensile stress. If the force is com-
pressive, and the member does not buckle (see 2.7 for criteria), 
is a uniformly distrib-
uted compressive stress. In practice, uniformly distributed stresses may be assumed only
if the bar is straight and homogeneous, the line of action of the force passes through the
centroid of the cut cross section, and the cutting plane is remote from the ends and from
any signiﬁcant geometric discontinuity in the bar.
Bending; Load, Shear, and Moment Diagrams
Load, shear, and moment diagrams for various types of beam conﬁgurations are very use-
ful to a designer because they provide a graphical summary of internal beam forces,
which in turn allows a quick visual appraisal of stress distributions and critical points.
The ﬁrst step in any bending analysis should be the careful construction of shear and
bending moment diagrams appropriate to the loading and support conﬁguration for the
beam of interest.
s
s
s = F
A
s
128
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Cutting plane
Cutting plane
d
F
F
F
A
A = d2
4
(a) Tensile force on solid cylindrical member.
(b) Side view of front free body showing
uniform normal stress distribution over
cut surface of cylinder, producing the
force A.
Figure 4.2
Axially loaded uniform
cylinder.

It is useful to note3 that for all portions of a beam between loads, the shearing force V
is equal to the rate of change of bending moment M with respect to x, or
(4-3)
The details of constructing shear and moment diagrams by writing force and moment equi-
librium equations as a function of position x along the beam are presented in most basic
strength-of-materials textbooks.4 Table 4.1 reviews a few common cases, and additional
diagrams may be found in the literature.5
dM
dx = V
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 129
TABLE 4.1 Loading (P), Shear (V), and Moment (M) Diagrams for Selected Beam Conﬁgurations. 
Note that y is transverse deﬂection and  is slope.
Case 1. Simple Beam; Concentrated Load 
at Center
Case 2. Simple Beam; Concentrated Load P at Any Point
yBC(a 6 x 6 L) = Pb
6L cL
b Ax - a)3 + AL2 - b2Bx - x3d
yAB(0 6 x 6 a) = Pbx
6L AL2 - x2 - b2B
ymaxaat x = A
L2 - b2
3
b =
PbAL2 - b2B3>2
913EIL
MAB = Pbx
L , MBC = Pa
L (L - x)
Mmax(at x = a) = Pab
L
RC = VC = Pa
L
RA = VA = Pb
L
= PL2
16EI
uA = -uC
=
Px
48EI 13L2 - 4x22
yxawhen x 6 L
2 b
= PL3
48EI
ymax1at point of load2
= Px
2
Mxawhen x 6 L
2 b
= PL
4
Mmax1at point of load2
= P
2
R = V
P
3From equilibrium equations.
4See, for example, ref. 1.
5See, for example, ref. 2, pp. 2–111 ff.
P
x
L
RC
RA
VA
VC
Mmax
A
B
C
a
b
L/2
L/2
L
R
R
P
x
V
V
Mmax
A
B
C
(Continued)

TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
Case 2. (Continued)
Case 3. Simple Beam; Uniformly Distributed Load w per Unit Length
(at center)
(at center)
Case 4. Simple Beam; End Couple 
(at 
)
Case 5. Simple Beam; Intermediate Couple 
= -RA
Vx
= -M0
L
RA = V = -RC
M0
= - M0L
24EI
umidspan1at x = L>22
= M0 L
6EI
uB
= M0 L
3EI
uA
= M0
6EIax3
L + 2Lx - 3x2b
yx
= 0.0642 M0 L2
EI
x = 0.422L
ymax
= M0 + RAx
Mx
= M0
Mmax1at A2
= RA
Vx
= - M0
L
RA = V = -RB
M0
= wL3
24EI
uA = -uC
=
wx
24EI 1L3 - 2Lx2 + x32
yx
= 5wL4
384EI
ymax
= wx
2 1L - x2
Mx
= wL2
8
Mmax
= waL
2 - xb
Vx
= wL
2
R = V
uC =
Pa
6EIL AL2 - a2B
uA =
Pb
6EIL AL2 - b2B
L/2
L/2
L
wL
R
R
x
V
V
Mmax
A
B
C
L
RA
RB
x
V
A
B
Mo
Mmax
130
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters

TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
Case 5. (Continued)
Case 6. Simple beam; Triangular Load w per unit Length
Case 7 Simple beam; Two Linearly Varying Distributed Loads
= wL2
12
Mmax1at x = L>22
= wL
2
R = V
uC = 8wL3
360EI
uA = 7wL3
360EI
17L4 - 10x2L2 + 3x42
yx =
wx
360EIL
= 2.5wL4
384EI
ymax 1at x = 0.519L2
- wx3
6L
Mx = wLx
6
= wL2
12  
Mmax 1at x = 0.577L2
= wL
3
RC = VC
= wL
6
RA = VA
= - M0
6EIaL - 3a2
L b
uC
= -M0
EI aa - a2
L - L
3 b
uB
= + M0
6EIa2L - 6a + 3a2
L b
uA
= M0
6EIc3a2 + 3x2 - x3
L - a2L + 3 a2
L bxd
yx1a … x … L2
= M0
6EI c a6a - 3 a2
L - 2Lbx - x3
L d
yx10 … x … a2
= RAx + M0
Mx1a … x … L2
= RAx
Mx10 … x … a2
= M0 + RAa
+Mmax1just right of B2
= RAa
-Mmax1just left of B2
L
RA
RB
x
V
A
B
C
+Mmax
–Mmax
Mo
a
w
L
RC
RA
VA
VA
Mmax
A
B
C
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 131
(Continued)

TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
Case 7. (Continued)
Case 8. Beam Fixed at Both Ends; Concentrated Load P at Center
(at center and ends)
(at center)
Case 9. Beam Fixed at Both Ends; Uniformly Distributed Load w per Unit Length
(at ends)
(at center)
(at center)
= 0
uA = uC
= wx2
24EI 1L - x22
yx
=
wL4
384EI
ymax
= w
12 16L x - L2 - 6x22
Mx
= wL2
24
MB
= wL2
12
Mmax
= w aL
2 - xb
Vx
= wL
2
R = V
= 0
uA = uC
= Px 2
48EI 13L - 4x2
yx ax 6 L
2 b
=
PL3
192EI
ymax
= P
8 14x - L2
Mx awhen x 6 L
2 b
= PL
8
Mmax
= P
2
R = V
= 5wL3
192EI
uA = -uC
125L4 - 40x2L2 + 16x42
yx =
wx
960EIL
=
wL3
120EI
ymax1at x = L>22
- wx3
3L
Mx = wLx
4
w
L
R
R
V
V
Mmax
A
B
C
A
B
C
Mmax
Mmax
Mmax
L/2
L/4
L/2
V
V
R
R
L
x
Mmax
Mmax
P
0.2113L
R
R
L
wL
x
L/2
L/2
V
V
Mmax
Mmax
Mmax
Mmax
MC
A
B
C
132
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters

TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
Case 10. Cantilever Beam; Concentrated Load P at Free End
(at ﬁxed end)
(at free end)
Case 11. Cantilever Beam; Uniformly Distributed Load w per Unit Length
(at ﬁxed end)
(at free end)
Case 12. Cantilever Beam; End Couple 
(over whole length)
(at free end)
=
- M0 L
EI
uA
= M0L2
2EI
ymax
= M0
2EI 1L2 - 2Lx + x22
yx
= M0
Mmax
= M0
Mx
= 0
V
= 0
R
Mo
= PL2
6EI
uA
=
w
24EI 1x4 - 4L3x + 3L42
yx
= wL4
8EI
ymax
= wx2
2
Mx
= wL2
2
Mmax
= wx
Vx
= wL
R = V
= PL2
2EI
uA
=
P
6EI 12L3 - 3L2x + x32
yx
= PL3
3EI
ymax
= Px
Mx
= PL
Mmax
= P
R = V
Bending; Straight Beam with Pure Moment
The simplest case of bending involves the application of a pure moment to a symmetrical
beam, with the moment applied in a plane containing an axis of symmetry. Under these con-
ditions no shear forces are induced. This case, called pure bending, is illustrated in Figure
4.3, where the y-axis is the axis of symmetry contained in the plane of the bending moment
L
R
x
V
A
B
Mmax
Mmax
P
L
wL
R
x
V
A
B
Mmax
Mmax
L
R
x
V
A
B
Mo
Mo
Mo
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 133

d
Cutting plane
M
M
z
d
y
L
x
b
(a) Pure bending moment on a beam
of rectangular cross section.
(b) Side view of front free body showing linear
normal stress distribution across cut surface.
Neutral
surface
Neutral
axis
c
t
cc
M
ct
y
x
y
z
y
b
I = bd3
12
Cutting plane
Figure 4.3
Straight beam subjected to pure bending moment.
M. As shown in Figure 4.3, the bending stress distribution is linear, varying in magnitude
from maximum tensile stress 
at one outer ﬁber, through zero at the neutral axis of bend-
ing, to maximum compressive stress 
at the other outer ﬁber. For straight beams the neu-
tral axis passes through the centroid of the beam cross sections. The expression for bending
stress at any distance y from the neutral axis within the beam cross section is given by
(4-4)
where I is the area moment of inertia of the cross section with respect to the neutral axis.
If the neutral axis is also a symmetry axis for the cross section, the maximum bending
stresses occur at both the tensile and compressive outer ﬁbers where y  c. Hence, for this
case, the magnitudes of the maximum bending stresses are given by
(4-5)
Expressions for area moment of inertia I and section modulus Z are shown for selected
cross-sectional shapes in Table 4.2. The section modulus is deﬁned as
(4-6)
If the cross section does not exhibit symmetry with respect to the neutral axis, the dis-
tances 
and 
from the neutral axis to tensile and compressive outer ﬁbers, respectively,
will be unequal, and tensile and compressive outer ﬁber stresses will differ in magnitude.
Depending upon the circumstances, both may need to be calculated. For such cases the
outer ﬁber bending stresses are given by
(4-7)
and
(4-8)
sc = Mcc
I
st = Mct
I
cc
ct
Z = I
c
ƒsmaxƒ = Mc
I
= M
Z
sx = My
I
sc
st
134
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters

TABLE 4.2 Properties of Plane Cross Sections
Distances
Moment of Inertia 
Section Modulus
and 
About Centroidal
About
Radius of Gyration, 
Shape
Area, 
to Outer Fibers
Axis 1-1
Axis 1-1
1. Rectangle
2. Trapezoid
—
3. Triangle
4. Solid circle
5. Hollow circle
2D2
o + D2
i
4
p1D4
o - D4
i 2
32Do
p1D4
o - D4
i 2
64
c = Do
2
p1D2
o - D2
i 2
4
Do
Di
D
4
pD3
32
pD4
64
c = D
2
pD2
4
D
Z2 = bd2
12
c2 = d
3
d
218
Z1 = bd2
24
bd3
36
c1 = 2d
3
bd
2
d
b
c1
c2
1
1
c2 =
2b + B
31b + B2d
d
61b + B2 221B2 + 4bB + b22
1B2 + 4bB + b22d3
361b + B2
c1 =
b + 2B
31b + B2d
1B + b2d
2
d
b
c1
c2
1
1
d
212
bd2
6
bd3
12
c1 = c2 = d
2
bd
d
b
c1
c2
1
1
r = 2I>A
A
Z = I>c
c2
c1
I
135

136
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
In practice, the above discussion, and the associated bending stress equations given,
may be assumed valid only if the bar is initially straight, loaded in a plane of symmetry,
made of homogeneous material, and stressed only to levels within the elastic range. Also,
calculations are valid only for cutting planes remote from sites where loads and reactions
are applied, and remote from signiﬁcant geometric discontinuities. The application of pure
moments to any real beam is virtually impossible, but calculations made under the condi-
tions just listed produce reasonably accurate results.
If the beam is initially curved, the neutral axis does not coincide with the centroidal
axis, as it does for straight beams. Consequently, the bending stress distribution is nonlin-
ear and calculation of bending stresses becomes more complicated.
Example 4.2 Flexure Stress
A T beam 2 m long is simply supported at its ends. The beam section has an overall width
of 100 mm and an overall height of 110 mm. The ﬂange and web are 10 mm thick. If the
allowable safe tensile and compressive stresses are 80 and 60 MPa respectively, calculate
the maximum load, which is uniformly distributed over the entire length that the beam can
carry.
100 mm
wkN/m
L = 2 m
10 mm
110 mm
10 mm
RL
RR
y
Figure E4.2
Simply supported beam.
Solution
Since the beam will be in bending the stress is given by (4-4)
Since the beam is loaded symmetrically, the maximum bending moment will occur at the
mid span. The left reaction is 
At the mid span of the beam the maximum bending moment is 
The CG is located at a distance from the top surface, thus
y = a
j
Aiyi
Ai
=
1001102152 + 10011021602
1001102 + 1001102
= 32.5 mm
y
Mmax = RL
L
2 - wL2
8 = w - w 4
8 = 0.5w kN # m
RL = wL
2
= w kN
s = My
I

The moment of inertia of the cross section is given as
The tension and compressive stresses are 
Since the safe tensile and compressive stresses are 80 and 60 MPa respectively we have 
and
Thus, the maximum allowable uniformly distributed load is
w = 2.42 kN/m
w = 4.32 kN/m
 13.9w = 60
w = 2.42 kN/m
 33.12w = 80
sc =
w * 10310.03252
2.34 * 10-6
= 13.9w MPa
st =
w * 10310.110 - 0.03252
2.34 * 10-6
= 33.12w MPa
= 2.34 * 106 mm4 = 2.34 * 10-6 m4
I =
10011023
12
+ 110021102132.5 - 522 +
10110023
12
+ 1001102160 - 32.522
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 137
6See, for example, ref. 3, pp. 107 ff.
7For other cross sections see, for example, refs. 4 and 5.
Bending; Initially Curved Beams
Previously when bending of straight beams was discussed, it was noted that for straight
beams the neutral axis of bending passes through the centroid of the beam cross section.
A linear stress distribution from tensile outer ﬁbers to compressive outer ﬁbers results, as
given by (4-4), or (4-7) and (4-8). If a beam is initially curved, however, the neutral axis
of bending does not coincide with the centroidal axis, and the stress distribution becomes
nonlinear. Examples of curved beams in practice include C-clamps, hooks, and C-shaped
machine frames. The neutral axis is shifted toward the center of curvature of an initially
curved beam by a distance e, as depicted in Figure 4.4. Based on equilibrium considera-
tions it may be shown that6
(4-9)
where A is area of the beam cross section, r is radius from center of initial curvature to dif-
ferential area dA, and 
is the radius of curvature of the centroidal surface of the curved
beam. Evaluations of the integral 
are given in Table 4.3 for several curved beam
cross sections.7
1dA>r
rc
e = re -
A
L
dA
r

138
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
TABLE 4.3 Integral Evaluations and Widely Distributed Stress Concentration Factors 
as a Function of 
for Curved Beams with Various Cross Sections1
Cross Section
1. Rectangular
1.20
2.888
1.40
2.103
1.60
1.798
1.80
1.631
2.00
1.523
3.00
1.288
4.00
1.200
6.00
1.124
8.00
1.090
10.00
1.071
2. Trapezoidal
when b2>b1  1>2
1.20
3.011
1.40
2.183
1.60
1.859
1.80
1.681
2.00
1.567
3.00
1.314
4.00
1.219
6.00
1.137
8.00
1.100
10.00
1.078
3. Triangular
1.20
3.265
(base inward)
1.40
2.345
1.60
1.984
1.80
1.784
2.00
1.656
3.00
1.368
4.00
1.258
6.00
1.163
8.00
1.120
10.00
1.095
abro
h  lnro
ri
b - b
ab1ro - b2ri
h
 lnro
ri
b - b1 + b2
b ln ro
ri
ki
rc
c
L
dA
r
rc
c
ki
b1
b2
h
ri
ro
b
h
ri
ro
b
h
ri
ro
A
A
M
M
ro
ri
rn
rc
Center of initial
curvature
Neutral
surface
Centroidal
surface
dA
Centroidal
axis
Neutral
axis
Section A-A
e
ci
co
y
Figure 4.4
Initially curved beam 
subjected to pure bending
moment.

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 139
The (hyperbolic) stress distribution from inner to outer curved beam surfaces is given by
(4-10)
where 
is the radius of curvature of the neutral surface and a positive moment is deﬁned
as one tending to straighten the beam. The extreme values of stress at the inner and outer
surfaces, where y is equal to 
and , respectively, are
(4-11)
and
(4-12)
Thus if a positive moment is deﬁned as one tending to straighten the beam, tensile
stresses result at the inner radius of the beam, , and compressive stresses result at the outer
radius . Equations (4-11) and (4-12) are, strictly speaking, applicable only for the case of
pure bending. If, as illustrated in Figure 4.5, the bending moment is produced by a system
of forces whose resultant line of action does not pass through the centroid of the critical
cross section, the moment of the forces, 
should be computed about the centroidal axis,
M,
ro
ri
so = - Mco
eAro
si = Mci
eAri
co
ci
rn
s =
-
My
eA1rn + y2
TABLE 4.3 (Continued)
Cross Section
4. Circular
1.20
3.408
1.40
2.350
1.60
1.957
1.80
1.748
2.00
1.616
3.00
1.332
4.00
1.229
6.00
1.142
8.00
1.103
10.00
1.080
5. Inverted tee
(when b2>b1  1>4
and h1>(h1  h2)  1>4)
1.20
3.633
1.40
2.538
1.60
2.112
1.80
1.879
2.00
1.731
3.00
1.403
4.00
1.281
6.00
1.176
8.00
1.128
10.00
1.101
1Extracted from ref. 4. Note that 
is to be applied to a nominal “straight-beam” bending stress in which 
; hence the “straight-
beam” parameter 
is tabulated.
rc>c
ci = co = c
ki
ki
rc
c
L
dA
r
h
ri
ro
b1
b2
h2
h1
ri
ro
2pe ari + h
2 b - c ari + h
2 b
2
- h2
4 d
1>2
f
b1 ln ri + h1
ri
+ b2 ln
ro
ri + h1

140
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
shown as point a in Figure 4.5, not the neutral axis. Further, an additional direct stress com-
ponent must be superposed on the bending stress to obtain the proper resultant stresses. In
such cases, (4-11) and (4-12) are modiﬁed to give
(4-13)
and
(4-14)
Finally, critical inner-ﬁber stresses are sometimes calculated as the result of widely
distributed stress concentration, as suggested in Chapter 5. Using this approach, the inner-
ﬁber bending stress is calculated by multiplying the nominal bending stress, calculated as
if the beam were straight, by a widely distributed stress concentration factor 
(sometimes
called “curvature factor”), giving 
(4-15)
Values of stress concentration factor 
are given in Table 4.3 for several curved beam
cross sections and curvature/depth ratios.8 Generally, the results from using (4-13) are more
accurate, but the use of Table 4.3 with (4-15) gives a quick estimate with little effort.
Example 4.3 Crane Hook (Curved Beam) Under Static Loading
A crane hook with the shape and dimensions shown in Figure E4.3 is loaded as shown
when a 3-ton weight is very slowly lifted. Assuming the load P to be static, do the fol-
lowing analyses for critical section A-A.
a.
Calculate the distance e that the neutral axis of bending is shifted toward the center of
curvature from the centroidal axis, due to initial curvature.
b.
Calculate stresses on section A-A at the inner radius 
and outer radius 
when load
P  6000 lb is applied to the hook.
ro
ri
ki
si = kisnom = kiaMc
I b
ki
so = - Mco
eAro
+ F
A
si = Mci
eAri
+ F
A
F
F
Ma = Frc
Centrodial
axis
Critical
cross section
(Area = A)
rc
a
Figure 4.5
Curved beam subjected to a system of forces.
8For other cross sections see, for example, ref. 4, Table 16. It is important to keep in mind that 
values 
in Table 4.3 are to be applied to the nominal bending stress from a “straight-beam” calculation for which
Hence the straight-beam parameter 
is tabulated in Table 4.3.
rc>c
ci = co = c.
ki

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 141
c.
Using the concept of widely distributed stress concentration, recalculate the stress at
inner radius 
of section A-A.
d.
If the hook is made of 1020 steel with properties as given in Table 3.3, would you pre-
dict yielding of the hook?
Solution
a.
The neutral axis shift, e, may be calculated using (4-9). From Table 4.3, case 1, the
integral may be evaluated for this rectangular cross section as
and
Hence, from (4-9),
b.
Since the load on the curved beam (the hook) produces both a bending moment and
a direct stress on section A-A, (4-12) and (4-13) are applicable. The bending moment
produced is
Also,
and
Then from (4-13)
si =
124,000211.642
0.3614.0212.02 + 6000
4.0
= 15,167 psi
ci = rn - ri = 3.64 - 2.0 = 1.64 inches
co = ro - rn = 6.0 - 14.00 - 0.362 = 2.36 inches
M = Prc = 600014.002 = 24,000 in-lb
e = rc -
A
L
dA
r
= 4.00 - 4.00
1.10 = 0.36 inch
A = 1142 = 4 in2
L
dA
r
= bln ro
ri
= 112ln 6
2 = 1.10
ri
P
P = 6000 lb
ri = 2 in.
ro = 6 in.
(a)
(b)
A
A
e
ri
rn
rc
ro
b = 1 in.
h = 4 in.
Section A-A
Figure E4.3
Crane hook with rectangular cross
section.

142
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
and from (4-14)
c.
Using the concept of widely distributed stress concentration, the stress on section 
A-A at inner radius , due to bending, is given by (4-15). The nominal bending stress,
based on bending of a straight beam, is
The stress concentration factor 
may be found in Table 4.3, case 1, using the ratio
The corresponding value of 
is
Thus the bending stress at 
becomes, from (4-15),
Adding the direct stress
This is in agreement with the result of 
above.
d.
From Table 3.3, the yield strength of 1020 steel is 
 51,000 psi. Since
failure by yielding would not be predicted.
Bending; Straight Beam with Transverse Forces
If a beam is subjected to transverse loads (perpendicular to the beam axis) acting in a plane
of symmetry, the calculation of stresses at any cut cross section involves both bending
stresses, , produced by the bending moment, M, and transverse shear stresses,
, pro-
duced by the transverse shear force, V. To calculate the bending stresses it is assumed that
the stress distribution is the same as for pure bending (just discussed), and therefore equa-
tions (4-4), (4-5), (4-7), and (4-8) remain valid for calculating bending stresses.
Calculation of the transverse shearing stresses is discussed in the next section. If the trans-
verse loads are not applied in a plane of symmetry, or if the beam does not have a plane of
symmetry, torsional shear stresses may also be induced in the beam.9
Direct Shear Stress and Transverse Shear Stress
When structures such as bolted, riveted, or pin-and-clevis joints are subjected to the type
of nearly colinear loading depicted in Figure 4.6, the bolt or rivet or pin is subjected to
t
s
si = 15,167 6 Syp = 51,000
Syp
si
si = 13,680 + 6000
4.0
= 15,180 psi
1si2b = 1.52190002 = 13,680 psi
ri
ki = 1.52
ki
rc
c = 4.0
2.0 = 2.0
ki
snom = Mc
I
= 6M
bd 2 =
6124,0002
1121422
= 9000 psi
ri
so = -
124,000212.362
0.3614.0216.02 + 6000
4.0
= -5056 psi
9See, for example, ref. 1, p. 235 ff.
Example 4.3 
Continues

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 143
direct shear on planes such as A-A and B-B. The average shear stress on such a shear plane
(e.g., A-A), may be calculated as
(4-16)
where 
is average shearing stress, 
is the shear area of the pin at section A-A, and
is the portion of the force passing through section A-A.
Although average shearing stress calculations are often used to roughly estimate bolt
or pin dimensions, the maximum shearing stresses are always higher than the average val-
ues because the actual shearing stress distribution is not uniform over the shear plane. This
more complicated nonlinear shearing stress distribution results because component stiff-
nesses and ﬁts between mating members always plays a role, and some bending is in-
evitably induced in any real structure. As discussed in the preceding section, bending
stresses may be calculated using (4-4), (4-5), (4-7), and (4-8). The distributions and mag-
nitudes of transverse shearing stresses require further discussion.
To visualize the transverse shearing stresses in a beam subjected to transverse load-
ing, the sketches of Figure 4.7 may be helpful. The unloaded simply-supported beam
shown in Figure 4.7(a) is made up of a stack of thin laminae free to slide over each other.
Figure 4.7(b) shows the deﬂected conﬁguration of the stacked laminae when a transverse
(bending) load P is applied. Note that sliding is induced along each interface between lam-
ina. Figure 4.7(c) schematically indicates the conﬁguration of the stacked laminae under
bending load P if a thin glue layer is applied at each laminar interface and cured prior to
loading. Intuitively, the cured glue layers resist sliding when the transverse load P is ap-
plied, generating resistive shearing stresses within the glue layers. These shearing stresses
are called transverse shearing stresses.
To assist in developing equations for transverse shearing stresses, Figure 4.8 depicts a
cantilever beam of arbitrary cross section lengthwise-symmetrical about a vertical central
plane that contains a concentrated transverse end-load P. To investigate the distribution of
transverse shearing stresses over any selected plane cross section of the beam, an elemen-
tal parallelopiped A-B-C-D-E-F-G-H may be deﬁned as shown in Figure 4.8(a). A view of
PA-A
AA-A
tave A-A
tave A-A =
PA-A
AA-A
A
A
P
P
B
B
Note: PAA + PBB = P
Figure 4.6
Direct shear loading.
RL
RR
RL
RR
RL
RR
P
P
(b)


(a)
(c)
Loaded beam showing interfacial
sliding and consequent deflection.
Unloaded beam made of a stack
of individual laminae free to slide
over each other.
Shearing stresses develop in glue
layers to resist interfacial sliding in
laminated beam to reduce beam
deflection.
Figure 4.7
Illustration of transverse loading on a laminated beam before and after interfacial gluing.

144
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
face A-B-C-D of the parallelopiped is given in more detail in Figure 4.8(b). Within the par-
allelopiped, an elemental slab of thickness dy, length dz, and width 
is deﬁned. The slab
is located a distance y up from the neutral surface. The C-D boundary of the parallelop-
iped is a distance 
up from the neutral surface, and the A-B boundary at the outer ﬁbers
of the beam is a distance 
up from the neutral surface.
For any cross section of the beam along its length, the bending moment is a func-
tion of end-load P and moment arm to the cross section, and the tensile bending stress,
in turn, is a function of the bending moment arm. Thus T is the maximum tensile stress
along AE (due to bending) at moment arm z from the end-load, and T  dT is the max-
imum tensile stress along BF at moment arm z  dz from the end-load. Since areas
AEGC and BFHD are equal, a net force to the right in Figure 4.6(c) must be balanced
by a shearing force to the left acting on shear plane CDHG, in accordance with equilib-
rium requirements.
To formulate these observations mathematically, the elemental slab shown in Figures
4.8(a) and 4.8(b) may be used to ﬁnd the differential forces 
on the left face of the
slab and 
on the right face of the slab as
(4-17)
and
(4-18)
From (4-4)
(4-19)
sz = My
I
1dF2r = szr Ayr
1dF2l = szl Ayl
1dF2r
1dF2l
c1
y1
xy
y1
c1
y
dz
z
Fixed
Elemental slab
Elemental
parallelopiped
Neutral surface
Neutral axis (neutral surface)
x
y
z
P
dz
xy
E
F
G
C
B
A
D
H
y
(a)
(b)
(c)
Cantilever beam with end load.
Elemental parallelopiped and elemental
slab viewed from right side of beam.
 Stress distribution on cut faces of
elemental parallelopiped.
y1
c1
dz
Neutral
axis
dy
A
B
C
D
Left face
Right face
T
A, E
B, F
C, G
D, H
y1
T + dT
Figure 4.8
Depiction of transverse
shearing stress 
in a
cantilever beam with an
end-load.
Ty1

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 145
and from Figure 4.8,
(4-20)
Thus (4-17) becomes
(4-21)
and (4-18) becomes
(4-22)
Integrating (4-21) over the left face of the parallelopiped and (4-22) over the right face
gives forces 
to the left and 
to the right as
(4-23)
and
(4-24)
Considering the parallelopiped shown in Figure 4.8(c) as a free body,
(4-25)
where 
is the shear force to the left on plane CDHG. This shear force may be expressed as
(4-26)
Substituting (4-23), (4-24), and (4-26) into (4-25), noting that moments are constant with
respect to integration on y and I is constant,
(4-27)
or
(4-28)
From (4-3)
(4-29)
hence
(4-30)
This general expression allows the calculation of transverse shearing stress at any distance
above the neutral axis of bending, and, in turn, the transverse shearing stress distribution.
y1
ty1 =
V
Ixy1 L
c1
y1
xyy dy
dM
dz = V
ty1 =
dM
Ixy1 dz L
c1
y1
xyy dy
1M + dM2
I
L
c1
y1
xyy dy - M
I L
c1
y1
xyy dy = ty1xy1 dz
Fy1 = ty1Ay1 = ty1xy1 dz
Fy1
Fr - Fl - Fy1 = 0
Fr =
L
c1
y1
1M + dM2
I
xyy dy
Fl =
L
c1
y1
M
I xyy dy
Fr
Fl
1dF2r =
1M + dM2
I
xy dy
1dF2l = My
I xy dy
Ayl = Ayr = xy dy

146
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
This procedure is valid for any transversely loaded beam of any cross-sectional shape as
long as the beam is loaded in a vertical plane of symmetry. From (4-30) it may be observed
that:
1.
At the outer ﬁber, where 
, the transverse shearing stress is zero.
2.
At the neutral axis of bending, where 
, the transverse shearing stress reaches its
maximum as long as the net width there is as small as the width anywhere else; if the
section is narrower elsewhere the maximum transverse shearing stress may not be at
the neutral axis.
3.
The integral 
represents the moment of the area of ACGE (see Figure 4.8)
about the neutral axis. This area moment may be expressed in alternative form as
, where is the y-distance from the neutral axis to the centroid of area ACEG.
This alternate expression provides the basis for the area moment method of calculat-
ing transverse shearing stresses.
In view of (3) above, the transverse shearing stress equation (4-30) may be written in
alternate form as
(4-31)
and further, if the cross section is irregular but can be divided into several regular parts,
each with its own 
and , (4-31) may be reexpressed as
(4-32)
Example 4.4 Transverse Shearing Stress Critical Points
It is desired to calculate the maximum transverse shearing stress in the hollow rectan-
gular cross section shown in Figure E4.4A for a cantilever beam loaded at the end by
force F.
a.
Where would the maximum transverse shearing stress 
be located?
b.
What is the magnitude of 
as a function of average shearing stress?
Solution
a.
From (4-30) it is clear that 
will reach its maximum when 
; hence the trans-
verse shearing stress is maximum at the neutral axis of bending.
b.
The magnitude of 
may be calculated directly by integrating (4-30) with 
or by using the area moment method of (4-32) with 
For both methods the area moment of inertia of the whole cross section about the neutral
axis is
From (4-30) with 
,
tmax =
V
18.422112 c
L
1.5
0
112 ydy +
L
2.0
1.5
122 ydyd
y1 = 0
I =
1221423
12
-
1121323
12
=  8.42 in4
y1 = 0.
y1 = 0,
tmax
y1 = 0
ty1
tmax
tmax
ty1 =
V
Ixy1 a
i
yi Ai
Ai
yi
ty1 =
V
Ixy1
yA
y
yAACGE
1
c1
y1 yxy dy
y1 = 0
y1 = c1
b = 2 in.
N.A.
d = 4 in.
t =
in.
2
1
V = F
Figure E4.4A
Hollow rectangular beam
cross section.

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 147
or
and
hence
Alternatively, using (4-32),
and again using 
,
tmax = 1.7tave = 1.7F
A
tave
tmax =
V
18.4221123112{10.522} + 112{10.522} + 11.752{1120.5}4 =  0.34V
tmax = 1.7tave = 1.7F
A
tave = V
A =
V
122142 - 112132 = 0.2V
tmax =
V
8.42 c a y2
2 b
1.5
0
+  2ay2
2 b
1.5
2.0 
d =  0.34V
2.0 in.
1.5 in.
y1
V
0.34 V
0.208 V
0.104 V
Neutral
axis
y1
Figure E4.4B
Transverse shearing stress distribution.
c.
To sketch the transverse shearing stress distribution for this cross section, equation
(4-30) may be utilized. It may be noted from (4-30) that as 
varies from zero at the
neutral axis to 
at the outer ﬁbers, the value of 
varies parabolically from a max-
imum at the neutral axis to zero at the outer ﬁbers. A discontinuity in the distribution
occurs, however, at 
because width 
jumps from 1.0 to 2.0 at that point,
giving values from (4-30) of
and
Using these results and the result from 
, the transverse shearing stress distribution
may be plotted as shown in Figure E4.4B
tmax
ty1=1.51+2 =
V
8.4212.02 L
2.0
1.5
12.02ydy =
V
8.42 ay2
2 b
2.0
1.5
= 0.104V
ty1=1.51-2 =
V
8.4211.02 L
2.0
1.5
12.02 ydy = 2.0V
8.42 ay2
2 b
2.0
1.5
= 0.208V
xy1
y1 =  1.5
ty1
c1
y1

TABLE 4.4 Magnitude and Location of Maximum Transverse Shearing Stress for
Several Cross-Sectional Shapes
Maximum Transverse
Location Where 
Section Shape
Shearing Stress, 
Maximum Occurs
1. Solid rectangle
Neutral axis
2. Solid circle
Neutral axis
3. Hollow circle
Neutral axis
4. Solid triangle
Half-way between top
and bottom
5. Solid diamond
At points 
above and
below the neutral axis 
d>8
tmax
148
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
The maximum transverse shearing stress can always be expressed as a constant
times the average transverse shearing stress, where the constant is a function of the
cross-sectional shape. The constants for several cross-sectional shapes are given in
Table 4.4.
Further, it should be noted that transverse shearing stress typically becomes important,
compared to bending stress, only in very short beams. The following rules of thumb are
sometimes used. Transverse shearing stress becomes important for
1.
Wood beams having a span/depth ratio less than 24
2.
Metal beams with thin webs having a span/depth ratio less than 15
3.
Metal beams with compact cross sections having a span/depth ratio less than 8
Example 4.5 Design for Transverse Shear Loading
The force analysis for a pin-and-clevis joint (see Example 4.1) has resulted in the free-
body diagram for the pin shown in Figure E4.5A. Using this free-body diagram as the
basis, complete the following tasks if 
and the
pin diameter is d. The maximum allowable tensile stress for the pin is 240 MPa, and the
maximum allowable sharing stress for the pin material is 140 MPa.
a.
Construct shear and bending moment diagrams for the pin loaded as shown in Figure
E4.5A.
b.
Find the location and magnitude of the maximum bending stress in the pin, and esti-
mate the required minimum pin diameter based on bending stress.
P = 45 kN, C = 25 mm, D = E = 12 mm,
9
8
F
A
3
2
F
A
2 F
A
4
3
F
A
3
2
F
A
F
N.A.
F
N.A.
F
N.A.
F
N.A.
d
F
N.A.

c.
Using the average shearing stress on the pin cross sections A-A and B-B as the basis,
estimate the required minimum pin diameters.
d.
Calculate the location and magnitude of the maximum transverse shearing stress in
the pin, and estimate the required minimum pin diameter on this basis.
e.
What would be an appropriate ﬁrst-iteration design recommendation for the pin diam-
eter under these conditions?
Solution
a.
Shear and bending moment diagrams for the pin may be plotted directly from
governing equations, or constructed using cases 3 and 11 from Table 4.1 as guide-
lines. The resulting diagrams, based on the pin loading shown in Figure E4.5A,
are shown in Figure E4.5B.
Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 149
P
P2
P1
A
A
C
E
D
B
B
Figure E4.5A
Loading shown on free-
body diagram of clevis pin.
Figure E4.5B 
Loading, shear, 
and bending moment
diagrams for pin 
loading of Figure
E4.5A.
(a)  Loading diagram
      (w = 1800 kN/m
      everywhere)
12 mm
12 mm
25 mm
P1 = 22.5 kN
V = 22.5 kN
V = 22.5 kN
P2 = 22.5 kN
P = 45 kN
(b)  Shear diagram
(c)  Moment diagram
Mmax = 270 N-m
MB–B = 135 N-m
B–B
A–A
b.
From Figure E4.5B, we note that 
N-m at midspan of the pin. Since
the pin diameter is constant, the maximum bending stress also occurs at
Mmax = 270

150
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
midspan of the pin. From (4-16), the maximum bending stress at the midspan
outer fibers is
Hence, the minimum pin diameter based on 
, is 
c.
Based on the average shearing stress at sections A-A and B-B, equation (4-16)
gives
and the minimum pin diameter at A-A and B-B on the shear diagram of Figure E4.5B
with 
is
d.
From the shear diagram of Figure E4.5B, the maximum transverse shear force,
occurs at sections A-A and B-B. Since the pin diameter is con-
stant, the maximum transverse shearing stress also occurs at these sections. From
case 2 of Table 4.4, the maximum transverse shearing stress occurs at the neutral
bending axis at A-A and B-B, and is
The minimum pin diameter at A-A and B-B based on the shear diagram of Figure
E4.5B with 
, is
e.
The results from (a), (b), (c), and (d) indicate that the bending-governed diameter is
the largest and since transverse shear is zero at the outer-ﬁber location of maximum
bending stress, no combined stress interactions need be considered. The appropriate
ﬁrst-iteration design recommendation for pin diameter, based on bending, would be
Torsional Shear; Circular Cross Section
The sketch of Figure 4.9(a) illustrates a torsional moment applied to a straight cylindri-
cal bar. The resulting distribution of shearing stress 
on the cut surface is shown in
Figure 4.9(b). It may be noted that the shearing stress appears to present a “swirl” pat-
tern; further, the shearing stress varies linearly from zero at the center to a maximum
t
d = 22.5 mm
d = C
16122.5 * 1032
3p1140 * 1062
= 0.0165 m = 16.5 mm
tmax = tallowable = 140 MPa
tmax = 4
3
VA-A
A
= 16VA-A
3pd2
Vmax = 22.5 kN,
d = C
4122.5 * 1032
p1140 * 1062
= 0.0143 m = 14.3 mm
tmax = tallowable = 140 MPa,
taveA-A = PA-A
AA-A
= 4VA-A
pd2
d =
3
A
3212702
p1240 * 1062
= 0.0225 m = 22.5 mm
smax = sallowable = 240 MPa
smax = Mmaxc
I
= Mmax
Z
= 32Mmax
pd3
Example 4.5 
Continues

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 151
value 
at the outer ﬁbers. The magnitude of the shearing stress 
at any radius r is
given by
(4-33)
where
(4-34)
is the polar moment of inertia of the cross section and T is the torsional moment. For a
solid circular cross section,
(4-35)
and for a hollow circular cross section,
(4-36)
The maximum shearing stress 
at the outer ﬁbers is, from (4-33),
(4-37)
where a is the radius to the outer ﬁbers of the cylinder. Equations (4-33) and (4-37) may
be assumed valid only if the bar is straight and cylindrical (either solid or hollow), made
of homogeneous material, and torque is applied about the longitudinal axis, stresses are
within the elastic range, and calculations are made for cutting planes remote from points
where loads are applied and remote from signiﬁcant geometric discontinuities. Under
these conditions cross-sectional planes of cylindrical bars remain plane and parallel after
twisting.
Because the torque on a shaft is frequently associated with the transmission of power
from an electric motor, or other power source, to a machine under load, it is convenient to
review the relationship among power, speed, and torque of a rotating shaft. Power is de-
ﬁned as the time-rate of doing work. Horsepower and kilowatts are common measures of
tmax = Ta
J
tmax
J =
p1D4
o - D4
i 2
32
J = pD4
32
J = 1r 2 dA
t = Tr
J
t
tmax
(b)
T
Cutting
Plane
J = D4
32
max
(a)
Side view of front free body showing linear shear
stress distribution over cut surface of cylinder.
Torsional moment on solid
cylindrical member.
Cutting plane
a
T
T
D = 2a
l
r
Figure 4.9
Uniform cylinder subjected to torsional moment.

152
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
power. One horsepower (hp) equals 33,000 ft-lb/min; one kilowatt (kw) equals 60,000
N-m/minute. If a constant torque T is applied to a shaft rotating at constant angular veloc-
ity 
rad/min, the work performed each minute is 
, and the power transmitted is
(4-38)
or
(4-39)
in-lb
or
(4-40)
so
(4-41)
-meters
Torsional Shear; Noncircular Cross Section
For cases where torsional moments are applied to bars of noncircular cross section, the equa-
tions just given do not yield correct results and should not be used. This is primarily because
cross-sectional planes distort signiﬁcantly when bars of noncircular cross sections are
twisted, as illustrated, for example, in Figure 4.10. Although the development of equations
kw = kilowatts
n = shaft speed, rev>min
 where  T = torque, Newton
kw =
Tn
9549
kw =
Tv
60,000 =
T12pn2
60,000
hp = horsepower
n = shaft speed, rev>min
where  T = torque,
hp =
Tn
63,025
hp =
1T>122v
33,000
=
T12pn2
1122133,0002
Tv
v
(a)
(b)
Before applying torque.
After applying torque.
T
T
Figure 4.10
Exaggerated depiction of distortions produced by
applying torsional moment to a noncircular cross
section.

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 153
for torsional shearing stress in noncircular cross sections is complicated, one means of ana-
lyzing such cases is by utilizing the membrane analogy.
Analogies are often useful in engineering practice when the governing equations for
different physical phenomena are formally the same. For example, electrical analogies to
mechanical components, such as springs, masses, and dampers, permit the use of electric
analog computers to solve mechanical vibration problems. In the case of the membrane
analogy, it turns out that the governing differential equation and boundary conditions for a
bar of any selected cross-sectional shape, subjected to a torsional moment, are formally
identical to the differential equation and boundary conditions deﬁning the spatial contour
of a thin pressurized membrane protruding above a base datum-plane through a hole hav-
ing the same shape as the selected bar cross section.10 The analogy therefore provides a
mathematical relationship between the contoured deﬂection surface and the distribution of
torsional shearing stresses in a twisted bar. Consequently, the behavior of a bar in torsion
may be deduced by studying the characteristics of the corresponding pressurized-mem-
brane contour map. Such a contour map is illustrated for a circular cross section in Figure
4.11. Three important observations have been established for interpreting results from the
membrane analogy.
1.
The tangent to a contour line (line of constant elevation) at any point on the deﬂected
membrane gives the direction of the torsional shearing stress vector at the correspond-
ing point in the cross section of the twisted bar.
2.
The maximum slope of the membrane at any point on the deﬂected membrane is pro-
portional to the magnitude of the shearing stress at the corresponding point in the
cross section of the twisted bar.
3.
The volume enclosed between the datum base-plane and the contoured surface of the
deﬂected membrane is proportional to the torque on the twisted bar.
All of these observations may be readily veriﬁed analytically for a twisted bar of cir-
cular cross section. Experimental agreement with the observations for noncircular shapes
is excellent. For a designer, the importance of the membrane analogy does not lie in its use
as a calculational tool, but rather, in its use as a quick, qualitative, stress analysis tool. By
simply visualizing a thin pressurized membrane protruding through a hole having the
shape of a noncircular bar subjected to torsion, a mental picture of the stress distribution
10See, for example, ref. 6, pp. 261, 269.
Lines of
constant elevation;
contour lines
Zero membrane slope
Thin membrane
Maximum
membrane slope
Datum
base plane
Maximum membrane
slope; maximum
shear stress
Zero membrane slope;
zero shear stress
Uniform pressure
Figure 4.11
Membrane analogy illustrated for tor-
sion applied to a bar of circular cross
section.

154
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
may be formulated, and the points of maximum shearing stress identiﬁed. These critical
points occur where the membrane slope is greatest; that is, where the contour lines are
closest together. On the other hand, at points where the membrane slope is near zero, the
shearing stress is near zero.
To illustrate, the membrane contour maps corresponding to a rectangular shaft and
a circular shaft with a keyway are sketched in Figure 4.12. For the torsionally loaded
rectangular bar shown in Figure 4.12(a), the contour lines are closest together (slope of
the membrane is greatest) at the midpoint of the longer side; hence the torsional shear-
ing stress is greatest there. Also, since the membrane slope is zero at the corners, the
torsional shearing stress is zero at the corners. It is interesting to note the potential error
that might be made if equation (4-37) for a circular cross section were applied to this
rectangular shaft, since (4-37) would seem to predict maximum shearing stress at the
corners (because the “radius” is largest at the corners), rather than the actual case of zero
shearing stress. For the circular shaft with a keyway depicted in Figure 4.12(b), the con-
tour line pattern is similar to that for the regular circular shaft shown in Figure 4.11, ex-
cept for the local disruptions around the keyway. The contour lines are crowded together
more closely as they flow around the keyway corners, indicating a concentration of
stress there. Thus the maximum shearing stress is greatest at the corners of the keyway.
Methods of calculating the actual magnitudes of stress at such stress concentration sites
are discussed in 5.3.
Typically it is possible to formulate an expression for maximum shearing stress in a
noncircular bar subjected to torque T as
(4-42)
where
(4-43)
Likewise, the angle of twist , in radians, may be formulated for noncircular cross sec-
tions subjected to torque T as
(4-44)
where
(4-45)
K = g 1cross sectional geometry2
u = TL
KG
u
Q = f 1cross sectional geometry2
tmax = T
Q
max
max
max
 = 0 (all corners)
 = 0 (both corners)
T
T
(a)
(b)
Rectangular bar.
Shaft with keyway.
Figure 4.12
Contour lines visualized from the mem-
brane analogy for a rectangular bar and
for a circular shaft with a keyway.

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 155
TABLE 4.5 Parameters for Determining Shearing Stress and Angular Deformation for Bars of Various
Cross-Sectional Shape Subjected to Torsional Moments
Shape and Dimensions
Location of Maximum 
of Cross Section
Shearing Stress
1. Solid circular
On entire boundary
2. Solid elliptical
At ends of minor
axis
3. Solid rectangular
At midpoint of
each longer side
(for 
)
(for 
)
4. Solid equilateral
At midpoint of
triangle
each side
5. Any thin tube of
Nearly uniform
uniform thickness 
throughout
U  length of median
boundary.
A  area enclosed by
median boundary.
t
4A2t
U
2At
23 a4
80
a3
20
a Ú b
a Ú b
ab3c16
3 - 3.36 b
a a1 -
b4
12a4bd
8a2b2
3a + 1.8b
pa3b3
a2 + b2
pab2
2
pr 4
2
pr 3
2
K, in4
Q, in3
2r
2b
2a
2a
2b
t
Median
boundary
11See, for example, refs. 4 and 7.
L is bar length, and G is shear modulus of elasticity. Expressions for Q and K are pro-
vided for several cross-sectional shapes in Table 4.5, and for numerous other shapes in
the literature.11
6. Any open thin tube of
Nearly uniform 
uniform thickness t
throughout
length of 
medium line 
U =
Ut 3
3
U2t 2
3U + 1.8t
Median
line
t
Example 4.6 Design of Torsionally Loaded Round and Square Shafts
Experimental power measurements made on a new-style rotary garden tiller indicate that
under full load conditions the internal combustion engine must supply 4.3 horsepower,
steadily, to the mechanical drive train. Power is transmitted through a solid 0.50-inch-
diameter round steel shaft rotating at 1800 rpm. It is being proposed to replace the round
a

steel shaft with a solid square shaft of the same material. Evaluate the proposal by deter-
mining the following information:
a.
What is the steady full-load torque being transmitted by the round steel shaft?
b.
What is the maximum stress in the round shaft, what type of stress is it, and where
does it occur?
c.
Assuming that the measurements of power transmitted by the round shaft were made un-
der full load, as speciﬁed, what design-allowable stress was probably used for the shaft?
d.
What design-allowable stress should be used in estimating the size required for the
proposed square shaft?
e.
What size should the proposed square shaft be made to be “equivalent” to the exist-
ing round shaft in resisting failure?
Solution
a.
From equation (4-39),
-lb
b.
The torque on the round shaft produces torsional shearing stress that reaches a max-
imum value all around the outer surface. The magnitude of the maximum shearing
stress is, from (4-37) and (4-35).
c.
Since the design objective is to size the part so that the maximum stress under “de-
sign conditions” is equal to the design-allowable stress 
,
d.
Since the material for the square shaft is the same as for the round shaft, the design-
allowable shearing stress should be the same. Hence, for the square shaft
e.
The proposed square shaft is in the category of a noncircular bar subjected to torsion;
hence, from (4-42),
For the square shaft, case 3 of Table 4.5 may be utilized by setting a  b, giving
Equating the two equations for Q gives
Hence the dimensions of each side of the square should be
s = 2a = 0.50 inch
a = A
3 0.025
1.67
= 0.25 inch
Q = 8a4
4.8a = 1.67a3
Q =
T
tall
= 150.6
6136 = 0.025
tall = 6136 psi
tall = tmax = 6136 psi
tall
tmax = Ta
J
=
TaD
2 b
apD4
32 b
= 16T
pD3 =
161150.62
p10.5023 = 6136 psi
T =
63,025 1hp2
n
=
63,02514.32
1800
= 150.6 in
156
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Example 4.6 
Continues

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 157
Example 4.7 Shear Stress, Thin-Walled Tube
A cylindrical tank with end plates is ﬁlled with water and is simply supported at its ends.
The tank, shown in Figure E4.7, has an outer diameter of 1 m and a thickness of 5 mm.
The length of the tank is 3 m. Determine the maximum shear stress on the cross section.
Figure E4.7
Simply supported cylindrical tank
ﬁlled with water.
25mm
1mm
3 m
Solution
For thin-walled vessels, an approximate value of the area A and moment of inertia I about
the neutral axis is 
The density of water is 1000 kg/m3. Therefore, the load per unit length is given by
The maximum shear force is Thus, 
the maximum shear
stress is
tmax = 2V
A =
211,1552
2p10.5210.0252 = 29.4 kPa
Vmax = 770132/2 = 1,155 N.
w = rV
L =
100019.81212p210.5210.02523
3
= 770 N/m
A = 2prt,
I = pr 3t
Torsional Shear; Shear Center in Bending
In the development of equations (4-4) for bending stress and (4-30) for transverse shear-
ing stress, it was stipulated that the plane of the bending moment produced by a coplanar
transverse force couple must coincide with a plane of symmetry for the beam; otherwise
the equations are not fully valid. In the case of beam bending produced by a coplanar force
couple, where the plane of the transverse force couple is not a plane of symmetry for the
beam, bending of the beam is usually accompanied by torsion on the beam. To eliminate
the torsion in such cases, the plane of the transverse force couple must be displaced paral-
lel to itself until it passes through the shear center, or center of twist, for the cross section.
The location of the shear center sometimes may be established by inspection, noting the
following:
1.
If a cross section has one axis of symmetry, the shear center must lie on that axis, but
usually will not be at the centroid.
2.
If a cross section has two axes of symmetry, the shear center will be at their point of
intersection (i.e., at the centroid).
3.
If a cross section has a point of symmetry, the shear center will be at the centroid.

158
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Table 4.6 shows the shear center location for a few beam cross sections, and others are
given in the literature.12
Example 4.8 Stresses in a Web-Vertical, End-Loaded, Channel-Section Cantilever
Beam
A channel-shaped cantilever bracket, oriented as shown in Figure E4.8A, is loaded at the
free end by a force P  8000 lb applied at the middle of the ﬂange. It is desired to review
this design conﬁguration by determining the following information:
12See, for example, refs. 4 and 7.
TABLE 4.6 Location of Shear Center for a Few Beam Cross Sections1
Shape and Dimensions
Position of Shear Center 
of Cross Section
(for vertical loading)
1. Channel
where
 product of inertia of the half-section (above X) with
respect to axes X and Y, and IX  moment of inertia of whole
section about axis X
If is uniform,
2. Angle
where Leg 1  rectangle 
; Leg 2  rectangle
 moment of inertia of Leg 1 about 
 moment of inertia of Leg 2 about 
If 
and 
are small. 
and 
is at 
3. Tee
For a T-beam of usual proportions, 
may be assumed to be at 
4.
with unequal
where 
and 
are moments of inertia of ﬂange 1 and ﬂange 2,
ﬂanges and thin web.
respectively, about the X axis
1Selected from ref. 4.
I2
I1
I
e = b a
I2
I1 + I2
b
O
Q
e = 1
2 1t1 + t22 ≥
1
1 + d3
1t1
d3
2t2
¥
O
Q
ex L ey L 0
w2
w1
Y2
I2
Y1
I1
w2h2
w1h1
ey = 1
2 h1 a
I1
I1 + I2
b
ex = 1
2 h2 a
I1
I1 + I2
b
e = b2h2t
4Ix
t
Hxy
e = h 
Hxy
Ix
Q
O
Q
e
d2
d1
t1
t2
O
Q
e
b
1
2
X
h
b
Y
t
t
e
Q
O
X
w2
w1
ex
ey
O
Y1
X1
Y2
h2
h1
1
Q
X2
2

Stress Analysis; Common Stress Patterns for Common Types of Loading 159
a.
What types of stress patterns are developed, and where the maximum stresses would
occur.
b.
What are the maximum stresses of each type that should be considered in the failure
prevention analysis of the bracket.
c.
What measures might be taken to reduce the stresses determined in (b) without chang-
ing loading magnitude or cross-sectional geometry.
Solution
a.
For this type of loading on a channel section oriented with the web vertical, as shown
in Figure E4.8A, three types of stress patterns should be examined. They are:
1. Bending stresses, which reach maximum values at the extreme upper and lower
ﬁbers at the wall.
2. Transverse shearing stresses, which reach maximum values at the neutral axis of
bending (normally the x-axis in Figure E4.8A, all along the length of the bracket).
3. Torsional shearing stresses, because the load P does not pass through the shear
center (see case 1 of Table 4.6). These reach maximum values in the upper and
lower ﬂanges, all along the length of the bracket.
b.
Maximum stresses of each type may be determined as follows:
1. Assuming that the bracket does not twist signiﬁcantly, the maximum bending stress
at the outer ﬁbers and at the wall may be calculated from (4-5) as
where
and13
or
= 1.71 + 3.03 = 4.74 in4
Ix =
0.321423
12
+ 2311.72 - 0.32210.322412.0 - 0.1622
Ix = th3
12 + 2Af d 2
c = h
2 = 4.0
2
= 2.0 inches
M = PL = 180002162 = 48,000 in-lb
smax = Mc
Ix
L = 6 in.
2.0 in.
0.86 in.
h = 4.0 in.
t
2 = 0.16 in.
1.72 in.
t = 0.32 in.
(typ.)
x
y
P = 8000 lb
Figure E4.8A
Channel-shaped cantilever bracket subjected to
transverse end-load.
13Equations for area moments of inertia and transfer of axes are available in numerous references (e.g., ref. 4).

160
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
hence
2. Transverse shearing stress 
is maximum at the neutral axis (x-axis in Figure
E4.8A), and may be calculated using (4-32) as
3. From case 1 of Table 4.6, the shear center for the channel section is located on the
x-axis a distance e to the left of the x-y origin. For the channel of Figure E4.8A,
Hence the shear center is on the x-axis a distance e  0.61 inch to the left of the
origin. In Figure E4.8B this produces a torsional moment T on the bracket where
and moment arm a is
hence
This torsional moment is resisted primarily by the opposing horizontal forces R,
one in each ﬂange, that form a resisting couple Rd. Based on moment equilibrium
hence
or
Thus, the maximum torsional shearing stress 
, in the ﬂanges, is 5170 psi.
c.
The torsional shearing stresses could be eliminated by translating the applied load P
to the left a distance 
inches so that the line of action of P would pass
through the shear center. This would probably require welding a small block on the
channel web to support the load.
a = 1.26
ttor
ttor-max = R
Af
=
2739
11.72210.322 = 4976 psi
R = T
d = 10,080
3.68
= 2739 lb
T = Rd
T = 800011.262 = 10,480 in-lb
a = 0.56 + 0.86 - 0.16 = 1.26 inches
T = Pa
e = b2h2t
4Ix
=
11.72 - 0.162214.0 - 0.322210.322
414.742
= 0.56 inch
= 7720 psi
tts-max = V
Ix t a
2
i=1
yi Ai =
8000
4.7410.322311.0212.0210.322 + 11.84211.4210.3224
tts
smax =
48,00012.02
4.74
= 20,250 psi
Q
R
R
e = 0.56 in.
X
d = 3.68 in.
P = 8000 lb
a = 1.26 in.
Y
Figure E4.8B
Torsional moment 
and
resisting force couple 
for the loaded bracket
shown in Figure E4.5A.
Rd
Pa
Example 4.8 
Continues
Surface Contact Stress
When loads are transmitted from one machine part to another through pins, fasteners, bear-
ings, gear teeth, or other types of joints, surface contact pressures are developed in the ar-
eas of contact between mating parts. Since the theoretical contact footprint between curved

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 161
surfaces is a point or a line, for such contacts the operating load must initially be supported
on near-zero contact areas, producing very high contact pressures. The high contact pres-
sures, in turn, produce elastic deformations at the contact site that broaden the footprint and
enlarge the contact area. The pressure distributions over such contact areas are nonuniform,
and the states of stress generated at and below the surface usually are triaxial because of
the elastic constraint of surrounding material. The complicated anlaysis of the stress dis-
tributions in the regions surrounding the contact site between two curved elastic bodies was
originated in 1881 by H. Hertz; therefore such stresses are usually called Hertz contact
stresses. Even cases of contact between planar bodies may produce nonuniform pressure
distributions in and around the contact region. For example, a planar contact between a
small rigid block pressed against a large elastic body produces nonuniform stress distribu-
tions near the edges of the block. Since contact stresses are generally multiaxial, further
discussion will be deferred until multiaxial states of stress have been discussed
in 5.2.
4.5 Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading
When forces are applied to structures or machine parts, not only are stresses generated but
strains and deﬂections are also produced. This concept has already been illustrated for the
case of a straight uniform elastic bar loaded by a direct axial force in Figures 2.1 and 2.2.
The force-deﬂection equation (2-1) for this simple axial loading case is repeated here for
convenience, as
(4-46)
where
(4-47)
is axial spring rate of the loaded bar, F is applied force, and 
is force-induced elastic de-
formation.
Torsional moment loading also produces torsional shearing strain and consequent an-
gular deﬂection of the torsionally loaded member. The angular deﬂection for torsional
loading of elastic members, given by (4-44), is repeated here, as
(4-48)
where is angular deﬂection in radians, T is applied torque, L is bar length, G is shear mod-
ulus of elasticity, and parameter K is a function of the cross-sectional shape, tabulated for
several cases in Table 4.5. If the member is cylindrical, K is the polar moment of inertia, J.
Bending loads produce transverse beam deﬂections that may be found (assuming elastic
behavior) by twice integrating the differential equation of the deﬂection curve and using
the particular boundary conditions of interest. The governing differential equation is 
(4-49)
where y is transverse beam deﬂection at any location x along the length of the beam, M is
applied bending moment, E is modulus of elasticity, and I is area moment of inertia about
d 2y
dx2 = - M
EI
15
u
u = TL
KG
df
k = AE
L
F = ky = kdf
14
14See 4.6 for a more complete discussion of multiaxial Hertz contact stress distributions.
15See, for example, ref. 1, p. 139.

162
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
the neutral axis of bending. The deﬂection equations for several common cases are given
in Table 4.1.
In all of these cases, when an elastic member is loaded slowly by a force, a torsional mo-
ment, or a bending moment, to produce corresponding axial, torsional, or bending deﬂections
or displacements, the external forces or moments do work on the body (average force or mo-
ment times corresponding displacement), which is stored in the strained body as potential en-
ergy of strain, usually just called strain energy. If the strain does not exceed the elastic limit,
the stored strain energy can be recovered during a gradual unloading of the body.
Stored Strain Energy
If a material follows Hooke’s Law, and if deformations are small, the displacements of an
elastic structure are linear functions of the external loads. Thus, if the loads increase in pro-
portion to each other, the displacements increase in like proportion. To illustrate, if a ma-
chine part or a structure is simultaneously loaded by external forces 
, the
corresponding displacements 
may be found from linear force-displacement
diagrams of the type shown in Figure 2.2, and the work done on the machine part, which
is equal to the stored strain energy, is
(4-50)
Forces and displacements in this context are generalized terms which include moments
and corresponding angular displacements.
For example, if the cubic element of material shown in Figure 4.13 is subjected to
three mutually perpendicular tensile forces 
, 
, and 
, the stored strain energy is
(4-51)
or, since
(4-52)
(4-53)
(4-54)
and
(4-55)
(4-56)
(4-57)
the strain energy expression (4-51) may be rewritten as
(4-58)
U = csxex
2
+
syey
2
+
szez
2
d dxdydz
ez =
dz
dz
ey =
dy
dy
ex = dx
dx
sz =
Pz
dxdy
sy =
Py
dxdz
sx =
Px
dydz
U = Pxdx
2
+
Pydy
2
+
Pzdz
2
Pz
Py
Px
U = P1d1
2
+ P2d2
2
+ Á + Pidi
2
d1, d2, Á  , di
P1, P2, Á  , Pi
Pz
Py
Px
z
y
x
dz
dx
dy
Figure 4.13
Unit cube of material 
subjected to mutually 
perpendicular forces Px,
Py, and Pz.

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 163
Noting that 
is the volume of the cube, the stored strain energy per unit volume, u,
may be written as
(4-59)
Based on the concept of (4-50) and the details of (4-46), (4-48), and (4-49), strain
energy expressions for various common loading conditions may be written. For exam-
ple, tension or compression loading gives, for the case of constant loading and constant
geometry16
(4-60)
For torsion
(4-61)
For pure bending
(4-62)
and for direct shear
(4-63)
For the case of transverse shear in a beam, expressions for strain energy due to the trans-
verse shear can be developed but are complicated functions of the beam cross section.
Except for very short beams, stored strain energy due to the transverse shear is negligible
compared to the stored strain energy due to the bending, given in (4-62).
A curved beam can be treated as a straight beam, from an energy standpoint, as long
as the radius of curvature of the beam is more than twice it depth. In addition the energy
due to axial load and shear can be neglected if the length to depth ratio is greater than 1017.
Consider a typical curved beam as shown in Figure 4.14.
The internal forces acting on an arbitary of the beam will consist of a normal (N) and
shear (V) forces as well as a bending moment (M). These internal loads are functions of
the applied load P, and the angle As a result, the strain energy for a curved beam is ex-
pressed in a somewhat different manner from that of a straight beam. for a curved meme-
ber we have the following expressions for the strain energy
Axial
(4-64)
Shear
(4-65)
U =
3
u
0
kV2
2GA R du
U =
3
u
0
N 2
2EA R du
u
Udir-sh = P
2 a PL
AGb = P 2L
2AG
Ubend = M
2 aML
EI b = M 2L
2EI
Utor = T
2 a TL
KGb = T 2L
2KG
Utens = F
2 a FL
AEb = F 2L
2AE
u =
U
dxdydz = sxex
2
+
syey
2
+
szez
2
dxdydz
16If load, cross-sectional shape or size, or modulus of elasticity vary along the length of the member, the appro-
priate integral expression from Table 4.7 must be written instead.
17See, for example, ref. 8. p. 165
Figure 4.14
Curved beam model
showing (a) the original
beam, and (b) the internal
forces acting on an 
arbitrary section of the
beam.
(a)
P
R
(b) 
P
R
V
N
M

164
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Bending
(4-66)
where k is a shear correction factor that depends on the beam cross-section (see Table 4.4)
U =
3
u
0
M2
2EI R du
Example 4.9 Stored Strain Energy in a Loaded Beam
A beam is simply supported at each end and loaded by a vertical midspan load P and a pure
moment M applied at the left support. Calculate the strain energy stored in the beam if it has
an area moment of inertia for the cross section equal to I and modulus of elasticity E.
Solution
For this case, the loading is constant and the cross section all along the beam is constant.
Therefore, from Table 4.1, superposing cases 1 and 4, the midspan deﬂection at 
(under load P) is
The end slope at the left end (where the moment is applied) is
Based on (4-50), the stored strain energy in the beam with both P and M acting is
or, substituting
where 
is the total stored strain energy in the beam.
U
U = P
2 a PL3
48EI + ML2
16EIb + M
2 a PL2
16EI + ML
3EIb = 1
EI aP 2L3
96
+ M 2L
6
+ PML2
16
b
U = Py
2 + MuA
2
uA = PL2
16EI + ML
3EI
y = PL3
48EI +
M
6EI a L3
8L + 2L2
2
- 3L2
4 b = PL3
48EI + ML2
16EI
x = L>2
Castigliano’s Theorem
By writing an expression for stored strain energy in any loaded elastic structure or machine
part, a simple energy method for calculating the displacements of points in the elastic body
may be utilized. This energy method, called Castigliano’s theorem, may be stated as follows:
When any combination of external forces and/or moments act on an elastic member, the small
displacements induced at any point and in any direction may be determined by computing the
partial derivative of total stored strain energy in the loaded member with respect to any selected
force or moment to obtain the displacement at the corresponding point and in the corresponding
direction of the selected force or moment.
For example, in the case of simple tension in a uniform prismatic member, the stored strain
energy is given by (4-60) as
(4-64)
Utens = F 2L
2AE

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 165
Differentiating partially with respect to force ,
(4-65)
This expression for force-induced elastic deformation 
in the direction of 
is conﬁrmed
by (2-6).
Castigliano’s theorem may also be used to ﬁnd the deﬂection at a point in a loaded
member even if no force or moment acts there. This is done by placing a dummy force or
dummy moment, 
, at the point and in the direction of the deﬂection desired, writing the
expression for total stored strain energy including the energy due to 
, and partially dif-
ferentiating the energy expression with respect to 
. This procedure yields the deﬂection
at the desired point. Since 
is a dummy force (or moment), it is set equal to zero in the
expression to obtain the ﬁnal result. Table 4.7 provides strain energy expressions and de-
ﬂection equations for common types of loading.
di
Qi
di
Qi
Qi
Qi
F
df
0U
0F = FL
AE = df
F
TABLE 4.7 Summary of Strain Energy Equations and Deﬂection Equations for Use with Castigliano’s
Method Under Several Common Loading Conditions
Type of Beam
Type of Load
Strain Energy Equation
Deﬂection Equation
Straight
Axial
Bending
Torsion
Direct shear1
Curved2
Normal
Bending
Bending
1Transverse shear associated with bending gives a similar but more complicated function of the particular cross-sectional shape (see Figure 4.8
and associated discussion) and is usually negligible compared to the strain energy of bending.
2Reference Figure 4.14 for description of N, M, and V.
d =
3
u
0
kV10M/0P2
GA
R du
U =
3
u
0
kV2
2GA R du
d =
3
u
0
M10M/0P2
EI
R du
U =
3
u
0
M2
2EI R du
d =
3
u
0
N10N/0P2
EA
R du
U =
3
u
0
N 2
2EA R du
d =
3
L
0
P10P> 0Q2
AG
dx
U =
3
L
0
P2
2AG dx
d =
3
L
0
T10T> 0Q2
KG
dx
U =
3
L
0
T 2
2KG dx
d =
3
L
0
M10M> 0Q2
EI
dx
U =
3
L
0
M2
2EI dx
d =
3
L
0
P10P> 0Q2
EA
dx
U =
3
L
0
P2
2EA dx

166
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
A
P
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
P
C
I, E
C
C
x
x
x
x
L
2
L
L
2
L
M
M
M
MAB
MBC
RL
RL
RL
QB
RR
RR
RR
yB
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
L – x
Figure E4.10
Simply supported beam with midspan load P and
moment M at the left support.
18See, for example, ref. 1. pp. 340 ff.
Redundant reactions in statically indeterminate structures or machine parts may also be
found by applying Castigliano’s theorem.18 This is accomplished by partially differentiat-
ing the total strain energy stored in the loaded member with respect to the chosen redundant
reaction force or moment, setting the partial derivative equal to zero (since immovable re-
actions do no work and store no energy), and solving for the redundant reaction.
Example 4.10 Beam Deﬂection and Slope Using Castigliano’s Theorem
The simply supported beam shown in Figure E4.10(a) is subjected to a load P at midspan and
a moment M at the left support. Using Castigliano’s theorem, ﬁnd the following deﬂections:
a.
Midspan beam deﬂection 
b.
Angular deﬂection 
of the beam at the left support
c.
Angular deﬂection 
of the beam at midspan
Solution
a.
To ﬁnd the midpsan deﬂection 
, where P is acting, the procedure will be to write an
expression for total strain energy in the beam under load, U, then differentiate U par-
tially with respect to P. From Table 4.7, the deﬂection equation for the case of bend-
ing may be seen to be
Since the beam of Figure E4.10(a) is not symmetrically loaded, the integration must be
separately executed for beam section 
and beam section 
, then added. That is,
d = 1
EI c
L
L>2
0
MAB
0MAB
0Q
dx +
L
L
L>2
MBC
0MBC
0Q
dxd
BC
AB
d =
L
L
0
M10M> 0Q2
EI
dx
yB
uB
uA
yB

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 167
Using the sketch of Figure E4.10(a), and taking counterclockwise moments as pos-
itive, the reactions 
and 
may be found from static equilibrium requirements
as
and
Next, based on the free-body diagrams of Figures E4.10(b) and (c), the moment equa-
tions for sections 
and 
of the beam may be found to be
and
These may be partially differentiated with respect to midspan load 
to give
and
Substituting gives
which yields
b.
To ﬁnd the angular deﬂection 
at the left support, the approach is similar, except that
MAB and MBC must be differentiated with respect to the moment M applied at the left
support, to give
and
0MBC
0M
= x
L - 1
0MAB
0M
= x
L - 1
uA
yB = PL3
48EI + ML2
16EI
  +
L
L
L>2
aPx
2 + Mx
L
- PL
2
- Mb a x
2 - L
2 b dxd
yB = 1
EIc
L
L>2
0
a - Px
2 + Mx
L
- Mb a - x
2 b dx
0MBC
0P
=  x
2 - L
2
0MAB
0P
= - x
2
P
MBC = Px
2 + Mx
L
- PL
2
- M    L
2 … x … L
MAB = - Px
2 + Mx
L
- M    0 … x … L
2
BC
AB
RR = P
2 + M
L
RL = P
2 - M
L
RR
RL

168
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Substituting gives
which yields
c.
To find 
, a dummy moment, 
, must be applied at midspan, in addition to the
actual loads on the beam, as shown in Figure E4.10(d). Referring to Figure 
E4-10(d), the reactions 
and 
may be found on the basis of static equilibrium
to be
and
With these reactions, the free-body diagrams of Figure E4.10(b) and (c) may again be
used to write the moment equations for sections 
and 
of the beam as
and
From Table 4.7, the total stored strain energy expression, 
, for the loaded beam
may be written as
Substituting MAB and MBC into this gives
  +
L
L
L>2
aPx
2 + Mx
L
+ QBx
L
- PL
2
- M - QBb
2
dxd
U =
1
2EI c
L
L>2
0
a - Px
2 + Mx
L
+ QBx
L
- Mb
2
dx
U =
1
2EIc
L
L>2
0
M 2
ABdx +
L
L
L>2
M 2
BCdxd
U
MBC = Px
2 + Mx
L
+ QBx
L
- PL
2
- M - QB    L
2 … x … L
MAB = - Px
2 + Mx
L
+ QBx
L
- M    0 … x … L
2
BC
AB
RR = P
2 + M
L + QB
L
RL = P
2 - M
L - QB
L
RR
RL
QB
uB
uA = PL2
16EI + ML
3
  +
L
L
L>2aPx
2 + Mx
L
- PL
2
- Mb a x
L - 1b dxd
uA = 1
EIc
L
L>2
0
a - Px
2 + Mx
L
- Mb a x
L - 1b dx
Example 4.10 
Continues

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 169
which yields
Differentiating partially with respect to 
,
Finally, setting dummy load 
equal to zero, gives
This may be veriﬁed by superposing cases 1 and 4 of Table 4.1.
uB = - ML
24EI
QB
uB = 0U
0QB
= - ML
24EI + QBL
12EI
QB
U = P 2L3
96EI + PML2
16EI + M2L
6EI - MQBL
24EI
+ Q2
BL
24EI
Example 4.11 Curved-Beam Deﬂection Using Castigliano’s Theorem
The curved beam in Figure E4.11A has a radius of curvature R and a circular cross-section
of radius r. It is subjected to a vertical load P at point B.
a.
Determine the horizontal displacement at B in terms of P, R, I and modulus of elasticity
E. Consider the bending only. 
b.
Determine the horizontal displacement at B as in (a) above including the normal force
N.
Solution
A section cut from the curved beam is shown in Figure E4.11B. 
Summing forces in the x-direction and moments about point C gives
a.
Applying Castigliano’s theorem yields
dHorz = 0U
0Q `
Q=0
= 0U
0M
0M
0Q `
Q=0
aMC = 0:  M = -QR11 - sin u2 - PR cos u
aFx = 0:  N = Qsin u - P cos u
Figure E4.11A
Curved beam with 
vertical load at end B.
P
B
A
R
P
B
Q
R
R – Rsin
V
N
C
R sin
x
R cos
M
Figure E4.11B
Free-body diagram of a
segment of the curved
beam.

170
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
The energy due to bending is
and we have
Thus, the horizontal deﬂection is 
b.
If the axial load is included, we have
We have
Thus
The horizontal deﬂection at B due to bending and axial load is given as
dHorz = dHorzM + dHorzN = PR3
2EI - PR
2EA
dHorzN = 0UN
0Q ` Q = 0 = -PR
2EA
0UN
0Q
=
R
EA3
p>2
0
1 Qsin2u - Psin u cos u2R du =
R
EAap
4 Q - 1
2Pb
0N
0Q = sin u and 0UN
0Q =
3
x>2
0
N
EA sin u R du
0UN
0Q = 0UN
0N
0N
0Q
UN =
3
x>2
0
N 2
2EA R du
dHorzM = PR3
2EI
0U
0Q `
Q=0
= PR3
EI 3
p>2
0
[cos u - sin u]du
0U
0Q =
3
p>2
0
-[QR11 - sin u2 + PRcos u][-R11 - sin u2]R du
0U
0M =
3
p>2
0
M
EI R du and 0M
0Q = -R11 - sin u2
U = Ubend =
3
p>2
0
M2
2EI R du
Example 4.11 
Continues

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 171
Note, that for a circular section 
Therefore, we can write 
We see that the term
Hence, UN can be neglected.
aR
r b
2
>>1 which implies  PR3
2EI >> PR
2EA
PR3
2EI = 2PR
Epr 2 aR
r b
2
I = p
4 r 4, A = pr 2
Example 4.12 Statically Indeterminate Beam–Method of Superposition
The 150 mm  150 mm steel beam in Figure E4.12A has been placed over a creek bed
that has a span of 6 m. The construction is such that the beam is ﬁxed at one end and sim-
ply supported at the other. If the supported end settles 20 mm, determine the reaction at
the supported end due to the beam carrying a uniform load of 7 kN/m.
Solution
The problem is statically indeterminate and can be solved using the method of superposi-
tion. The problem can be expressed as follows, as shown in Figure E4.12B:
The deﬂection due to the load R is found from Table 4.1 (case 10) and is 
and for the deﬂection due to the uniform load w, we have from Table 4.1 (case 11)
Thus we have for the end deﬂection,
d = dR + dw = - RL3
3EI + wL4
8EI
dw = wL4
8EI
dR = RL3
3EI
Figure E4.12A
Cantilevered beam simply
supported at one end.
20 mm
7 kN/m
L = 6/m
R
7 kN/m
7 kN/m
20 mm =
+
L = 6/m
R
R
w
Figure E4.12B
Superposition
model

172
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Solving for the reaction R gives
The moment of inertia of the cross section is
and R is given as
R =
3170002162
8
-
31207 * 1092142.1875 * 10-62
63
10.0202 = 13.32 kN
I = bh3
12 = h4
12 = 1504
12
= 42.1875 * 106 mm4
R = 3wL
8
- 3EI
L3 d
Example 4.12 
Continues
Example 4.13 Statically Indeterminate Beam–Castigliano’s Method
The beam C-B in Figure E4.13A is ﬁxed at C and simply supported on the cantilever A-B
at B.
Both beams are steel with E  207 GPa. Beam A-B has I  25  106 mm4 and beam
C-B has I  15  106 mm4. Determine the deﬂection of the intermediate support B.
Solution
The free-body diagrams of the beams are shown in Figure E4.13B. 
For beam I, the moment equation is 
M1 = Rx - wx2
2
Figure E4.13A 
Statically indeterminate
beams.
w = 8 kN/m
B
A
C
5 m
5 m
w = 8 kN/m
LBC
LAC
B
B
A
C
VC
VA
MC
MA
x
x
R
R
Beam I
Beam II
Figure E4.13B
Free-body diagrams of upper (Beam I) and lower
(Beam II) beams.

Deﬂection Analysis; Common Types of Loading 173
and the strain energy is 
The deﬂection at B is given as
In the same manner, we have for beam II
and the deﬂection is 
Let’s assume that deﬂection upward is positive; thus, we have at B that
or
and
Substituting the given values gives
R =
8000(5)4
8A15 * 10-6B
53
3A25 * 10-6B
+
53
3A15 * 10-6B
= 9.375 kN
R =
wL4
CB
8EII
a L3
CB
3EII
+ L3
AB
3EIII
b
Ra L3
CB
3EII
+ L3
AB
3EIII
b = wL4
CB
8EII
RL3
CB
3EII
- wL4
CB
8EII
=
- RL3
AB
3EIII
dBI = dBII
=
1
EIII
aRx¿3
3 b
LAB
0
= RL3
AB
3EIII
dBII = 0UII
0R =
1
EIII3
LAB
0
Rx¿ x¿ dx¿ =
1
EIII3
LAB
0
Rx¿2 dx¿
UII =
3
L
0
M2
2EIII
dx =
1
2EIII3
LAB
0
(Rx¿)2dx
MII = Rx¿
=
1
EII
aRx3
3
- wx4
8 b
LCB
0
= RL3
CB
3EII
- wL4
CB
8EII
dBI = 0UI
0R =
1
EII3
LCB
0
aRx - wx2
2 b x dx =
1
EII3
LCB
0
aRx2 - wx3
2 b dx
UI =
3
L
0
M2
2EII
dx =
1
2EII 3
LCB
0
aRx - wx2
2 b dx

174
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
z
y
F
F
Sphere 1
Sphere 2
d1
d2
E1, v1
E2, v2
2a
pmax
x
Circular
contact
footprint
Semielliptic
pressure distribution
Figure 4.15
Two spheres in contact, loaded by force F.
19See, for example, ref. 8, pp. 581 ff., or ref. 4, p. 652.
4.6 Stresses Caused by Curved Surfaces in Contact
In 4.4 the development of contact pressure between mating surfaces of joints, where loads
are transmitted from one machine part to another, was brieﬂy discussed. As noted in that dis-
cussion, the Hertz contact stress distributions at and below the surfaces within the contact re-
gion of the mating parts are typically triaxial. Because of the triaxiality, a failure theory must
be utilized if it is desired to assess the potential for failure by the governing failure mode.
The general case of contact stress occurs when each of the two contacting bodies
loaded against each other has two mutually perpendicular principal curvatures at the con-
tact site, measured by 
and 
for body 1, and 
and 
for body 2.19 The
two more common speciﬁc cases are two spheres in contact (including a sphere on a
sphere, a sphere on a ﬂat plane, and a sphere in a spherical cup) and two parallel cylinders
in contact (including a cylinder on a cylinder, a cylinder on a ﬂat plane, and a cylinder in
a cylindrical groove). Examples of machine elements having characteristics of such con-
tact geometries include ball bearings, roller bearings, cams, and gear teeth.
For the case of solid spheres with diameters 
and 
, pressed together by a force F,
the “footprint” of the small contact area is circular, having radius a as shown in Figure 4.15.
The radius of the circular contact area is given by
(4-67)
The maximum contact pressure 
, at the center of the circular contact area, is
(4-68)
pmax =
3F
2pa2
pmax
v1, v2 = Poisson’s ratios for spheres 1 and 2, respectively
where E1, E2 = moduli of elasticity for spheres 1 and 2, respectively
a =
3
f
3Fc a 1 - v 2
1
E1
b + a1 - v 2
2
E2
b d
8a 1
d1
+ 1
d2
b
d2
d1
R2 min
R2 max
R1 min
R1 max

Expressions (4-67) and (4-68) are equally valid for two spheres in contact (
and 
positive), a sphere on a plane 
for the plane), and a sphere in a spherical cup (d is
negative for a cup).
The maximum stresses 
, and 
are generated on the z-axis, where they are prin-
cipal stresses. On the z-axis then, the principal stresses are
(4-69)
and
(4-70)
Since 
, 
 0, and
(4-71)
Figure 4.16 depicts these stresses as a function of distance below the contact surfaces
up to a depth of 3a. It may be noted that the maximum shearing stress, 
, reaches a peak
value slightly below the contact surface, as alluded to in the discussion of surface fatigue
failure in 2.3.
When two parallel solid cylinders of length L, with diameters 
and 
, are pressed
together radially by a force F, the “footprint” of the narrow contact area is rectangular,
having half-width b as shown in Figure 4.17.
The half-width of the narrow rectangular contact area may be calculated from
(4-72)
b =
f
2Fc a 1 - v2
1
E1
b + a1 - v2
2
E2
b d
pLa 1
d1
+ 1
d2
b
d2
d1
tmax
ƒt1ƒ = ƒt2 ƒ = tmax = ` s1 - s3
2
`
ƒt3 ƒ
s1 = s2
sz = s3 = -pmax
J
1
a z2
a2 + 1b K
sx = s1 = sy = s2 = -pmax
J
11 + v 2a1 - z
a  tan -1 a
z b -
1
2a z2
a2 + 1b K
sz
sx, sy
1d = q
d2
d1
Stresses Caused by Curved Surfaces in Contact 175
1
σ,τ
σz
σx,σy
τmax
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
00
0.5a
1.5a
2.5a
3a
z
2a
a
Distance below contact surface
Ratio of stress to pmax
Figure 4.16
Magnitudes of 
x,
y,
z, and 
max as a
function of maximum contact pressure 
between spheres for various distances z
below the contact interface (for v  0.3).
T
S
S
S

176
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
z
F
F
Cylinder 2
Cylinder 1
d1
d2
E1, v1
E2, v2
pmax
x
Rectangular
contact
footprint
Semielliptic
pressure distribution
L
2b
Figure 4.17
Two cylinders in contact, loaded by
force F uniformly distributed over
their length L.
The maximum contact pressure 
, along the centerline of the narrow rectangular
contact area, is
(4-73)
Expressions (4-72) and (4-73) are equally valid for two parallel cylinders in contact
and 
positive), a cylinder on a plane 
for the plane), or a cylinder in a cylin-
drical groove (d is negative for the groove).
The maximum normal stresses (principal stresses) 
, and 
occur on the z-axis.
Thus the principal stresses are
(4-74)
(4-75)
and
(4-76)
The magnitudes of the principal shearing stresses20 are
(4-77)
ƒt1 ƒ = ` s2 - s3
2
`
s3 = sz = -pmax
J
1
A
z2
b2 + 1 K
s2 = sy = -pmaxJ P
2 -
1
a z2
b2 + 1b Q
A
z2
b2 + 1 - 2z
b
K
s1 = sx = -2vpmaxcA
z2
b2 + 1 - z
b d
sz
sx, sy
1d = q
d2
1d1
pmax =
2F
pbL
pmax
20See, for example, ref. 8, pp. 100

Stresses Caused by Curved Surfaces in Contact 177
(4-78)
and
(4-79)
Of these three principal shearing stresses, 
is a maximum at about z  0.75b below
the surface, as shown in Figure 4.18, and is larger there than either 
or 
(although 
is
not largest for all values of z/b).
In some instances the “normal approach” (displacement of the centers of two con-
tacting spheres or cylinders toward each other) caused by the load-induced elastic contact
deformations will be of interest. For example, the overall stiffness of a machine assembly
may be needed for certain design evaluations, requiring therefore that the stiffness be
known for each component in the assembly. If bearings, cams, or gear teeth are compo-
nents of an assembly, the normal approach due to contact deformation may be a very sig-
niﬁcant part of the overall deformation.
For the case of two spheres in contact, the normal approach 
is given by21
(4-80)
For the case of two parallel cylinders (of the same material) in contact, the normal ap-
proach 
may be calculated, deﬁning 
and 
, as
(4-81a)
¢c =
2F11 - v22
pLE
a2
3 + ln 2d1
b
+ ln 2d2
b b
E1 = E2 = E
v1 = v2 = v
¢c
¢s = 1.0
3
4BF2a 1
d1
+ 1
d2
b c a 1 - v2
1
E1
b + a1 - v2
2
E2
b d
2
¢s
t1
t3
t2
t1
ƒt3ƒ = ` s1 - s2
2
`
ƒt2ƒ = ` s1 - s3
2
`
1
σ,τ
σz
σy
σx
τmax
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
00
0.5b
1.5b
2.5b
3b
2b
b
Distance below contact surface
Ratio of stress to pmax
z
Figure 4.18
Magnitudes of 
x,
y,
z, and 
max as a
function of maximum contact pressure 
between cylinders, for various distances z
below the contact interface (for v  0.3).
T
S
S
S
21See, for example, ref. 4, Table 33.

178
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
2 in.
F = 4000 lb
2 in.
d1 =
1.000 in.
r2 = 0.531 in.
C = 1.469 in. (unloaded)
L
Figure E4.14
Special-load transfer joint, made of AISI 4340 steel.
For a cylinder in a cylindrical groove
(4-81b)
It should be noted that these displacements are highly nonlinear functions of the load;
hence the stiffness characteristics of curved surfaces in contact are highly nonlinear.
¢c =
2F11 - v22
LE
a1 - 2ln b
2 b
Example 4.14 Cylindrical Surfaces in Direct Contact
Figure E4.14 shows the tentative concept for a special load transfer joint in a torque mea-
suring ﬁxture. It is important to accurately maintain distance L at a constant value. The joint
is to be constructed using a 2-inch-long cylinder of ultrahigh strength AISI 4340 steel (see
Tables 3.3 and 3.9) with a diameter of 1.000 inch, residing in a 0.531-inch-radius semicir-
cular groove in a 2-inch-wide block of the same material. It has been estimated that a to-
tal force of 4000 lb will be distributed across the cylinder as shown. Experimentation has
indicated that for satisfactory service the maximum surface contact pressure should not ex-
ceed 250,000 psi. For the proposed design conﬁguration:
a.
Determine whether the surface contact pressure is below the speciﬁed limiting value.
b.
Determine the magnitude of the maximum principal shearing stress in the contact re-
gion, and its depth below the surface.
c.
Estimate the change in dimension C as the joint goes from the unloaded to the fully
loaded condition.
Solution
a.
For the parallel cylindrical surfaces in contact, the maximum contact pressure is given
by (4-73) as
where b is given by (4-72). To calculate b, we ﬁrst ﬁnd from Table 3.9 and the prob-
lem statement that
F = 4000 lb
L = 2.0 inches
v1 = v2 = v = 0.3
E1 = E2 = 30 *  106 psi
pmax =
2F
pbL

Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies and Structures 179
hence
and
Since the limiting allowable contact pressure is given as 250,000 psi, the calcu-
lated value of 
 95,426 psi is acceptable.
b.
To ﬁnd the value of 
, the plot of Figure 4.18 may be utilized. Noting that 
peaks at about z  0.75b (for v  0.3), the corresponding ratio of 
may be
read as
Thus
and it occurs at a depth
below the surface. The shearing stress and its depth below the surface are approxi-
mately the same in both members since the material is the same for both.
c.
The change in dimension C, when the joint is loaded as shown, may be calculated
from (4-81b) as
¢c =
214000211 - 0.322
12.0230 * 106
a1 - 2ln 0.013
2
b = 0.0013 inch
z = 0.7510.0132 = 0.010 inch
t1 max = 0.3195,4262 = 28,628 psi
t1 max
pmax
= 0.3
t1 max >pmax
t1 max
t1 max
pmax
pmax =
2140002
p10.013212.02 = 95,426 psi
b =
a
2140002c2a 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 b d
p12.02c
1
1.000 +
1
-1.062 d
= 0.013 inch
4.7 Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies and Structures
Force-ﬂow concepts22 are useful in visualizing the paths taken by lines of force as they pass
through a machine or structure from points of load application to points of structural sup-
port. If the structure is simple and statically determinate, the equations of static equilib-
rium given in (4-1) are sufﬁcient to calculate all the reaction forces. If, however, there are
redundant supports, that is, supports in addition to those required to satisfy the conditions
of static equilibrium, equations (4-1) are no longer sufﬁcient to explicitly calculate the
magnitudes of any of the support reactions. Mathematically, this happens because there are
more unknowns than equilibrium equations. Physically, it happens because each support
behaves as a separate “spring,” deﬂecting under load in proportion to its stiffness, so that
the reactions are shared among the supports in an unknown way.
22Discussed in 4.3.

180
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
F
Spring 2
(soft)
Spring 1
(stiff)
k1
k2
y1 = y2 = y
Figure 4.19
Parallel spring conﬁguration.
F
Spring 2
(soft)
Spring 1
(stiff)
y = y1 + y2
L2
L1
y1 = ΔL1
y2 = ΔL2
Figure 4.20
Series spring conﬁguration.
From a mathematical point of view, additional deﬂection equations must be written
and combined with the equilibrium equations of (4-1) so that the number of unknowns
matches the number of independent equations.
From a physical point of view it is important to appreciate how load sharing relates to
relative stiffness. If a stiff spring, or stiff load path, is in parallel with a soft spring or soft
load path, as illustrated in Figure 4.19, the stiff path carries more of the load.23 If a stiff
spring or stiff load path is in series with a soft spring or load path, as illustrated in Figure
4.20, the loads carried are equal but the stiff spring deﬂection is smaller than the soft spring
deﬂection.24 The importance of these simple concepts cannot be overemphasized because
all real machines and structures are combinations of springs in series and/or parallel.
Using these concepts, a designer may quantitatively determine the overall spring rate for
any member or combination of members in a machine or structure. Consequently, load car-
rying and load sharing may be quantitatively evaluated at an early design stage.
Examples of machine and structural elements for which load-sharing concepts may be
useful include bearings, gears, splines, bolted joints, screw threads, chain and sprocket
drives, timing belt drives, multiple V-belt drives, ﬁlamentary composite parts, machine
frames, housings, and welded structures. In certain applications, such as machine grips,
hub-and-shaft assemblies, or stacked elements subjected to cyclic loads, load-sharing con-
cepts may be used to design for local strain-matching at critical interfaces.25
Machine Elements as Springs
Although the rigid body assumption is a useful tool in force analysis, no real machine el-
ement (or material) is actually rigid. All real machine parts have ﬁnite stiffnesses, that is,
ﬁnite spring rates. A uniform prismatic bar in axial tension as analyzed in 2.4, leads to 
(2-7), repeated here as
(4-82)
kax = AE
L
23May be veriﬁed using (4-87).
24May be veriﬁed using (4-90).
25If small-amplitude cyclic relative motions are induced between two contacting surfaces because of differential
stiffness qualities of the two mating bodies, fretting fatigue or fretting wear may become potential failure modes.
Reducing the amplitude of the cyclic sliding motion by strain-matching may reduce or eliminate fretting. 
See 2.9.

Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies and Structures 181
where 
is axial spring rate, A is cross-sectional area, E is modulus of elasticity, and L is
bar length. Figure 2.2 depicts the linear force-deﬂection curve characterizing an axially
loaded uniform bar in tension. Many, but not all, machine elements exhibit linear force-
deﬂection curves. Some exhibit nonlinear curves, as sketched in Figure 4.21. For example,
nonlinear stiffening curves are typiﬁed by Hertz contact conﬁgurations such as bearings,
cams, and gear teeth, and nonlinear softening curves are associated with arches, shells, and
conical-washer (Belleville) springs. In addition to axial loading, other conﬁgurations ex-
hibiting linear spring rates include elements in torsion, bending, or direct shear. From ear-
lier equations for deﬂection, given in 4.4, spring rate (force or torque per unit displacement)
expressions may be developed.
For torsionally loaded members, from (4-44),
(4-83)
where 
is torsional spring rate, T is applied torque, is angular displacement, G is shear
modulus, L is length, and K is a cross-sectional shape constant from Table 4.5.
For members in bending the concept is the same but details are more involved, re-
quiring that members in bending be handled on a case-by-case basis. For example, case 1
of Table 4.1 would give
(4-84)
where 
is bending spring rate for case 1 of Table 4.1, P is concentrated center load,
is deﬂection at the loading point, E is modulus of elasticity, and L is length of the sim-
ply supported beam.
For simple members in direct shear,26 the spring rate is
(4-85)
where 
is the direct shear spring rate, 
is displacement of the loaded edge, and G is
shear modulus of elasticity.
For nonlinear springs such as bearings or gear teeth (Hertzian contacts), the spring
rate is not constant and cannot be simply described. A linearized spring rate approxima-
tion is often deﬁned about the operating point, especially if vibrational characteristics are
of interest.
dP
kdir-sh
kdir-sh = P
dP
= AG
L
yload
kbend-1
kbend-1 =
P
yload
= 48EI
L3
u
ktor
ktor = T
u = KG
L
kax
Force
Force
Displacement
Force
Displacement
Displacement
(a) Linear
(b) Stiffening
(c) Softening
Figure 4.21
Various force-deﬂection
characteristics exhibited
by springs or machine 
elements when loaded.
26For example, a short block of “length” L and cross-sectional “shear” area A, if ﬁxed at one “end” and loaded
at the other by a force P, illustrates the case of direct shear.

182
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
As illustrated by Figures 4.19 and 4.20, spring elements may combine in either paral-
lel or series arrangements. If springs combine in parallel, as shown in Figure 4.19, the dis-
placements are equal but the total force F is split between spring 1 and spring 2. That is,
(4-86)
and since 
,
(4-87)
or
(4-88)
where 
is the combined spring rate for the springs in parallel.
On the other hand, if springs combine in series, as shown in Figure 4.20, the force F
is the same on both springs but displacements for spring 1 and spring 2 add to give total
displacement y. That is,
(4-89)
Since 
, (4-89) may be rewritten as
(4-90)
from which
(4-91)
where 
is the combined spring rate for the springs in series.
These results may be extended to any number of spring elements in series, in parallel,
or in any series-parallel network.
ks
ks =
1
1
k1
+ 1
k2
y
F = y1
F1
+ y2
F2
F = F1 = F2
y = y1 + y2
kp
kp = k1 + k2
F
y = F1
y1
+ F2
y2
y1 = y2 = y
F = F1 + F2
Example 4.15 Spring Rates and End Deﬂection of a Right-Angle Support Bracket
The steel right-angled support bracket with leg lengths 
and 
,
as shown in Figure E4.15, is to be used to support the static load 
. The load is
to be applied vertically at the free end of the cylindrical leg, as shown. Both bracket leg
centerlines lie in the same horizontal plane. If the square leg has side 
, and the
cylindrical leg has diameter 
,
a.
Develop an expression for the overall spring rate 
of the bracket in the vertical di-
rection at the point of load application (point O).
b.
Calculate the numerical value of 
.
c.
Find the deﬂection 
for a load of 
.
Solution
a.
The overall spring rate at point O is 
. It may be determined by noting that
“effective” springs in the bracket include
1.
, caused by bending of the square leg
k1
ko = P>yo
P = 4.5 kN
yo
ko
ko
d = 32 mm
s = 32 mm
P = 4.5 kN
L2 = 125 mm
L1 = 250 mm

Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies and Structures 183
2.
, caused by torsion of the square leg reflected to point O through rigid body
rotation of cylindrical leg length 
3.
, caused by bending of the cylindrical leg
Since these three springs are in series 
and 
, 
from (4-91)
Using case 10 from Table 4.1,
For the square section 
, and 
Next, for torsion of the square cross section, using case 3 from Table 4.5 with 
(4-44), and recalling from geometry that 
, where 
and 
where, from Table 4.5, 
. Hence,
Finally, again using case 10 from Table 4.1, for bending of the cylindrical leg
For the cylindrical section 
, and 
k3 = 3pEd4
64L3
2
I = pd4>64
k3 = 3EI
L3
2
k2 = 0.14s4G
L1L2
2
K = 2.25(s>2)4
k2 = P
y2
=
P
L2u = KG
L1L2
2
T = PL1
u = TL2>KG
y2 = L2u
k1 = 3Es4
12L3
1
= Es4
4L3
1
I = bd3>12 = s4>12
k1 = P
y1
= 3EI
L3
1
ko =
1
1
k1
+ 1
k2
+ 1
k3
P = P1 = P2 = P3)
(yo = y1 + y2 + y3
k3
L2
k2
L1
s
s
L2
P
d
y
Fixed
O
L
C
L
C
Figure E4.15
Right-angle support bracket.

184
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
B
C
P
D
10 in.
 = 60°
 = 60°
d1 = 1
2 in.
d2 = 5
8 in.
d3 = 3
4 in.
A
Figure E4.16A
Pinned-joint structure.
B
C
P
D
L2


d1
d2
d3
A
y = y2
y3 = y1
y1
Figure E4.16B
Deﬂections of pinned joint
structure.
Substituting 
, 
, and 
into the equation for 
b.
Since the material is steel, 
and 
, which re-
sults in
c.
Knowing 
and 
yo =
45 * 103
1.46 * 106 = 0.0308 m = 30.8 mm
P = 4.5 kN
ko = P>yo
ko = 1.46 * 106 N/m
=
1
0.288 * 10-6 + 0.337 * 10-6 + 0.061 * 10-6
ko =
1
4(0.25)3
207 * 109(0.032)4 +
0.25(0.125)2
0.14(79 * 109)(0.032)4 +
64(0.125)3
3p(207 * 109)(0.032)4
G = 79 * 109 N/m2
E = 207 * 109 N/m2
ko =
1
4L3
1
Es4 +
L1L2
2
0.14Gs4 +
64L3
2
3pEd4
k0
k3
k2
k1
Example 4.15 
Continues
Example 4.16 Load-Sharing in a Redundant Structure
The pinned-joint structure shown in Figure E4.16A is to be used to support the load P. The
structural members are solid cylindrical steel bars. For the dimensions given, how would
the load P be shared among the bars?
Solution
For this statically indeterminate structure, the load will be shared in proportion to stiffness
among the three links (springs) in parallel. From Figure E4.16B the spring rate for link 1
is (in the vertical direction)
k1V = F1V
y
= F1cosa
y1> cosa = F1cos 2a
y1

Load Sharing in Redundant Assemblies and Structures 185
or, using (4-82),
For link 2
and for link 3
Noting that
these spring rates may be written as
Since the links are in parallel, the combined spring rate, vertically at point A, is
From Figure E4.16C the load-sharing proportions then are, for links 1, 2, and 3 respectively,
and
Evaluating these three expressions numerically,
k3V =
p130 * 1062
41102
10.7522cos60 = 6.63 * 105 lb
in
k2V =
p130 * 1062
41102
10.62522 = 9.20 * 105 lb
in
k1V =
p130 * 1062
41102
10.522cos60 = 2.95 * 105 lb
in
P3
P = k3V
kA
P2
P = k2V
kA
P1
P = k1V
kA
kA = pE
4L2
1d 2
1cos a + d 2
2 + d 2
3cos a2
k3V = pE
4 ad 2
3cos 2 a
L2cos a b
k2V = pE
4 ad 2
2
L2
b
k1V = pE
4 ad 2
1cos 2 a
L2cos a b
L2 = L3 =
L1
cosa
k3V = F3V
y
= F3cosa
y3> cosa = A3E
L3
cos 2 a
k2V = F2V
y
= F2
y2
= A2E
L2
k1V = A1E
L1
cos 2 a
P
A
P1
P2
P3
Figure E4.16C
Free-body diagram of
joint A.

186
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
whence
Hence
P3 = 6.63
18.78P = 0.353P
P2 = 9.20
18.78P = 0.490P
P1 = 2.95
18.78P = 0.157P
kA = k1V + k2V + k3V = 12.95 + 9.20 + 6.632105 = 18.78 * 105lb
in
Example 4.16 
Continues
4.8 Preloading Concepts
Preloads may be induced in structures or machine assemblies by forcing two or more parts
together or apart (intentionally or unintentionally), then clamping them in such a way that the
tension in some parts equilibrates the compression in other parts. A consequence of pre-
loading is that “built-in” stresses are produced within the assembled device, with no exter-
nally applied loads. As discussed in 4.7, parts that are preloaded against each other behave
as integrated systems of springs in series and/or parallel. Proper preloading has many poten-
tial advantages, including elimination of unwanted clearance gaps between parts, increased
stiffness of machine assemblies, and improved fatigue resistance of component parts.
Examples of components and/or assemblies that may display signiﬁcant improvements in
performance as a result of proper preloading include bearing assemblies, gear trains, bolted
joints, ﬂange-and-gasket seals, and springs. Preloading may be used to increase the axial or
radial stiffness of rolling element bearings,27 to eliminate backlash from gear meshes, to
avoid separation of bolted joints subjected to cyclic loading, to prevent separation of ﬂange-
and-gasket seals under ﬂuctuating loads or pressures,28 and to improve the dynamic response
characteristics of cyclically loaded assemblies. It is important to remember, however, that
when determining the dimensions of critical cross sections, the “built-in” stresses induced by
preloading must always be superposed upon the stresses produced by operational loads.
Enhancements for fatigue resistance (presented in Chapter 5) by initially preloading
parts that are to be subjected to ﬂuctuating loads is a particularly useful concept. The ef-
fect of tensile preloading on a completely reversed cyclically loaded member is to increase
the mean stress from zero to a signiﬁcant tensile value29. The preload typically has a small
effect on the maximum cyclic stress. In fatigue analysis, the equivalent completely re-
versed stress, eqCR (deﬁned in Chapter 5) can be used to determine the maximum fatigue
stress on a component.
If, for example, the external load on a selected member induces a maximum stress of,
say, max  0.75Su, and if the mean stress is zero, the equivalent completely reversed cyclic
stress amplitude is eqCR  max  0.75Su
If the cyclically loaded member is intially preloaded to a tensile mean stress of,
say, 0.9 max and the operational cyclic loading remains unchanged, we would find
27See 11.6.
28See 13.4.
29See 5.6.

Preloading Concepts 187
eqCR  0.31 max  0.23Su. For this case, preloading would reduce the equivalent
completely reversed cyclic stress for 0.75Su to 0.31Su, which is a signiﬁcant reduction in
the equivalent stress amplitude. This results in an increased fatigue life expectancy.
30Of course there are in reality no rigid blocks, frictionless surfaces, or ﬁxed walls. In any real application the
validity of such assumptions would require evaluation. Nevertheless, the preloading concepts remain valid. 
Example 4.17 System Stiffness as a Function of Preload
The “rigid” block shown in Figure E4.17A is supported on a “frictionless” surface between
two linear compression springs. The outer end of each spring abutts a “ﬁxed” wall,30 and there
are no gaps between the inner spring ends and the block. Also, there is no “attachment” of the
block to the inner spring ends (hence, the block separates from the spring if tension is applied).
For case 1 shown in Figure E4.17A, there is no preload. For case 2, the ﬁxed outer walls are
relocated closer together, squeezing the springs compressively to produce a “built-in” 4-lb
spring force (preload) in each spring. The linear force-deﬂection curve is shown in Figure
E4.17A for each spring, both for the case of no preload and for the case of a 4-lb preload.
Compare the system stiffness for the non-preloaded case with the system stiffness for
the preloaded case.
Solution
For non-preloaded case 1, the rigid block may be taken as a free body, as shown in Figure
E4.17B. Summing forces horizontally for case 1,
FL1 + F1 = FR1
2
2
0
0
4
4
6
6
4
4
0
0
8
8
12
12
y, in.
y, in.
F, lb
F, lb
(a) Case 1—no preload.
Block
Frictionless
plane
kL = 2 lb/in.
kR = 2 lb/in.
Fixed wall
Fixed wall
2
2
0
0
4
4
6
6
4
4
0
0
8
8
12
12
y, in.
y, in.
F, lb
F, lb
(b) Case 2—with preload.
Block
Frictionless
plane
kL = 2 lb/in.
kR = 2 lb/in.
Fixed wall
Fixed wall
Figure E4.17A
Comparison of behavior of preloaded
spring system versus non-preloaded 
system.

188
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
Since there is no preload, any rigid block displacement y to the right causes separa-
tion of the block from the left spring, hence
Thus
and the spring rate 
for the non-preloaded system may be written as
For preloaded case 2, the rigid block may again be taken as a free body, as shown in
Figure E4.17B. Summing forces horizontally for case 2,
Since there is a preload of 4 lb initialy built into the system, for the zero-displacement
equilibrium position shown in Figure E4.17A, for case 2 
 0, giving
For displacements y to the right, reading the force-displacement diagrams for case 2,
shown in Figure E4.17A,
and
Also for case 2,
With a 4-lb preload,
or
F2 = 1kL + kR2y    for  y … 4
kL
4 - kL y + F2 = 4 + kRy    for  y … 4
kL
FR2 = 4 + kRy
FL2 = 0    for  y Ú 4
kL
FL2 = 4 - kL y    for  y … 4
kL
FL2 = FR2 = 4 lb
F2
FL2 + F2 = FR2
kNP = F1
y = 2lb
in
kNP
F1 = FR1 = kRy = 2y
FL1 = 0
Solid block
FL1 = 0
FR1
F1
y
(a) Case 1—no preload.
Solid block
FL2
FR2
F2
y
(b) Case 2—with preload.
Figure E4.17B
Rigid block from Figure E4.17A,
taken as a free body.
Example 4.17 
Continues

Residual Stresses 189
and
so the spring rate 
for the preloaded system may be written as
and
Thus the stiffness 
 2 lb/in, calculated for the non-preloaded system, has been
doubled to 
 4 lb/in, calculated for the preloaded system, as long as rigid block dis-
placements are less than 2 inches. For displacements over 2 inches, a gap begins to open
between the left spring and the block, and the spring rate of the preloaded system falls off.
However, in a well-designed system no gaps would be permitted to open.
kP
kNP
kP = F2
y = 4
y + kR = 4
y + 2lb
in    for  y Ú 2 inches
kP = F2
y = kL + kR = 4lb
in    for  y … 2 inches
kP
F2 = FR2 = 4 + kRy    for  y 7 4
kL
4.9 Residual Stresses
A usual premise in stress-analyzing machine elements is that if the load is zero, the stress
is zero. However, in 4.8 the discussion of preloading introduces the idea that two or more
parts may be clamped together in such a way that built-in tension in some parts opposes
built-in compression in others. Consequently, nonzero stresses are induced in the parts by
preloading, even when the external loads are all zero.
Additionally, when ductile machine parts have stress concentration sites (due to holes,
ﬁllets, etc.), or regions where load-induced stress gradients exist (due to bending, torsion,
etc.), yield strength levels may be exceeded locally, producing highly local plastic ﬂow.
These small regions of high stress and highly local plastic ﬂow produce little or no observ-
able change in macroscopic dimensions or appearance of the loaded member.31 When ex-
ternal loads are released, the elastic “springback” of the bulk of the material forces the small
plastically deformed regions back into an oppositely stressed condition. These stresses, in-
duced by nonuniform plastic deformation, are called residual stresses because they persist
after the external loading has been removed. Residual stresses may be induced, either acci-
dentally or intentionally, during processing, machining, and/or assembly operations, in-
cluding heat treatment, shot-peening, rolling, forming, presetting, turning, milling,
grinding, polishing, plastic bending or torsion, shrink-ﬁt assembly processes, overpressur-
ization, or overspeeding. The residual stresses induced may be either tensile or compressive,
depending on how they are generated, and are typically difﬁcult to detect, measure, or esti-
mate.32 Since residual stresses at any critical point add directly to the load-induced opera-
tional stresses at the same point, residual stresses, although unknown or even unsuspected,
may greatly inﬂuence the potential for failure. That is, residual stresses may be either very
harmful or very beneﬁcial, depending upon how they combine with the operational stresses.
Another basic concept in generating beneﬁcial residual stresses is that residual stress
should tend to oppose operational stress at the critical point, so that the resultant stress is
31See 5.3.
32See, for example, ref. 9, pp. 461–465, or ref. 5, p. 725–726

190
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
0.48 in.
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
0
10
20
30
40
50
60°
0.33 in.
0.075 in.
Notch root rad.
< 0.001 in.
90 percent
70 percent
50 percent
50 percent
70 percent
90 percent
Temsile prestress as
percent of notched
ultimate strength
(leaves notch root
with residual compr.)
Compressive prestress
as percent of notched
ultimate strength
(leaves notch root
with residual tension)
Specimens not prestressed
Figure 4.22
Effects of axial static prestress
on the S-N curve of 7075-T6
specimens tested in rotating
bending fatigue tests. (Data
from ref. 10).
minimized. While the concept is true both for static and ﬂuctuating loads, it is especially
important for ﬂuctuating loads because they may lead to fatigue failure. Since a very high
proportion of fatigue cracks originate at surfaces of machine parts, signiﬁcant improvement
in fatigue resistance may often be made by treatments that strengthen only the surface lay-
ers by inducing a favorable (usually compressive) residual stress ﬁeld there. As discussed
in 5.6, “Factors That May Affect S-N Curves,” the processes of shot-peening, cold-rolling,
and presetting all may be used to intentionally induce compressive residual surface stresses.
Figure 5.35 illustrates the effects of shot-peening, and Figure 5.36 the effects of cold-
rolling. Figure 4.22 illustrates the effects of axial static prestress on the fatigue strength of
7075-T6 aluminum specimens. Note in Figure 4.22 that residual compressive stress at the
notch root (induced by tensile prestress) signiﬁcantly improves fatigue resistance, while
residual tensile stress at the notch root (induced by compressive prestress) signiﬁcantly di-
minishes fatigue strength. This is an example of a basic principle of effective prestressing,
namely, the imposition of an overload that causes local yielding will produce a residual
stress ﬁeld favorable to future loads in the same direction, and unfavorable to future loads
in the opposite direction. Thus, if prestressing is to be used, the prestressing force should
always be imposed in the same direction as anticipated operational loads.
Estimating Residual Stress
For simple loading and simple geometry, residual stresses may be estimated if the stress-
strain properties are known for the material and stress concentration factors are available
for the geometry of the part. For example, if the material behavior is idealized to have an
elastic–perfectly plastic stress-strain curve, as shown in Figure 4.23, the residual stresses
usually may be estimated. For instance, an axially loaded uniform straight cylindrical bar
with a circumferential semicircular notch, such as the one shown in Figure 4.24(a), may

Residual Stresses 191
yp
–yp
Stress, 
Strain, 
E
Rupture
Figure 4.23
Stress-strain curve for idealized elastic–perfectly
plastic material.
P
P
Pb
Pc
Pd
Pe = 0
r
D
(a) Load applied.
(b) act < Syp
(e) Load returned to zero.
(c) act = Syp
(d) act causes local plastic flow.
A
A
Aroot = (D – 2r)2
4
Syp
Syp
Syp
act
act
act
ave = Pb
A
ave = Pc
A
ave = Pd
A
Compressive residual stress at notch
Tensile residual stress in core
(truncated at Syp
because of local
plastic flow)
Figure 4.24
Stress distributions for selected 
sequence of applied axial load P to a
notched tension bar.
be analyzed for residual stresses if the dimensions of the bar and the notch are known. The
procedure for making such an estimate would be to
1.
Deﬁne a speciﬁc (idealized) stress-strain curve for the material, in a format similar to
Figure 4.23.

192
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
2.
From loading and geometry determine stress concentration factor 
, using the
method discussed in 5.6 and a chart of the type shown in Figure 5.5.
3.
Calculate 
as a function of axial load P, and visualize changes in stress
distribution on cutting plane A-A using a series of free-body sketches related to in-
creasing values of P, as shown in Figure 4.24. Note in Figure 4.24 that for free-body
sketch (b), 
, for (c) 
, for (d) 
tries to exceed 
but cannot due
to perfectly plastic behavior (consequently local plastic ﬂow occurs to reestablish equi-
librium), and for (e) load P is returned to zero, giving rise to elastic springback that
forces a pattern of residual stresses, as shown. The compressive residual stress at the
surface is typically about one-half the strain-hardened yield strength of the material
when well-designed prestressing procedures are used. It is important to note that when
subsequent operational loads are applied in the same direction as the preload force, the
compressive residual stresses add algebraically to the tensile operational stresses. This
results in a reduction of the peak resultant surface stress, as long as the new operational
load P does not exceed
[see Figure 4.24(c)]. These basic concepts apply to bending
and torsional prestressing conﬁgurations as well as to axial conﬁgurations.33
Pc
Syp
sact
sact = Syp
sact 6 Syp
sact = Ktsnom
Kt
33See, for example, ref. 9, pp. 103 ff.
Example 4.18 Estimating Residual Stress Distributions
The simply supported steel beam in Figure E4.18A is subjected to a pure applied bending
moment
The beam material is ductile and has a yield strength of 
. Elastic-perfectly
plastic behavior may be assumed, and buckling is not a problem.
a.
Calculate the moment 
at which ﬁrst yielding occurs, and sketch the stress distri-
bution through at midspan when 
is applied, knowing 
and 
b.
Calculate and sketch the midspan stress distribution when 
is applied.
c.
Find the residual stresses when the moment 
is removed, and sketch the correspon-
ding residual stress distribution.
Solution
a.
The moment required to cause ﬁrst yielding will occur when 
Using (4-5)
The stress distribution associated with this bending moment is shown in Figure E4.18B
Mfy =
Sypbd2
6
= 483 * 106(0.025)(0.050)2
6
= 5030 N-m
s max = Syp =
Mfyc
I
=
6Mfy
bd2
s max = Syp
Ma
Ma = 6800 N-m
d = 50 mm
b = 25 mm
Mfy
Mfy
Syp = 483 MPa
Ma
Ma
Ma
b
d
L
Figure E4.18A 
Simple beam with rectangular cross section,
subjected to a pure bending moment.
Mfy = 5030 N-m
Mfy = 5030 N-m
max = Syp = 483 MPa
Neutral surface
max = Syp – = – 483 MPa
Figure E4.18B 
Stress distribution when ﬁrst yielding occurs.

Residual Stresses 193
b.
Since 
is greater than 
, plastic ﬂow occurs at the
outer ﬁbers and extends to some depth 
, as shown in Figure E4.18C. In this ﬁgure we
model both a plastic force 
and an elastic force 
located at the centroid of each
stress distribution. The stress across the beam width is assumed to be constant.
Knowing that 
, 
, and 
, we can deﬁne the plastic
and elastic forces in terms of 
as
Using the plastic and elastic forces deﬁned above, we satisfy moment equilibrium
with
Since 
cannot physically exceed 0.025 m, 
. The midspan
stress distribution is therefore as shown in Figure E4.18C with 
.
c.
To ﬁnd the residual stress distribution when 
is released, it may be
noted that releasing 
is equivalent to superposing a moment of 
upon the
stress distribution of Figure E4.18C, where the superposed stresses will remain com-
pletely elastic (as long as all the residual stresses, displayed in Figure E4.18D, are
within the elastic range). Thus, when 
is applied, the outer ﬁber (elastic) stress
is
smax-e = -Mac
I
= -6Ma
bd2 = -
6168002
0.02510.0522 = -652.8 MPa L -653 MPa
s max -e
-Ma
-Ma
Ma
Ma = 6800 N-m
dp = 11.4 mm
dp = 0.0114 m = 11.4 mm
dp
d2
p + 0.6167dp - 0.0161 = 0 :  dp = 0.025 ; 0.0136 m
6800 = 12.075 * 106dp(0.05 - dp) + 8.05 * 106(0.025 - dp)2
= Fp1d - dp2 + Fe 4
3ad
2 - dpb
Ma
= 6800 = 2eFpc1
2 1d - dp2d + Fe
2
3 ad
2 - dpb f
= 6.0375 * 10610.025 - dp2
Fe = 1
2Sypbad
2 - dpb = 1
21483 * 106210.0252a 0.05
2
- dpb
Fp = Sypbdp = 483 * 106(0.025)dp = 12.075 * 106dp
dp
Syp = 483 MPa
d = 50 mm
b = 25 mm
Fe
Fp
dp
Mfy = 5030 N-m
Ma = 6800 N-m
Figure E4.18C
Stress distribution when plastic deformation is
present.
d
Ma
Ma
Fp
Fp
Fe
Fe
dp
dp
1
2 (d – dp)
– dp
2
3
d
2

194
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
4.10 Environmental Effects
When discussing materials selection in Chapter 3, the effect of environment upon material
properties was an important consideration. In Table 3.1, for example, environment-related
factors in material selection include strength at elevated temperature, long-term dimen-
sional stability, dimensional stability under temperature ﬂuctuation, resistance to chemi-
cally reactive environments, and resistance to nuclear radiation environments. Also, the
discussion of potential failure modes in Chapter 2 addresses the inﬂuence of environment.
Environmentally sensitive failure modes listed in 2.3 include temperature-induced elastic
deformation, thermal fatigue, corrosion, corrosion fatigue, stress corrosion, erosion, abra-
sive wear, corrosive wear, creep, stress rupture, thermal shock, radiation damage, and
creep buckling.
Apart from material selection and failure mode deﬁnition, another important design
consideration involves the assessment of environmentally induced changes in loading, di-
mensions, or functional capability. For example, temperature, moisture, wind or ﬂowing
ﬂuids, abrasives or contaminants, vibration, or earthquake activity may interfere with the
ability of a machine or structure to perform its function. If a designer creates an otherwise
superb machine, but fails to consider an important environmental excitation, a surprise fail-
ure may result. Addressing pertinent environmental factors often requires ingenuity and in-
sight. “Standard” equations and approaches are not always available. The following brief
discussion illustrates the concern.
Temperature changes may cause signiﬁcant expansion or contraction of an element
or a structure. For example, bridges, pipelines, or machine frames, in some cases, may de-
velop serious operational problems if thermal expansions or contractions are not properly
assessed. If expanding elements are constrained by stiff surrounding structure, high in-
ternal forces may be developed. Such forces may cause misalignment, binding, or exces-
sive stress levels. If two different materials with two different thermal expansion
coefﬁcients are used for parallel structural elements, destructive internal forces may be
generated. Even small temperature changes may induce destructive internal forces in
some cases. If temperature gradients are induced in a machine element, warpage and dis-
tortion may cause intolerable changes in geometry or changes in ﬁt. Carefully planned
preloads, designed to increase stiffness or reduce susceptibility to cycling loads, may be
Example 4.18 
Continues
Figure E4.18D
Residual stress distribution in beam obtained by superposing stresses due to Ma upon
those due to Ma.
11.4 mm
11.4 mm
483 MPa
–653 MPa
–483 MPa
653 MPa
170 MPa
–170 MPa
–128 MPa
128 MPa
11.4 mm
6.5 mm
Stress distribution
due to Ma
Stress distribution
due to – Ma
Residual stress distribution
Superposing this stress distribution upon the distribution shown in Figure E4.18C gives the
residual stress distribution shown in ﬁgure E4.18D.

Problems 195
relaxed or lost because of elevated temperature. The effects of beneﬁcial residual stresses
may be reduced or lost as well.
Water, oil, or other ﬂuids may inﬂuence operational characteristics in some cases. For
example, the coefﬁcients of friction may be reduced, causing problems such as reduced
torque capacities of brakes and clutches, or altered tightening torque requirements for
bolted joints. Volumetric changes in polymeric or composite elements, because of ﬂuid ab-
sorption, may cause unacceptable dimensional mismatches.
Abrasives or other contaminants may inﬁltrate joints, bearings, and gear boxes in ap-
plications such as mining machines, construction equipment, or farm machinery. Sand,
shale, coal dust, limestone, and phosphate dust are examples of contaminants that should
be considered when assessing potential lubrication requirements, as they relate to poten-
tial wear failure of critical elements or subassemblies.
Wind or other ﬂowing-ﬂuid environments may induce signiﬁcant structural loads or
deﬂections, may excite unanticipated vibratory behavior, or may carry abrasive particles or
other contaminants to critical operating interfaces of bearings or gears. The vibration of
smokestacks, submarine periscopes, off-shore drilling platforms, ship propellers, turbine
blades, and the “galloping” of electrical transmission lines, are examples of ﬂow-induced
vibration that may cause failure. Civilian and military vehicles operating in desert envi-
ronments provide an example of potential wind-driven sand and dust contamination of en-
gine bearings and gear boxes.
Remote vibratory sources sometimes induce waves that propagate through founda-
tions or the earth to interfere with operation of other machines located far from the vibrat-
ing source. Precision measuring equipment is especially vulnerable to such adverse
effects. In some cases, a statically loaded machine element may be transformed into a
cyclically loaded element because of a remote vibratory disturbance. Earthquake or seis-
mic activity should also be considered by designers of certain equipment and structures
scheduled for installation in seismically active areas.
It is important for a designer to assess the direct inﬂuence of environment on the in-
tegrity of machine elements and structures so that surprise failures are not generated. In
most cases, environmentally induced changes in loading, dimensions, or functional be-
havior can be anticipated if environmental inﬂuences are carefully considered.
4-1. For the pliers shown in Figure P4.1, construct a complete
free-body diagram for the pivot pin. Pay particular attention to
moment equilibrium.
Problems
4-2. For the bolted bracket assembly shown in Figure P4.2,
construct a free-body diagram for each component, including
each bracket-half, the bolts, the washers, and the nuts. Try to
give a qualitative indication of relative magnitudes of force
vectors where possible. Indicate sources of the various force
vectors you show.
4-3. For the simple short-shoe block brake shown in Figure
P4.3, construct a free-body diagram for the actuating lever
and short block, taken together as the free body.
4-4. A ﬂoor-support beam of rectangular cross section sup-
ports a uniformly distributed load of w lb/ft over its full
length, and its ends may be regarded as ﬁxed.
a. Construct a complete free-body diagram for the
beam.
b. Construct shear and bending moment diagrams for
the beam.
Pivot pin
Pivot pin
a
F
F
A
A
b
Work piece
Section A-A
Figure P4.1
Sketch of a pair of pliers.

4-5. The toggle mechanism shown in Figure P4.5 is to be
used to statically load a helical coil spring so that it may be
inspected for cracks and flaws while under load. The spring
has a free length of 3.5 inches when unloaded, and a spring
rate of 240 lb/in. When the static actuating force is applied,
and the mechanism is at rest, the spring is compressed as
shown in Figure P4.5, with dimensions as noted. Determine
all the forces acting on link 3, and neatly draw a free-body di-
agram for link 3. Clearly show the numerical magnitudes and
actual directions for all forces on link 3. Do only enough
analysis to determine the forces on link 3, not the entire
mechanism.
4-6. A simply supported beam is to be used at the 17th ﬂoor of
a building under construction to support a high-speed cable
hoist, as shown in Figure P4.6. This hoist brings the 700-pound
payload quickly from zero velocity at ground level to a maxi-
mum velocity and back to zero velocity at any selected ﬂoor be-
tween the 10th and 15th ﬂoor levels. Under the most severe
operating conditions, it has been determined that the accelera-
tion of the payload from zero to maximum velocity produces a
dynamic cable load of 1913 lb. Perform a force analysis of the
beam under the most severe operating conditions. Show ﬁnal
results, including magnitudes and actual directions of all forces,
on a neat free-body diagram of the beam.
4.7. Two steel bars are pin-connected as shown in Figure P4.7.
If the cross-sectional area of the steel bars is 50 mm2 and the
196
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
P
P
Figure P4.2
Bolted bracket assembly.
d
b
a
Fa
c
A
B
C
D
T


R
Actuating lever
Short shoe (block)
Lining
Load torque
Rim (drum)
Figure P4.3
External short-shoe block brake.
G
B
C
A
E
F
1
4
2
3
5
a = 2.1 in.
b = 10.5 in.
c =
10.5 in.
1.5 in.
D
	 = 0
Fa = static actuating force
k = 240 lb/in.; free length = 3.5 in.
Figure P4.5
Toggle mechanism.
150 in.
100 in.
Support beam
to be analyzed
(weighs 88 lb/ft)
Pinned
support
17th floor
level
High speed
cable hoist
Roller
support
700 lb
payload
v
B
A
C
Figure P4.6
Support beam for high-speed cable hoist.
3m
P
L = 2.5m
Figure P4.7
Pin-connected steel bars subjected to a vertical load. 

allowable stress is 300 MPa, what value of P can be carried by
the bars?
4-8. a. Determine the maximum shear stress due to torsion in
the steel shaft shown in Figure P4.8. (b) Determine the
maximum tensile stress due to bending in the steel shaft
shown above.
4-9. Consider the circular bent rod with diameter 20 mm
shown in Figure P4.9. The free-end of the bend is subjected to
a vertical load of 800 N and a horizontal load of 400 N.
Determine the stress at locations a-a and b-b.
4-10. Determine the bearing reactions and draw the bending
moment diagram for the shaft in Figure P4.10. Determine the
location and magnitude of the maximum moment.
4.11. A bar of steel is 600 mm long. It has a diameter of 25 mm
at one end and 30 mm at the other. Each has a length of 150
mm. The remaining central section has a 20-mm diameter and
is 300 mm in length, as shown in Figure P4.11. When the bar is
subjected to a tensile load of 110 kN, determine the length of
the bar. Take E for steel to be 207 GPa.
4.12. Two vertical rods are both attached rigidly at the upper
ends to a horizontal bar, as shown in Figure P4.12. Both rods
have the same length of 600 mm and a 10-mm diameter. A hor-
izontal cross bar whose weight is 815 kg connects the lower
ends of the rods and on it is placed a load of 4 kN. Determine
the location of the 4 kN load so that the cross member remains
horizontal, and determine the stress in each rod. The left rod is
steel and the right rod is aluminum. 
GPa and
GPa.
4-13. Determine the maximum deﬂection of the steel cantilever
shaft shown in Figure P4.13.
EAL = 71
Es = 207
Problems 197
D1 = 240 mm
D = 40 mm
580 N
580 N
800 N
800 N
120 mm
280 mm
200 mm
D2 = 120 mm
F2 = 400 N
F1 = 1.2 kN
FH
B
A
Figure P4.8
Steel shaft subjected to loads on various machine elements.
400 mm
100 mm
300 mm
A
b
a
a
C
D
B
b
200 mm
400 N
800 N
Figure P4.9
Circular bent rod.
300 1b
10 in.
30 in.
10 in.
400 1b
500 1b
6 in.
A
B
Figure P4.10
Shaft subjected to various loads.

height of 3 in. Determine the maximum deﬂection of the beam.
Take E to be 
psi.
4.16. Consider the cantilever beam shown in Figure P4.16. The
beam has a square cross-section with 160 mm on a side.
Determine the slope at B and the deﬂection at C. The material
is steel with 
GPa.
E = 207
30 * 106
198
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
30 in.
2 in. D
10 in.
400 1b
4 in.
A
B
Figure P4.13
Steel shaft supported by bearings.
500 mm
qa = 5 kN/m
A
B
Figure P4.14
Cantilevered beam with a linearly distributed load.
Figure P4.15
Simply supported beam subjected to a uniform load.
100 1b/ft
6 ft
3 ft
3 ft
y
x
150 mm
300 mm
150 mm
30 mm
25 mm
D = 20 mm
600 mm
Figure P4.11
Stepped bar. 
600 mm
Steel
10 mm D
815 kg
10 mm D
Aluminium
4 kN
800 mm
Figure P4.12
Vertical rods supporting a horizontal bar.
2.4 m
1.2 m
2.4 kN/m
y
A
B
C
x
Figure P4.16
Cantilevered beam with a uniform load along a portion of
the beam span.
4-14. For the square, 20 mm  20 mm, aluminum beam shown
in Figure P4.14, determine the slope and deﬂection at B. Take
GPa.
4-15. A simply supported beam subjected to a uniform load
over a portion of the beam, as shown in Figure P4.15. The cross
section of the beam is rectangular with the a width 4 in and a
E = 71

4-17. A horizontal steel cantilever beam is 10 inches long and
has a square cross section that is one-inch on each side. If a ver-
tically downward load of 100 pounds is applied at the mid-
length of the beam, 5 inches from the ﬁxed end, what would be
the vertical deﬂection at the free end if transverse shear is ne-
glected. Use Castigliano’s theorem to make your estimate.
4-18. a. Using the strain energy expression for torsion in
Table 4.7, verify that if a prismatic member has a uni-
form cross section all along its length, and if a constant
torque T is applied, the stored strain energy in the bar is
properly given by (4-61).
b. Using Castigliano’s method, calculate the angle of
twist induced by the applied torque T.
4-19. The steel right-angle support bracket, with leg lengths
 10 inches and 
inches, as shown in Figure P4.19,
is to be used to support the static load 
lb. The load
is to be applied vertically downward at the free end of the
cylindrical leg, as shown. Both bracket-leg centerlines lie in
the same horizontal plane. If the square leg has sides 
inches, and the cylindrical leg has diameter 
inches,
use Castigliano’s theorem to ﬁnd the deﬂection 
under the
load P.
yo
d = 1.25
s = 1.25
P = 1000
L2 = 5
L1
4-22. A beam of square cross-section of 2 in x 2 in ﬁxed at both
ends is subjected to a concentrated load of 2400 lb and a uniform
load of 400 lb/ft as shown in Figure P4.22. Determine:
a The beam reactions.
b The deflection at the location of the concentrated
load P.
Problems 199
L1
s
s
L2
P
d
y
Fixed
O
L
C
L
C
Figure P4.19
Right-angle support bracket with transverse end-load.
Figure P4.20
Bevel gear attached to a
shaft.
4.20. The bevel gear shown in Figure P4.20 carries an axial
load of 2.4 kN. Sketch the bending moment diagram for the
steel shaft and calculate the deﬂection due to P in the axial di-
rection using Castigliano’s theorem. Neglect energy stored in
the system between the gear and bearing B.
4.21. Using Castigliano’s theorem, determine the deﬂection of
the steel shaft shown in Figure P4.21 at the location of the gear.
Take E to be 207 GPa.
600 mm
50 mm D
P = 2.4 kN
160 mm
A
B
Figure P4.21
Steel shaft supporting a gear.
25 mm Dia
520 mm
280 mm
P = 3.2 kN
A
B
C
10 ft
2.5 ft
P = 2400 1b
w = 400 1b/ft
Figure P4.22
Fixed-ﬁxed beam with a concentrated load and a uniform
load distribution.
4-23. Consider a beam that is supported at the left end and
ﬁxed at the right end and subjected to a uniform load of 4 kN/m,
as shown in Figure P4.23. Determine the beam reactions and
the maximum deﬂection of the beam. Take 
GPa.
4-24. Consider a steel beam on three supports subjected to a
uniform load of 200 lb/ft, as shown in Figure P4.24. Determine
the maximum deﬂection and the slope at B.
E = 200

200
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
4-27. Determine the force at support B for the steel beam such
that the deﬂection at point B is limited to 5 mm. The cross sec-
tion is a rectangle with width 30 mm and height 20 mm.
4-28. The two-span beam shown in Figure P4.28 supports a
uniform load of 1000 lb/ft over the central portion of the beam.
Determine the various reactions using Castigliano’s theorem.
5 m
40
240
Dimensions in mm
160
40
w = 4kN/m
Figure P4.23
Propped cantilever T-beam with a uniform load distribution.
8 ft
A
C
B
4 ft
4 in
4 in
2 in
2 in
w = 200 1b/ft
Figure P4.24
Statically indeterminate beam with a uniform load distri-
bution. 
4-25. The steel shaft shown in Figure P4.25 is ﬁxed at one end
and simply supported at the other and carries a uniform load of
5 kN/m. The shaft is 120 mm in diameter. Determine the equa-
tion for the deﬂection of the shaft and the location and magni-
tude of the maximum deﬂection.
5 m
w = 5 kN/m
Figure P4.25
Propped cantilever beam supporting a uniform load.
4-26. Consider the beam ﬁxed at one end and simply supported
at the other, as shown in Figure P4.26.
a Using Castiglano’s theorem, determine the redundant
reaction at the simple support.
b Assume that 
lb, 
ft, 
ft, 
psi, and 
in.4. Using Castigliano’s theo-
rem, determine the deﬂection at the location of P.
I = 100
30 * 106
E =
a = 4
L = 10
P = 400
a
b
P
L
Figure P4.26
Propped cantilever beam supporting a concentrated load.
A
C
B
2 m
6 m
8 m
w = 5 kN/m
v
Figure P4.27
Simply supported beam with a uniform load distribution.
12 ft
12 ft
12 ft
12 ft
w = 1000 1b/ft
Figure 4.28
Two-span beam with a uniform load distribution.
4-29. Consider a steel beam ﬁxed at one end and simply sup-
ported at the other carrying a uniformly varying load, as shown
in Figure P4.29. Determine the moment at the ﬁxed support.
L = 2m
w = 20 kN/m
Figure 4.29
Propped cantilever beam a linear load distribution.
4-30. An S-hook, as sketched in Figure P4.30, has a circular
cross section and is being proposed as a means of hanging unit-
ized dumpster bins in a new state-of-the-art, dip-style, painting
process. The maximum weight of a dumpster is estimated at be
1.35 kN; and two hooks will typically be used to support the
weight, equally split between two lifting lugs. However, the
possibility exists that on some occasions the entire weight may
have to be supported by a single hook. The proposed hook ma-
terial is commercially polished AM350 stainless steel in age-
hardened condition (see Table 3.3). Preliminary considerations
indicate that yielding is the most likely mode of failure. Identify
the critical points in the S-hook, determine the maximum stress

Problems 201
25 mm
35 mm
P
P
7.5 mm
diameter wire
Figure P4.30 
S-hook of circular cross section.
at each critical point, and predict whether the loads can be sup-
ported without failure.
4-31. The support (shackle) at one end of a symmetrical leaf
spring is depicted in Figure P4.31. The cross section at A-B is
rectangular, with dimensions of 38 mm by 25 mm thickness
in and out of the paper. The total vertical force at the center
of the leaf spring is 18 kN up on the spring.
a. Find the maximum stress at the critical point in the sup-
port.
b. Would it be reasonable to select ASTM A-48 (class
50) gray cast iron as a potential material candidate for the
support? (See Table 3.3 for properties.)
A
B
22
°
1
2
25 38 mm 38 mm
57 mm
D
C
Figure P4.31
Support bracket for leaf spring attachment.
Figure P4.32
Cast-iron C-frame subjected to 13 kN separating force.
25 mm
18 mm
10 mm
10 mm
A
13 kN
90 mm
38 mm
A
Figure P4.33
Curved bracket.
R = 100 mm
B
P = 2 kN
A
4-33. Consider the thin-curved element shown in Figure P4.33.
Determine the horizontal displacement of the curved beam at
location A. The cross section is square being at 5 mm  5 mm.
Use 
GPa.
E = 200
4-34. A snap-ring type of leaf spring is shown in Figure P4.34.
Determine the following:
a The bending moment equation at location B.
b The total amount of deﬂection (change in distance AD)
caused by the loads acting at the ends using Castigliano’s
4-32. A 13-kN hydraulic press for removing and reinstalling
bearings in small-to medium-sized electric motors is to consist
of a commercially available cylinder mounted vertically in a C-
frame, with dimensions as sketched in Figure P4.32. It is being
proposed to use ASTM A-48 (Class 50) gray cast iron for the
C-frame material. Predict whether the C-frame can support the
maximum load without failure.
Figure P4.34
Snap- ring type leaf spring.
B
A
P
P
D
R
C
h

202
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
second theorem. Take 
in, the width 
in,
in, 
psi, 
lb, and 
c Plot the deﬂection as a function of 
from 
4-35. Your group manager tells you that she has heard that a
sphere of AISI 1020 (HR) steel will produce plastic ﬂow in the
region of contact due to its own weight if placed on a ﬂat plate
of the same material. Determine whether the allegation claim
may be true, and, if true, under what circumstances. Use SI ma-
terial properties to make your determination.
4-36. Two mating spur gears (see Chapter 15) are 25 mm wide
and the tooth proﬁles have radii of curvature at the line of con-
tact of 12 mm and 16 mm, respectively. If the transmitted force
between them is 180 N, estimate the following:
a. The width of the contact zone
b. The maximum contact pressure
c. The maximum subsurface shearing stress and its dis-
tance below the surface
4-37. The preliminary sketch for a device to measure the axial
displacement (normal approach) associated with a sphere sand-
wiched between two ﬂat plates is shown in Figure P4.37. The
material to be used for both the sphere and the plates is AISI
4340 steel, heat treated to a hardness of 
56 (see Tables 3.3,
3.9, and 3.13). Three sphere diameters are of interest:
inch, 
inch, and 
inches.
a. To help in selecting a micrometer with appropriate
measurement sensitivity and range, estimate the range of
normal approach for each sphere size, corresponding to a
sequence of loads from 0 to 3000 pounds, in increments of
500 pounds.
ds = 1.500
ds = 1.000
ds = 0.500
Rc
to a0 = 45°
f0 = 1°
f0
f0 = 10°.
P = 10
E = 30 * 106
h = 0.2
b = 0.4
R = 1
b. Plot the results.
c. Would you classify these force-deﬂection curves as
linear, stiffening, or softening? (See Figure 4.21).
4-38. Consider two cylinders of length 250 mm in contact un-
der a load P, as shown in Figure P 4.38. If the allowable contact
stress is 200 MPa, determine the maximum load P that can be
applied to the cylinders. Take 
mm, 
mm,
GPa, and 
.
v = 0.25
E = 200
r2 = 300
r1 = 200
Figure P4.37
Device for measuring nonlinear deﬂection as a function of
load for contact between a sphere and ﬂat plate.
ds
Micrometer
F
Hardened steel
sphere
Hardened steel
platen
0
Figure P 4.38
Contact between two different size cylinders.
r1
F
F
F
F
L
r2
4-39. It is being proposed to use a single small gas turbine
power plant to drive two propellers in a preliminary concept for
a small vertical-stationary-take-off-and-landing (VSTOL) air-
craft. The power plant is to be connected to the propellers
through a “branched” system of shafts and gears, as shown in
Figure P4.39. One of many concerns about such a system is that
rotational vibrations between and among the propeller masses
and the gas turbine mass may build up their vibrational ampli-
tudes to cause high stresses and/or deﬂections that might lead to
failure.
a. Identify the system elements (shafts, gears, etc.) that
might be important “springs” in analyzing this rotational
mass-spring system. Do not include the gas turbine or the
propellers themselves.
b. For each element identiﬁed in (a), list the types of
springs (torsion, bending, etc.) that might have to be ana-
lyzed to determine vibrational behavior of the rotational
vibrating system.
4-40. a. A steel horizontal cantilever beam having the dimen-
sions shown in Figure P4.40(a) is to be subjected to a ver-
tical end-load of 
lb. Calculate the spring rate of
the cantilever beam referred to its free end (i.e., at the
point of load application). What vertical deﬂection at the
end of the beam would you predict?
F = 100

Problems 203
b. The helical coil spring shown in Figure P4.40(b) has
been found to have a linear spring rate of 
lb/in.
If an axial load of 
lb is applied to the spring,
what axial (vertical) deﬂection would you predict?
c. In Figure P4.40(c), the helical coil spring of (b) is
placed under the end of the cantilever beam of (a) with
F = 100
ksp = 300
no clearance or interference between them, so that the
centerline of the coil spring coincides with the end of the
cantilever beam. When a vertical load of 
lb is
applied at the end of the beam, calculate the spring rate
of the combined beam and coil spring assembly referred
to the free end of the beam (i.e., at the point of load ap-
plication). What vertical deﬂection of the end of the
beam would you predict?
d. What portion of the 100-lb force F is carried by the
cantilever beam, and what portion is carried by the coil
spring?
4-41. To help assess the inﬂuence of bearing stiffness on lateral
vibration behavior of a rotating steel shaft with a 100-lb steel
ﬂywheel mounted at midspan, you are asked to make the fol-
lowing estimates:
a. Using the conﬁguration and the dimensions shown in
Figure P4.41(a), calculate the static midspan deﬂection
and spring rate, assuming that the bearings are inﬁnitely
stiff radially (therefore they have no vertical deﬂection
under load), but support no moment (hence the shaft is
simply supported).
b. Using the actual force-deﬂection bearing data shown in
Figure P4.41(b) (supplied by the bearing manufacturer),
calculate the static midspan deﬂection of the shaft bearing
system and the midspan spring rate for the shaft bearing
system.
c. Estimate the percent change in system stiffness attrib-
utable to the bearings, as compared to system stiffness cal-
culated by ignoring the bearings. Would you consider this
to be a signiﬁcant change?
4-42. For the system shown in Figure P 4.42, determine the de-
ﬂection for a load of 10 kN. The beam has a length L of 600 mm
and a rectangular cross-section with a width of 20 mm and
height 40 mm. The column has a length l of 450 mm and a
diameter of 40 mm. Take 
GPa for both.
E = 200
F = 100
(a) Cantilever beam spring.
(b) Helical coil spring.
(c) Combination.
d = 0.5 in.
b = 2 in.
L = 16 in.
L = 16 in.
ycb
ysp
y
F
F
F
ksp = 300 lb
in
Figure P4.40
Combination of a cantilever beam and helical coil spring
to support a load F.
Figure P4.39
Branched drive system being 
proposed for a small VSTOL 
aircraft.
Left propeller
Right propeller
Left propeller
drive shaft
Right propeller
drive shaft
Left propeller
drive gear box
Right propeller
drive gear box
Left drive
box shaft
Right drive
box shaft
Branched speed
reducer
Left branch
shaft
Right
branch
shaft
Turbine output
drive shaft
Left right-angle gear
box (allows rotation
of propeller     from
vertical to horizontal)
Right right-angle gear
box (allows rotation
of propeller     from
vertical to horizontal)
Gas
turbine
L
C
L
C

204
Chapter 4 / Response of Machine Elements to Loads and Environments; Stress, Strain, and Energy Parameters
across the minimum section for each of the following circum-
stances, assuming elastic–perfectly plastic behavior.
a. A tensile load of 
lb is applied to the bar.
b. The 10,000-lb tensile load is released.
c. A tensile load of 
lb is applied to a new bar
of the same type.
d. The 20,000-lb load is released.
e. A tensile load of 
-lb is applied to another
new bar of the same type.
f. Would the same or different results be obtained if the
same bar were used for all three loads in sequence?
4-44. An initially straight and stress-free beam, is 5.0 cm high
and 2.5 cm wide. The beam is made of a ductile aluminum ma-
terial with yield strength of 
MPa.
a. What applied moment is required to cause yielding to
a depth of 10.0 mm if the material behaves as if it were
elastic–perfectly plastic?
b. Determine the residual stress pattern across the beam
when the applied moment of (a) is released.
Syp = 275
Pe = 30,000
Pc = 20,000
Pa = 10,000
Rotating disk
(a) System configuration.
(b) Force-deflection curve for single bearing.
6.00 in.
3.00 in.
ds = 1.50 in.
Shaft
Wdisk =
1000 lb
Left
bearing
Right
bearing
Radial force, lb
Radial deflection, in.
0
0.0005
0.001
0
500
1000
1500
Figure P4.41
Flywheel and shaft supported by ball bearings.
Figure P4.42
System adjusting of two ﬁxed-ﬁxed beams and a column.
L/2
P
L
l
4-43. A notched rectangular bar of the type illustrated in Figure
4.21(b) is 1.15 inches wide, 0.50 inch thick, and is symmetri-
cally notched on both sides by semicircular notches with radii
of r  0.075 inch. The bar is made of a ductile steel with yield
strength of 
psi. Sketch the stress distribution
Syp = 50,000

Failure Theories
Chapter 5
205
5.1 Preliminary Discussions
The modes of failure discussed in Chapter 2 were presented as an overview of the possible
mechanisms which trigger a failure. Assessing failure requires an accurate and thorough
stress analysis in which the largest stresses (principal stresses) that occur at a critical point
in the component under evaluation must be estimated. In addition to deﬁning the principal
stresses, one must also be aware of the type of material they are working with. Ductile and
brittle materials will typically fail in different manners, and their failure is predicted by
different theories. Similarly, when fatigue is being considered, the overall strength of the
material is reduced as the number of load cycles increases.
5.2 Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain
Under the most complicated loading conditions, a machine part may be subjected to forces
and moments produced by various combinations of direct axial loads, bending loads, direct
or transverse shearing loads, torsional loads, and/or surface contact loads. As noted in 4.2,
no matter how complicated the geometry of the part or how many different external forces
and moments are being applied, the force system can always be resolved into just three re-
sultant forces and three resultant moments, each deﬁned with respect to an arbitrarily cho-
sen x-y-z coordinate system. The origin of the selected x-y-z coordinate system may be
placed at any desired critical point within the part. The most complicated state of stress that
can be produced in a small elemental volume of material at the critical point is the triaxial
state of stress1; any triaxial state of stress may be fully specified relative to the chosen
x-y-z coordinate system by specifying the three normal stress components 
, and the
three shearing stress components 
and 
.
Principal Stresses
It can be shown2 that if the selected x-y-z coordinate axes, together with the elemental vol-
ume of material, are rotated in three-dimensional space, about the ﬁxed origin, a unique
new orientation may be found for which the shearing stress components vanish on all faces
of the newly oriented elemental volume. This unique orientation, for which the shearing
stress components on all faces of the elemental cube are zero, is called the principal ori-
entation. For the principal orientation, the three mutually perpendicular planes of zero
tzx
txy, tyz,
sx, sy, sz
1See Figure 4.1.
2For example, see ref. 1, Ch. 4.

shear are called principal planes, and the normal stresses on these principal planes (planes
of zero shear) are called principal normal stresses, or just principal stresses.
The importance of principal stresses lies in the fact that among them will be the
largest normal stress that can occur on any plane passing through the point, for the given
loading. The principal stresses are usually designated 
and 
. There are always
three principal stresses, but some of them may be zero.
There is a second special orientation of coordinate axes that may be found, for which
the shearing stresses on the faces of the rotated volume element reach extreme values. Of
the three extreme values, one is a maximum, one is a minimum, and the third is a minimax
value. This orientation is called the principal shearing orientation, and the shearing
stresses on these three mutually perpendicular principal shearing planes are called princi-
pal shearing stresses. The principal shearing planes may have nonzero normal stresses act-
ing on them, depending upon the type of loading, but normal stresses on planes of
principal shear are not principal stresses.
The importance of principal shearing stresses lies in the fact that among them will be
the largest or maximum shearing stress that can occur on any plane passing through the
point, for the given loading. The principal shearing stresses are usually designated 
,
and 
.
Stress Cubic Equation
Depending upon whether its material behaves in a brittle or a ductile manner, failure at the
governing critical point of a machine part is dependent upon the principle normal stresses,
the principal shearing stresses, or some combination of these. In any event, it is important
for a designer to be able to calculate principal normal stresses and principal shearing stresses
for any combination of applied loads. To do this, the general stress cubic equation3 may be
employed to ﬁnd the principal stresses 
, 
, and 
as a function of the readily calculable
components of stress 
, 
, 
,
,
, and 
relative to any selected x-y-z coordinate sys-
tem. The general stress cubic equation, developed from equilibrium concepts, is
(5-1)
Since all normal and shearing stress components are real numbers, all three roots of
(5-1) are real; these three roots are the principal normal stresses 
, 
, and 
.
It is also possible to ﬁnd the directions of principal stress vectors (and principal shear-
ing stress vectors) if necessary.4
Furthermore, it can be shown that the magnitudes of the principal shearing stresses
may be calculated from 
(5-2)
(5-3)
(5-4)
ƒt3 ƒ = `
s1 - s2
2
`
ƒt2 ƒ = `
s3 - s1
2
`
ƒt1 ƒ = `
s2 - s3
2
`
s3
s2
s1
- 1sx sy sz + 2txytyztzx - sxt2
yz - syt2
zx - szt2
xy2 = 0
s3 - s21sx + sy + sz2 + s1sx sy + sy sz + sz sx - t2
xy - t2
yz - t2
zx2
tzx
tyz
txy
sz
sy
sx
s3
s2
s1
t3
t1, t2
s3
s1, s2,
206
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
3For example, see ref. 1, p. 97.
4See, for example, ref. 1,

To summarize, if loads and geometry are known for a machine part, a designer may
identify the critical point, arbitrarily select a convenient x-y-z coordinate system, and cal-
culate the resultant six stress components 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. Equations (5-1)
through (5-4) may then be solved to ﬁnd the principal normal stresses and the principal
shearing stresses. This procedure works for all cases; if the case is biaxial, one of the prin-
cipal stresses will be zero, and if it is uniaxial, two principal stresses will be zero.
Example 5.1 Multiaxial States of Stress; Principal Stresses
A hollow cylindrical 4340 steel member has a 1.0-inch outside diameter, wall thickness of
0.25 inch, and length of 30.0 inches. As shown in Figure E5.1A, the member is simply sup-
ported at the ends, and symmetrically loaded at the one-third points by 1000-lb loads. The
tubular bar is simultaneously subjected to an axial force of 5000-lb tension and a torsional
moment of 3000 in-lb. For the critical point at midspan, determine (a) the principal stresses
and (b) the principal shearing stresses.
Solution
a.
Since the vertical transverse loads and end supports are symmetric, the vertical com-
ponents (z-components) produce pure bending, with the maximum bending moment
extending over the entire middle span. Therefore bending stress (tensile) will be max-
imum at the lower extreme ﬁber all along the center span between the 1000-lb trans-
verse loads. The axial tensile force produces uniform axial (x-component) tensile
stress throughout the wall. The torsional shearing stress produced by torque T will be
maximum at the outer ﬁbers throughout the tube. Based on these observations, the
midspan critical point A is depicted in Figure E5.1B. The resultant state of stress at
critical point A due to bending, tension, and torsional shear is shown in Figure E5.1C.
The stress components 
and 
may be evaluated as follows:
and
From the dimensions of the tube
and
J = 2I = 0.092 in4
I =
p1d 4
o - d 4
i 2
64
=
p11.04 - 0.542
64
= 0.046 in4
txy = Ta
J
sx = Mc
I
+ Fa
A
txy
sx
tzx
tyz
txy
sz
sy
sx
Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain 207
RL
RR
10 in.
10 in.
10 in.
1000 lb
1000 lb
Fa = 5000 lb
T = 3000 in.-lb
1.0 in. O.D. × 0.25 in.
thick wall
1.0 in. D
Critical
point
A
1
2 in. D
x
z
y
x
xy
xy
Figure E5.1A
Hollow bar loaded by forces and torques.
Figure E5.1B
Critical point location.
Figure E5.1C
State of stress at critical
point A.

Therefore
and
For the state of stress at critical point 
depicted in Figure E5.1C, the stress
cubic (5-1) reduces to
giving three roots
and
These may be rewritten as
Substituting for 
and 
, the principal stresses become
b.
From (5-2), (5-3), and (5-4) and using results from above the principal shearing stresses
become
ƒt3ƒ = `
119,425 - 1-22252
2
` = 60,825 psi
ƒt2ƒ = ` 0 - 119,425
2
` = 59,713 psi
ƒt1ƒ = ` -2225 - 0
2
` = 1113 psi
s3 = 0
s2 = 58,600 - 60,825 = -2225 psi 
= 58,600 + 60,825 = 119,425 psi 
s1 = 117,200
2
+ A a117,200
2
b
2
+ 116,30022
txy
sx
s3 = 0
s2 = sx
2 - A asx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy
s1 = sx
2 + A asx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy
s = 0
s = sx
2 ; A asx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy
s3 - s2sx + s1-t2
xy2 = 0
A
txy =
130002a1.0
2 b
0.092
= 16,300 psi
sx =
311000211024a 1.0
2 b
0.046
+ 5000
0.589 = 117,200 psi
208
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.1 
Continues

Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain 209
Example 5.2 Principal Stress
It is desired to assemble a cast-iron hub to a steel shaft using an interference fit for
retention. The system is subjected to a vertical load P and a torque T as shown in 
Figure E5.2 (a). At the critical location the stress field is given by the stresses shown in
Figure E5.2 (b)
z
xz
y
x
(b)
R1
R2
T
P
T
(a)
Figure E 5.2
Cast-iron hub ﬁt to a steel shaft and associated state of stress at the critical location.
Solution
The stress cubic equation is given as
where
are the stress invariants. The above values can be written in matrix form as 
Using any number of programs, such as Maple, Matlab, etc., the above can be solved for
the roots of the polynomial equation or the matrix equation can be solved for the eigen-
values, which are the principal stresses of the system. These are given as
s1 = 26.22 MPa,      s2 = 16.94 MPa,      s3 = -38.16 MPa,
s = J
sx
txy
txz
txy
sy
tyz
txz
tyz
sz K
= J
 20
  7.5
15.5
 7.5
  15
-12.5
15.5
-12.5
-30
K MPa
I3 = sxsysz + 2txytyztzx - sxt2
yz - syt2
zx - szt2
xy
I2 = sxsy + sysz + sxsz - t2
xy - t2
yz - t2
zx
I1 = sx + sy + sz
s3 - s2I1 + sI2 - I3 = 0

Mohr’s Circle Analogy for Stress
For biaxial states of stress the stress cubic equation (5-1) degenerates to the form
(5-5)
if stress components lie only in the xy plane. If stress components lie only in the yz plane
or the zx plane, the stress cubic yields the same formal expression with solely yz subscripts
or solely zx subscripts, respectively. The principal stress solutions for (5-5) are (see
Example 5.1)
(5-6)
(5-7)
(5-8)
Examination of (5-6) and (5-7) suggests that these equations are formally the same as
the equation of a circle plotted on the 
plane, since the equation of such a circle on an
xy plane has the form
(5-9)
where h and k are the x-y coordinates of the center of the circle, and R is the radius. An anal-
ogy (refer to the discussion of the “membrane analogy” in 4.4) was developed by Mohr5 in
1882 in which he successfully postulated that a circle plotted on the 
plane could be
used to represent any biaxial state of stress because the governing equations are formally
the same for a circle as for a biaxial state of stress. Such plots have come to be known as
Mohr’s circles for stress. For example, a biaxial state of stress in the xy plane (see principal
stress solutions in (5-6), (5-7), and (5-8)) may be represented by a circle6 with center on the
-axis of a 
plot if in (5-9) x and y are replaced by 
and respectively, and
(5-10)
(5-11)
(5-12)
Figure 5.1 shows such a plot. To successfuly utilize Mohr’s circle as a stress analysis tool
the following sign conventions should be adopted:
1.
Normal stresses should be plotted as positive if tensile, and negative if compressive.
2.
Shearing stresses should be plotted as positive if they produce a clockwise (CW) cou-
ple, and negative if they produce a counterclockwise (CCW) couple. (This convention
is used only for Mohr’s circle applications.)
The plotting procedure, illustrated in Figure 5.1, is to plot point A (tensile 
and CW
couple), then point B (tensile 
and CCW 
couple), then pass a circle through A and
B. The location of center C and magnitude of radius R may be established geometrically
txy
sx
txy
sy
R = A a
sx - sy
2
b
2
+ t2
xy
k = 0
h =
sx + sy
2
t
s
s-t
s
s-t
1x - h22 + 1y - k22 = R2
s-t
s3 = 0
s2 =
sx + sy
2
- A a
sx - sy
2
b
2
+ t2
xy
s1 =
sx + sy
2
+ A a
sx - sy
2
b
2
+ t2
xy
s3 - s21sx + sy2 + s1sx sy - t2
xy2 = 0
210
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
5See ref. 1.
6For example, see ref. 1, or ref. 8, Ch. 10.

as shown, and principal stresses 
and 
pinpointed where the circle intersects the -axis
(shear is 0 on the -axis). The principal shearing stress 
may also be found as shown (see
(5-4)). The third principal stress, 
, should not be ignored; plot 
at the origin of the
plane and then construct two additional Mohr’s circles, one through 
and an-
other through 
. From these circles 
and 
may be found as shown. If the maxi-
mum shearing stress for this state of stress is needed for failure prevention calculations, it
will be the largest of 
, 
, and 
; for the case illustrated in Figure 5.1 this is 
Note speciﬁcally that 
is not
, which is based on the initially plotted solid circle. If
had not been plotted, the dashed circles would have been missed, and, therefore,
the true maximum shearing stress would have been missed.
It is also possible to ﬁnd the orientation of the principal axes from the Mohr’s circle
construction, using the expression
(5-13)
where the double angle 
is shown in Figure 5.1(b), measured from the ray CA to the prin-
cipal stress ray 
. This corresponds to the rotation angle 
in Figure 5.1(a) measured in
the same direction as 
, from the y-axis to the principal axis 1. A consequence of this pro-
cedure is that principal axis 2 will be perpendicular to axis 1 in the x-y plane, and princi-
pal axis 3 will be mutually perpendicular to axes 1 and 2.
2u
u
s1
2u
2u = tan -1
2txy
sy - sx
s3 = 0
t3
tmax
tmax = t2.
t3
t2
t1
t2
t1
s1 - s3
s2 - s3
s-t
s3
s3 = 0
t3
s
s
s2
s1
Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain 211
xy
xy
y
1
2
(a)
(b)
Biaxial element at
critical point.
Mohr's circle for xy biaxial state of stress shown
in (a); note that 3 = 0 for this biaxial case.
x
x
xy

y

(CW)
(CCW)
max = 2
3
1
3
x
x
y
x + y
y – x
2
1

3
O
2
2
2
(y, xy)
(x, xy)
A
B
C
R
x-axis
y-axis
Note: R2 =
y – x
2
+ xy
2
2
Figure 5.1
Mohr’s circle for a biaxial
state of stress in the x-y
plane.
Example 5.3 Mohr’s Circle for Stress; Principal Stresses
Using the Mohr’s circle analogy, solve the problem posed in Example 5.1 to ﬁnd
a.
The principal stresses
b.
The principal shearing stresses

Solution
Reviewing the analysis of Example 5.1, the state of stress at the critical point A is shown
in Figure E5.3A, repeated from Figure E5.3C.
Also, the magnitudes of 
, 
, and 
were determined in Example 5.1 to be
a.
Using the Mohr’s circle analogy to ﬁnd principal stresses, the xy plane of Figure
E5.3A may be redrawn as shown in Figure E5.3B. Mohr’s circle may next be con-
structed as shown in Figure E5.3C by plotting points A and B as shown, passing a cir-
cle through them and ﬁnding principal stresses 
and 
semigraphically. The third
principal stress, 
, is plotted at the origin.
From Figure E5.3C, the following values may be found graphically
and for this biaxial state of stress
s3 = 0
s2 = C - R = 117,200
2
- 60,825 = -2225 psi
s1 = C + R = 117,200
2
+ 60,825 = 119,425 psi
s3 = 0
s2
s1
txy = 16,300 psi
sy = 0
sx = 117,200 psi
txy
sy
sx
212
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.3 
Continues
x
xy
xy
z
y
x
Figure E5.3A
State of stress at critical point A.
y
x
x = 117,200 psi
xy = 16,300 psi
Figure E5.3B
Biaxial xy element from Figure E5.3A.
3

1
2
1

2
3 = 0
A
C
B
117,200
2
117,200
2
117,200
2
(0, 16,300)
R1-2
R1-2 =
2
+ (16,300)2 = 60,825 psi
(117,200, –16,300)
Figure E5.3C
Mohr’s circle constructed for biaxial 
element shown in Figure E5.3B.

These values are the same as those found in Example 5.1 by solving the stress
cubic equation.
b.
To ﬁnd the principal shearing stresses, the remaining two (dashed) Mohr’s circles are
constructed, and the principal shearing stresses are found to be, from the radii of the
three circles,
These values are the same as those shown in Example 5.1. From these values it may
be noted that
tmax = t3 = 60,825 psi
ƒt3 ƒ = R1-2 = 60,825 psi
ƒt2 ƒ = R1-3 = 119,425
2
= 59,713 psi
ƒt1 ƒ = R2-3 = 2225
2
= 1113 psi
Multiaxial States of Stress and Strain 213
Strain Cubic Equation and Principal Strains
Just as stress is an important measure of loading severity, strain may also be an impor-
tant parameter in assessing failure potential in a machine part. Strain is the term used
to define the intensity and direction of the deformation at a given critical point, with re-
spect to a specified plane or set of planes passing through the critical point. Analogous
to state of stress, the state of strain at a point may be fully defined by six components
of strain relative to any selected x-y-z coordinate system: three normal strain compo-
nents and three shearing strain components. The normal strain components are usually
designated , , and , and the shearing strain components 
, 
, and 
. Just as the
state of stress may be completely defined in terms of three principal stresses and their
directions, the state of strain may be completely defined in terms of three principal
strains and their directions. The principal strains may be determined from a general
strain cubic equation analogous to the general stress cubic equation (5-1). The strain
cubic equation is
(5-14)
This equation is formally the same as the stress cubic equation (5-1) except that the nor-
mal strains, and the shearing strains divided by two, replace the normal stresses and
shearing stresses. The three solutions of (5-14) are the three principal normal strains 
,
, and 
.
Mohr’s Circle Analogy for Strain
In some circumstances, a designer may be interested in ﬁnding stresses or strains at par-
ticular points in an existing machine part. Such an interest may stem from the need to im-
prove failure resistance, to verify a calculation procedure, or some other requirement. In
e3
e2
e1
- cex ey ez + 1
4 1gxygyzgzx - exg2
yz - eyg2
zx - ezg2
xy2d = 0
e3 - e23ex + ey + ez4 + ecex ey + ey ez + ez ex - 1
4 1g2
xy + g2
yz + g2
zx2d
gzx
gyz
gxy
ez
ey
ex

these cases it is common to bond a strain gage or a strain rosette to the surface at one or
more critical points.7 Using the strain gage data to evaluate biaxial solutions of the strain
cubic equation (5-14), the principal strains and their directions may be found. Use of a
Mohr’s strain circle to determine the principal strains is common.
Mohr’s strain circles may be constructed using the techniques just described for
Mohr’s stress circles, except that normal and shearing strains are plotted on the cartesian
axes 
and 
rather than 
and . To utilize the resulting Mohr’s strain circle solutions
for principal strains, with the objective of estimating stresses at the critical point, relation-
ships between stress and strain must be known.
Elastic Stress-Strain Relationships (Hooke’s Law)
For a broad class of engineering materials it has been experimentally well established that
a linear relationship exists between stress and strain so long as the material is not loaded
beyond its elastic range. These linear elastic relationships were ﬁrst presented in the
seventeenth century by Robert Hooke, and have come to be known as the Hooke’s Law
relationships. They are
(5-15)
(5-16)
(5-17)
and
(5-18)
(5-19)
(5-20)
where the elastic constants are
Numerical values of these elastic constants are given in Table 3.9 for several engi-
neering materials.
G = shear modulus of elasticity
v = Poisson’s ratio
E = Young’s modulus of elasticity
gzx =
tzx
G
gyz =
tyz
G
gxy =
txy
G
ez = 1
E3sz - v1sx + sy24
ey = 1
E3sy - v1sz + sx24
ex = 1
E3sx - v1sy + sz24
t
s
g>2
e
214
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
7A strain gage is a device designed to measure the displacement between two points some known distance
apart. They may be mechanical, optical, electroresistive, piezoresistive, capacitive, inductive, or acoustical in
nature. The electrical-resistance strain gage is often employed on the free surface of a machine part or speci-
men to ﬁnd stresses there. It is usual to use an arrangement of three gages to measure three strains at known
angles to each other, from which principal surface strains and directions may be found. These three-gage arrays
are called rosettes. To convert strains to stresses, Young’s modulus of elasticity and Poisson’s ratio must also 
be known.

It should be noted that the Hooke’s Law relationships are valid for any arbitrarily
selected x-y-z cartesian coordinate system orientation, including the principal 1-2-3 orien-
tation. The Hooke’s Law relationships may also be inverted to give
(5-21)
(5-22)
(5-23)
5.3 Stress Concentration
Failures in machines and structures virtually always initiate at sites of local stress concen-
tration caused by geometrical or microstructural discontinuities. These stress concentra-
tions, or stress raisers, often lead to local stresses many times higher than the nominal net
section stress that would be calculated without considering stress concentration effects. An
intuitive appreciation of the stress concentration associated with a geometrical discontinu-
ity may be developed by thinking in terms of force ﬂow through a member as it is subjected
to external loads (see 4.3). The sketches of Figure 5.2 illustrate the concept. In Figure
5.2(a) the rectangular ﬂat plate of width w and thickness t is ﬁxed at its lower edge and
subjected to a total vertical force F uniformly distributed along the upper edge. The dashed
lines each represent a ﬁxed quantum of force, and the local spacing between lines is there-
fore an indication of the local force intensity, or stress. In Figure 5.2(a) the lines are uni-
formly spaced throughout the plate, and the stress 
is uniform and calculable as
(5-24)
In the sketch of Figure 5.2(b) a ﬂat rectangular plate of the same thickness is subjected
to the same total force F, but the plate has been made wider and notched back to provide
the same net section width w at the site of the notch. The lines of force ﬂow may be visu-
alized in very much the same way that streamlines would be visualized in the steady ﬂow
of a ﬂuid through an obstructed channel with the same cross-sectional shape as the plate
cross section. It may be noted in Figure 5.2(b) that no force can be supported across the
notch, and therefore the lines of force ﬂow must pass around the root of the notch, just as
a ﬂowing ﬂuid must pass around the obstruction. In so doing, force-ﬂow lines crowd
s = F
wt
s
sz =
E
11 - v - 2v22
311 - v2ez + v1ex + ey24
sy =
E
11 - v - 2v22
311 - v2ey + v1ez + ex24
sx =
E
11 - v - 2v22
311 - v2ex + v1ey + ez24
Stress Concentration 215
F
F
w
(a)
w
(b)
Figure 5.2
Intuitive concept of stress concentra-
tion. (a) Without stress concentration.
(b) With stress concentration.

together locally near the root of the notch, producing a higher force intensity, or stress, at
the notch root. Even though the net section nominal stress is still properly calculated by
(5-24), the actual local stress at the root of the notch may be many times higher than the
calculated nominal stress.
Some common examples of stress concentration are illustrated in Figure 5.3.
Discontinuities at the roots of gear teeth, at the corners of keyways in shafting, at the roots
of screw threads, at the ﬁllets of shaft shoulders, around rivet holes and bolt holes, and in
the neighborhood of welded joints all constitute stress raisers that usually must be consid-
ered by a designer. The seriousness of the stress concentration depends on the type of load-
ing, the type of material, and the size and shape of the discontinuity.
Stress Concentration Effects
For the purposes of studying stress concentration effects, stress raisers may be classiﬁed
as being either highly local or widely distributed. Highly local stress raisers are those for
which the volume of material containing the concentration of stress is a negligibly small
portion of the overall volume of the stressed member. Widely distributed stress raisers are
those for which the volume of material containing the concentration of stress is a signiﬁ-
cant portion of the overall volume of the stressed member. For the case of a highly local
stress concentration, the overall size and shape of the stressed part would not be signiﬁ-
cantly changed by yielding in the region of the stress concentration. For a widely distrib-
uted stress concentration, the overall size and shape of the stressed part would be subject
to signiﬁcant changes by virtue of yielding in the region of stress concentration. Small
holes and ﬁllets would usually be regarded as highly local stress concentrations; curved
beams, curved hooks, and eye-and-clevis joints would usually be categorized as cases of
widely distributed stress concentration.
With the foregoing deﬁnitions made, stress concentration effects may be classiﬁed as
shown in Table 5.1. From the table it may be noted that the effects of stress concentration
216
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
Figure 5.3
Some common examples of stress concentration. (a) Gear teeth. (b) Shaft keyway. (c) Bolt threads. (d) Shaft
shoulder. (e) Riveted or bolted joint. (f) Welded joint.
TABLE 5.1 Effects of Stress Concentration
Type of Stress
Type of
Type of
Stress Concentration
Concentration
Loading
Material
Type of Failure
Factor
Widely distributed
Static
Ductile
Widely distributed yielding
Kt (modiﬁed)
Widely distributed
Static
Brittle
Brittle fracture
Kt
Widely distributed
Cyclic
Any
Fatigue failure
Kf
Highly local
Static
Ductile
No failure (redistribution occurs)
Highly local
Static
Brittle
Brittle fracture
Kt
Highly local
Cyclic
Any
Fatigue failure
Kf
Kt : 1

must be considered for all combinations of geometry, loading, and material with the pos-
sible exception of one, namely, the case of a highly local stress concentration in a ductile
material subjected to static loading. In this case the local yielding is usually negligible and
a stress concentration factor of unity may often be used. All other cases must be analyzed
for potential failure because of the effects of stress concentration. The ﬁnal column in
Table 5.1 lists 
or 
as stress concentration factors. The factor 
is the theoretical elas-
tic stress concentration factor, which is deﬁned to be the ratio of the actual maximum lo-
cal stress in the region of the discontinuity to the nominal net section stress calculated by
simple theory as if the discontinuity exerted no stress concentration effect; that is,
(5.25)
It should be noted that the value of 
is valid only for stress levels within the elastic range,
and it must be suitably modiﬁed if stresses are in the plastic range.
The factor 
is the fatigue stress concentration factor, which is deﬁned to be the ratio
of the effective fatigue stress that actually exists at the root of the discontinuity to the nom-
inal fatigue stress calculated as if the notch has no stress concentration effect. 
may also
be deﬁned as the ratio of the fatigue strength of an unnotched member to the fatigue
strength of the same member with a notch. Thus, the fatigue stress concentration factor
may be deﬁned as
(5-26)
Stress concentration factors are determined in a variety of different ways, including direct
measurement of strain, utilization of photoelastic techniques, application of the principles
of the theory of elasticity, and ﬁnite element analysis. Numerical values for a wide variety
of geometries and types of loading are presented in reference 9. A few of the more com-
mon cases drawn from the literature are reproduced in Figures 5.4 through 5.12. Data for
the important case of screw threads are sparse, but reference 9 reports a range of values for
from about 2.7 to 6.7 at the thread root of standard threads. Most (but not all) threaded
fastener failures tend to occur in the thread at the nut face.
Multiple Notches
Sometimes it will be found that one stress raiser is superimposed upon another, such as
a notch within a notch or a notch in a fillet. Although accurate calculation of the overall
stress concentration factor is difficult for such combinations, reasonable estimates can
be made.8 Figure 5.13(a) illustrates a large notch with a smaller notch at its root. To es-
timate the combined influence of these notches, the stress concentration factor 
for
the large notch is determined as if the small notch does not exist. This permits an esti-
mate of the stress 
at the root of the large notch by multiplying the nominal stress 
by 
to give
(5-27)
Now, assuming that the stress 
occurs throughout the zone within the dashed line near
the notch root of Figure 5.13(a), 
becomes the nominal stress as far as the small notch
is concerned (because the entire small notch lies within the 
ﬁeld). Next, determining
s¿n
s¿n
s¿n
s¿n = Kt1sn
Kt1
sn
s¿n
Kt1
Kt
Kf = effective fatigue stress
nominal fatigue stress =
SN 1unnotched2
SN 1notched2
Kf
Kf
Kt
Kt = actual maximum stress
nominal stress
= sact
snom
Kt
Kf
Kt
Stress Concentration 217
8See ref. 6.

218
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
1.01
1.05
1.2
r/d
Kt
Mc
I
32M
d3
nom =
=
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
D
d
r
M
M
D/d = 6
3
1.5
1.1
1.03
1.01
r/d
Kt
P
A
4P
d2
nom =
=
0
0.1
0.2
(b)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
D
d
r
P
P
D/d = 2
1.5
1.09
r/d
Kt
Tc
J
16T
d3
nom =
=
0
0.1
0.2
(c)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
D
d
r
T
T
D/d = 2
1.2
Figure 5.4
Stress concentration factors for a shaft
with a ﬁllet subjected to (a) bending, 
(b) axial load, or (c) torsion. (From ref. 2;
adapted with permission of John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc.)

Stress Concentration 219
1.01
r/d
Kt
Tc
J
16T
d3
nom =
=
0
0.1
0.2
(c)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
D
d
r
T
T
D/d    2
1.1
≥
D
d
r
r/d
Kt
Mc
I
32M
d3
nom =
=
0
0.1
0.2
(a)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
M
M
D/d > 2
1.1
1.03
1.01
D
d
r
r/d
Kt
0
0.1
0.2
(b)
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
D/d > 2
1.1
1.03
1.01
P
A
4P
d2
nom =
=
P
P
Figure 5.5
Stress concentration factors for a shaft
with a groove subjected to (a) bending,
(b) axial load, or (c) torsion. (From 
ref. 2; adapted with permission from
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)

220
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
d
r/d
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
2
3
4
5
6
Kts
(c)
For 0.01 ≤r/d ≤ 0.04
Kts = 6.083 = 14.775
+ 18.250
10r
d
2
Kts = max

16T
d3
 =
10r
d
0.158 d
0.079 d
r
T
T
T
D
d
d/D
Kt
(a)
M
M
P
P
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
Axial load:
Bending (in this plane):
nom = P
A
P
(D2/4) – Dd
≈
nom = Mc
I
M
(D3/32) – dD2/6
≈
Torsion:
nom = Tc
J
T
(D3/16) – dD2/6
≈
r/d
Kt
(b)
r
d
h = d/8
b = d/4
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
1.0
1.4
1.8
2.2
2.6
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.2
Figure 5.6
Stress concentration factors for (a) a shaft with a radial hole subjected to axial load, bend-
ing, or torsion (from ref. 3 with permission of the McGraw-Hill Companies), (b) a shaft
with a straight parallel keyway subjected to torsion (from ref. 4, with permission of the
McGraw-Hill Companies), and (c) a shaft with an eight-tooth spline subjected to torsion
(from ref. 2, with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).

Stress Concentration 221
1.01
r/h
Kt
0
0.10
0.05
0.20
0.15
(a)
0.30
0.25
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
H/h = 6
2
1.2
1.05
H
r
Mc
I
6M
bh2
nom =
=
h
b
M
M
1.01
r/h
Kt
0
0.10
0.05
0.20
0.15
(b)
0.30
0.25
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
H/h = 3
2
1.5
1.15
1.05
H
r
h
b
P
A
P
bh
nom =
=
P
P
1.05
1.01
r/h
Kt
0
0.10
0.05
0.20
0.15
(a)
0.30
0.25
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
H/h = ∞
1.5
1.15
H
r
Mc
I
6M
bh2
nom =
=
h
b
M
M
1.05
P
A
P
bh
nom =
=
P
P
1.01
r/h
Kt
0
0.10
0.05
0.20
0.15
(b)
0.30
0.25
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
H/h = ∞
1.5
1.15
H
r
h
b
Figure 5.7
Stress concentration factors for a ﬂat bar with a shoulder ﬁllet subjected to (a) bending or
(b) axial load. (From ref. 2; adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
Figure 5.8
Stress concentration factors for a ﬂat bar with a notch subjected to (a) bending or (b) axial
load. (From ref. 2; adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
d
(b – d)h2
d/b
Kt
0
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
(a)
0.6
0.5
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
h
b
M
M
2.0
1.0
0.5
0.25
∞
Mc
I
6M
nom =
=
d/h = 0
d
(b – d)h
d/b
Kt
0
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.3
(b)
0.6
0.5
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
h
b
P
P
P
A
P
nom =
=
Figure 5.9
Stress concentration factors for a ﬂat plate with a central hole subjected to (a) bending or (b)
axial load. (From ref. 2; adapted with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)

222
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
0.157
0.235
e/h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
Kt
h
h
e
f
20°
20°
20°
20° Stub system
20° Full depth system
0.2
Pd
Pd
0.123
Pd
0.170
Pd
0.3
Pd
1.6
Pd
2
Pd
Pd = Dimetral
pitch
Not standardized
rt =
Pd
rt =
rt
(std.)
w 
h
e
max
max
nom
6we
h2
w
h
nom =
Minimum fillet
radius f
Tip
radius
of
generating
cutter
tooth
rt
to
0.304
Pd
0.316
Pd
to
0.548
Pd
0.554
Pd
to
Kt =
Kt = 0.18 +
–
tan 
w = Load per unit width of tooth face
0.15
0.45
Figure 5.10
Theoretical stress concen-
tration factor Kt for a ten-
sion-side gear tooth ﬁllet.
Pressure angle is 
 20º.
(From ref. 2; adapted
with permission from
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
W
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
t/d
Kt
s/d = –0.1
–0.3
+0.1
–0.3
+0.1
+0.2
+0.3
–0.1
+0.2
+0.3
b/d = 1.33
 = 0
Kt values are averages of
    pin and journal values
Kt = max
nom
nom = Md/2
I
M
d3/32
=
r/d =
0.0625
r/d =
0.1
M
M
d
d
s
s
r
r
t
b

Fillet
detail
Figure 5.11
Stress concentration factors Kt for a
crankshaft in bending. Note: When the
inside of the crankpin and the outside
of the journal are in line, s  0 When
the crankpin is closer, s is positive (as
shown). When the crankpin’s inner
surface is farther away than d/2, S is
negative. (From ref. 2; adapted with
permission from John Wiley & Sons,
Inc.)

Stress Concentration 223
Kt
lh/ds
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
p = interfacial pressure
 = shaft bending stress
lh = hub length
ds = shaft diameter
Kt = theoretical stress
         concentration factor
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
p
 = 1.0
Figure 5.12
End-of-hub stress concentration fac-
tors for press ﬁt assemblies subjected
to bending moments. (From ref. 5;
reprinted by permission of Pearson
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River,
NJ.)
the stress concentration factor 
for the small notch acting alone, it may be multiplied
times 
to obtain the actual stress at the small notch root, or
(5-28)
Next, utilizing (5-27),
(5-29)
Thus, the combined theoretical stress concentration factor 
for the multiple notch
is the product of the stress concentration factors for the two notches considered individu-
ally, giving
(5-30)
This has been veriﬁed photoelastically.9 The combined fatigue stress concentration factor
, as for any other stress concentration factor, depends10 on q and can be calculated from
(5-92) by substituting 
for 
in that equation. One technique for estimating a conser-
vative value for 
is sketched in Figure 5.13(b). The technique assumes the notch of
5.13(a) to be ﬁlled in as shown by the crosshatched area. This leaves a single, deep, nar-
row notch, for which the theoretical stress concentration factor will always be greater than
the stress concentration factor for the multiple notch.
Ktc
Kt
Ktc
Ktc
Ktc = Kt1Kt2
Ktc
sactual = Kt1Kt2sn
sactual = Kt2s¿n
s¿n
Kt2
9Ibid.
10See (5-91).
d
Kt1
Kt2
P
P
P
P
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.13
Stress concentration ef-
fects due to superimposed
multiple notches. (After
ref. 6; adapted with per-
mission of The McGraw-
Hill Companies.)
Example 5.4 Stress Concentration of Flat Bar
Two ﬂat bars with different conﬁgurations are shown in Figure E5.4 (a) and (b). Each car-
ries a steady load of 4 kN. The material is gray cast iron ASTM A-48 (class 40). Determine
the maximum stress induced for each of the conditions shown.

Solution
(a) The actual stress at the critical location adjacent to the hole is
The nominal stress is calculated as
From Figure 4.22(b) with d/b  10/40  1⁄4
Kt  2.37
Hence, the actual stress becomes
(b) The nominal stress is
From Figure 4.20(b) with r/h  5/30  0.1667, and H/h  40/30  1.333
Hence, the actual stress becomes
sact = 1.7(26.7) = 45.4 MPa
Kt = 1.7
snom =
P
Anet
=
4000
0.005(0.03) = 26.7 MPa
sact = 2.37(26.7) = 63.3 MPa
snom =
P
Anet
=
4000
0.005(0.040 - 0.010) = 26.7 MPa
sact = Ktsnom
224
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.4 
Continues
20 mm
40 mm
30 mm
20 mm
4 kN
4 kN
4 kN
4 kN
5 mm
(a)
(b)
5 mm
5 mm r
10 mm d
Figure E5.4
Flat bars supporting an axial load of 4 kN.
5.4 Combined Stress Theories of Failure
Predicting failure, or establishing a combination of material and geometry that will avert
failure, is a relatively simple matter if the machine part is subjected to a static uniaxial
state of stress. It is necessary only to have available the simple uniaxial stress-strain curve
for the material of interest, which can be readily obtained from one or a few simple ten-
sion and compression experiments. For example, if yielding has been established as the
governing failure mode for a uniaxially stressed machine part, failure of the part would be
predicted when its maximum normal stress equals or exceeds the uniaxial yield strength
of the material.

Combined Stress Theories of Failure 225
If a machine part is subjected to a multiaxial state of stress, the accurate prediction of
failure becomes far more difﬁcult. No longer can one accurately predict yielding, for ex-
ample, when the maximum normal stress exceeds the uniaxial yield strength because the
other two principal normal stress components at the critical point may also inﬂuence yield-
ing behavior. Further, multiaxial yield strengths are generally unavailable because of the
time and expense required to determine them experimentally. Therefore, when one desires
to predict failure, or to pick a combination of material and geometry to avert failure, when
the machine part is subjected to a multiaxial state of stress, it is usual to utilize an experi-
mentaly validated theory that relates failure in the multiaxial state of stress to failure by the
same mode in a simple uniaxial stress test. All such failure prediction theories are based on
well-chosen loading severity parameters such as stress, strain, or strain energy density.
Loading severity parameters must be readily calculable in the multiaxial state of stress and
readily measurable in a simple uniaxial stress test. These theories, called combined stress
theories of failure, all share a common postulate, namely, that failure is predicted to occur
when the maximum value of the selected loading severity parameter in the multiaxial state
of stress becomes equal to or exceeds the value of the same loading severity parameter that
produces failure in a simple uniaxial stress test using a specimen of the same material.
Many combined stress failure theories have been proposed, but three have found wide
acceptance because of their relatively good agreement with experimental results and rea-
sonable simplicity in application. They are
1.
Maximum normal stress theory
2.
Maximum shearing stress theory
3.
Distortion energy theory
Maximum Normal Stress Theory (Rankine’s Theory)
In words, the maximum normal stress theory may be expressed as:
Failure is predicted to occur in the multiaxial state of stress when the max-
imum principal normal stress becomes equal to or exceeds the maximum
normal stress at the time of failure in a simple uniaxial stress test using a
specimen of the same material.
(5-31)
For a multiaxial state of stress, the maximum principal normal stress is the largest of the
three roots to the stress cubic equation (5-1), that is, the largest of 
, 
, and 
. The max-
imum normal stress at the time of failure is equal to the uniaxial strength of the material
corresponding to the governing failure mode. It should be noted that for some materials the
failure strength under tensile loading may be different from the failure strength under com-
pressive loading.
With these factors in mind, the word statement (5-31) may be expressed mathemati-
cally as failure is predicted by the maximum normal stress theory to occur if (FIPTOI)
(5-32)
or if
(5-33)
s3 … sfail-c
s2 … sfail-c
s1 … sfail-c
s3 Ú sfail-t
s2 Ú sfail-t
s1 Ú sfail-t
s3
s2
s1

where fail-t is the uniaxial tensile () failure strength of the material and fail-c is the uni-
axial compressive () failure strength of the material, corresponding to the governing fail-
ure mode (usually yielding or ultimate rupture if loading is static).
The maximum normal stress theory provides good results for brittle materials, as il-
lustrated in Figure 5.14, but should not be used for ductile materials.
Maximum Shearing Stress Theory (Tresca–Guest Theory)
In words, the maximum shearing stress theory may be expressed as
Failure is predicted to occur in the multiaxial state of stress when the max-
imum shearing stress magnitude becomes equal to or exceeds the maximum
shearing stress magnitude at the time of failure in a simple uniaxial stress
test using a specimen of the same material.
(5-34)
For a multiaxial state of stress the maximum shearing stress magnitude is the largest
of the three principal shearing stresses 
, 
, and 
, given by (5-2), (5-3), and (5-4). For
a uniaxial stress test, the only nonzero normal stress component is a principal stress com-
ponent in the direction of the applied force. From (5-2), (5-3), and (5-4), in a uniaxial
stress test at failure, two of the principal normal stresses are zero and the third is set equal
to 
, giving
(5-35)
With these factors in mind, word statement (5-34) may be expressed mathematically
as failure is predicted by the maximum shearing stress theory to occur if (FIPTOI)
(5-36)
where 
is the largest principal shearing stress at the time of failure in a uniaxial stress
test, as given by (5-35).
tfail
ƒt3ƒ Ú ƒtfail ƒ
ƒt2ƒ Ú ƒtfail ƒ
ƒt1ƒ Ú ƒtfail ƒ
tfail =
sfail
2
sfail
t3
t2
t1
226
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
1. 0
–1.0
1.0
Brittle materials
0
2
ult
1
ult
Brass
3 = 0
Cast iron
Cast iron
Maximum normal
stress theory
Figure 5.14
Comparison of biaxial ultimate strength data
for brittle materials with the maximum normal
stress theory.

The maximum shearing stress theory provides good results for ductile materials, as il-
lustrated in Figure 5.15, but should not be used for brittle materials.
Distortion Energy Theory (Huber–von Mises–Hencky Theory)
In words, the distortion energy theory, sometimes called the von Mises theory, may be ex-
pressed as
Failure is predicted to occur in the multiaxial state of stress when the dis-
tortion energy per unit volume becomes equal to or exceeds the distortion
energy per unit volume at the time of failure in a simple uniaxial stress test
using a specimen of the same material.
(5-37)
The distortion energy theory, developed as an improvement over an earlier “total
strain energy theory,” is based on the postulate that the total strain energy 
stored in a
volume of stressed material may be divided into two parts: the energy associated solely
with change in volume, 
, termed dilatation energy, and the energy associated solely
with change in shape, 
, termed distortion energy. It was further postulated that failure,
particularly under conditions of ductile behavior, is related only to the distortion energy.
Thus
(5-38)
Dividing by the volume in each term, the distortion energy per unit volume may be ex-
pressed as
(5-39)
An expression for total strain energy per unit volume, 
may be found11 by calculat-
ing the work done in a triaxial state of stress by forces associated with 
, 
, and 
, act-
ing over their respective areas, to induce the strains 
, 
, and 
, and their corresponding
displacements.
e3
e2
e1
s3
s2
s1
uT
ud = uT - uv
UT = Uv + Ud
Ud
Uv
UT
Combined Stress Theories of Failure 227
1. 0
–1.0
1.0
Ductile materials
0
2
yp
1
yp
Aluminum
Steel
Mild steel
Carburized steel
Copper
Nickel
Distortion
energy theory
Maximum shear
theory
3 = 0
Figure 5.15
Comparison of biaxial yield strength data with
the maximum shearing stress theory and the
distortion energy theory.
11See equations (4-59), (5-1), (5-15), (5-16), and (5-17).

Employing Hooke’s Law, the resulting expression for total strain energy per unit vol-
ume becomes
(5-40)
Likewise, the dilatation (volume changing) energy per unit volume may be found12 as
(5-41)
Then substituting (5-40) and (5-41) into (5-39), the distortion energy per unit volume is
found to be
(5-42)
To ﬁnd the distortion energy per unit volume at the time of failure, 
, (5-42) is evalu-
ated under uniaxial failure conditions, when two of the principal stresses are equal to zero
and the third one is equal to the uniaxial failure strength 
. Thus
(5-43)
With (5-42) and (5-43) at hand, word statement (5-37) may be expressed mathemati-
cally as failure is predicted by the distortion energy theory to occur if (FIPTOI)
(5-44)
The distortion energy theory provides very good results for ductile materials, as illus-
trated in Figure 5.15, but generally should not be used for brittle materials.
The left side of (5-44) is sometimes defined as the square of the von Mises stress,
the effective stress, or the equivalent uniaxial stress, 
, giving the expression
(5-45)
For a biaxial state of stress, assuming 
becomes
(5-46)
In terms of rectangular components of stress, the von Mises criterion can be written as
(5-47)
and for a biaxial state of stress, assuming that 
, and 
, we have
(5-48)
seq = 2s2
x - sxsy + s2
y + 3t2
xy
txz = tyz = 0
sz = 0
seq = A
1
2 C(sx - sy)2 + (sy - sz)2 + (sz - sx)2D + 3(t2
xy + t2
yz + t2
xz)
seq = 2s2
1 - s1s2 - s2
2
s3 = 0, (5-45)
seq = A
1
2[(s1 - s2)2 + (s2 - s3)2 + (s3 - s1)2]
seq
1
231s1 - s222 + 1s2 - s322 + 1s3 - s1224 Ú s2
fail
ud-fail = c 1 + v
3E
ds2
fail
sfail
ud-fail
ud = 1
2 c1 + v
3E
d 31s1 - s222 + 1s2 - s322 + 1s3 - s1224
uv =
311 - 2v2
2E
 cs1 + s2 + s3
3
d
2
uT =
1
2E3s2
1 + s2
2 + s2
3 - 2v1s1s2 + s2s3 + s3s124
228
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
12For example, see ref. 1, p. 154.

Failure Theory Selection
Evaluation of the three failure theories just discussed in light of experimental evidence
leads to the following observations:
1.
For isotopic materials that fail by brittle fracture, the maximum normal stress theory
is the best theory to use.
2.
For isotropic materials that fail by yielding or ductile rupture, the distortion energy
theory is the best theory to use.
3.
For isotropic materials that fail by yielding or ductile rupture, the maximum shearing
stress theory is almost as good as the distortion energy theory.
4.
As a rule of thumb,13 the maximum normal stress theory would be used for isotropic
brittle materials (materials that exhibit a ductility of less than 5 percent elongation
in 2 inches) and either the distortion energy theory or maximum shearing stress the-
ory would be used for isotropic ductile materials (materials that exhibit a ductility
of 5 percent or more in a 2-inch gage length). Where possible, a fracture mechanics
analysis should be performed.
Combined Stress Theories of Failure 229
13The 5 percent boundary between “brittle” and “ductile” behavior is an arbitrary but widely used rule of thumb.
Example 5.5 Yielding Failure Prediction Under Static Multiaxial State of Stress
An aircraft wing ﬂap actuator housing is made of cast magnesium alloy AZ63A-T4 (Su 
276 MPa, Syp  97 MPa, e  12% in 50 mm). The state of stress has been calculated for
the suspected critical point and is shown in Figure E5.5. Would you predict failure due to
yielding?
Figure E5.5
State of stress at suspected
critical point.
Solution
For the state of stress shown, the stress cubic equation (5-1) becomes
Substituting numerical values (in MPa)
s3 - 310s2 + 29 200s - 756000 = 0
- [(140)(70)(100) - 140(40)2] = 0
s3 - s2(140 + 70 + 100) + s[(140)(70) + (70)(100) + (100)(140) - (40)2]
s3 - s2(sx + sy + sz) + s(sx sy + sy sz + sz sx - t2
yz) - (sx sy sz - sx t2
yz) = 0

Since shearing stresses are zero on the x-plane, it is, by deﬁnition, a principal plane. Thus,
is one of the three solutions of (1). Next, dividing (1) by 
gives
whence
giving the solution
and
Since the elongation in 50 mm is given as 12 %, the material may be regarded as ductile;
and the distortional energy theory of failure, given in (5-??) is the best theory to use. Thus,
FIPTOI
or FIPTOI  
Since this condition is not met, failure is not predicted at the speciﬁed critical point.
8495 Ú 9409
1
2C(140 - 127.7)2 + (127.7 - 42.3)2 + (42.3 - 140)2D Ú (97)2
s3 = 42.3 MPa
s2 = 127.7 MPa
s = 170 ; 2(170)2 - 4(5400)
2
= 85 ; 42.7
s2 - 170s + 5400 = 0
(s - 140)
sx = s1 = 140 MPa
230
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.5 
Continues
Example 5.6 Thickness of Thin Cylindrical Pressure Vessel
A thin-walled cylindrical pressure vessel with closed ends is subjected to an internal
pressure of 100 MPa. The internal diameter is 50 mm. If the yield stress for the pressure
vessel is 400 MPa, what should be the wall thickness based upon (a) the maximum shear
stress theory and (b) distortion energy theory?
Solution
The stresses in the cylindrical pressure vessel are (see Chapter 9) given as
where 
is the tangential stress and 
is the longitudinal stress. The tangential and lon-
gitudinal stresses are also the principal stresses in the pressure vessel. Thus, we have
(a) Maximum shear stress theory is given as
tmax = s1 - s3
2
= 2500 - 0
2t
= 1250
t
s3 = 0
s2 = s1 = 100(50)
4t
= 1250
t
,
s1 = st = 100(50)
2t
= 2500
t
,
s1
s1
st = ptd
4t
st = ptd
2t ,

Thus, we have
(b) Distortion energy theory is given by the following:
Hence,
t = 2165.06
400
= 5.41 mm
seq = Syp = 400 = 1
t 225002 - 2500 * 1250 + 12502 = 2165.06
t
seq = 2s2
1 - s1s2 + s2
2
t = 1250
200 = 6.25 mm
tmax = 1250
t
=
Syp
2
= 400
2
= 200
Combined Stress Theories of Failure 231
Example 5.7 Maximum Torque in Shaft Subjected to Bending
A 2.5-in diameter shaft is made of AISI 1020 cold-drawn steel. The shaft is subjected to a
bending moment of 50,000 in-lb. Determine the maximum torque that can be applied to
the shaft according to (a) the maximum shear stress theory and (b) the distortion energy
theory.
Solution
The maximum bending stress occurs on the outer surface of the shaft and is given by 
The maximum shear stress due to torque T occurs on the outer surface of the shaft and is
given by 
The principal stresses are obtained from
(a) The maximum shear stress theory states that the maximum shear stress is 
tmax = s1 - s2
2
=
16
pd3 2M2 + T2 =
Syp
2
=
16
pd3CM ; 2M2 + T2D
s1,2 = sx
2 ; B asx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy = 16M
pd3 ; B a16M
pd3 b
2
+ a16T
pd3 b
2
txy = Tr
J = 16T
pd3
sx = Mc
I
= 32M
pd3

Solving for torque T gives
Thus, for AISI 1020 CD Syp  51,000 psi, we ﬁnd
(b) The distortion energy theory is given by
Solving for torque T gives
For AISI 1020 CD, we ﬁnd
T = e 1
3a c51,000ap(2.5)3
16
b d
2
- 4(50,000)2b f
1>2
= 69,478 in-lb
T = e 1
3 a cSypapd3
16 b d
2
- 4M2b f
1>2
seq = 2s2
1 - s1s2 + s2
2 =
16
pd3 24M2 + 3T2
T = a c51,000(p)a2.53
32 b d
2
- 50,0002d
1>2
= 60170 in-lb
T = a cSypAp2B a d3
32 b d
2
- M2b
1>2
232
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.7 
Continues
Example 5.8 Factor of Safety for Shaft Subjected to Bending and Torsion
A simply supported stationary shaft, 50 mm in diameter and made of AISI 1060 hot-rolled
steel, is subjected to a maximum bending moment of 3000 N-m and a maximum torque of
2000 N-m. Find the factor of safety corresponding to failure based on the distortion energy
theory.
Solution
The bending stress is given as
and the maximum torsional stress is 
The distortion energy theory is given as
For AISI 1060 hot-rolled steel, the yield strength is 372 MPa; thus the factor of safety is 
nd =
Syp
seq
=
372
282.28 = 1.32
seq = 2s2
x + 3t2
xy = 2(244.46)2 + 3(81.49)2 = 282.28 MPa
txy = Tr
J = 16T
pd3 = 16(2000000)
p(50)3
= 81.49 MPa
sx = Mc
I
= 32M
pd3 = 32(3000000)
p(50)3
= 244.46 MPa

5.5 Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; Linear Elastic
Fracture Mechanics
When the material behavior of a machine part is brittle rather than ductile, the mechanics
of the failure process are much different. As described in 2.3, in brittle fracture the part
separates into two or more pieces due to the breaking of primary interatomic bonds, with
little or no plastic ﬂow. High-velocity crack propagation from preexisting ﬂaws results in
sudden and catastrophic failure. If material behavior is clearly brittle, and geometry and
loading are simple, as for the axially loaded bar of Figure 2.1, failure by brittle fracture
may be predicted when the stress , from (2-1), exceeds the material’s ultimate strength 
. Hence failure is predicted to occur if (FIPTOI)
(5-49)
Thus for a uniaxial state of stress the failure prediction expression (5-49) for brittle
fracture is formally the same as (2-18) for ductile rupture. If the loading is more compli-
cated, and a multiaxial state of stress is produced by the loads, fracture may be predicted
with reasonable accuracy through the use of the maximum normal stress theory of failure,
as discussed in 5.4.
On the other hand, it has now been well established that nominally ductile materials
may also fail by a brittle fracture response in the presence of cracks or ﬂaws if the combi-
nation of crack size, geometry of the part, temperature, and/or loading rate lies within cer-
tain critical ranges. The prediction of brittle fracture in these circumstances has been based
on the assumptions that the stress at a crack tip, where failure is initiated, may be calcu-
lated as if the material behavior is linear elastic and the state of stress is two-dimensional;
thus the procedure is often referred to as linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM).
Three basic types of stress ﬁelds have been deﬁned for crack-tip stress analysis, each
one associated with a distinct mode of crack deformation, as illustrated in Figure 5.16. The
crack opening mode, Mode I, is associated with local displacement in which the crack sur-
faces move directly apart. Modes II and III are forward sliding and tearing displacements re-
spectively. Mathematical expressions have been developed for the intensity and distribution
of stress near the crack tips for each of the three modes shown in Figure 5.16.14 For failure
prediction purposes, the crack-tip stress-intensity factors, developed from these mathemati-
cal expressions, provide a good measure of the seriousness of loading and geometry in any
particular case. In general, the expressions for stress intensity factor, K, are of the form
(5-50)
where 
is gross-section nominal stress, a is a crack-length parameter, and C is dependent
upon the type of loading and the geometry away from the crack. Many values of C have
s
K = Cs2pa
s Ú Su
Su
s
Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics 233
14See, for example, the Westergaard equations, ref. 1, pp. 54–55.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.16
Basic modes of crack displacement. 
(a) Mode I, (b) Mode II, (c) Mode III.
(To be read “Mode-one,” “Mode-two,”
and “Mode-three.”)

234
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
been published,15 and several typical charts for selecting proper C values for through-the-
thickness cracks are given in Figures 5.17 through 5.21. Figure 5.22 gives a chart for sur-
face ﬂaw shape parameter Q to be used in ﬁnding stress-intensity factors for part-through
thumbnail-shaped surface cracks. The stress-intensity factor, K, calculated from (5-50), is
a single-parameter measure of the seriousness of the stress ﬁeld around the crack tip. The
magnitude of K associated with the onset of rapid crack extension (initiation of brittle frac-
ture) has been designated as critical stress intensity, 
. Thus failure by brittle fracture may
be predicted to occur for through-the-thickness cracks if (FIPTOI)
(5-51)
or, for thumbnail-shaped surface cracks if
(5-52)
For a given cracked plate, for example the case shown in Figure 5.19, the stress-inten-
sity factor K increases proportionally with gross nominal stress , and also is a function of
s
K = 1.12
2Q  s2pa Ú Kc
K = Cs2pa Ú Kc
Kc
Figure 5.17
Stress-intensity factors KI, KII and
KIII, for center-cracked test speci-
men. (Source: ref. 11, Del Research
Corp.)
C 1 – (a/b)
a/b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.8
1.0
a
a


h
b




(I)
(II)
(III)
Modes I and II
Mode III
2 – 4
2
= 0.826
b
2
 = 0.637
KI = CI a
KIII = CIII a
KII = CII a
+ +
+ +
h
+
15See, for example, ref. 7.

Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics 235
Figure 5.18
Stress-intensity factors KI, KII and
KIII, for double-edge notch test spec-
imen. (Source: ref. 7, Del Research
Corp.)
a
a


h
b








(I)
(II)
(III)
+ + +
+ + +
b
KI = CI a
KIII = CIII a
KII = CII a
C 1 – (a/b)
a/b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
1.2
1.0
0.8
Modes I and II
Mode III
2
 = 0.637
h
Figure 5.19
Stress-intensity factors KI, for
single-edge notch test specimen.
(Source: ref. 7, Del Research
Corp.)
b


h
CI [1 – (a/b)]3/2
a/b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
1.122
1.122
Mode I
h
KI = CI a

236
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
a/2C
Flaw shape parameter, Q
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
t/Syp = 0
t/Syp = 0.6
t/Syp = 0.8
t/Syp = 1.0
2C
a
Figure 5.22
Surface ﬂaw shape parameter. (From ref. 9;
adapted by permission of Pearson
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, N.J.)
Figure 5.21
Stress-intensity factors KI, for a through-the-thickness crack emanating from a circular hole in an inﬁnite plate under 
biaxial tension. (Source: ref. 7, Del Research Corp.) 
KI = CI a
CI = (1 – 	)F0 + 	F1
a
R + a


	
	
R
a
R + a
F0 ,F1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
0
3
4
2
0.707
3.365
F0
F1
2.243
a
h
M
M
b
h
KI = CIb a
CI[1 – (a/b)]3/2
b = 6M/tb2
t = beam
thickness
a/b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.3
0.9
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.7
0.374
1.122
Figure 5.20
Stress-intensity factors KI,
for single through-the-
thickness edge crack un-
der pure bending
moment. (Source: ref. 7,
Del Research Corp.)

Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics 237
instantaneous crack length a. For the inﬁnite plate shown in Figure 5.23, the crack is ori-
ented so that its plane is perpendicular to the direction of applied uniaxial stress, , hence
pure Mode 1 loading exists. The crack front extends uniformly all the way through the plate,
so the crack is a through-the-thickness crack. The usual coordinate system for deﬁning state
of stress at the crack tip is shown. In studying material behavior it has been found that for
a given material, depending upon the state of stress at the crack tip, the critical stress inten-
sity 
decreases to a lower limiting value as the state of strain at the crack tip approaches
the conditions of plane strain.16 This lower limiting value deﬁnes a basic material property,
the plane strain fracture toughness, designated17
. Standard test methods have been es-
tablished for the determination of 
values.18 A few data are given in Table 5.2. For the
plane strain fracture toughness 
to be a valid failure prediction criterion for a machine
part, plane strain conditions19 must exist at the crack tip; that is, the material must be thick
enough to ensure plane strain conditions. It has been estimated empirically that for plane
strain conditions the minimum material thickness B must be
(5-53)
If the material is not thick enough to meet the criterion of (5-53), plane stress better
characterizes the state of stress at the crack tip, and 
, the critical stress-intensity factor
for failure prediction under plane stress conditions, may be estimated using a semiempiri-
cal relationship for 
as a function of plane strain fracture toughness 
and thickness
B.20 This relationship is
(5-54)
Kc = Klc c1 + 1.4
B2 aKlc
Syp
b
4
d
1>2
KIc
Kc
Kc
B Ú 2.5aKIc
Syp
b
2
KIc
KIc
KIc
Kc
s
16For thick plates the surrounding material constrains the crack-tip zone to near-zero strain in the thickness 
direction, resulting in plane (biaxial) strain. See also 5.2.
17To be read “K-one-c.”
18See ref. 8.
19Plane strain (biaxial state of strain) occurs when nonzero strain components exist in only two coordinate 
directions. See also 5.2.
20See refs. 13 and 14.
r
y
x
z

2a

Figure 5.23
Coordinate system for inﬁnite plate containing a
through-the-thickness crack of length 2a.

238
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
TABLE 5.2 Yield Strength and Plane Strain Fracture Toughness Data for Selected Engineering Alloys1
Test
Temperature
Alloy
Form
ksi
MPa
ksi
MPa
AISI 1045 steel
Plate
25
39
269
46
50
AISI 1045 steel
Plate
0
40
276
46
50
4340 steel (500
temper)
Plate
70
21
217–238
1495–1640
45–57
50–63
4340 steel (800
temper)
Forged
70
21
197–211
1360–1455
72–83
79–91
D6AC steel (1000
temper)
Plate
70
21
217
1495
93
102
D6AC steel (1000
temper)
Plate
228
1570
56
62
18 Ni maraging steel (300)
Plate
600
316
236
1627
80
87
18 Ni maraging steel (300)
Plate
70
21
280
1931
68
74
18 Ni maraging steel (300)
Plate
305
2103
42
46
A 538 steel
—
—
—
250
1722
100
111
2014-T6 aluminum
Forged
75
24
64
440
28
31
2024-T351 aluminum
Plate
80
27
54–56
370–385
28–40
31–44
6061-T651 aluminum
Plate
70
21
43
296
26
28
6061-T651 aluminum
Plate
45
310
30
33
7075-T6 aluminum
—
—
—
75
517
26
28
7075-T651 aluminum
Plate
70
21
75–81
515–560
25–28
27–31
7075-T7351 aluminum
Plate
70
21
58–66
400–455
28–32
31–35
Ti-6Al-4V titanium
Plate
74
23
119
820
96
106
1From refs. 10–12.
-80
-112
-73
-100
-54
-65
°F
°F
°F
°F
-18
-4
1m
1in
°C
°F
KIc
Syp
As long as the crack-tip plastic zone is in the regime of small-scale yielding,21 this esti-
mation procedure provides a good design approach. If the plastic zone size ahead of the
crack tip becomes so large that the small-scale yielding condition is no longer satisﬁed, an
appropriate elastic-plastic fracture mechanics (EPFM) procedure would give better re-
sults. For example, a failure assessment diagram22 might be utilized; however such EPFM
procedures are beyond the scope of this text.
To utilize (5-52) as a design or failure prediction tool, the stress-intensity factor K
must be determined for the particular loading and geometry of the part or structure under
consideration. The critical stress intensity is set equal to 
if the minimum thickness cri-
terion (5-53) is met, otherwise 
is estimated from (5-54). If failure is predicted to occur
using (5-52), redesign becomes necessary.
Kc
KIc
21Small-scale yielding means that the crack-tip plastic zone size is small compared to the dimensions of the
crack.
22See ref. 1, pp. 70–76.
Example 5.9 Brittle Fracture
Two “identical” support straps of forged 2014-T6 aluminum, shown in Figure E5.8, have
been inspected and found to contain through-the-thickness cracks. While the total crack
length of 5 mm is the same for both straps, one strap (case A) involves two edge cracks,
each with 2.5-mm length, opposite each other; while the other strap (case B) involves a sin-
gle crack of 5-mm length at the center. The straps are of rectangular cross section 50 mm

Brittle Fracture and Crack Propagation; Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics 239
wide and 12.5 mm thick, and the straps are 660 mm in length. The straps are loaded by a
direct tensile force P  220 kN in the 660 mm direction, as shown. 
a.
For each case, what is the governing failure mode?
b.
For each case, is failure predicted to occur?
c.
Is center cracking or edge cracking the more serious conﬁguration?
d.
How would the analysis change if the strap thickness for each case had been 11 mm 
instead of 12.5 mm?
Solution
a.
Both yielding and brittle fracture should be checked for each case. Property values
from Table 5.2 are
b.
For each case, failure by both yielding and brittle fracture must be checked. For case A
(edge cracks), to check for yielding, from (2-17) FIPTOI
Where
Hence, FIPTOI 
. Therefore, failure by yielding is not predicted for case A.
To check brittle fracture, from (5-52) FIPTOI
Using the Mode I curve from Figure 5.18, with a  2.5, b  25, and a/b  0.1,
The cross-sectional stress is
s = P
Ag
=
220,000
(0.05)(0.0125) = 352 MPa
CA21 - 0.1 = 1.07 :  CA = 1.13
CAs1pa Ú Kc
391 Ú 440
s =
P
Anet
=
220,000
(0.05 - 0.005)(0.0125) = 391 MPa
s Ú Syp
Syp = 440 MPa      and
Klc = 31 MPa1m
Figure E5.9 
Cracked support bracket.
660 mm
12.5 mm
12.5 mm
2.5 mm
2.5 mm
50 mm
50 mm
Case A
Case B
5 mm
P
P
P
P

Checking for plane strain, from (5-50) plane strain exists if
Since 
, the plain strain condition is met and plain strain conditions pre-
vail. Therefore,
and the failure criteria may be evaluated as FIPTOI
or if
Hence, failure by brittle fracture is predicted for case A.
For case B (center crack), the calculation for yielding failure is identical to the
case A calculation, since the net cross-sectional area is the same in both cases.
Therefore, failure by yielding is not predicted for case B. To check brittle frac-
ture, from (5-52) FIPTOI
Using the Mode I curve from Figure 5.17, with a  2.5, b  25, and a/b  0.1,
The cross-sectional stress is the same as for case A. Thus, 
.
Since the material properties are the same as for case A, plain strain conditions
prevail if and 
Now the failure criteria may be evaluated as FIPTOI
or if
Hence, failure by brittle fracture is also predicted for case B, but only by a slight
margin.
c.
Since the stress-intensity factor K for case A (
) is larger than for case B
(
), the edge-crack case (case A) is more serious.
d.
If the strap thickness is reduced from 12.5 mm to 11 mm, the plain strain condition is
no longer met and the nominal stress levels increase. To check for yielding for both
cases A and B we compute the stress
FIPTOI 
. Therefore, failure by yielding is predicted for both cases.
444 Ú 440
s =
P
Anet
=
220 000
(0.05 - 0.005)(0.011) = 444 MPa
31.5 MPa2m
35.2 MPa2m
31.5 Ú 31
(1.01)(352)2p(0.0025) Ú 31
Kc = KIc = 31 MPa2m
s = 352 MPa
CB21 - 0.1 = 0.96 :  CB = 1.01
CBs2pa Ú Kc
35.2 Ú 31
CAs2pa Ú Kc: (1.13)(352)2p(0.0025) Ú 31
Kc = KIc = 31 MPa2m
B = 12.5 mm
B Ú 2.5aKIc
Syp
b
2
= 2.5a 31
440 b
2
= 0.0124 m
240
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.9 
Continues

To check for brittle fracture, since only the thickness has changed, the values
and 
remain unchanged. The gross-section stress for both
cases becomes
Since plain strain conditions are not satisﬁed, from (5-51)
Then for case A, FIPTOI
or if
And failure by brittle fracture is again predicted for case A.
Similarly, for case B, FIPTOI
or if
So brittle fracture is again predicted for case B.
35.8 Ú 35.1
(1.01)(400)2p(0.0025) Ú 35.1
40.1 Ú 35.1
(1.13)(400)2p(0.0025) Ú 35.1
Kc = KIcc1 + 1.4
B2 aKIc
Syp
b
4
d
1/2
= 31c1 +
1.4
(0.011)2 a 31
440 b
4
d
1/2
= 35.1 MPa
s =
220,000
(0.05)(0.011) = 400 MPa
CB = 1.01
CA = 1.13
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 241
If loading conditions are more complicated, fracture mechanics procedures are avail-
able but much more involved. For example, in cases where the plane of a through-the-
thickness crack is oriented at some other angle than perpendicular to the direction of , the
applied stress ﬁeld induces a combination of Mode I and Mode II loading on the crack.
Mixed-mode fracture behavior presents an analytical challenge, and a designer would usu-
ally consult with a fracture mechanics specialist to evaluate such a problem. Likewise, a
specialist would often be involved in addressing problems associated with high-rate load-
ing, cyclic loading, or cases where LEFM conditions are not valid.
5.6 Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life
In modern engineering practice, repeated loads, ﬂuctuating loads, and rapidly applied
loads are far more common than static or quasistatic loads. By far, the majority of engi-
neering design environments involve machine parts subjected to ﬂuctuating or cyclic
loads. Such loads induce ﬂuctuating or cyclic stresses that often result in failure by fatigue.
Fatigue is a progressive failure process that involves the initiation and propagation of
cracks until one reaches an unstable size, triggering a sudden catastrophic separation of
the affected part into two or more pieces. It is difﬁcult to detect the progressive changes in
material properties that occur during fatigue stressing, and fatigue failure may therefore
s

occur with little or no warning. Periods of rest, with the fatigue stress removed, do not lead
to any signiﬁcant healing or recovery from the effects of the prior cyclic stressing. Hence,
the damage done during the fatigue process is cumulative. Fatigue failures have been rec-
ognized for over 150 years, but only with the advent of high-speed high-performance ma-
chinery, and the development of the aerospace industry, has widespread attention been
directed toward trying to understand the fatigue process.
In recent years it has been recognized that the fatigue failure process involves three
phases. A crack initiation phase occurs ﬁrst, followed by a crack propagation phase; ﬁnally,
when the crack reaches a critical size, the terminal phase of unstable rapid crack growth to
fracture completes the failure process. Traditionally, the models for analysis and prediction
of fatigue failure have lumped all three phases together in the stress-life (S-N) approach.
Numerous analytical/empirical procedures and a large database have been developed to sup-
port the S-N approach. More recently, the separate modeling of each phase has been under
intense development, and prediction models have now been set forth for each phase sepa-
rately. This methodology may be referred to as the fracture-mechanics (F-M) approach.
Additionally, two domains of cyclic loading have been identiﬁed on the basis of
whether the induced cyclic strains are predominantly elastic or predominantly plastic.
When cyclic loads are relatively low, strain cycles are conﬁned largely to the elastic range,
and long lives or high numbers of cycles to failure are exhibited, the domain is called high-
cycle fatigue. When cyclic loads are relatively high, signiﬁcant levels of plastic strain are
induced during each cycle, and short lives or low numbers of cycles to failure are exhibited,
the domain is called low-cycle fatigue, or cyclic strain-controlled fatigue. Occasionally, a
machine part may be subjected to intermixed loadings from both domains. High-cycle fa-
tigue predominates in most design environments; therefore high-cycle fatigue analysis will
be emphasized in this text. Low-cycle fatigue analysis is widely discussed in the literature.23
Fluctuating Loads and Stresses
Fluctuating loads and loading spectra, producing associated stress spectra in a machine
part, reﬂect the design conﬁguration and operational use of the machine. Perhaps the sim-
plest fatigue stress spectrum to which a machine element may be subjected is a zero-mean
sinusoidal stress-time pattern of constant amplitude and ﬁxed frequency, applied for a
speciﬁed number of cycles. Such a stress-time pattern, often referred to as a completely re-
versed or zero-mean cyclic stress, is illustrated in Figure 5.24(a). Using the sketches of
Figure 5.24, we may deﬁne several useful terms and symbols; these include
A = amplitude ratio = sa
sm
R = stress ratio = smin
smax
¢s = range of stress = smax - smin
sa = alternating stress amplitude = smax - smin
2
sm = mean cyclic stress = smax + smin
2
smin = minimum stress in the cycle
smax = maximum stress in the cycle
242
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
23For example, see refs. 1 or 15.

Any two of the quantities just deﬁned, except the combination 
and 
or the combi-
nation A and R, are sufﬁcient to completely describe the stress-time pattern.
A second type of stress-time pattern often encountered is the nonzero-mean spectrum
shown in Figure 5.24(b). This pattern is very similar to the completely reversed case ex-
cept that the mean stress is either tensile or compressive, in any event different from zero.
The nonzero-mean case may be thought of as a static stress equal in magnitude to the mean
with a superposed completely reversed cyclic stress of amplitude 
.
A special case of nonzero-mean stress, illustrated in Figure 5.24(c), is often encoun-
tered in practice. In this special case the minimum stress ranges from zero up to some ten-
sile maximum and then back to zero. This type of stressing is often called released tension.
For released tension it may be noted that 
. A similar but less frequently en-
countered stress-time pattern is called released compression, where 
and
.
More complicated stress-time patterns are illustrated in Figure 5.25. In Figure 5.25(a)
the mean stress is zero but there are two (or more) different stress amplitudes mixed to-
gether. In Figure 5.25(b), not only does the stress amplitude vary, but also the magnitude of
sm = smin>2
smax = 0
sm = smax>2
sa
sm
¢s
sa
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 243
min = 0
max
m
(c)
Stress
min
max
m
(b )
Stress
m = 0
max
min
(a)
Stress
Time
Time
Time

a
Figure 5.24
Several constant-amplitude stress-time pat-
terns of interest. (a) Completely reversed; 
R  1. (b) Nonzero-mean stress. 
(c) Released tension; R  0.
(b)
(a)
Time
Stress
Time
Stress
Figure 5.25
Stress-time patterns in
which the amplitude
changes or both mean
and amplitude change to
produce a more compli-
cated stress spectrum.
(a) Zero mean, changing
amplitude. (b) Changing
mean and amplitude.

the mean stress periodically changes, approaching a more realistic condition. Figure 5.26 il-
lustrates a realistic stress-time pattern, as might be observed, for example, in an airframe
structural member during a typical mission including refueling, taxi, takeoff, gusts, maneu-
vers, and landing. To effectively predict and prevent fatigue failures, procedures for assess-
ing damage due to all of these various stress-time spectra are required.
Fatigue Strength and Fatigue Limit
Designing machine parts or structures that are subjected to fatigue loading is usually based
on the results of laboratory fatigue tests using small polished specimens of the material of
interest. To be successful in using small-specimen data, a designer must be aware of the
merits and limitations of such data, including inﬂuences of size, surface ﬁnish, geometry,
environment, speed, and many other factors. Basic fatigue data in the high-cycle life range
are usually displayed on a plot of cyclic stress versus life. These plots, called S-N curves,
constitute design information of fundamental importance for machine parts subjected to
cyclic or repeated loadng.
Figure 5.27 illustrates the characteristic appearance of an S-N curve for a ferrous ma-
terial. The curve is constructed by ﬁtting it to data collected from laboratory tests of a large
number of specimens at various cyclic stress amplitudes and zero-mean stress. Because of
244
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Stress
Time
Figure 5.26
A quasi-random stress-time pattern that
might be typical of an operational aircraft
during any given mission.
Stress a, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
104
105
106
107
108
0
20
40
60
80
100
m = 0
= failure
= runout
Figure 2.27
Plot of stress-life (S-N) data as they might
be collected by laboratory fatigue testing
of a new alloy.

the scatter of fatigue life data at any given stress level, the construction of the most ap-
propriate curve through the data becomes a design issue of importance. A statistical de-
scription of fatigue failure data is usually used to facilitate construction of the most
appropriate S-N curve. Using this approach, one would construct for each test stress level
a histogram, such as the one shown in Figure 5.28, which shows the distribution of fail-
ures as a function of the logarithms of lives for the sample tested. Computation of the sam-
ple mean and standard deviation24 permits estimation of the probability of failure (P) at
each stress level. Points of equal probability of failure may then be connected to obtain
curves of constant probability of failure on the S-N plot. A family of such S-N-P curves is
shown in Figure 5.29 for 7075-T6 aluminum alloy. It is also of interest that the reliability
(R) is deﬁned to be 1 minus the probability of failure; hence R  (1P). Thus in Figure
5.29, the 10 percent probability of failure curve (P  0.10) may alternatively be designated
as the 90 percent reliability curve (R  0.90), and some references may be found in the lit-
erature to these so-called R-S-N curves.
Usually, references in the literature to “the” S-N curve refer to the mean or 50 per-
cent probability of failure curve unless otherwise specified. The mean S-N curves of
Figure 5.30 distinguish two commonly observed types of response to cyclic loading. The
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 245
Number of
specimens failed
Log N (cycles to failure)
Stress  = constant
Figure 5.28
Distribution of fatigue specimen
failures at a constant stress level
as a function of logarithm of
life.
24See, for example, ref. 1, Ch. 9.
Altertnating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
104
105
106
107
108
10
30
20
40
50
60
R = 0.01; P = 0.99
R = 0.10; P = 0.90
R = 0.99; P = 0.01
R = 0.90; P = 0.10
R = P = 0.50
Figure 5.29
Family of S-N-P curves, or R-S-N curves for 7075-T6 
aluminum alloy. Note: P  probability of failure; R  relia-
bility  1  P. (Adapted from ref. 16, p. 117, Copyright ©
1969, by permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
Stress, psi
Cycles to failure
Ferrous alloys and titanium alloys
Nonferrous alloys
Fatigue strength
at N cycles
Fatigue
limit
105
106
107
108
109
N
Figure 5.30
Two types of material response to cyclic loading.

ferrous alloys and titanium exhibit a steep branch in the shorter life range, leveling off
to approach a stress asymptote at longer lives. This stress asymptote is called the fatigue
limit, Sf or Sf (formerly called endurance limit) and is the stress level below which an
infinite number of cycles could theoretically be sustained without failure. The symbol Sf
is commonly used to denote fatigue limit of an actual machine part, while Sf is fatigue
limit of the material based on small polished specimens. The nonferrous alloys do not
exhibit an asymptote, and the curve of stress versus life continues to drop off indefi-
nitely. For such alloys there is no fatigue limit, and failure as a result of cyclic stress is
only a matter of applying enough cycles. To characterize the failure response of most
nonferrous materials, and of ferrous or titanium alloys in the finite life range, the term
fatigue strength at a specified life, S or SN, is used; SN denotes finite-life fatigue
strength of a component, while SN is finite-life fatigue strength of the material based on
small polished specimens. The specification of fatigue strength without specifying the
corresponding life is meaningless. The specification of a fatigue limit always implies in-
finite life. Use of these terms is illustrated in Figure 5.31, which depicts S-N curves for
several alloys.
Estimating S-N Curves
When designing a machine part to be subjected to ﬂuctuating loads it is essential to obtain
an S-N curve for the candidate material for which heat treatment, operating temperature,
and other operating conditions match the application. If such an S-N curve can be found in
the literature or in an available database, the curve may be used directly to design the part.
If not, it may be possible to ﬁnd an S-N curve for small polished specimens of the candi-
date material and modify it by using a series of appropriate factors as discussed later in
connection with Table 5.3. If S-N data cannot be found for the candidate material it be-
comes necessary either to perform laboratory fatigue tests on small polished specimens
(a lengthy and expensive process) or to attempt to estimate the basic S-N curve for the
material. Although there is no direct connection between static strength and fatigue
strength, purely empirical relationships have been documented by examining large bodies
of existing data. These empirical observations allow a designer to estimate S-N curves
from static ultimate tensile strength (Sut) values. These estimated S-N curves are often
accurate enough for the design task at hand, especially at the preliminary design stage. For
246
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
0
20
40
60
80
Altertnating stress apptitude, ksi
Cycles to failure
104
105
106
107
108
109
1020 steel
Ti 150a titanium
2024-T4 aluminum
Sf for T-1
'
T-1 steel
Fatigue strength S5 	 108 for 2024-T4
Magnesium
 alloy
5 	 108
Sf for 1020
Sf for Ti 150a
'
'
'
Figure 5.31
Effect of material composition on the 
S-N curve. Note that ferrous and titanium
alloys exhibit well-deﬁned fatigue limits
whereas other alloy compositions do not.
(Data from refs. 17 and 18.)

wrought-ferrous alloys, the mean S-N curve may be estimated for polished specimens by
plotting on a semilog plot of strength versus log life the following:
1.
Plot 
at N  1 cycle.
2.
Plot 
at N  106 cycles if 
or,
Plot 
at N  106 cycles if 
3.
Connect (1) with (2) by a straight line.
4.
Construct a horizontal straight line from (2) toward very long lives.
This estimated mean (50 percent reliability) S-N curve may be supplemented if de-
sired by using the standard normal variable X of Table 5.4 to calculate and construct esti-
mated S-N curves with higher reliabilities.
Sut 7 200 ksi
S¿f = 100 ksi
Sut … 200 ksi
S¿f = 0.5Sut
S¿N = Sut
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 247
TABLE 5.3 Strength-Inﬂuencing Factors That May Affect S-N Curves
Approximate
Inﬂuencing Factor
Symbol
Range
“Typical” Value1
Material composition
—
—
Speciﬁc S-N data required
Heat treatment
—
—
Speciﬁc S-N data required
Operating temperature
—
—
Speciﬁc S-N data required
Grain size and direction
kgr
0.4–1.0
1.0
Welding
kwe
0.3–0.9
0.8
Geometrical discontinuity
kf
0.2–1.0
Reciprocal of Kf; see 4.8
Surface condition
ksr
0.2–0.9
0.7
Size effect
ksz
0.5–1.0
0.9
Residual surface stress
krs
0.5–2.5
Speciﬁc data required; see 4.11
Fretting
kfr
0.1–0.9
0.35 if fretting exists, 1.0 if no fretting; 
also see 2.11
Corrosion
kcr
0.1–1.0
Speciﬁc data required
Operating speed
ksp
0.9–1.2
1.0
Strength reliability required
kr
0.7–1.0
0.9; also see Table 2.3
Conﬁguration of stress-time pattern
—
—
See later section titled Cumulative
Damage Concepts and Cycle Counting
Nonzero-mean stress
—
—
See later section titled Nonzero-Mean Stress
Damage accumulation
—
—
See later section titled Cumulative
Damage Concepts and Cycle Counting
1These “typical” values may be used for solving problems in this text or for making preliminary design estimates when actual conditions are
poorly known. However, any critical design situation would require a literature/database search or supporting laboratory experiments to establish
more accurate values.
TABLE 5.4 Strength Reliability Factors as a Function of Reliability
Level
Corresponding Standard
Reliability R
Normal Variable X
Strength Reliability
(percent)
(see Table 2.9)
Factor kr
90
1.282
0.90
95
1.645
0.87
99
2.326
0.81
99.9
3.090
0.75
99.995
3.891
0.69

For cast irons and cast steels a similar procedure may be used except that
or
Guidelines for other alloys have been published as follows:25
Titanium alloys: Sf  0.45Sut
to
0.65Sut
at
N  106 cycles
Aluminum alloys: SN  0.4Sut
at
N  5 	 108 cycles
Magnesium alloys: SN  0.35Sut
at
N  108 cycles
Copper alloys: SN  0.2Sut
to
0.5Sut
at
N  108 cycles
Nickel alloys: SN  0.3Sut
to
0.5Sut
at
N  108 cycles
It is very important to emphasize that these guidelines provide only estimates, to be used
when pertinent S-N data are unavailable, and must be used with caution.
Stress-Life (S-N) Approach to Fatigue
For uniaxial states of cyclic stress the traditional S-N approach to fatigue design is straight-
forward in concept. Data are required for the material of interest, including effects of size,
surface ﬁnish, geometry, and environment, and information is required on the cyclic load-
ing to be applied to the part. From these, the size and shape of the part to provide the de-
sired cyclic life may be determined. To implement the S-N approach, material data are best
presented as S-N curves, such as those shown in Figure 5.30 or 5.31, or Figure E5.10 of
Example 5.10. For example, if a part to be made of 2024-T4 aluminum has a design life
requirement of 5 	 108 completely reversed stress cycles, its fatigue strength SN at a life
N  5 	 108 cycles may be read from Figure 5.31 as 20,000 psi. This assumes that the
part operates under conditions matching the conditions used to obtain the data for Figure
5.31. Also, since 
 20,000 psi is a fatigue failure strength, an appropriate safety
factor would typically be imposed for safe operation, as discussed in Chapter 2.
Factors That May Affect S-N Curves
As already mentioned, published S-N curves, unless otherwise labeled, are typically mean
value curves for small polished specimens. Actual machine parts subjected to cyclic or ﬂuc-
tuating stress levels exhibit S-N responses different from small, polished-specimen curves,
depending upon differences in composition, processing, environment, and operational fac-
tors. Thus the fatigue strength or fatigue limit of an actual machine part (SN or Sf) is nearly
always different (usually lower) from the fatigue strength or fatigue limit SN or Sf read from
a published S-N curve for small polished specimens of the same material. Furthermore, pub-
lished S-N curves for small polished specimens are somewhat dependent upon the test
method used to obtain the underlying data. The test method of choice in modern practice is
to use computer-controlled closed-loop axial push-pull fatigue testing machines that apply
uniformly distributed cyclic direct stresses to small polished specimens. Most S-N data pre-
sented in this textbook may be assumed to have been produced by uniform uniaxial cyclic
stresses on small polished specimens, unless otherwise noted. Older small specimen S-N
data found in the literature may have been obtained from cyclic bending tests, using either
rotating or reciprocating bending machines. If such bending data are used as the basis for
SN=5*108
S¿f = 40 ksi    if  Sut 7 88 ksi
S¿f = 0.4Sut  at  N = 106 cycles    if  Sut … 88 ksi
248
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
25See ref. 6

obtaining fatigue strength or fatigue limit estimates for an actual machine part, as in (5-55)
or (5-56), the fatigue limit values from the cycle bending data should be reduced by about
10 percent (because of the bending-stress gradients; see Figure 4.3) to be compatible with
the uniformly stressed push-pull small specimen data used in this textbook.
The factors that may cause differences between the fatigue response of actual machine
parts and small polished specimens are shown in Table 5.3 and brieﬂy discussed in the fol-
lowing paragraphs. More detailed discussions may be found in the fatigue literature.26
To obtain an estimate for fatigue strength or fatigue limit of an actual machine part
from small-polished-specimen S-N data and a knowledge of operational and environmen-
tal requirements for the part, the usual procedure is to utilize an expression of the form
(5-55)
or
(5-56)
depending upon whether fatigue limit, or fatigue strength corresponding to a design life of
N cycles, is required. From Table 5.3 the expressions for 
and 
may be written as the
products of pertinent inﬂuencing factors. Thus
(5-57)
and
(5-58)
It should be recognized that the various factors may have different values for ﬁnite-life de-
sign requirements as compared to inﬁnite-life design speciﬁcations. Also, it should be
noted that these procedures assume that no interactions occur between or among the vari-
ous strength-inﬂuencing factors, an assumption not always justiﬁed. For example, the sur-
face condition effect and corrosion effect may interact, or other effects may interact to
produce unknown inﬂuences on the fatigue strength or fatigue limit. For this reason it is
always advisable in practice to subject the ﬁnal design to full-scale prototype testing un-
der simulated service conditions.
Approximate ranges and “typical” values for many of the strength-inﬂuencing factors
are shown in Table 5.3. While these may be helpful guidelines in approximating the fa-
tigue strength or fatigue limit of a machine part, more speciﬁc values are usually required
for any critical design situation, and a search of fatigue databases or fatigue literature is
common practice. The following brief remarks relative to the entries of Table 5.3 are of-
fered as additional guidance.
Material composition is the most basic factor in determining fatigue strength. As
noted in the discussion of Figure 5.30, materials divide themselves into two broad groups
with respect to S-N failure response. The ferrous alloys and titanium exhibit a rather well-
deﬁned fatigue limit, which is well established by the time 107 cycles of stress have been
applied. The other nonferrous alloys do not exhibit a fatigue limit at all, and their S-N
curves continue to fall off at lives of 108, 109, and larger numbers of cycles.
Heat treatment is also a strong inﬂuencing factor on the fatigue strength, just as it is
in the case of static strength. Small-polished-specimen S-N data for which the specimen
heat treatment corresponds to that proposed for the actual part under consideration is very
useful in determining fatigue response of the part.
kN = 1kgrkwekfksrkszkrskfrkcrkspkr2N
k q = 1kgrkwekfksrkszkrskfrkcrkspkr2q
kN
k q
SN = kNS¿N
Sf = k qS¿f
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 249
26See for example, ref. 1, 6, 17, 19–23.

Operating temperature may have a significant influence on fatigue strength.
Generally, the fatigue strength is somewhat enhanced at temperatures below room tem-
perature and diminished at temperatures above room temperature. In the range of temper-
ature from around zero on the Fahrenheit scale to about one-half the absolute melting
temperature, the effects of temperature are slight in most cases. At higher temperatures the
fatigue strength diminishes signiﬁcantly. Further, alloys that exhibit a fatigue limit at room
temperature tend to lose this characteristic at elevated temperatures, making inﬁnite-life
design at elevated temperatures impossible.
Grain size and grain direction may play a signiﬁcant role in fatigue strength. Fine-
grained materials tend to exhibit fatigue properties that are superior to coarse-grained mate-
rials of the same composition. This superiority becomes less signiﬁcant at elevated
temperatures when the characteristic room temperature transgranular cracking gives way to
intergranular cracking paths. When the cyclic loading direction is across the grain (transverse
direction) of an anisotropic specimen or machine part, fatigue strength properties are inferior
to fatigue strength when the loading direction is along the grain (longitudinal direction).
Welding produces a metallurgically nonhomogeneous region ranging from unheated
parent metal through the heat-affected zone (HAZ), to the weld metal zone. In some cases
the entire welded joint may be post-heat-treated, in which case the structure of weld metal,
HAZ, and parent metal may become nearly identical; in some critical cases postweld ma-
chining operations may be used to restore geometrical uniformity. Even with such care
(and expense), welded joints (as well as bolted, riveted, or bonded joints) tend to have a
fatigue strength inferior to that of a monolithic part of the same material. Factors con-
tributing to fatigue strength reduction in welded joints, in addition to the gradient in  ho-
mogeneity across the weld zone, include cracking in weld metal or base metal due to
postcooling shrinkage stresses, incomplete penetration, lack of fusion between weld metal
and parent metal from prior welding passes, undercut at the edge of weld metal deposit,
overlap of weld metal ﬂowing beyond the fusion zone, slag inclusions, porosity, misshapen
welds, or welds with surface defects. Some of the effects of welding on fatigue strength
properties are illustrated in Figure 5.32.
250
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
20
50
100
150
5
10
15
20
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
Alternating stress amplitude, MPa
Cycles to failure
105
5 	 105
5 	 106
106
1. Plain plate
2. Transverse butt
    weld (manual)
3. Transverse butt weld
    (automatic)
4.Transverse nonload-carrying fillet
   weld
5. Longitudinal nonload-carrying fillet weld
6. Longitudinal attachment fillet welded to plate
    edge
7. Longitudinal load-carrying fillet weld
1
2
3
5
4
6
7
Figure 5.32
Effects of welding detail on the S-N
curve of structural steels, with yield
strengths in the range 30,000–52,000
psi. Tests were released tension 
(
min  0) (Data from ref. 23.)
S

Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 251
Surface factor, ksr
Tensile strength Su, ksi
Hardness, BHN
60
80
100
120
200
220
240
260
140
160
180
120
160
200
240
400
440
480
520
280
320
360
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Mirror-polished
Machined
Corroded in
tap water
Hot-rolled
As forged
Fine-ground or
commercially polished
Corroded in salt water
104
0
17
34
52
69
86
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure
105
106
107
Unplated
Unplated, cold soak
   prior to testing
Corronized
Hard nickel plated
Electroless nickel plated
Hard chromium plated
Figure 5.33
Reduction of fatigue strength due to
surface ﬁnish (steel parts). (From ref. 6,
reproduced with permission of The
McGraw-Hill Companies.)
Figure 5.34
Effects of several electrodeposited coatings on the
S-N curve of low-alloy steel at room temperature
under axial tension-tension loading with R  0.02.
Static ultimate strengths: unplated, 172,300 psi;
corronized, 177,700 psi; hard nickel plated,
176,100 psi; electroless nickel plated, 182,100 psi;
hard aluminum plated, 162,400 psi. (Data from 
ref. 16, Copyright © 1969, adapted by permission
from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
Stress concentration effects due to geometrical discontinuities, such as changes in
shape or joint connections, may seriously diminish the fatigue strength of a machine part,
even if the part is made of a ductile material. The severity of notches, holes, ﬁllets, joints,
and other stress raisers depends upon the relative dimensions, type of loading, and notch
sensitivity of the material. A detailed discussion of stress concentration is presented in 5.3.
Surface condition is a very important factor in fatigue strength of a machine part
since a very high proportion of all fatigue failures nucleate at the surface. Irregular sur-
faces and rough surfaces generally exhibit inferior fatigue properties as compared to
smooth or polished surfaces, as illustrated in Figure 5.33. Cladding, plating, or coating
may reduce the fatigue strength of the plated member because fatigue nuclei initiated in
the plating continue to propagate into the base metal. This may cause a reduction in fa-
tigue strength, as illustrated in Figure 5.34. Usually, however, the corrosion protection af-
forded by the plating more than offsets the strength loss due to plating. 

Larger specimens and machine parts exhibit a size effect, having lower fatigue
strengths than smaller specimens of the same material. For example, the fatigue strength
of a 6-inch-diameter machine part might be as much 15 or 20 percent lower than a one-
half-inch-diameter specimen of the same material.
Residual stresses in the surface layer, whether induced intentionally or accidentally, may
play an extremely important role in the overall fatigue response of a specimen or machine
part. If the induced residual surface stresses are tensile, the fatigue strength is diminished. If
the residual surface stresses are compressive, the fatigue strength is improved. Three com-
mon methods of inducing compressive residual surface stresses are shot-peening, cold-
rolling, and presetting.27 Figures 5.35 and 5.36 illustrate these effects. It is also notable that
surface treatments such as shot-peening and cold-rolling not only improve the mean fatigue
strength, but reduce the scatter (standard deviation) as well.
Fretting at the contacting surfaces of joints or connections may lead to a very signiﬁcant
reduction in fatigue strength of a machine part. As discussed in 2.9, the prediction of the fret-
ting effect is difﬁcult because many factors are involved. Experimental testing of the assem-
bly under actual service conditions and loading should be undertaken for critical parts.
Corrosion tends to lower the fatigue strength, often by a large amount. Corrosive ef-
fects are speciﬁc to the combination of material composition and operating environment.
Experimental testing of the machine part under service environment and loading should be
employed for critical parts.
252
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
3 	 104
20
10
30
40
50
60
Alternating torsional shear stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure
Mean shear stress = 56,000 psi all tests
105
106
107
As received
Preset
Peened,
then preset
Preset, then peened
0
40
80
120
160
Altertnating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure
103
104
105
106
107
a
b
Figure 5.35
Effects of shot-peening and/or presetting on the 
S-N curve of hot wound helical coil springs made of
0.9 percent carbon steel. Spring details: hardness 
Vickers DPH 550; wire diameter 
inch; mean coil
diameter 
inches; number of turns  6; free
length 
or 6 inches. (Data from ref. 24.)
5116
258
12
Figure 5.36
Effects of cold-rolling threads before and after heat treat-
ment on the S-N curve for 220,000 psi ultimate strength
bolts. (a) Rolled after heat treatment. (b) Rolled before heat
treatment. (Data from ref. 16, Copyright © 1969, by 
permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
27Shot-peening involves uniform bombardment of the surface with a high-velocity stream of small steel spheres.
Cold-rolling is accomplished by pressing a hard contoured-roller against the surface to be treated and uniformly
rolling and translating the roller to cover the area to be cold worked. Presetting involves the application of a
static overload on the part, in the direction of operational loads, to induce local yielding at stress concentrations
and subsequent compressive residual stresses at these sites upon release of the static overload. Also, see 4.9.

Operating speeds in the range from about 200 cycles per minute (cpm) to about 7,000
cpm appear to have little effect on fatigue strength. Below 200 cpm there is often a small
decrease in fatigue strength, and in the range 7,000 cpm to around 60,000 cpm many mate-
rials exhibit a signiﬁcant increase in fatigue strength. Rest periods have no effect on fatigue
strength.
Strength reliability, or reliability of fatigue strength, is usually based on the stresswise
distribution of S-N-P data for small polished specimens of a particular material. Assuming
the stresswise distribution of fatigue strengths to be normal is a reasonable and convenient
procedure for estimating the strength reliability factor.28 From any table for the cumulative
distribution function29 for the standard normal variable X, where
(5-59)
and using the empirical estimate30 for standard deviation of fatigue strength to be
, the strength reliability factor may be expressed as
(5-60)
Based on this relationship, values for 
are shown in Table 5.4 for a range of strength re-
liability values, R. If statistical data were available for the distributions of other factors
listed in Table 5.3, a similar reliability approach could be taken for these inﬂuencing fac-
tors, but such data are not generally available.
In practice, the conﬁguration of the stress-time pattern may take many forms, includ-
ing sinusoidal, reversed ramp, superposed ripples, or distorted peaks as shown in Figure
5.37. Generally, the fatigue failure response seems to be relatively insensitive to changes
kr
kr = 1 - 0.08X
sN = 0.08S¿f
X = `
S¿f (R) - S¿f
sN
`
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 253
28Although the Weibull distribution is widely agreed to be more accurate, its use is more cumbersome. 
See ref. 1, Ch. 9, for example.
29See, for example, Chapter 2, Table 2.9.
30See ref. 24.
(a)
Stress
max
Time
T
(b)
Stress
max
Time
T
(c)
Stress
max
Time
T
(d)
Stress
max
Time
T
(e)
Stress
max
Time
T
Figure 5.37
A variety of stress-time
patterns used in evaluat-
ing fatigue behavior. 
(a) Completely reversed
sinusoid. (b) Completely
reversed ramp. 
(c) Superposed ripples.
(d) Secondary peaks. 
(e) Distorted peaks.

in wave shape as long as peak value and period are the same. When practical, however, it
is better to account for each and every stress reversal by using a good cycle counting
method such as the rain ﬂow method discussed in the section “Cumulative Damage
Concepts and Cycle Counting” below.
The magnitude of any nonzero-mean stress has an important inﬂuence on fatigue
response and is discussed in detail in the next section. Likewise, the accumulation of
fatigue damage caused by cyclic loading, or cumulative damage, is fully discussed in a
later section.
254
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.10 Estimating Fatigue Properties
A wrought carbon-steel alloy is known to have the static properties Su  76,000 psi, Syp 
42,000 psi, and e (2 inches)  18 percent, but fatigue properties cannot be located for the
material. It is necessary to quickly estimate the fatigue properties for the preliminary design
of a machine part for which the ﬂuctuating loads will induce a stress spectrum with cyclic
amplitudes in both the ﬁnite-life range and the inﬁnite-life range.
a.
How could the basic small-polished-specimen “mean S-N curve” be estimated for this
material?
b.
How could the R  99.9 percent reliability S-N curve be estimated for the material?
Solution
a.
Using the estimation guidelines for wrought-ferrous alloys with 
(since
 76,000 psi),
Plotting these values on semilog coordinates and connecting them in accordance
with the guideline procedures gives the mean (R  50 percent) S-N curve shown in
Figure E5.10.
b.
To obtain an estimate of the R  99.9 percent reliability S-N curve, the expression for
standard normal variable X given in (5-59) may be utilized. Since the R  99.9 percent
S¿N=1 = Su = 76,000 psi
S¿f = 0.51Su2 = 0.5176,0002 = 38,000 psi
Sut = Su
Sut 6 200 ksi
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0.1
1
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
102
103
104
105
106
107
R = 50% (mean)
R = 99.9%
Figure E5.10
Estimated S-N curves for
fatigue strength reliability
levels of 50 percent (mean)
and 99.9 percent.

curve must lie below the mean curve, Sf (R  99.9) is less than the mean value Sf.
Hence, for this case, from (5-59)
(1)
Therefore
and using the estimated standard deviation 
discussed just after (5-59),
with the Table 5.4 value for X corresponding to R  99.9 percent reliability
equation (1) may be solved for 
to give
or
Plotting 
on the S-N coordinates of Figure E5.10 at 106 cycles,
and connecting to the point Sut at 
cycle, results in the estimated 99.9 percent relia-
bility S-N curve, as shown.
N = 1
S¿f1R = 99.92 = 25,600 psi
S¿f1R = 99.92 = 38,000 - 3.09130402 = 28,600 psi
S¿f1R = 99.92 = S¿f - XsN
S¿f 1R = 99.92
X1R = 99.92 = 3.09
sN = 0.08S¿f = 0.08138,0002 = 3040 psi
sN
S¿f = 38,000 psi
X =
S¿f - S¿f1R = 99.92
sN
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 255
Example 5.11 Failure Mode Assessment
An axially loaded straight cylindrical bar of diameter 
is to be made of 2024-
T4 aluminum with ultimate strength of 
, yield strength 
, and
fatigue properties shown in Figure 5.31. The bar is to be subjected to a completely reversed
axial force of 27 kN, and must last for at least 
cycles.
a.
What is the governing failure mode?
b.
Is failure predicted to occur?
Solution
a.
The two most probable candidates for governing failure mode are yielding and fatigue.
Both should be calculated to determine which one governs.
b.
For yielding, from (2-17) FIPTOI
Now
s = F
Ao
= 4F
pd2 =
4(27000)
p(0.0125)2 = 220 MPa
s Ú Syp
107
Syp = 331 MPa
Su = 469 MPa
d = 12.5 mm

Hence, for yielding, FIPTOI
Therefore, failure by yielding is not predicted to occur.
For fatigue, at a design life requirement of 
cycles, FIPTOI
From Figure 5.31, using the curve for 2024-T4 aluminum for 
cycles, the fatigue
strength at 
cycles may be read as
Hence, for fatigue at a design life requirement of 
cycles, FIPTOI 
Therefore, failure by fatigue is predicted. That is, fatigue failure would be expected before
the design life of 
cycles is achieved.
107
220 Ú 159
Nd = 107
SN=107 = 23 ksi L 159 MPa
N = 107
107
s max Ú SN=107
Nd = 107
220 Ú 331
256
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.11 
Continues
Example 5.12 Design for Inﬁnite Fatigue Life
An axially loaded straight cylindrical bar is to be made of 1020 steel, with fatigue proper-
ties as shown in Figure 5.31. The bar is to be subjected to a completely reversed axial force
of 7000 lb maximum. Fatigue is the governing failure mode.
If inﬁnite life is desired for this part, what is the minimum diameter that the bar should
be made?
Solution
Since fatigue is the governing failure mode and inﬁnite life is desired, the stress in the bar
must be just below the fatigue limit, read from Figure 5.31 for 1020 steel as
The maximum stress in the bar is
or
Setting 
psi (incipient failure),
Thus the minimum diameter for infinite life would be 0.52 inch. Again, it must be
cautioned that this assumes that the S-N curve of Figure 5.31 properly reflects the con-
ditions of the axially loaded bar in terms of size, surface finish, geometry, environment,
and other influence factors. Further, statistical scatter or reliability level should also be
d = A
4170002
p133,0002 = 0.52 inch
smax = Sf¿ = 33,000
d = A
4Fmax
psmax
smax = Fmax
Ao
=
Fmax
apd 2
4
b
S¿f = 33,000 psi

considered in establishing the bar diameter, using techniques such as the ones described
in Example 5.9(b). As a practical matter, the small-polished-specimen S-N curve in
Figure 5.31 would typically be modified by using appropriate factors from Table 5.3 to
reflect the operating conditions, and a safety factor would be used to protect against re-
maining uncertainties.31
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 257
31See Chapter 2.
Example 5.13 Estimating Fatigue Properties of a Part
A wrought-carbon steel alloy with 
, 
, and  
,
is to be considered a candidate material for a proposed machine part to be used under the
following conditions:  
a.
The part is to be lathe-turned from a bar of the wrought-steel alloy.
b.
The part is uniform in shape at the critical point.
c.
Operating speed is 3600 rpm.
d.
A very long life is desired.
e.
A strength reliability factor of 99.9% is desired.
It is desired to make a preliminary design estimate of the pertinent fatigue properties of the
candidate material so that approximate size of the part can be estimated.
Solution
Since a very long life is desired, the fatigue property of primary interest is the fatigue limit
of the part, .
From (5-52) and (5-54),
and
Using estimation guidelines for wrought-ferrous alloys with 
To evaluate 
, each of the inﬂuence factors must be evaluated. Referring to Table 5.3
and the discussion following the table:
(from Table 5.3)
(no welding anticipated)
(uniform shape speciﬁed)
(see Figure 5.33)
(size unknown; use Table 5.3)
(no information available; later review essential)
(no fretting anticipated)
(no information available; later review essential)
(moderate; use Table 5.3)
(from Table 5.4 for 
)
Now we evaluate 
as
k q = 11.0211.0211.0210.65210.9211.0211.0211.0211.0210.752 = 0.43875 = 0.44
k q
R = 99.9
kr = 0.75
ksp = 1.0
kcr = 1.0
kfr = 1.0
krs = 1.0
ksz = 0.9
ksr = 0.65
kf = 1.0
kwe = 1.0
kgr = 1.0
k q
S'
f = 0.5(Su) = 0.5(524) = 262 MPa
Su 6 200 ksi(1379 MPa)
k q = (kgrkwekfksrkszkrskfrkcrkspkr)
Sf = k qS'
f
Sf
e(50 mm) = 18%
Syp = 290 MPa
Su = 524 MPa

The fatigue limit is therefore
Thus, the estimated fatigue limit for the part is 115.3 MPa. Using an appropriate
safety factor with 
would allow calculation of the approximate size of the part to produce
inﬁnite life.
Sf
Sf = 0.44(262) = 115.3 MPa
258
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.13 
Continues
Nonzero-Mean Stress
Fatigue failure data collected in the laboratory for small polished specimens are most of-
ten obtained for completely reversed, or zero-mean alternating stresses. Many, if not most,
service applications involve nonzero-mean cyclic stresses. It is very important, therefore,
to be able to predict the inﬂuence of mean stress on fatigue behavior so that completely re-
versed small-polished-specimen S-N data may be utilized to design machine parts sub-
jected to nonzero-mean cyclic stresses.
High-cycle fatigue data collected from a series of experiments devised to investigate
combinations of alternating stress amplitude 
and mean stress 
may be characterized
by a plot of 
versus 
for any speciﬁed failure life of N cycles, such as Figure 5.38. As
shown, the failure data points typically tend to cluster about a curve that passes through the
point 
at 
 0 and the point 
at 
As shown, failure is very sensi-
tive to the magnitude of mean stress in the tensile mean-stress region but rather insensitive
to the magnitude of mean stress in the compressive mean-stress region. Nonzero-mean fail-
ure data are available in the literature for some materials, usually presented as constant life-
time diagrams, or master diagrams, such as those shown in Figure 5.39. If a designer is
fortunate enough to ﬁnd such data for a proposed material that match the operating condi-
tions for the application of interest, of course these data should be used. If pertinent data are
not available, an estimate of the  inﬂuence of nonzero-mean stress may be made by utiliz-
ing a mathematical model that approximates data of the type shown in Figure 5.38.
Numerous successful models have been developed for this purpose.32 Well known amongst
these models and accepted as representing the experimental data are those due to Goodman
(now called the modiﬁed Goodman relationship) and Gerber. The modiﬁed Goodman rela-
tionship provides a simple linear estimate, whereas Gerber provides a parabolic estimate.
Modified Goodman lines used to approximate the data are constructed on a plot of sa
sa = 0.
sm = Su
sm
sa = SN
sm
sa
sm
sa
0
–Su
Su
SN
(Compressive mean)
(Tensile mean)
N = constant for all points
a
m
Figure 5.38
Simulated high-cycle fatigue failure data
showing the inﬂuence of mean stress. 
32See, for example, ref. 25, 26.

Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 259
A = 
R = –1.0
Maximum stress, ksi
Minimum stress, ksi
–120 –100 –80 –60 –40 –20
0
160
180
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
40
20
60
80
100
120
20
40
60
80
Mean stress, ksi
Alternating stress, ksi
100 120 140 160
AISI 4340
Sn = 158 ksi,
Sy = 147 ksi
RT, 2000 cpm
180
4.0
–0.6  
2.33
–0.4  
1.5
–0.2  
A = 1
R = 0
0.67
0.2
0.43
0.4
0.25
0.6
0.11
0.8
0
1.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Kt = 3.3,  = 0.010
Unnotched
Notched
A = 
R = –1.0
Maximum stress, ksi
Minimum stress, ksi
–150 –125–100 –75 –50 –25
0
175
150
125
100
75
50
25
50
25
75
100
125
25
50
75 100
Mean stress, ksi
Mean stress, ksi
Alternating stress, ksi
125 150 175
Ti-6 Al-4V
Sol'n-treated
and aged
Sut = 172 ksi,
TYS = 158 ksi
RT, 1850 cpm
4.0
–0.6  
2.33
–0.4  
1.5
–0.2  
A = 1
R = 0
0.67
0.2
0.43
0.4
0.25
0.6
0.11
0.8
0
1.0
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
Kt = 2.8
Unnotched
Notched
A = 
R = –1.0
Maximum stress, ksi
Minimum stress, ksi
–60 –50 –40 –30 –20 –10
0
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
20
30
40
Alternating
stress, ksi
50
60
70
80
7075-T6
Wrought
aluminum alloy
Sut = 82 ksi,
RT, 2000 cpm
4.0
–0.6  
2.33
–0.4  
1.5
–0.2  
A = 1
R = 0
0.67
0.2
0.43
0.4
0.25
0.6
0.11
0.8
0
1.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Kt = 3.4
Unnotched
Notched
104 C
105 C
104 C
104 C
107 C
105 C
106 C
105 C
104 C
106 C & 107 C
106 C & 107 C
106 C & 107 C
105 C
104 C
105 C
106 C
105 C
104 C
106 C
107 C
10
R = –2.0
Figure 5.39
Master diagrams for alloys of
steel, aluminum, and titanium.
(From ref. 27, pp. 317, 322).

versus 
by connecting the points 
on the 
axis to 
on the 
axis in the tensile mean-
stress region and passing a second line horizontally through SN in the compression
mean-stress region. The Gerber parabola is constructed on a plot of 
versus 
by con-
necting the points 
on the 
axis to , and 
on the 
axis in the tension-compression
mean-stress region. These lines, shown in Figure 5.40, approximate the data illustrated in
Figure 5.38 for a speciﬁed constant failure lifetime, N. Other failure lines would give simi-
lar curves but would change since the magnitude of SN depends on failure life. Also it must
be recognized that if 
or 
exceed yield strength values of the material, failure by
yielding will occur. Thus yielding failure lines may be plotted from 
on the 
axis
to 
on the 
axis, as shown in Figure 5.40 by dashed lines.
Any combination of 
and 
that plots above either the solid or dashed lines in
Figure 5.40 represents failure in a life shorter than N cycles, either by fatigue or by
yielding. Writing an equation for line 

in the point-intercept form for the tensile
mean-stress region,
(5-61)
which becomes
(5-62)
Recalling that
(5-63)
and substituting into (5-62),
(5-64)
or
(5-65)
smax - sm cSu - SN
Su
d = SN
smax - sm + SN
Su
sm = SN
sa = smax - sm
sa = -SN
Su
sm + SN
y = mx + b
Su
SN
sm
sa
sm
sm = ;Syp
sa
sa = Syp
ƒsmin ƒ
ƒsmaxƒ
sm
Su
Su
sa
SN
sm
sa
sm
Su
sa
SN
sm
260
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Alternating stress
Gerber
Goodman
C
Syp
Syp
Su
–Su –Syp
0
SN
B
A
Figure 5.40
Modiﬁed Goodman and Gerber diagram
representing fatigue failure at a life of N
cycles.

Deﬁning the terms
(5-66)
and
(5-67)
equation (5-65) may be rewritten as
(5-68)
To clarify, 
in this equation represents the cyclic maximum stress that, with the pres-
ence of mean stress 
, will cause failure in the same number of cycles as 
at zero-mean
stress. To recognize that this is therefore a “strength parameter,” we set
(5-69)
Further, 
may not exceed 
either, or yielding will occur. Summarizing then, for the
tensile mean-stress region,
or
(5-70)
where
and
By a similar reasoning process for the compressive mean-stress region, 
represents
the cyclic minimum stress that, with the presence of mean stress 
, will cause failure in
the same number of cycles as 
at zero-mean stress. Again, 
may not exceed 
or
yielding will occur. Thus for the compressive mean-stress region
or
(5-71)
where
and
Referring to Note 1 of Figure 5-40, and solving (5-62) from a different perspective, mod-
iﬁed Goodman expressions may be developed for an equivalent completely reversed cyclic
stress, 
. This stress 
is a calculated completely reversed cyclic stress that
would produce failure in exactly the same number of cycles 
as would the actual
N
seq-CR
seq-CR
Rc = sm
smin
mc = 1
Smin-N = -Syp    for  sm … 0  and  Smin-N … -Syp
Smin-N =
-SN
1 - mcRc    for   sm … 0  and  Smin-N Ú -Syp
ƒSypƒ
ƒsmin ƒ
SN
sm
smin
Rt =
sm
smax
mt = Su - SN
Su
Smax-N = Syp    for  sm Ú 0  and  Smax-N Ú Syp
Smax-N =
SN
1 - mtRt    for   sm Ú 0  and  Smax-N … Syp
Syp
smax
smax K Smax-N
SN
sm
smax
smax =
SN
1 - mtRt
Rt K
sm
smax
mt K Su - SN
Su
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 261

262
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
nonzero-mean cyclic stress that has amplitude 
and mean 
. Thus any nonzero-mean
cyclic stress may be transformed into an equivalent completely reversed cyclic stress of
amplitude 
that induces fatigue damage at the same rate cycle-by-cycle. Using this
approach for the tensile mean-stress region
or
(5-72)
and for the compressive mean-stress region
or
(5-73)
For the Gerber parabola, any combination of 
and 
that plots above either the
dashed line or the solid curved line in Figure 5.40 again represents failure at a shorter life
than N cycles, either by fatigue or yielding. Writing an equation for the Gerber parabola
yields the form
which becomes
(5-74)
Again, referring to Note 1 of Figure 5.40 and solving (5-74) for an equivalent completely
reversed cyclic stress, 
, we have only at the tensile mean-stress region
or
(5-75)
The Gerber parabola is limited to tensile mean stresses because it incorrectly predicts a
harmful effect for compressive mean stresses.33 For compressive mean stresses 
,
equations (5-73) should be used.
In all equations from (5-70) through (5-75), it should be noted that if the design ob-
jective is inﬁnite life, 
should be substituted for 
everywhere.
Example 5.14 Design to Account for Nonzero Mean Stress
A low-alloy steel link is to be made from a solid cylindrical bar subjected to an axial cyclic
force that ranges from a maximum of 270 kN tension to a minimum of 180 kN compres-
sion. The static material properties are 
, 
, and elongation in
50 mm of 25%. Calculate the diameter the link should be to provide inﬁnite life. 
Syp = 524 MPa
Su = 690 MPa
SN
Sf
(sm … 0 )
seq-CR = Syp
for
sm Ú 0   and s max Ú Syp
seq-CR =
sa
c1 - asm
Su
b
2
d
for sm Ú 0 and s max … Syp
seq-CR
sa = -SN
S2
u
s2
m + SN
y = -ax2 + b
sb
sa
seq-CR = ƒ -Syp ƒ    for  sm … 0  and  ƒsmin ƒ Ú ƒ -Sypƒ
seq-CR = sa    for   sm … 0  and  ƒsmin ƒ … ƒ -Syp ƒ
seq-CR = Syp    for  sm Ú 0  and  smax Ú Syp
seq-CR =
sa
1 - sm
Su
    for   sm Ú 0  and  smax … Syp
seq-CR
sm
sa
33See ref. 28, page 430.

Solution
Since the link is cyclically loaded and inﬁnite life is desired, the fatigue limit 
is the ma-
terial property of primary interest; yielding should also be checked. Using the estimation
guidelines, since 
,
Following the procedures of Example 5.12, and utilizing Table 5.3, the fatigue limit for the
part may be estimated as
Since little information is given, the inﬂuencing factors of Table 5.3 may be estimated as:
(from Table 5.3)
(no welding anticipated)
(uniform shape speciﬁed)
(lathe-turned)
(from Table 5.3)
(no information available; later review essential)
(no fretting anticipated)
(no information available; later review essential)
(from Table 5.3)
(from Table 5.4 For 
)
From the loading speciﬁcation it may be noted that we have a case of nonzero-mean cyclic
loading. Since stress is proportional to loading,
where A is the unknown cross-sectional area of the link.
Since the mean stress is tensile, (5-67) may be used with
so that (5-67) gives
(1)
Since
Yielding does not occur and (1) is valid.
To obtain the required diameter, we set the maximum applied stress 
equal to the
inﬁnite-life strength for the speciﬁed nonzero-mean loading, giving
s max = Smax - q
s max
Smax - q = 208.5 6 Syp = 524
Smax - q =
SN
1 - mtRt
=
182.9
1 - (0.735)(0.167) = 208.5 MPa
Rt =
sm
s max
=
Pm/A
Pmax/A =
Pm
Pmax
= 45
270 = 0.167
mt = 690 - 182.9
690
= 0.735
SN= q = Sf = 182.9 MPa
sm = Pm
A =
1
2APmax + Pmin B
A
=
1
2A(270) + (-180)B
A
= 45
A
Sf = 0.53(345) = 182.9 MPa
k q = (1.0)(1.0)(1.0)(0.65)(0.9)(1.0)(1.0)(1.0)(1.0)(0.9) = 0.5265 = 0.53
R = 90
kr = 0.9
ksp = 1.0
kcr = 1.0
kfr = 1.0
krs = 1.0
ksz = 0.9
ksr = 0.65
kf = 1.0
kwe = 1.0
kgr = 1.0
Sf = k qS'
f = k q(345)
S'
f = 0.5(Su) = 0.5(690) = 345 MPa
Su 6 200 ksi(1379 MPa)
Sf
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 263

or
Solving for the diameter
Thus the required link diameter is 41 mm to provide inﬁnite life. It should be noted, how-
ever, that in practice a safety factor would also be imposed, and the required “safe” diam-
eter would be somewhat larger than the 41 mm just calculated.
Example 5.15 Design for Selected Reliability
A one-inch-square bar is to be subjected to an axial cyclic force that ranges from a maxi-
mum of 36,000 lb (tension) to a minimum of 
lb (compression). The material is
the wrought-steel alloy of Example 5.10 and the operating conditions are the same as those
speciﬁed in Example 5.10. A fatigue strength reliability level of 99.9 percent is desired.
How many cycles of operation would be expected before failure occurs?
Solution
Since the material and the operating conditions are exactly the same as for Example 5.10,
and a fatigue strength reliability level of 99.9 percent is speciﬁed, the R = 99.9 percent
curve of Figure E5.10 in Example 5.10 represents the appropriate estimate of the S-N curve
for the one-inch-square bar.
From the known loading and geometry,
Since the mean stress is tensile, from (5-72)
Also,
so yielding does not occur and 
is valid.
Since the mean stress is positive and yielding does not occur, Gerber’s equation could
also be applied. Hence, using (5-75)
seq-CR =
sa
1 - asm
Su
b
2 =
29,000
1 - a 7,000
76,000 b
2 = 29,248 psi
seq-CR
smax = 36,000 6 Syp = 42,000
seq-CR =
sa
1 - sm
Su
=
29,000
1 - a 7000
76,000 b
= 31,940 psi
sa = smax - smin
2
=
36,000 - 1-22,0002
2
= 29,000 psi
sm = smax + smin
2
=
36,000 + 1-22,0002
2
= 7000 psi
smin = Pmin
A
= -22,000
1122
= -22,000 psi
smax = Pmax
A
= 36,000
1122
= 36,000 psi
-22,000
d = A
4Pmax
p(208.5) = A
4(270 * 103)
p(208.5 * 106)
= 0.0406 m = 0.041 mm
Pmax
A
= 4Pmax
pd2
= 208.5
264
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.14 
Continues

Referring to the S-N curve of Figure E5.15 for R  99.9 percent, repeated below as
Figure E5.15, and reading from the curve on the stress axis at
and
Then across to intersect the S-N curve, the intersections occur at 
, using
Goodman and 
using the Gerber approach.
The number of cycles to failure could also be obtained from the following equation
since the S-N curve is taken as a straight line
Applying the conditions that 
, gives
and
From above, for R  99.9 percent, 
and, therefore,
c = 76,000
b = 28,600 - 76,000
log(106)
= -7900
S¿f = 28,600 psi (see example 5.10)
N = 10(S-c)>b
c = Su,
b =
S¿f - Su
log(N)
at N = 1,
S = Su
and
at N = 106, S¿f = 0.5Su
S = c + blog(N)
N = 827,000 cycles
N = 378,000 cycles
S = seq-CR = 29,248 psi
S = seq-CR = 31,940 psi
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 265
Figure E5.15
Estimated S-N curve for fatigue
strength reliability levels of 
50 percent (mean) and 
99.9 percent.
90
80
70
R = 50% (mean)
R = 99.9%
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10–1
100
101
102
103
Cycles to failure, N
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
104
105
106
107

For S  31,940 psi, 
and for S  29,250 psi
The appropriate fatigue failure curve to be used depends on how well the material property
is known.
Cumulative Damage Concepts and Cycle Counting
Nearly all machines operate over a spectrum of speeds or loads, giving rise to a spectrum
of alternating stress amplitudes and mean stresses, as illustrated for example in Figures
5.25 and 5.26. Such variations in stress amplitudes and mean stresses make the direct use
of standard S-N curves inapplicable because these curves are developed and presented for
constant stress amplitude operation (and usually for zero-mean stress). Therefore it be-
comes important to a designer to have available a theory or hypothesis, veriﬁed by exper-
imental observations, that will permit good design estimates to be made for operation
under conditions of spectrum loading using standard constant-amplitude S-N curves.
The basic postulate adopted by all fatigue investigators is that operation at any given
cyclic stress amplitude will produce fatigue damage, the seriousness of which will be related
to the number of cycles of operation at that stress amplitude and also related to the total num-
ber of cycles that would be required to produce failure of an undamaged specimen or part at
that stress amplitude. It is further postulated that the damage incurred is permanent, and op-
eration at several different stress amplitudes in sequence will result in an accumulation of to-
tal damage equal to the sum of damage increments accrued at all the different stress levels.
When the total accumulated damage reaches a critical value, fatigue failure occurs.
Of the many damage theories proposed,34 the most widely used is a linear theory ﬁrst
proposed by Palmgren in 1924 and later developed by Miner in 1945. This linear theory is
referred to as the Palmgren–Miner hypothesis or the linear damage rule. The theory, based
on the postulate that there is a linear relationship between fatigue damage and cycle ratio
n/N, may be described using the S-N plot shown in Figure 5.41.
N = 10(29250-76000)>(-7900) = 827,000 cycles
N = 10(31940-76000)>(-7900) = 378,000 cycles
266
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.15 
Continues
34See, for example, ref. 1, Ch. 8.
Alternating stress amplitude
Log N
Mean stress = 0
n2
ni Ni
Ni – 1
ni – 1
n1 N1
N2
1
2
i – 1
i
Figure 5.41
Illustration of spectrum loading where ni
cycles of operation are accrued at each of
the different corresponding stress levels
, and the Ni are cycles to failure at 
each 
.
Si
Si

By deﬁnition of the S-N curve, operation at a constant stress amplitude 
will pro-
duce complete damage, or failure, in 
cycles. Operation at stress amplitude 
for a num-
ber of cycles 
, smaller than 
, will produce a smaller fraction of damage, say 
. 
is
usually termed the damage fraction. Operation over a spectrum of i different stress levels
results in a damage fraction 
for each of the different stress levels 
in the spectrum.
When these damage fractions sum to unity, failure is predicted; that is, failure is predicted
to occur if (FIPTOI)
(5-76)
The Palmgren–Miner hypothesis asserts that the damage fraction 
at any stress level
is linearly proportional to the ratio of number of cycles of operation 
to the total num-
ber of cycles 
that would produce failure at that stress level; that is,
(5-77)
By the Palmgren–Miner hypothesis then, (5-76) becomes FIPTOI
(5-78)
or FIPTOI
(5-79)
This is a complete statement of the Palmgren–Miner hypothesis, or the linear damage
rule. It has one sterling virtue, namely, simplicity; and for this reason it is widely used.
Further, other much more complicated cumulative damage theories typically do not yield
a signiﬁcant improvement in failure prediction reliability. Perhaps the most signiﬁcant
shortcomings of the linear damage rule are that no inﬂuence of the order of application of
various stress levels is recognized, and damage is assumed to accumulate at the same rate
at a given stress level without regard to past history. Nevertheless, the Palmgren–Miner hy-
pothesis may be used with good success most of the time.
Example 5.16 Zero-Mean Spectrum Loading
An alloy steel strut for an experimental aircraft application is fabricated from a supply
of material that has an ultimate strength of 135,000 psi, yield strength of 120,000 psi,
elongation of 20 percent in 2 inches, and fatigue properties under test conditions that
match the actual operating conditions, as shown in the table of experimental results in
Table E5.16.
The cross-sectional area of the strut is 0.10 in2 and buckling has been found not to be
a problem due to the selected cross-sectional shape. In service, the strut is to be subjected
to the following spectrum of completely reversed axial loads during each duty cycle:
This duty cycle is to be repeated three times during the life of the strut.
Assuming fatigue to be the governing failure mode, would this strut be expected to
survive all three duty cycles, or would it fail prematurely?
Pc = 6500 lb for 500,000 cycles
Pb = 8300 lb for 4000 cycles
Pa = 11,000 lb for 1000 cycles
a
n
j=1
nj
Nj
Ú 1
n1
N1
+ n2
N2
+ Á + ni
Ni
Ú 1
Di = ni
Ni
Ni
ni
si
Di
D1 + D2 + Á + Di Ú 1
si
Di
D1
D1
N1
n1
s1
N1
s1
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 267

Solution
Based on the data from Table E5.16, an S-N curve may be plotted as shown in Figure
E5.16.
Since the completely reversed axial loads are given, and the cross-sectional area of the
strut is given as 0.10 in2, the completely reversed stress spectrum for each duty cycle may
be calculated as
sc = Pc
A = 6500
0.10 = 65,000 psi;  nc = 500,000 cycles
sb = Pb
A = 8300
0.10 = 83,000 psi;  nb = 4000 cycles
sa = Pa
A = 11,000
0.10
= 110,000 psi;  na = 1000 cycles
268
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
TABLE E5.16 Fatigue Test Data for Strut
Material
Stress Amplitude (psi)
Cycles to Failure, N
110,000
6,600
105,000
9,500
100,000
13,500
95,000
19,200
90,000
27,500
85,000
39,000
80,000
55,000
75,000
87,000
73,000
116,000
71,000
170,000
70,000
220,000
69,000
315,000
68,500
400,000
68,000
q
Example 5.16 
Continues
Stress, S, ksi
N, cycles
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
103
104
105
106
107
a = 110,000 psi
b = 83,000 psi
c = 65,000 psi
Na = 6,600 cycles
Nb = 48,000 cycles
Nc = ∞
m = 0
Figure E5.16
S-N curve for alloy steel data from Table
E5.16.

Reading from the S-N curve of Figure E5.16 for completely reversed stresses 
, 
and 
, respectively,
Furthermore, three such duty cycles must be sustained without failure.
To determine whether failure would be predicted, the Palmgren–Miner linear damage
rule formulated in (5-79) may be used. Hence FIPTOI
or, FIPTOI
Using the results above, FIPTOI
or FIPTOI
Since this failure expression is not satisﬁed, the strut would be predicted to survive the
three duty cycles.
For the simple case of a stress spectrum composed of a sequence of uniaxial com-
pletely reversed stresses of various amplitudes, the estimation of cumulative damage and
prediction of failure are relatively straightforward, as illustrated by Example 5.16. If the
stress spectrum is more complicated, as shown, for example, in Figures 5.25 or 5.26, the
task of evaluating cumulative damage and even the task of counting the cycles in the spec-
trum become much more difﬁcult. Although numerous cycle counting methods have been
devised,35 the rain ﬂow cycle counting method is probably more widely used than any
other method and will be the only method presented in this text.
To use the rain ﬂow method, the stress-time history (stress-time spectrum) is plotted
to scale on a stress-time coordinate system so that the time axis is vertically downward,
and the lines connecting the stress peaks are imagined to be a series of sloping roofs, as
shown, for example, in Figure 5.42. Several rules are imposed on “raindrops” ﬂowing
down these sloping roofs so that the rain ﬂow may be used to deﬁne cycles and half-cycles
of ﬂuctuating stress in the spectrum.
Rain ﬂow is initiated by placing raindrops successively at the inside of each peak
(maximum) or valley (minimum).
The rules are as follows:
1. The rain is allowed to ﬂow on the roof and drip down to the next slope except that,
if it initiates at a valley, it must be terminated when it comes opposite a valley more nega-
tive than the valley from which it initiated. For example, in Figure 5.42 the ﬂow begins at
330.152 + 0.083 + 04 = 0.706 Ú 1
3c1000
6600 +
4000
48,000 + 500,000
q
d Ú 1
3c na
Na
+ nb
Nb
+ nc
Nc
d Ú 1
a
n
j=1
nj
Nj
Ú 1
Nc =
q 1since sc 6 Sf = 68,0002
Nb = 48,000 cycles to failure
Na = 6600 cycles to failure
sc
sb,
sa
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 269
35See, for example, ref. 1, p. 289.

valley 1 and stops opposite valley 9, valley 9 being more negative than valley 1. A half-
cycle is thus counted between valleys 1 and peak 8.
2. Similarly, if the rain flow initiates at a peak, it must be terminated when it comes
opposite a peak more positive than the peak from which it initiated. For example, in
Figure 5.42 the flow begins at peak 2 and stops opposite peak 4, thus counting a half-
cycle between peak 2 and valley 3.
3. A rain ﬂow must also stop if it meets the rain from a roof above. For example, in
Figure 2.30, the ﬂow beginning at valley 3 ends beneath peak 2. Using these rules, every
part of the stress-time history is counted once and only once.
4. If cycles are to be counted over the duration of a duty cycle or a “mission proﬁle”
block that is to be repeated block after block, the cycle counting should be started by ini-
tiating the ﬁrst raindrop either at the most negative valley or the most positive peak, and
continuing until all cycles in a complete block have been counted in sequence. This pro-
cedure assures that a complete stress cycle will be counted between the most positive peak
and most negative valley in the block.
The nonzero-mean stress cycles may be converted to equivalent completely reversed cycles
by utilizing (5-72) or (5-73).
To determine the fatigue damage in each cycle associated with the equivalent completely
reversed spectrum, an S-N curve for the material must be available or estimated using the
techniques presented in Example 5.10 and the preceding discussion.
Finally, damage is summed by utilizing the Palmgren–Miner linear damage rule
(5-79) as illustrated in Example 5.16.
It should be clear that for most real-life design cases the prediction techniques just de-
scribed are practical only with the help of a digital computer program designed to carry
forth the tedious cycle-by-cycle analyses involved. Many such programs are available.36
270
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Time
Stress
2
4
3
1
5
6
8
10
12
14
18
16
15
17
19
24
26
28
30
32
27
29
31
23
25
11
13
9
7
21
22
20
Figure 5.42
Example of rain ﬂow cycle counting method. 
(After ref. 29.)
36See, for example, ref. 15, App. 5A.

Example 5.17 Cycle Counting, Nonzero-Mean Loading, and Fatigue Life
The stress-time pattern shown in Figure E5.17A is to be repeated in blocks. Using the rain
ﬂow cycle counting method and the S-N curve of Figure E5.17B, estimate the time in hours
of testing required to produce failure.
Solution
The stress-time pattern of Figure E5.17A is ﬁrst rotated so that the time axis is vertically
downward, as shown in Figure E5.17C. Following the rules for rain ﬂow cycle counting,
the count is started at a minimum valley, as shown for raindrop (1) of the time-shifted
block in Figure E5.17C.
Data for each raindrop, read from Figure E5.17C, are recorded in Table E5.17. Values
for 
are calculated using (5-72) and (5-73). Values of N corresponding to each rain-
drop’s 
value are read from the completely reversed S-N curve of Figure E5.17B.
seq-CR
seq-CR
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 271
Stress, ksi
–50
– 40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
1 block
1 minute
Figure E5.17A
Stress-time pattern applied.
Figure E5.17B
S-N curve.
Stress, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
103
102
104
105
106
107
 Su = 62,000 psi
Syp = 55,000 psi
 m = 0
Time, minutes
Stress, ksi
–50 – 40 –30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
–50 – 40 –30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
1
9
7
6
2
3
5
4
1 minute
1 block
1 block
10
8
Figure E5.17C
Stress-time pattern oriented for rain ﬂow
cycle counting.

Based on the Palmgren–Miner linear damage rule of (5-79), FIPTOI
using 
to denote the number of block to failure.
From Table E5.17 it may be noted that only raindrops 1 and 4 will produce a nonzero
cycle ratio.
Thus FIPTOI
Using the equal sign, which corresponds to incipient failure, and reading numerical values
from Table E5.17,
or
At 1 block/minute, as indicated in Figures E5.17A and E5.17C, the predicted time to
failure in hours, 
, would be
Multiaxial Cyclic Stresses
Uniaxial cyclic stressing has been implicit in all of the discussion thus far in 5.6. Most real
design situations, including rotating shafts, pressure vessels, power screws, springs, gears,
ﬂywheels, and many other machine elements, may involve multiaxial states of cyclic stress.
Because of the complexities and costs in producing multiaxial fatigue failure data, only a
limited body of such data exists. Consequently, no consensus has yet been reached on the
best approach to prediction of failure under multiaxial fatigue stresses; however, various
proposals have been discussed in recent books on fatigue analysis.37 The approach adopted
in this text involves the concept of equivalent stress to deﬁne a uniaxial equivalent to the
Hf = a6 * 103 blocks
min
b a 1 min
block b a 1 hr
60 min b = 100 hr to failure
Hf
Bf = 6 * 103 blocks to failure
Bfa
1
6 * 103 b = 1
Bfa
n1,4
N1,4
b Ú 1
Bf
Bfa
5
j=1
nj
Nj
Ú 1
272
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
37See, for example, refs. 1, 19, 21, and 25.
TABLE E5.17 Rain Flow Data for One “Block” of the Stress-Time Pattern
Raindrop
n,
,
,
,
,
,
N,
Number
cycles
ksi
ksi
ksi
ksi
ksi
cycles
1,4 @ cycle each
1
40
–50
–5
45
45
2,3 @ cycle each
1
20
–10
5
15
16.3
5,8 @ cycle each
1
35
10
22.5
12.5
19.6
6,7 @ cycle each
1
30
20
25
5
8.4
9,10 @ cycle each
1
30
0
15
15
19.8
q
1
2
q
1
2
q
1
2
q
1
2
6 * 103
1
2
seq-CR
sa
sm
smin
smax
Example 5.17 
Continues

actual multiaxial state of cyclic stresses, including both the alternating stress amplitudes and
mean stresses. 
Fracture Mechanics (F-M) Approach to Fatigue
In the introductory paragraphs of section 5.6 it was noted that fatigue is a progressive
failure process that involves three phases: the initiation of crack nuclei, propagation of
cracks until one reaches an unstable size, and finally, a sudden catastrophic separation
of the affected part into two or more pieces. In the discussion of the S-N approach to
fatigue design and analysis just completed, the three phases are lumped together in an
S-N curve that represents a final failure locus for a part or specimen subjected to known
fluctuating loads. The transitions from initiation to propagation to final fracture cannot
be identified from an S-N curve, and the S-N approach does not require such informa-
tion. Physically, however, the three phases have been well documented and the separate
modeling of each phase in sequence has been under intense development. The results
of these efforts have led to an approach to fatigue called the fracture mechanics (F-M)
approach. An extensive database has now been established to support the F-M method
and it has in recent years been very successfully used in the analysis and design of
machine parts subjected to cyclic loads. A brief discussion of the F-M approach is in-
cluded here, but much more complete discussions may be found in the recent literature
on fatigue.38
Crack Initiation Phase
The most widely accepted approach to the prediction of crack initiation life is the local
stress-strain approach. While the details of the local stress-strain approach are compli-
cated, the concepts are not. The basic premise is that the local fatigue response of the small
critical zone of material at the crack initiation site, usually at the root of a geometrical dis-
continuity, is analogous to the fatigue response of a small smooth laboratory specimen sub-
jected to the same cyclic strains and stresses as the critical zone. This concept is illustrated
in Figure 5.43. The number of cycles required to initiate a crack in the critical zone, 
, is
postulated to be equal to the number of cycles to produce failure of the small smooth spec-
imen in a laboratory test under the same cyclic strains and stresses. Digital computer sim-
ulation of the smooth specimen failure process then allows the prediction of 
if
appropriate cyclic material response data are available.
To proceed with the analysis, the prediction model must contain the ability to
1.
Compute local stresses and strains, including means and ranges, from the applied
loads and geometry of the structure or machine part.
2.
Count cycles and associate mean and range values of stress and strain with each cycle.
3.
Convert nonzero-mean cycles to equivalent completely reversed cycles.
4.
Compute fatigue damage during each cycle from stress and/or strain amplitudes and
cyclic materials properties.
5.
Compute damage cycle-by-cycle and sum the damage to give the desired prediction
of 
.
Many of these steps may be accomplished using methods already developed earlier in
5.6. Rain ﬂow cycle counting (Example 5.16) may be used for item (2), modiﬁed
Goodman relationships (Example 5.15) for item (3), and Palmgren–Miner linear damage
rule (Example 5.16) for item (5). Items (1) and (4) require further discussion.
Ni
Ni
Ni
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 273
38See, for example, refs. 1, 19, 21, and 25.
Critical
zone
Smooth
specimen
Notch
Figure 5.43
Smooth specimen analog
of material at critical
point in the structure.
(See ref. 30.)

To compute local stresses and strains from the external loading and geometry, a mod-
iﬁed version of the Neuber Rule39 for estimating theoretical stress concentration factors
leads to the expression
(5-80)
where
From other work,42 an empirical expression for the cyclic stress-strain curve43 satis-
factory for most engineering metals has been developed as
(5-81)
where 
and 
are material constants, the cyclic strength coefﬁcient and cyclic strain-
hardening exponent, respectively. Values for 
and 
may be found from the intercept and
slope of an experimentally determined log-log plot of cyclic stress amplitude 
versus
cyclic strain amplitude 
. Values for many materials may be found in the literature.44
With known values of material properties 
and , the fatigue stress concentration fac-
tor 
, and readily calculable value of nominal stress range 
, equations (5-80) and
(5-81) may be solved simultaneously to ﬁnd values for local stress range 
and local
strain range 
.
To compute the local fatigue damage associated with equivalent completely reversed
stress and strain ranges for each cycle, it is necessary to have experimental failure data for
strain amplitude versus cycles to failure (crack initiation), 
, often plotted as strain am-
plitude versus reversals to failure (crack initiation), 2
, as illustrated in Figure 5.44.
Noting from Figure 5.44 that total strain amplitude may be expressed as the sum of
elastic strain amplitude plus plastic strain amplitude, each linear with cycles or reversals
to failure (crack initiation) on a log-log plot, an empirical expression for total strain am-
plitude versus cycles to crack initiation, 
, has been developed as45
(5-82)
The constants b and 
are the slope and one-reversal intercept of the elastic line in
Figure 5.44, and the constants c and 
are the slope and one-reversal intercept of the plas-
tic line in Figure 5.44. The values of the cyclic material properties 
(cyclic true fracture
strength) and 
(cyclic true fracture ductility) must be experimentally determined. With
e¿f
s¿f
e¿f
s¿f >E
¢e
2
=
s¿f
E 12Ni2b + e¿f 12Ni2c
Ni
Ni
Ni
¢e
¢s
¢S
Kf
n¿
E, k¿,
¢e>2
¢s>2
n¿
k¿
n¿
k¿
¢e
2
= ¢s
2E + c ¢s
2k¿ d
 1>n¿
E = Young’s modulus of elasticity
Kf = fatigue stress concentration factor41
¢S = nominal40 stress range
¢e = local strain range
¢s = local stress range
¢s¢e =
1Kf ¢S22
E
274
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
39See, for example, ref. 1, p. 283.
40Stress calculated assuming no stress concentration effect; note that the use here of S for stress deviates from
the usual policy in this text of reserving S to denote strength.
41See 5.3.
42See ref. 30, p. 7.
43Usually signiﬁcantly different from the static stress-strain curve. See, for example, ref. 1, pp. 284–285.
44See, for example, ref. 31.
45See ref. 29.

known cyclic material properties equation (5-82) may be used to calculate the number of
cycles to crack initiation, 
, for any given total strain amplitude, 
.
All ﬁve steps of the local stress-strain approach may therefore be completed if the
cyclic material properties data are available and the applied nominal stress spectrum is
known.
Example 5.18 Fatigue Crack Initiation Life
Experimentally determined values for the properties of a martensitic steel have been found
to 
be 
, 
, 
, 
,
, 
, 
, 
, 
, and 
. A
direct tension member made of this alloy has a single semicircular edge notch that results
in a fatigue stress concentration factor46 of 1.6. The rectangular net section of the member
at the root of the notch is 9 mm thick by 36 mm wide. A completely reversed axial force
of 70 kN amplitude is applied to the tension member.
a.
How many cycles would you estimate that it would take to initiate a fatigue crack at
the notch root?
b.
What length would you estimate this crack to be at the time it is initiated by the cal-
culation of part (a)?
Solution
a.
The nominal stress amplitude 
may be calculated as
Hence the nominal stress range 
is given by
Using (5-75)
(1)
¢s¢e =
31.6(432 * 106242
207 * 109
= 2.31 MPa
¢S = 2Sa = 2(216) = 432 MPa
¢S
Sa = Fa
A =
70 000
(0.009)(0.036) = 216 MPa
Sa
c = -0.60
b = -0.091
s¿f = 2000 MPa
e¿f = 0.48
n¿ = 0.15
k¿ = 1069 MPa
e(50 mm) = 20%
KIc = 81 MPa2m
Syp = 1379 MPa
Su = 1482 MPa
¢e>2
Ni
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 275
Strain amplitude, log scale
Reversals to failure, log scale
Plastic
Elastic
Total
2Nt
1
c
f
E

f'
'
1
b
Figure 5.44
Schematic representation of elastic, plastic,
and total strain amplitude versus fatigue life.
(After ref. 29.)
46See 5.3.

Next, from (5-76), using the results from (1)
This can be iterated to the solution
Then, from (5-77)
This can be iterated to
cycles to initiation
b.
There is no known method for calculating the length of a newly initiated fatigue crack.
The length must either be measured from an experimental test or estimated from
experience. Often, if no other information is available, a newly initiated crack is
assumed to be approximately 
Crack Propagation and Final Fracture Phases
As discussed in 5.5, the concepts of linear elastic fracture mechanics may be employed to
predict the size of a crack in a given structure or machine part that will, under speciﬁed
loadings, propagate spontaneously to ﬁnal fracture. This critical crack size, 
may be de-
termined, for example, by solving (5-52) for crack size, which then (by deﬁnition) be-
comes 
when the applied stress 
is given its maximum value. Thus, from (5-52)
(5-83)
Further, if plane strain conditions are met, as deﬁned by (5-53), 
becomes equal to
the plane strain fracture toughness 
, and (5-83) becomes
(5-84)
A fatigue crack that has been initiated by cyclic loading, or any other preexisting ﬂaw
in the material, may be expected to grow under sustained cyclic loading until it reaches the
critical size, 
, from which it will propagate spontaneously to catastrophic failure in ac-
cordance with the laws of fracture mechanics. Typically, the time for a fatigue-initiated
crack to grow to critical size is a signiﬁcant portion of the life of the machine part. Thus,
not only is it necessary to understand the crack initiation phase and the deﬁnition of criti-
cal crack size but an understanding of the growth of a crack from initial size 
to critical
size 
is also essential.
acr
ai
acr
acr = 1
pc KIc
Csmax
d
2
KIc
Kc
acr = 1
pc
Kc
Csmax
d
2
s
acr
acr,
ai = 1.3 mm
Ni = 4.8 * 107
1.82 * 10-3 = 9.07 * 10-3(Ni)-0.091 + 0.317(Ni)-0.6
3.64 * 10-3
2
= 2000 * 106
207 * 109 (2Ni)-0.091 + 0.48(2Ni)-0.6
¢e = 3.64 * 10-3 m/m
¢e = 21.11 * 10-5 + 3.26 * 10-20(¢e)-5.67
(¢e)2
2
= 5.56 * 10-6 + 1.63 * 10-20(¢e)(1-1/0.15)
¢e
2
=
2.3 * 106
414 * 109(¢e)
+ c
2.3 * 106
2138 * 106(¢e)
d
1/0.15
¢e
2
=
¢s
2(207 * 109)
a ¢e
¢e b + c
¢s
2(1069 * 106)
a ¢e
¢e b d
1/0.15
276
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.18 
Continues

The crack growth rate, da/dN, has been found to be related to the range of stress-
intensity factor, 
, where
(5-85)
and the range of stress is given by
(5-86)
Most crack propagation data are presented as log-log plots of da/dN versus 
. Figure
5.45 shows such a plot for various types of steels. The study of such data has led to many
different empirical models47 for the prediction of crack growth rate da/dN as a function of
. One such model, developed by Paris and Erdogan,48 has become widely known as the
Paris Law,
(5-87)
where n is the slope of the log-log plot of da/dN versus 
, as shown in Figure 5.45, and
is an empirical parameter that depends upon material properties, cyclic frequency,
mean stress, and perhaps other secondary variables.
CPE
¢K
da
dN = CPE1¢K2n
¢K
¢K
¢s = smax - smin
¢K = C¢s2pa
¢K
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 277
47See, for example, ref. 32.
48See ref. 33.
1 ksi   in = 1.099 MPa   m
Fatigue-crack-growth rate, da/dN, in/cycle
Stress-intensity-factor range, KI, ksi   inch
4
5 6
8
10
20
30
40 50
100
10–7
10–6
2
3
4
5
6
8
10–5
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
8
Martensitic
Ferrite-pearlite
Austenitic stainless
1 inch = 25.4 mm
KI in ksi   in
a in inch
da/dN = 3.6 	 10–10(KI)3.0
da/dN = 0.66 	 10–8(KI)2.25
da/dN = 3.0 	 10–10(KI)3.25
Steel
Figure 5.45
Fatigue crack propagation behavior of various
steels. (Reprinted from ref. 34 by permission of
Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River,
N.J.)

If the parameters 
and n are known for a particular application, the crack length,
, resulting from the application of N cycles of loading after the crack is initiated, may be
computed from the expression
(5-88)
or
(5-89)
where 
is the length of a newly initiated crack and 
the number of loading cycles in the
propagation phase following crack initiation. For complicated spectrum loading histories,
these computations require block-by-block or cycle-by-cycle analyses, making the use of
modern digital computer systems mandatory for the solution of most practical design prob-
lems. It should also be recognized that various other phenomena may take place in the zone
of material around the tip of a growing crack to inﬂuence the crack growth prediction
accuracy.49 These may include crack growth retardation or acceleration due to plastic
zones produced by preceding cyclic load histories, the inﬂuence of nonzero-mean stresses,
and crack size effects. Typically, a designer would utilize (5-88) or (5-89) to obtain
preliminary estimates of crack propagation life, but would enlist the help of a fracture
mechanics specialist to improve prediction accuracy by including modiﬁcations to account
for such factors as loading sequence, environment, frequency, multiaxial states of stress,
and determination of applicable 
values in view of plasticity at the crack tip.
Example 5.19 Fatigue Crack Propagation Life
The martensitic alloy steel tension member of Example 5.17 is to be subjected to a contin-
uation of completely reversed cyclic axial force of 70 kN amplitude, following the initia-
tion of a fatigue crack. It may be assumed that the length of the newly initiated fatigue crack
is 1.3 mm. Further, it may be assumed that the stress concentration effects are negligible for
the propagating crack (because the initiated crack tip probably extends through most of the
zone of stress concentration). How many cycles of continued loading would you estimate
could be applied before catastrophic fracture would occur?
Solution
Since the applied axial force is completely reversed, the maximum and minimum normal
stresses are
Using (5-50) to check the plain strain conditions
Since this expression is satisﬁed, plain strain conditions exist and the critical crack size
may be determined from (5-79). Thus,
(1)
The parameter C may be evaluated from Figure 5.19 using the methods of Example 5.9,
but must be iterated together with (1) above since the crack length 
must be known to
acr
acr = 1
pc KIc
Csmax
d
2
= 1
pc 81
216C d
2
= 0.0448
C 2
B = 0.009 Ú 2.5aKIc
Syp
b
2
= 2.5a 81
1379 b
2
= 0.0086
smax , min = ; Fa
A = ;
70 000
(0.009)(0.036) = ; 216 MPa
¢K
Np
ai
aN = ai +
L
Np
1
CPE1¢K2n dN
aN = ai + a
Np
j=1
CPE1¢K n2
aN
CPE
278
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
49See, for example, ref. 1, pp. 293–304.

ﬁnd C, and C must be known to ﬁnd 
. To illustrate the iteration, assume, for example,
. Then from Figure 5.19,
and
From (1)   
Iterating, try 
, giving 
and 

187. This results in
This is considered close enough to the assumed value of 
. Corresponding to
this critical crack length, we use 
.
For the newly initiated crack of length 
, the corresponding 
may be
found from Figure 5.19, with 
Since this is a martensitic steel, from Figure 5.45 the applicable empirical crack growth
model must be converted into SI and is 
(2)
where 
is in 
and 
is in meter per cycle.
Next we establish 
using the maximum and minimum normal stresses 
Substituting (5-80) into (2) above
or
Integrating both sides
(3)
Note that C is taken as the average of 
and 
. A more accurate solution could be found
by partitioning the crack growth into smaller increments and separately integrating each
increment, summing the results to obtain 
. Evaluating (3)
propagation cycles to ﬁnal fracture
Np = 1.94 * 103
a -0.125
- 0.125 `
0.0125
0.0013
= 0.00233Np :  Np = 1.94 * 103
Np
Ccr
Ci
L
acr=0.0125
ai=0.0013
da
a1.125 = 3.03 * 10-10c a1.13 + 1.87
2
b(432)2p d
2.25
L
Np
0
dN
da
a1.125 = 3.03 * 10-10(C¢s2p)2.25dN
da
dN = 3.03 * 10-10(C¢s2pa)2.25
¢s = 216 - (-216) = 432 MPa
¢s
da/dN
MPa2m
¢K
da
dN = 3.03 * 10-10(¢K)2.25
Ci = 1.07/(1 - 0.036)3/2 = 1.13
ai/b = 1.3/36 = 0.036
Ci
ai = 1.3 mm
Ccr = 1.87
acr = 12.5 mm
acr = 0.0448
(1.87)2 = 0.0128 m = 12.8 mm
C = 0.98/(1 - 0.35)3/2
a/b = 12.5/36 = 0.35
acr = 12.5 mm
acr = 0.0448
(2.2)2 = 0.0093 m = 9.3 mm
C(1 - 0.42)3/2 = 0.97 :  C = 2.2
a/b = 15/36 = 0.42
acr = 15 mm
acr
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 279

Design Issues in Fatigue Life Prediction
Using the F-M approach to estimate the total fatigue life of a proposed design conﬁgura-
tion is simple in concept. The total fatigue life to failure 
is the sum of the initiation life
plus the propagation life 
. That is,
(5-90)
The initiation life may be calculated using the local stress-strain approach, as illus-
trated in Example 5.18. The propagation life may be calculated using an appropriate crack
growth model together with LEFM estimates of critical crack size, as illustrated in
Example 5.19. As a practical matter, however, several important additional issues must be
addressed when attempting to use (5-90) as a design tool. These include the following: (1)
determining or specifying the size of an initiated crack corresponding to 
cycles; (2) ac-
counting for geometric stress concentration effects and stress gradients; (3) accounting for
strength gradients, especially as associated with metallurgical or mechanical surface treat-
ments; (4) accounting for residual stress ﬁelds; (5) accounting for multiaxial states of
stress, three-dimensional effects, and others. Most of these issues remain research topics,
requiring designers to consult with fracture mechanics specialists and/or make appropriate
simplifying assumptions when utilizing (5-90). In the ﬁnal analysis, it is essential to con-
duct full-scale fatigue tests to provide acceptable reliability.
Example 5.20 Estimating Total Fatigue Life
Referring to the solutions of Examples 5.18 and 5.19, estimate the total fatigue life of the
martenstic steel tensile member subjected to a completely reversed cyclic axial force of 70
kN amplitude.
Solution
The total fatigue life may be estimated using (5-90). With the results from Examples 5.18
and 5.19
cycles
For this member, the fatigue life 
is dominated by the crack initiation phase.
Fatigue Stress Concentration Factors and 
Notch Sensitivity Index
Unlike the theoretical stress concentration factor 
, the fatigue stress concentration factor 
is a function of the material, as well as geometry and type of loading. To account for the in-
ﬂuence of material characteristics, a notch sensitivity index q has been deﬁned to relate the
actual effect of a notch on fatigue strength of a material to the effect that might be predicted
solely on the basis of elastic theory. The deﬁnition of notch sensitivity index q is given by
(5-91)
The magnitude of ranges from zero for no notch effect to unity for full notch effect. The
notch sensitivity index is a function of both material and notch radius, as illustrated in
q
q = notch sensitivity index valid for high-cycle fatigue range
Kt = theoretical stress concentration factor
where Kf = fatigue stress concentration factor
q =
Kf - 1
Kt - 1
Kf
Kt
Nf
Nf = Ni + Np = 4.8 * 107 + 1.94 * 103 = 4.8 * 107
Ni
Nf = Ni + Np
Np
Ni
Nf
280
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories

Figure 5.46 for a range of steels and an aluminum aloy. For ﬁner-grained materials, such
as quenched and tempered steels, q is usually close to unity. For coarser-grained materials,
such as annealed or normalized aluminum alloys, q approaches unity if the notch radius
exceeds about one-quarter inch. In view of these facts it is tempting to recommend the use
of 
as a simplifying assumption. Doing so, however, would ignore several impor-
tant notch sensitivity effects, including:
1.
Under fatigue loading, an alloy steel with superior static properties will often be found
not to have superior fatigue properties when compared to a plain carbon steel, because
of the difference in notch sensitivities.
2.
There is a tendency to improperly assess the effects of tiny scratches and cavities un-
less notch sensitivity effects are recognized.
3.
Serious errors in applying the results from models to large structures may be made if
notch sensitivity effects are not recognized.
4.
In critical design situations, inefﬁciencies may accrue if notch sensitivity effects are
not considered.
Based on (5-91), an expression for fatigue stress concentration factor may be written as
(5-92)
The theoretical elastic stress concentration factor 
may be determined, on the basis of
geometry and loading, from handbook charts such as those depicted in Figures 5.4
through 5.12. The notch sensitivity index q may also be read from charts, such as the one
shown in Figure 5.46.
For uniaxial states of cyclic stress it is sometimes convenient to use 
as a “strength
reduction factor” rather than as a “stress concentration factor.” This may be done by di-
viding the fatigue limit by
rather than multiplying the applied nominal cyclic stress times
. Although conceptually it is more correct to think of 
as a stress concentration factor,
computationally it is often simpler to use 
as a strength reduction factor when the cyclic
stresses are uniaxial. For multiaxial states of stress, however, 
must be used as a stress
concentration factor.
The fatigue stress concentation factor (or strength reduction factor) determined from
(5-92) is strictly applicable only in the high-cycle fatigue range (lives of 105–106 cycles
Kf
Kf
Kf
Kf
Kf
Kf
Kt
Kf = q1Kt - 12 + 1
Kf = Kt
Fluctuating Loads, Cumulative Damage, and Fatigue Life 281
Notch sensitivity index, q
Notch radius r, in.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Su for bending or axial loading, ksi
Su for torsional loading (tentative), ksi
Steel
Aluminum alloy (based on 2024-T6 data)
200 (400 Bhn)
180 (360 Bhn)
120 (240 Bhn)
80 (160 Bhn)
60 (120 Bhn)
140 (280 Bhn)
100 (200 Bhn)
80 (160 Bhn)
60 (120 Bhn)
50 (100 Bhn)
Figure 5.46
Curves of notch sensitivity index
versus notch radius for a range of
steels and an aluminum alloy
subjected to axial, bending, and
torsional loading. (After ref. 15;
reprinted with permission of the
McGraw-Hill Companies.)

and greater). It has earlier been noted that for ductile materials and static loads, effects of
stress concentration may usually be neglected. In the intermediate and low-cycle life range
(from a quarter-cycle up to about 105–106 cycles), the stress concentration factor increases
from unity to 
, so the notched and unnotched S-N curves tend to converge toward the
quarter-cycle point A, as shown in Figure 5.47.
Estimates for fatigue stress concentration factor can be made by constructing a
straight line from the ultimate strength plotted at a life of 1 cycle to the unnotched fatigue
strength divided by 
plotted at a life of 106 cycles, on a semilogarithmic S-N plot.50 The
ratio of unnotched to notched fatigue strength at any selected intermediate life may be used
as an estimate of fatigue stress concentration factor for that life.
Finally, experimental investigations have indicated that for evaluating fatigue of duc-
tile materials, the fatigue stress concentration factor for any nonzero mean cyclic state of
stress should be applied only to the alternating component of stress (and not to the steady
component). In evaluating the fatigue loading of brittle materials, the stress concentration
factor should be applied to both the alternating and the steady component.
Example 5.21 Fatigue Life Prediction Under Uniaxial Stress, Including Stress
Concentration
A 60-mm-wide by 2.5-mm-thick rectangular plate of annealed 1040 steel has a 6-mm-
diameter hole drilled through, as shown in Figure E5.21. The properties of the 1040 steel
are 
, 
, 
, and 
. The plate is to
be subjected to a completely reversed alternating direct force of 8 kN. Buckling is not a
problem. What life cycle would you predict for the bar if the not notched S-N curve of
Figure 5.47 is valid?
Solution
The actual stress amplitude at the critical point adjacent to the hole is
(sa)act = Kf(sa)nom = Kfa Pa
Anet
b = Kfa
8000
0.06(0.0025)b = 53.3Kf MPa
Sf = 186 MPa
e(50 mm) = 50%
Syp = 330 MPa
Su = 372 MPa
Kf
Kf
282
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
50See Figure 5.47.
Ultimate tensile strength
, percent
Alternating stress amplitude
Cycles to failure
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
A
Notched
Not notched
Figure 5.47
S-N curves for notched and unnotched
specimens subjected to completely 
reversed axial loading. (After ref. 16.)
Figure E5.21
Steel bar with stress concentration
subjected to cyclic loading.
Pa = 8 kN
Pa = 8 kN
d = 6 mm
b = 60 mm
t = 2.5 mm

From (5-92)
Using Figure 5.46 with 
and 
,
From Figure 4.9 (b), with 
,
Therefore,
The actual stress is, therefore,
Calculating the ordinate ratio
And using it to read into the “not notched” S-N curve of Figure 5.47, the predicted cyclic
life of the plate is inﬁnite.51 It should be recognized, however, that there is virtually no
margin of safety. It would be prudent, therefore, to impose an appropriate safety factor or
reliability assessment before going further.
5.7 Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and Multiaxial 
Fatigue Failure Theories
An extensive discussion of the prediction and prevention of fatigue failure and fatigue life
under uniaxial states of cyclic stress was presented in 5.6. As mentioned in that discussion,
most real design situations involve ﬂuctuating loads that produce multiaxial states of cyclic
stress. A consensus has not yet been reached on the best approach to prediction of failure
under multiaxial states of cyclic stress. However, one technique used for ductile materials
subjected to ﬂuctuating multiaxial stresses is to utilize a cyclic adaptation of the equiva-
lent stress expression of (5-45). For brittle materials subjected to ﬂuctuating multiaxial
stresses, the principal normal stress expressions are utilized.
An equivalent uniaxial alternating stress expression 
for ductile materials, based
on the equivalent stress equation of (5-47), becomes
seq-a
(sa)act
Su
= 122
372 = 0.378 = 37.87%
(sa)act = 53.3Kf = 53.3(2.29) = 122 MPa
Kf = 0.76(2.7 - 1) + 1 = 2.29
Kt = 2.7
b/d = 6/60 = 0.10
q = 0.76
r = 3 mm L 0.125 in
Su = 372 MPa = 54 ksi
Kf = q(Kt - 1) + 1
Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and Multiaxial Fatigue Failure Theories 283
51Because the ordinate ratio 0.42 lies below the S-N curve.
seq-a = A
1
23(sx-a - sy-a)2 + (sy-a - sz-a)2 + (sz-a - sx-a)24 + 3(t2
xy-a + t2
yz-a + t2
xz-a)
seq-m = A
1
23(sx-m - sy-m)2 + (sy-m - sz-m)2 + (sz-m - sx-m)24 + 3(t2
xy-m + t2
yz-m + t2
xz-m)
(5-93)
An equivalent uniaxial mean stress expression 
for ductile materials, based on the
equivalent stress equation of (5-47), is
seq-m
(5-94)

or, for plane stress,
(5-95)
(5-96)
The equations (5-93) through (5-96) may be substituted into any of the expressions
discussed in 5.6 as equivalents for their uniaxial counterparts, 
and 
. For example, in
using (5-72), if the loading conditions produce a multiaxial state of cyclic stress the equa-
tions become
(5-97)
or
(5-98)
where
(5-99)
For brittle materials subjected to multiaxial states of cyclic stress, if the convention
is adopted, the expressions 
and 
may be substituted into any of the
uniaxial procedures discussed in 5.6. With brittle materials, for example, equations (5-73)
would become, under multiaxial states of cyclic stress,
(5-100)
Example 5.22 Fatigue Failure Prediction Under Fluctuating Multiaxial Stresses
A power transmission shaft of solid cylindrical shape is to be made of 1020 hot-rolled steel
with Su  65,000 psi, Syp  43,000 psi, e  36 percent elongation in 2 in, and fatigue prop-
erties as shown for 1020 steel in Figure 5.31. The shaft is to transmit 85 horsepower at a
rotational speed of n  1800 rpm, with no ﬂuctuations in torque or speed. At the critical
location, midspan between bearings, the rotation shaft is also subjected to a pure bending
moment of 1500 in-lb, ﬁxed in a vertical plane by virtue of a system of symmetrical
external forces on the shaft. If the shaft diameter is 1.0 in, what operating life would be
predicted before fatigue failure occurs?
Solution
From the horsepower equation (4-39), the steady shaft torque is
And from the problem statement, the bending moment is completely reversed (due to shaft
rotation), giving
Since the maximum shearing stress due to torque T occurs at the surface, and cyclic
bending stresses range from maximum to minimum and back to maximum at the surface
with each rotation, all midspan surface points are equally critical.
A typical volume element at a midspan critical point is shown in Figure E5.22. The
steady torsional shearing stress may be calculated from (4-37) as 
txy = Ta
J
= 16T
pd3
M = 1500 in-lb (completely reversed)
T = 63,025(hp)
n
= 63,025(85)
1800
= 2976 in-lb (steady)
seq-CR =
s1a
1 - 1s1m>Su2      for s1m Ú 0   and   smax … Su
s1m
s1a
s1 Ú s2 Ú s3
smax = seq-a + seq-m
seq-CR = Syp      for seq-m Ú 0   and   smax Ú Syp
seq-CR =
seq-a
1 - 1seq-m>Su2      for seq-m Ú 0   and   smax … Syp
sm
sa
seq-m = 2s2
x-m + s2
y-m - sx-msy-m + 3t2
xy-m
seq-a = 2s2
x-a + s2
y-a - sx-asy-a + 3t2
xy-a
284
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories

and cyclic bending stress from (4-5) as
Noting that Tmax  Tmin  Tm  T  2976 in-lb, Mmax  1500 in-lb, Mmin  1500 in-
lb, and Mm  0, the alternating and mean components stresses are 
Since e  36 percent, the material is ductile and the equivalent stress concepts of
(5-95) and (5-96) may be used to write
Using the expressions in (5-99), the condition of 
may be checked by calculating
Thus, (5-97) is valid, and gives
Checking Figure 5.31, this value, 
, corresponds to inﬁnite life for 1020
steel. No strength-inﬂuencing factors such as surface ﬁnish, corrosion, and so forth, have
been considered. A more accurate prediction could be made by considering such factors,
as was done in Example 5.13.
Example 5.23 Fatigue Life Predication Under Multiaxial Stresses, Including Stress
Concentration Effects
Refer to Figure E5.23A, in which a torsionally oscillating shaft of 1.25-in diameter has
a 0.25-inch diametral hole all the way through it. By the way the shaft is loaded, it is
subjected to a released torsional moment of 8300 in-lb, and an in-phase released cyclic
seq-CR = 25,631 psi
seq-CR =
15,279
1 - 26,253
65,000
= 25,631 psi
smax = 15,279 + 26,253 = 41,532 6 43,000 psi
smax
seq-m = 202 + 3(15,157)2 = 26,253 psi
seq-a = 2(15,279)2 + 02 = 15,279 psi
sx-a = 32(1500)
p(1)3
= 15,279 psi
sx-m = 0 psi,
txy-m = 16(2976)
p(1)3
= 15,157 psi, txy-a = 0 psi
sx = Mc
I
= 32M
pd3
Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and Multiaxial Fatigue Failure Theories 285
Figure E5.22
State of stress at a typical midspan critical
point.
x
y
txy (steady)
sx (cyclic)
z

bending moment, in the plane of the through-hole axis, of 3700 in-lb. If the shaft is made
of 4340 steel with Su  150,000 psi, Syp  120,000 psi, e  15 percent in 2 in, and the
fatigue properties shown in Figure E5.23B, how many torsional oscillations would you
expect could be completed before fatigue failure of the shaft takes place? (Assume that
the critical point for bending and torsion coincide.)
286
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.23 
Continues
T
T
Mb
Mb
12 in.
d = 0.25
D = 1.25 in.
Figure E5.23A
Oscillating shaft with through hole.
Ultimate tensile strength
, percent
Alternating stress amplitude
Cycles to failure
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Figure E5.23B
Uniaxial fatigue properties of 4340 steel used in the torsion-
ally oscillating shaft.
x
xy
z
x
Figure E5.23C
State of stress at the critical point.
Solution
The critical points for bending and torsion are assumed to be at the same location, adja-
cent to the edge of the hole at top and bottom surface elements. The state of stress at the
critical point is shown in Figure E5.23C.
From Figure 5.6, the nominal bending and torsional stresses as well as bending and
torsional stress concentration factors may be found. The nominal bending stress is
and the nominal torsional stress is
Referring again to Figure 5.6, for
d
D = 0.25
1.25 = 0.2
tnom =
T
pD3
16
- dD2
6
=
T
p(1.25)3
16
- 0.25(1.25)2
6
= 3.14T
snom =
M
pD3
32
- dD2
6
=
M
p(1.25)3
32
- 0.25(1.25)2
6
= 7.9M

It may be found that
and
Also, from Figure 5.46
and
Then from (5-92)
and
Then
and
Since the shaft is subjected to a released torsional moment of 8300 in-lb and a released
cyclic bending moment of 3700 in-lb, the maximum and minimum values are
The alternating and mean values are
Based on the above equations, the alternating and mean component stresses are
Since e  15 percent, the material is ductile, and the equivalent stress concepts of (5-95)
and (5-96) may be used to give
And
seq-m = 2(28,509)2 + 3(19,173)2 = 43,767 psi
seq-a = 2(28,509)2 + 3(19,173)2 = 43,767 psi
txy-a = txy-m = 4.62(4150) = 19,173 psi
sx-a = sx-m = 15.41(1850) = 28,509 psi
Ta
= Tm = 8300
2
= 4150 in-lb
Ma = Mm = 3700
2
= 1850 in-lb
Tmax  = 8300 in-lb, Tmin = 0
Mmax = 3700 in-lb, Mmin = 0
sx = 1.95(7.90M) = 15.41M
txy = 1.47(3.14T) = 4.62T
Kf-bend = 0.92(2.03 - 1) + 1 = 1.95
Kf-tor = 0.94(1.50 - 1) + 1 = 1.47
qbend = 0.92
qtor = 0.94
(Kt)bend = 2.03
(Kt)tor = 1.50
Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and Multiaxial Fatigue Failure Theories 287

Using these expressions in (5-99), the condition on 
may be checked by calculating
Based on the validity criteria
And
If (5-72) is chosen, the result is
If (5-75) is chosen, the result would be
Since the fatigue limit in Figure E5.23B is shown as 
, both values calcu-
lated for 
would be predicted to give inﬁnite life (an inﬁnite number of torsional os-
cillations) for this part. Strength-inﬂuencing factors such as surface ﬁnish, corrosion, and
so on, should be reviewed, however, to improve the life assessment. (See Example 5.13.)
seq–CR
Sf = 75,000 psi
seq-CR =
43,767
1 - (43,767>150,000)2 = 47,840 psi
seq-CR =
43,767
1 - (43,767>150,000) = 61,800 psi
s max = 87,534 6 Syp =  120,000 psi
seq-m Ú 0
smax = 43,767 + 43,767 = 87,534 psi
smax
288
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
D = 1.12 in.
P
r = 0.06 in.
d = 1.00 in.
Pmax = 23,000 lb
Pmin = 0
Figure E5.24A
Cyclically loaded cylindrical steel support
bar with circumferential groove of semi-
circular proﬁle.
Example 5.23 
Continues
Example 5.24 Fatigue Life Improvement Resulting from Shot-Peening (Favorable
Residual Stresses)
A cylindrical support bar is to be subjected to a released cyclic tensile load of 
 23,000
lb. The critical section in the bar is at the root of a circumferential groove of semicircular
proﬁle, having the dimensions shown in Figure E5.24A. The material is to be a wrought 
carbon steel alloy with Su  76,000 psi, Syp  42,000 psi, and e (2 inches)  18 percent
when in hot rolled condition, and Su  70,000 psi, Syp  54,000 psi, and e (2 inches)  15
percent when in cold drawn condition. Fatigue properties are deﬁned by the S-N curve
from Example 5.10, and repeated here as Figure E5.24B.
a.
Using a fatigue strength reliability level of 99.9 percent, estimate the life of the bar
under the conditions given, if the material is in hot-rolled condition.
b.
Estimate the improvement in life (if any) that might be expected from the hot-rolled
bar if the groove is properly shot-peened, assuming that the shot-peening process
results in a compressive residual surface stress of about 50 percent of the strain-
hardened yield strength.
Pmax

Solution
a.
For the released loading applied, with 
 23,000 lb, the nominal cyclic stress
ranges from
to
giving nominal values of stress amplitude and tensile mean stress of
and
Using methods developed in 5.3, since the material is ductile,
and
Then from (5-91)
where q may be read from Figure 5.11 with r  0.06 and 
 76,000 psi, as
From Figure 5.5(b), with r/d  0.06 and D/d  1.12, 
may be read as
Kt = 2.18
Kt
q = 0.74
Su
Kf = q1Kt - 12 + 1
1sm2act = 1sm2nom
1sa2act = Kf 1sa2nom
1sm2nom = 29,285 + 0
2
= 14,642 psi
1sa2nom = 29,285 - 0
2
= 14,642 psi
1smax2nom = Pmax
Anet
=
23,000
p11.0022
4
= 29,285 psi
1smin2nom = 0
Pmax
Multiaxial States of Cyclic Stress and Multiaxial Fatigue Failure Theories 289
Alternating stress amplitude, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
R = 50% (Mean)
R = 99.9%
Figure E5.24B
Estimated S-N curves for
fatigue strength reliability
levels of 50% and 99.9%
(repeat of Figure E5.10A).
Note that Sf for R  50%
is 38,000 psi and Sf for 
R  99.9% is 28,600 psi.

giving
From this, 
and
Therefore, effective values for 
and 
are
and
Now, using (5-72),
Taking this equivalent completely reversed stress amplitude to the 99.9 percent relia-
bility S-N curve of Figure E4.20B, the estimated life is read as
b.
If the groove were shot-peened to give a residual compressive stress of 50 percent of the
strain-hardened yield strength, the compressive residual stress at the surface would be
Superposing the residual stress on the effective operational stresses at the notch
root, we get
and
so
and
For the shot-peened groove, then, since mean stress is compressive, using (5-73),
seq-CR = 1sa2sp-eff = 27,381 psi
1sm2sp-eff =
15,023 + 1-39,7392
2
= -12,358 psi
1sa2sp-eff =
15,023 - 1-39,7392
2
= 27,381 psi
1smin2sp-eff = -12,739 + 1-27,0002 = -39,739 psi
1smax2sp-eff = 42,023 + 1-27,0002 = 15,023 psi
sres = -0.5154,0002 = -27,000 psi
N = 2 * 105 cycles
seq-CR =
1sa2act
1 - sm
Su
=
27,381
1 - 14,642
76,000
= 33,915 psi
1smin2eff = 14,642 - 27,381 = -12,739 psi
1smax2eff = 27,381 + 14,642 = 42,023 psi
smin
smax
1sm2act = 14,642 psi
1sa2act = 1.87114,6422 = 27,381 psi
Kf = 0.7412.18 - 12 + 1 = 1.87
290
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
Example 5.24 
Continues

Taking the equivalent completely reversed stress amplitude to the 99.9 percent re-
liability S-N curve of Figure E5.24B, the estimated life is read as
because
Shot-peening the groove in this case is estimated to increase fatigue life of the part
from about 200,000 cycles to inﬁnite life. Shot-peening is widely used to improve
fatigue failure resistance.
seq-CR = 27,381 6 Sf 1R = 99.9%2 = 28,600 psi
Nsp =
q cycles
Problems 291
5-1. As shown in Figure P5.1, a beam of solid rectangular
cross section is fixed at one end, subjected to a downward ver-
tical load (along the z-axis) of 
at the free end,
and at the same time subjected to a horizontal load (along the 
y-axis) to the right, looking directly at the free end of the
beam, of H  3000 lb. For the beam dimensions shown, do
the following:
a. Identify the precise location of the most serious critical
point for this beam. Explain your logic clearly.
b. Calculate the maximum stress at the critical point.
c. Predict whether failure by yielding should be ex-
pected if the beam is made of AISI 1020 annealed carbon
steel.
V = 8000 lb
Problems
7.0 in.
H = 3000 lb
V = 8000 lb
3.0 in.
z
y
z
V
l = 80 in.
x
H
Figure P5.1
Cantilever beam subjected to simultaneous vertical and
horizontal end-loads.
5-2. A rectangular block shown in Figure P.5.2 is free on its up-
per end and ﬁxed at its base. The rectangular block is subjected
to a concentric compressive force of 200 kN together with a
moment of 5.0 kN-m, as shown.
a. Identify the location of the most critical point on the
rectangular block. 
b. Determine the maximum stress at the critical point and
determine if yielding will take place. The material is AISI
1060 hot-rolled steel.
50 mm
25 mm
y
x
x
z
P = 200 kN
M = 5.0 kN-m
Figure P5.2
Rectangular block subjected to an axial load and a bend-
ing moment.
5-3. Consider the bent circular rod shown in Figure P5.3. The
rod is loaded as shown with a transverse load P of 1000 lb.
Determine the diameter d in order to limit the tensile stress to
15,000 psi.

5.4. Consider the cylindrical bent shown in Figure P5.4.
a. Determine the maximum bending stress at point A.
b. Calculate the following stresses at point B:
i. Torsional shear
ii. Direct shear
5-5. The electronic detector package for monitoring paper
thickness in a  high-speed paper mill scans back and forth along
horizontal precision guide rails that are solidly supported at 24-
inch intervals, as shown in Figure P5.5. The detector package
fails to make acceptable thickness measurements if its vertical
displacements exceed 0.005 inch as it moves along the guide
rails during the scanning process. The total weight of the detec-
tor package is 400 lb and each of the two guide rails is a solid
AISI 1020 cold drawn steel cylindrical bar ground to 1.0000
inch in diameter. Each of the support rails may be modeled as a
beam with ﬁxed ends and a midspan concentrated load. Half the
detector weight is supported by each rail.
292
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
a. At a minimum, what potential failure modes should be
considered in predicting whether the support rails are ade-
quately designed?
b. Would you approve the design of the rails as proposed?
Clearly show each step of your supporting analysis, and be
complete in what you do.
c. If you do not approve the design, what recommenda-
tions would you make for speciﬁc things that might be
done to improve the design speciﬁcations? Be as complete
as you can.
5-6. A shaft having a 40 mm diameter carries a steady load F
of 10,000 N and torque T of 5000,000 N-mm is shown in Figure
P5.6. The shaft does not rotate. Locate the critical location and
determine the principal stresses at the critical location using
Mohr’s circle.
5.7. At a point in a body, the principal stresses are 10 MPa and
4 MPa. Determine:
a The resultant stress on a plane whose normal makes an
angle of 
with the normal to the plane of maximum
principal stress.
b The direction of the resultant stress.
5-8. A newly designed “model” is to be tested in a hot ﬂowing
gas to determine certain response characteristics. It is being
proposed that the support for the model be made of Ti-6Al-4V
25o
4 in.
10 in.
P = 1000 lb
d
Figure P5.3
Bent circular rod with applied load P.
d = 30 mm 
B
A
P = 700 N
200 mm
325 mm
wall thickness t = 5 mm
Figure P5.4
Bent circular rod with vertical end load.
W = 200 lb/rail
Support
"A"
Support
"C"
W
W
Support rails
24 in.
Figure P5.5
Simpliﬁed sketch of thickness-measuring scanner for 
paper mill application.

Problems 293
20.00 in.
0.0625 in.
3.00 in.
F = 17,500 lb
Fixed
Flow
d = 40 mm
T = 500,000 N-mm
y
z
F = 10,000 N
T = 500,000 N-mm
150 mm
150 mm
RB
RA
x
Figure P5.8
Titanium support for ﬂow-testing a model.
225 kN
225 kN
Enlarged view
Enlarged view
Crack length 1.5 mm
Crack
Crack
Crack length 1.5 mm
25 mm
25 mm
1.25 m
1.25 m
1.25 m
1.88 m
3.75 m
3 mm D. hole
3 mm D. hole
RL
RR
4 cm
25 cm
Figure P5.9
Module support beam with two small holes.
Figure P5.6
Shaft subjected to torsion
and a steady applied load.
titanium alloy. The titanium support is to be a rectangular
plate, as shown in Figure P5.8, 3.00 inches in the ﬂow direc-
tion, 20.00 inches vertically (in the load-carrying direction),
and 0.0625 inch thick. A vertical load of 17,500 pounds must
be carried at the bottom end of the titanium support, and the
top end of the support is ﬁxed for all test conditions by a spe-
cial design arrangement. During the test the temperature is ex-
pected to increase from ambient 
to a maximum of
. The vertical displacement of the bottom end of the ti-
tanium support must not exceed 0.1250 inch, or the test will be
invalid.
a. What potential failure modes should be considered in
predicting whether this support is adequately designed?
b. Would you approve the proposed design for the tita-
nium support? Support your response with clear, complete
calculations.
5-9. A polar exploration team based near the south pole is
faced with an emergency in which a very important “housing
and supplies” module must be lifted by a special crane, swung
across a deep glacial crevasse, and set down in a safe location
on the stable side of the crevasse. The only means of support-
ing the 450-kN module during the emergency move is a 3.75-
m-long piece of steel with a rectangular cross section of 4 cm
1400°F2
175°F2
thick by 25 cm deep with two small holes. The holes are both
3 mm in diameter, and are located at midspan 25 mm from the
upper and the lower edges, as shown in Figure P5.9. These
holes were drilled for some earlier use, and careful inspection
has shown a tiny through-the-thickness crack, approximately
1.5 mm long, emanating from each hole, as shown. The support
member may be modeled for this application as a 3.75-m-long
simply supported beam that symmetrically supports the module
weight at two points, located 1.25 m from each end, as shown.
The material is known to be D6AC steel (1000 F temper).
Ambient temperature is about 
C.
If the beam is to be used only once for this purpose, would
you approve its use? Support your answer with clearly ex-
plained calculations based on the most accurate techniques that
you know.
5-10. The support towers of a suspension bridge, which
spans a small estuary on a tropical island, are stabilized by
anodized aluminum cables. Each cable is attached to the end
of a cantilevered support bracket made of D6AC steel (tem-
pered at 1000 F) that is fixed in a heavy concrete foundation,
°
-54°
°

as shown in Figure P5.10. The cable  load, F, may be regarded
as static and has been measured to be about 200,000 lb, but
under hurricane conditions may reach 500,000 lb due to wind
loading.
Inspection of the rectangular cross-section brackets has
turned up a crack, with dimensions and location as shown in
Figure P5.10. Assuming that fatigue is not a potential failure
mode in this case, would you recommend that the cracked sup-
port bracket be replaced (a very costly procedure) or allow it to
remain in service? (Repair procedures such as welding of the
crack are not permitted by local construction codes.)
5-11. A horizontal cantilever beam of square cross section is
250 mm long, and is subjected to a vertical cyclic load at its free
end. The cyclic load varies from a downward force of
to an upward force of 
. Estimate
the required cross-sectional dimensions of the square beam if
the steel material has the following properties: 
,
, and 
(note that 
has already been corrected for the inﬂuencing factors). Inﬁnite
life is desired. For this preliminary estimate, the issues of safety
factor and stress concentration may both be neglected.
5-12. A short horizontal cantilever bracket of rectangular cross
section is loaded vertically downward (z-direction) at the end
by a force of 
, as shown in Figure P5.12. The
F = 85,000 lb
Sf = 345 MPa
Sf = 345 MPa
Syp = 552 MPa
Su = 655 MPa
Pup = 13.5 kN
Pdown = 4.5 kN
294
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
beam cross section is 3.0 inches by 1.5 inches, as shown, and
the length is 1.2 inches. The beam is made of hot-rolled AISI
1020 steel.
a. Identify potential critical points other than the point di-
rectly under the force F.
b. For each identiﬁed critical point, show a small volume
element including all nonzero stress components.
c. Calculate the magnitude of each stress component
shown in (b). Neglect stress concentration effects.
d. Determine whether failure by yielding will occur, and
if it does, state clearly where it happens. Neglect stress
concentration effects.
5-13. The stubby horizontal cantilevered cylindrical boss
shown in Figure P5.13 is loaded at the free end by a vertically
downward force of 
. The circular cross section has
a diameter of 7.5 cm and a length of just 2.5 cm. The boss is
made of cold-rolled AISI 1020 steel.
a. Identify clearly and completely the locations of all po-
tential critical points that you believe should be investi-
gated, and clearly explain why you have chosen these
particular points. Do not consider the point where force F
is concentrated on the boss.
b. For each potential critical point identiﬁed, neatly sketch
a small-volume element showing all pertinent stress com-
ponents.
F = 575 kN.
l = 1.2 in.
F = 85,000 lb
d = 3.0 in.
w = 1.5 in.
x
y
z
Fixed
Figure P5.12
Short rectangular cantilever bracket with transverse end-
load.
l = 2.5 in.
d = 7.5 cm
Fixed
end
F = 575 kN
Figure P5.13
Stubby cylindrical cantilever boss with transverse end-
load.
60°
F
Cable
8 in.
12 in.
3 in.
Crack
2 in.
Crack
Fixed concrete
foundation
0.35 in.
0.070 in. deep
12 in.
(a) Cable attachment and
      crack location details.
(b) Cross section of steel support
  through the cracked region.
L
C?
Figure P5.10
Cantilevered support bracket
for anchoring bridge region.

c. Calculate a numerical value for each stress component
shown in (b).
d. At each of the critical points identiﬁed, determine
whether yielding should be expected to occur. Show cal-
culation details for each case.
5-14. The short tubular cantilever bracket shown in Figure P5.14
is to be subjected to a transverse end-load of 
Neglecting possible stress concentration effects, do the fol-
lowing:
a. Specify precisely and completely the location of all po-
tential critical points. Clearly explain why you have cho-
sen these particular points. Do not consider the point
where force F is applied to the bracket.
b. For each potential critical point identiﬁed, sketch a
small-volume element showing all nonzero components of
stress.
c. Calculate numerical values for each of the stresses
shown in (b).
d. If the material is cold-drawn AISI 1020 steel, would
you expect yielding to occur at any of the critical points
identiﬁed in (a)? Clearly state which ones.
5-15. It is being proposed to use AISI 1020 cold-drawn steel for
the shaft of a 22.5-horsepower electric motor designed to oper-
ate at 1725 rpm. Neglecting possible stress concentration effects,
what minimum diameter should the solid steel motor shaft be
made if yielding is the governing failure mode? Assume the
yield strength in shear to be one-half the tensile yield strength.
5-16. It is desired to use a solid circular cross section for a ro-
tating shaft to be used to transmit power from one gear set to
another. The shaft is to be capable of transmitting 18 kilowatts
at a speed of 500 rpm. If yielding is the governing failure mode
and the shear yield strength for the ductile material has been de-
termined to be 900 MPa, what should the minimum shaft diam-
eter be to prevent yielding?
5-17. A solid steel shaft of square cross section is to be made
of annealed AISI 1020 steel. The shaft is to be used to transmit
power between two gearboxes spaced 10.0 inches apart. The
shaft must transmit 75 horsepower at a rotational speed of 2500
rpm. Based on yielding as the governing failure mode, what
F = 30,000 lb.
Problems 295
minimum dimension should be speciﬁed for the sides of the
square shaft to just prevent yielding? Assume the yield strength
in shear to be one-half the tensile yield strength. There are no
axial or lateral forces on the shaft.
5.18. It is necessary to use a solid equilateral triangle as the
cross-sectional shape for a rotating shaft to transmit power from
one gear reducer to another. The shaft is to be capable of trans-
mitting 4 kilowatts at a speed of 1500 rpm. Based on yielding
as the governing failure mode, if the shear yield strength for the
material has been determined to be 241 MPa, what should the
minimum shaft dimensions be to just prevent yielding?
5-19. a. Find the torque required to produce ﬁrst yielding in a
box-section torsion-bar built up from two equal-leg L-sec-
tions (structural angles), each 
inch, welded
together continuously at two places all along their full
length of 3 feet. The material is hot-rolled AISI 1020
steel. Assume the yield strength in shear to be one-half the
tensile yield strength. Neglect stress concentration effects.
b. For the box-section torsion-bar of (a), what torque
would cause ﬁrst yielding if the welder forgot to join the
structural angles along their length? Compare with the
result from (a).
5-20. A hollow square tube is to be used as a shaft to transmit
power from an electric motor/dynamometer to an industrial
gearbox which requires an input of 42 horsepower at 3400 rpm,
continuously. The shaft material is annealed AISI 304 stainless
steel. The dimensions of the square shaft cross section are 1.25
inches outside, the well thickness is 0.125 inch, and the shaft
length is 20 inches. There are no signiﬁcant axial or lateral
loads on the shaft.
a. Based on yielding as a failure mode, what existing
safety factor would you calculate for this shaft when it is
operating under full power? Assume the yield strength in
shear to be one-half the tensile yield strength.
b. What angle of twist would you predict for this shaft
when operating under full power?
5-21. Compare and contrast the basic philosophy of failure pre-
diction for yielding failure with failure by rapid crack exten-
sion. As a part of your discussion, carefully deﬁne the terms
stress-intensity factor, critical stress intensity, and fracture
toughness.
5-22. Describe the three basic crack-displacement modes, us-
ing appropriate sketches.
5-23. Interpret the following equation, and carefully deﬁne
each symbol used. Failure is predicted to occur if:
5-24. A very wide sheet of 7075-T651 aluminum plate, 8 mm
thick is found to have a single-edge through-the-thickness crack
25 mm long. The loading produces a gross nominal tension
stress of 45 MPa perpendicular to the plane of the crack tip.
a. Calculate the stress intensity factor at the crack tip.
Cs 2pa Ú KIc
21
2 * 21
2 * 1
4
l = 1.5 in.
F = 30,000 lb
Fixed
end
do = 3.25 in.
di = 3.00 in.
Figure P5.14
Short tubular cantilever bracket with transverse end-load.

b. Determine the critical stress-intensity factor.
c. Estimate the factor of safety (
)
5-25. Discuss all parts of 5-24 under conditions that are identi-
cal to those stated, except that the sheet thickness is 3 mm.
5-26. A steam generator in a remote power station is supported
by two tension straps, each one 7.5 cm wide by 11 mm thick by
66 cm long. The straps are made of A538 steel. When in opera-
tion, the fully loaded steam generator weights 1300 kN, equally
distributed to the two support straps. The load may be regarded
as static. Ultrasonic inspection has detected a through-the-thick-
ness center crack 12.7 mm long, oriented perpendicular to the
66-cm dimension (i.e., perpendicular to the tensile load). Would
you allow the plant to be put back into operation? Support your
answer with clear, complete engineering calculations.
5-27. A pinned-end structural member in a high-perform-
ance tanker is made of a 0.375-inch-thick-by-5-inches-wide,
rectangular cross-section, titanium 6Al-4V bar, 48 inches
long. The member is normally subjected to a pure static ten-
sile load of 154,400 lb. Inspection of the member has indi-
cated a central through-the-thickness crack of 0.50-inch
length, oriented perpendicular to the applied load. If a safety
factor (see 5.2) of 
is required, what reduced load
limit for the member would you recommend for safe opera-
tion (i.e., to give 
)?
5-28. An engine mount on an experimental high-speed shuttle
has been inspected, and a thumbnail surface crack 0.05 inch
deep and 0.16 inch long at the surface has been found in mem-
ber A, as shown in Figure P5.28. The structure is pin-connected
at all joints. Member A is 0.312 inch thick and 1.87 inches
wide, of rectangular cross section, and made of 7075-T6 alu-
minum alloy. If full power produces a thrust load 
of 18,000 lb
at the end of member B, as shown in Figure P5.28, what per-
centage of full-power thrust load would you set as a limit until
part A can be replaced, if a minimum safety factor (see 5.2) of
1.2 must be maintained?
5-29. A 90-cm-long structural member of 7075-T6 aluminum
has a rectangular cross section 8 mm thick by 4.75 cm wide.
The member must support a load of 133 kN static tension. A
P
n = 1.7
n = 1.7
n = KIc/KI
296
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
thumbnail surface crack 2.25 mm deep and 7 mm long at the
surface has been found during an inspection.
a. Predict whether failure would be expected.
b. Estimate the existing safety factor under these condi-
tions.
5-30. A transducer support to be used in a high-ﬂow-rate com-
bustion chamber is to be made of hot-pressed silicon carbide
with tensile strength of 110,000 psi, compressive strength of
500,000 psi, fracture toughness of 3100 psi
, and nil ductil-
ity. The dimensions of the silicon-carbide support, which has a
rectangular cross section, are 1.25 inches wide by 0.094 inch
thick by 7.0 inches long. Careful inspection of many such
pieces has revealed through-the-thickness edge cracks up to
0.060 inch long, but none longer. If this part is loaded in pure
uniform tension parallel to the 7-inch dimension, approxi-
mately what maximum tensile load would you predict the part
could withstand before failing?
5-31. A newly installed cantilever beam of D6AC steel
(1000
temper) has just been put into use as a support bracket
for a large outdoor tank used in processing synthetic crude oil
near Ft. McMurray, Alberta, Canada, near the Arctic Circle. As
shown in Figure P5.31, the cantilever beam is 25 cm long and
has a rectangular cross section 5.0 cm deep by 1.3 cm thick. A
large ﬁllet at the ﬁxed end will allow you to neglect stress con-
centration there. A shallow through-the-thickness crack has
been found near the ﬁxed end, as shown, and the crack depth
has been measured as 0.75 mm. The load 
is static and will
P
°F
2in
0.312 in.
Crack (lies in
plane of the
cross section)
Enlarged cross
section of "A" at
the crack location
Primary
structure
Crack
(see enlarged
cross section)
P
10 in.
10 in.
"A"
"B"
5 in.
1.87 in.
0.05 in.
0.16 in.
Figure P5.28
Sketch of cracked engine mount.
Through-the-thickness crack
Section through beam
at the crack location
1.3 cm
0.75 mm
5.0 cm
P = 22 kN
25 cm
Figure P5.31
Cracked cantilever beam.

never exceed 22 kN. Can we get through the winter without re-
placing the defective beam, or should we replace it now?
5-32. Identify several problems a designer must recognize when
dealing with fatigue loading as compared to static loading.
5-33. Distinguish the differences between high-cycle fatigue
and low-cycle fatigue.
5-34. Carefully sketch a typical S-N curve, use it to deﬁne and
distinguish between the terms fatigue strength and fatigue en-
durance limit, and brieﬂy indicate how a designer might use
such a curve in practice.
5-35. Make a list of factors that might inﬂuence the S-N curve,
and indicate brieﬂy what the inﬂuence might be in each case.
5-36. Sketch a family of S-N-P curves, explain the meaning
and utility of these curves, and explain in detail how such a
family of curves would be produced in the laboratory.
5-37. a. Estimate and plot the S-N curve for AISI 1020 cold-
drawn steel, using the static properties of Table 3.3 (use
SI units).
b. Using the estimated S-N curve, determine the fatigue
strength at 
cycles.
c. Using Figure 5.31, determine the fatigue strength of
1020 steel at 
cycles and compare it with the estimate
of (b).
5-38. a. Estimate and plot the S-N curve for 2024-T3 aluminum
alloy, using the static properties given in Table 3.3.
b. What is the estimated magnitude of the fatigue en-
durance limit for this material?
5-39. a. Estimate and plot the S-N curve for ASTM A-48 (class
50) gray cast iron, using the static properties of Table 3.3
(use SI units).
b. On average, based on the estimated S-N curve, what
life would you predict for parts made from this cast iron
material if they are subjected to completely reversed uni-
axial cyclic stresses of 210 MPa amplitude? 
5-40. It has been suggested that AISI 1060 hot-rolled steel (see
Table 3.3) be used for a power plant application in which a
cylindrical member is subjected to an axial load that cycles
from 78,000 pounds tension to 78,000 pounds compression, re-
peatedly. The following manufacturing and operating condi-
tions are expected:
a. The part is to be lathe-turned.
b. The cycle rate is 200 cycles per minute.
c. A very long life is desired.
d. A strength reliability of 99 percent is desired.
Ignoring the issues of stress concentration and safety factor,
what diameter would be required for this cylindrical cast iron
bar?
5-41. A solid square link for a spacecraft application is to be
made of Ti-Al-4V titanium alloy (see Table 3.3). The link must
transmit a cyclic axial load that ranges form 220 kN tension to
220 kN compression, repeatedly. Welding is to be used to attach
106
106
Problems 297
the link to the supporting structure. The link surfaces are to be
ﬁnished by using a horizontal milling machine. A design life of
cycles is required.
a. Estimate the fatigue strength of the part used in this
application.
b. Estimate the required cross-sectional dimensions of the
square bar, ignoring the issues of stress concentration and
safety factor.
5-42. An old “standard” design for the cantilevered support
shaft for a bicycle pedal has a history of fatigue failure of about
one pedal shaft for every 100 pedals installed. If management
desires to reduce the incidence of failure to about one pedal
shaft for every 1000 pedals installed, by what factor must the
operating stress at the critical point be reduced, assuming that
all other factors remain constant?
5-43. An axially loaded actuator bar has a solid rectangular
cross section 6.0 mm by 18.0 mm, and is made of 2024-T4 alu-
minum alloy. The loading on the bar may be well approximated
as constant-amplitude axial cyclic loading that cycles between
a maximum load of 20 kN tension and a minimum load of 2 kN
compression. The static properties of 2024-T4 are 
, and 
(50 mm)  20 percent. Fatigue proper-
ties are shown in Figure 5.31. Estimate the total number of cy-
cles to failure for this bar. Neglect stress concentration effects.
Assume that buckling is not a problem.
5-44. A tie-bar is to be used to connect a reciprocating power
source to a remote shaking sieve in an open-pit mine. It is 
desired to use a solid cylindrical cross section of 2024-T4 alu-
minum alloy for the tie-bar. The applied axial load fluctuates
cyclically from a maximum of 45,000 pounds tension to a
minimum of 15,000 pounds compression. If the tie-bar is to be
designed for a life of 107 cycles, what diameter should the bar
be made? Ignore the issue of safety factor.
5-45. A 1-m-long, simply supported horizontal beam is to be
loaded at midspan by a vertical cyclic load P that ranges be-
tween 90 kN down and 270 kN down. The proposed beam cross
section is to be rectangular, 50 mm wide by 100 mm deep. The
material is to be Ti-6Al-4V titanium alloy.
a. What is (are) the governing failure mode(s), and why?
b. Where is (are) the critical point(s) located? How do you
come to this conclusion?
c. How many cycles would you predict that the beam
could sustain before it fails?
5-46. Explain how a designer might use a master diagram,
such as the ones shown in Figure 5.39.
5-47. a. An aluminum bar of solid cylindrical cross section is
to be subjected to a cyclic axial load that ranges from
5000 pounds tension to 10,000 pounds tension. The ma-
terial has an ultimate tensile strength of 100,000 psi, a
yield strength of 80,000 psi, a mean fatigue strength at
105 cycles of 40,000 psi, and an elongation of 8 percent
in 2 inches. Calculate the bar diameter that should be
used to just produce failure in 105 cycles, on the average.
e
Syp = 324 MPa
Su = 469 MPa,
105

298
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
b. If, instead of the loading speciﬁed in part (a), the cyclic
axial loading ranged from 15,000 pounds tension to 20,000
pounds tension, calculate the bar diameter that should be
used to just produce failure in 105 cycles, on the average.
c. Compare the results of parts (a) and (b), making any
observations you think appropriate.
5-48. The S-N data from a series of completely reversed fatigue
tests are shown in the chart below. The ultimate strength is 1500
MPa, and the yield strength is 1380 MPa. Determine and plot
the estimated S-N curve for the material if its application can be
well characterized as having a mean stress of 270 MPa.
The ultimate strength is 240,000 psi, and the yield strength
is 225,000 psi.
a. Determine and plot the 
curve for this mate-
rial for a mean stress of 50,000 psi tension.
b. Determine and plot, on the same graph sheet, the
curve for this material for a mean stress of
50,000 psi compression.
5-50. Discuss the basic assumptions made in using a linear
damage rule to assess fatigue damage accumulation, and note
the major “pitfalls” one might experience in using such a the-
ory. Why, then, is a linear damage theory so often used?
5-51. The critical point in the main rotor shaft of a new VSTOL
aircraft of the ducted-fan type has been instrumented, and dur-
ing a “typical” mission the equivalent completely reversed
stress spectrum has been found to be 50,000 psi for 15 cycles,
30,000 psi for 100 cycles, 60,000 psi for 3 cycles, and 10,000
psi for 10,000 cycles.
Ten missions of this spectrum have been “ﬂown.” It is de-
sired to overload the shaft to 1.10 times the “typical” loading
spectrum. Estimate the number of additional “overloaded” mis-
sions that can be ﬂown without failure, if the stress spectrum is
linearly proportional to the loading spectrum. An S-N curve for
the shaft material is shown in Figure P5.51.
5-52. A hollow square tube with outside dimensions of 32 mm
and wall thickness of 4 mm is to be made of 2024-T4 alu-
minum, with fatigue properties as shown in Figure 5.31. This
tube is to be subjected to the following completely reversed ax-
ial force amplitudes: ﬁrst, 90 kN for 52,000 cycles; next, 48 kN
for 948,000 cycles; then, 110 kN for 11,100 cycles.
After this loading sequence has been imposed, it is desired
to change the force amplitude to 84 kN, still in the axial direc-
tion. How many remaining cycles of life would you predict for
the tube at this ﬁnal level of loading?
5-53. A solid cylindrical bar of 2024-T4 aluminum alloy (see
Figure 5.31) is to be subjected to a duty cycle that consists of the
smax - N
smax - N
S (MPa)
N (cycles)
1170
1040
970
880
860
850
840
2 * 106 :  q
1 * 106
5 * 105
2 * 105
1 * 105
5 * 104
2 * 104
5-49. The 
data for direct stress fatigue tests, in
which the mean stress was 25,000 psi tension for all tests, are
shown in the table. 
smax - N
(psi)
N (cycles)
150,000
131,000
121,000
107,000
105,000
103,000
102,000
2 * 106
1 * 106
5 * 105
2 * 105
1 * 105
5 * 104
2 * 104
smax
Stress, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
1
10
0
20
40
60
80
102
103
104
105
106
107
 Su = 69,000 psi
Syp = 45,000 psi
 m = 0
Figure P5.51
S-N curve for rotor shaft material.

Problems 299
following spectrum of completely reversed axial tensile loads:
First, 50 kN for 1200 cycles; next, 31 kN for 37,000 cycles; then
40 kN for 4300 cycles. Approximate static properties of 2024-
T4 aluminum alloy are 
MPa and 
MPa.
What bar diameter would be required to just survive 50
duty cycles before fatigue failure takes place?
5-54. The stress-time pattern shown in Figure P5.54(a) is to be
repeated in blocks until failure of a test component occurs.
Using the rain ﬂow cycle counting method, and the S-N curve
given in Figure P5.54(b), estimate the hours of life until failure
of this test component occurs.
5-55. The stress-time spectrum shown in Figure P5.55 is to be
repeated in blocks until failure of the component occurs on a
laboratory test stand. Using the rain ﬂow cycle counting
method, and the S-N curve shown in Figure P5.54(b), estimate
the time in hours of testing that would be required to produce
failure.
5-56. In “modern” fatigue anlaysis, three separate phases of fa-
tigue are deﬁned. List the three phases, and brieﬂy describe how
each one is currently modeled and analyzed.
5-57. For the equation 
, deﬁne each term, de-
scribe the physical phenomenon being modeled, and tell what
the limiting conditions are on the magnitude of 
. What are
the consequences of exceeding the limits of validity?
5-58. Experimental values for the properties of an alloy steel
have been found to be 
MPA, 
MPa,
MPa
, 
percent in 50 mm, 
MPa, 
, 
and 
A direct tension member made of this alloy
has a single semicircular edge notch that results in a fatigue
stress concentration factor of 1.6. The net cross section of the
member at the root of the notch is 9 mm thick by 36 mm wide.
A completely reversed cyclic axial force of 72 kN amplitude is
applied to the tension member.
c = -0.060.
e¿j = 0.48, s¿j = 2000 MPa, b = -0.091,
n¿ = 0.15
k¿ = 1070
e = 20
1m
Klc = 81.4
Syp = 1370
Su = 1480
¢K
da>dN = C¢K n
Syp = 330
Su = 470
a. How many cycles would you estimate that it would take
to initiate a fatigue crack at the notch root?
b. What length would you estimate this crack to be at the
time it is “initiated” according to the calculation of part (a)?
5-59. Testing an aluminum alloy has resulted in the following
data: 
, 
, 
,
, 
, 
, 
,
, 
, 
, and 
A direct tension member made of this alloy is to be 50 mm wide,
9 mm thick, and have a 12-mm diameter hole, through the thick-
ness, at the center of the tension member. The hole will produce a
fatigue stress concentration factor of 
. A completely re-
versed axial force of 28 kN amplitude is to be applied to the
kf = 2.2
71 GPa.
E =
c =
- 0.60
b =
- 0.12
s¿f = 1100 MPa
e¿f = 0.22
n' = 0.065
k' = 655 MPa
e(50 mm) = 22%
KIc = 28 MPa1m
Syp = 345 MPa
Su = 483 MPa
Stress, ksi
–50
– 40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
1 minute
1 block
(a)
(b)
Stress, ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
103
102
104
105
106
107
 Su = 65,000 psi
Syp = 55,000 psi
 m = 0
Figure P5.54
Stress-time spectrum and S-N curve for test component.
Stress, ksi
–50
– 40
–30
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
1 block
1 second
Figure P5.55
Stress-time pattern.

member. Estimate the number of cycles required to initiate a fa-
tigue crack at the edge of the hole.
5-60. A Ni-Mo-V steel plate with yield strength of 84,500 psi,
plane strain fracture toughness of 33,800 psi
, and crack-
growth behavior shown in Figure P5.60, is 0.50 inch thick, 10.0
inches wide, and 30.0 inches long. The plate is to be subjected
to a released tensile load ﬂuctuating from 0 to 160,000 lb, ap-
plied in the longitudinal direction (parallel to 30-inch dimen-
sion). A through-the-thickness crack of length 0.075 inch has
been detected at one edge. How many more cycles of this re-
leased tensile loading would you predict could be applied be-
fore catastrophic fracture would occur?
1in
300
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
5-61. A helicopter-transmission support leg (one of three such
members) consists of a ﬂat plate of rectangular cross section.
The plate is 12 mm thick, 150 mm wide, and 200 mm long.
Strain gauge data indicate that the load is cycling between 450 N
and 100 kN tension, each cycle at a frequency of about 5 times
per second. The load is applied parallel to the 200-mm dimen-
sion and is distributed uniformly across the 300 mm width. The
material is Ni-Mo-V alloy steel with an ultimate strength of 758
MPa, yield strength of 582 MPa, plane strain fracture toughness
of 
, and crack-growth behavior is approximated
as 
, where 
is measured in
and 
is measured in 
.
If a through-the-thickness crack at one edge, with a crack
length of 1 mm, is detected during an inspection. Estimate the
number of cycles before the crack length becomes critical.
5-62. Make two neat, clear sketches illustrating two ways of
completely deﬁning the state of stress at a point. Deﬁne all sym-
bols used.
5-63. A solid cylindrical bar is ﬁxed at one end and subjected
to a pure torsional moment 
at the free end, as shown in
Figure P5.63. Find, for this loading, the principal normal
stresses and the principal shearing stresses at the critical point,
using the stress cubic equation (5-1).
Mt
MPa1m
¢K
m m/m
da/dN
da/dN L 4.8 * 10-27(¢K)3
37.2 MPa1m
5-64. Solve problem 5-63 using the Mohr’s circle analogy.
5-65. A solid cylindrical bar of diameter d is ﬁxed at one end
and subjected to both a pure torsional moment 
and a pure
bending moment 
at the free end. Using the stress cubic
equation (5-1), ﬁnd the principal normal stresses and principal
shearing stresses at the critical point for this loading, in terms
of applied moments and bar dimensions.
5-66. Solve problem 5-65 using the Mohr’s circle analogy.
5-67. From the stress analysis for a machine part at a speciﬁed
critical point, it has been found that 
MPa, 
MPa, and 
 5 MPa. For this state of stress, deter-
mine the principal stresses and the maximum shearing stress at
the critical point.
5-68. A solid cylindrical bar of 7075-T6 aluminum is 3 inches
in diameter, and is subjected to a torsional moment of
in-lb, a bending moment of 
in-lb,
and a transverse force of 
lb, as shown in the
sketch of Figure P5.68.
FZ = 90,000
My = 50,000
Tx = 75,000
tyz
tyz = 5
sZ = 6
Mb
Mt
K in psi inch
Crack growth rate da/dN, microinches/ cycle
Crack growth rate da/dN, in./ cycle
Stress intensity factor range, KI, ksi
in
1
2
4
6
8
10
20
40
60
80
100
200
400
600
800
1000
10–6
10–5
10–4
10–3
10
20
40
60
80 100
NiMoV steel
0.2% yield strength = 84.5 ksi
Test temp. = 75°F
Test frequency = 1800 cpm
Max. cyclic load, lbs
*For       in in./cycle
* = 1.8 	 10 –19K3
da
dN
da
dN
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9200
9900
Figure P5.60
Crack-growth data for Ni-Mo-V alloy steel. (From W. G.
Clark, Jr., “Fracture Mechanics in Fatigue,” Experimental
Mechanics, Sept. 1971. (Reprinted from “Experimental
Mechanics” with the permission of the Society for
Experimental Mechanics, Inc., 7 School St., Bethel, CT
06801, (203) 790-6373, www.sem.org.)
Mt
a
x
y
z
Figure P5.63
Solid cylindrical bar subjected to a pure torsional moment.

Problems 301
7075-T6
Aluminum
Tx = 75,000 in.-lb
My = 50,000 in.-lb
Cross section
of interest
Fz = 90,000 lb
d = 3.00 in.
y
x
z
Figure P5.68
Solid cylindrical bar subjected to torsion, bending, and
transverse shear.
a. Clearly establish the location(s) of the potential critical
point(s), giving logic and reasons why you have selected
the point(s).
b. Calculate the magnitudes of the principal stresses at the
selected critical point(s).
c. Calculate the magnitude(s) of the maximum shearing
stress(es) at the critical point(s).
5-69. The square cantilever beam shown in Figure P5.69 is
subjected to pure bending moments 
and 
, as shown.
Stress concentration effects are negligible.
a. For the critical point, make a complete sketch depicting
the state of stress.
b. Determine the magnitudes of the principal stresses at
the critical point.
5-70. Equations (5-15), (5-16), and (5-17) represent Hooke’s
Law relationships for a triaxial state of stress. Based on these
equations:
a. Write the Hooke’s Law relationships for a biaxial state
of stress.
b. Write the Hooke’s Law relationships for a uniaxial state
of stress.
c. Does a uniaxial state of stress imply a uniaxial state of
strain? Explain.
5-71. It has been calculated that the critical point in a 4340 steel
part is subjected to a state of stress in which 
psi,
sx = 6000
Mz
My
psi, and the remaining stress components are all
zero. For this state of stress, determine the sum of the normal
strains in the x, y, and z directions; that is, determine the magni-
tude of 
.
5-72. For the case of pure biaxial shear, that is, the case where
is the only nonzero component of stress, write expressions
for the principal normal strains. Is this a biaxial state of strain?
Explain.
5-73. Explain why it is often necessary for a designer to utilize
a failure theory.
5-74. What are the essential attributes of any useful failure
theory?
5-75. What is the basic assumption that constitutes the frame-
work for all failure theories?
5-76. a. The first strain invariant may be defined as
. Write in words a “ﬁrst strain invari-
ant” theory of failure. Be complete and precise.
b. Derive a complete mathematical expression for your
“ﬁrst strain invariant” theory of failure, expressing the
ﬁnal result in terms of principal stresses and material
properties.
c. How could one establish whether or not this theory of
failure is valid?
5-77. The solid cylindrical cantilever bar shown in Figure P5.77
is subjected to a pure torsional moment T about the x-axis, pure
bending moment Mb about the y-axis, and pure tensile force P
along the x-axis, all at the same time. The material is a ductile
aluminum alloy.
a. Carefully identify the most critical point(s), neglecting
stress concentration. Give detailed reasoning for your se-
lection(s).
b. At the critical point(s), draw a cubic volume element,
showing all stress vectors.
c. Carefully explain how you would determine whether or
not to expect yielding at the critical point.
5-78. In the triaxial state of stress shown in Figure P5.78, de-
termine whether failure would be predicted. Use the maximum
normal stress theory for brittle materials and both the distortion
I1 K ei + ej + ek
txy
ex + ey + ez
txy = 4000
L
x
y
a
a
z
My
Mz
Figure P5.69
Cantilever beam subjected to bending about two axes.
x
y
L
z
Mb
T
P
d
Figure P5.77
Cylindrical cantilever beam subjected to torsion, bending,
and direct tension.

energy theory and the maximum shearing stress theory for duc-
tile materials:
a. For an element stressed as shown, made of 319-T6 alu-
minum 
percent
in 50 mm).
b. For an element stressed as shown, made of 518.0 alu-
minum, as cast 
percent in 50 mm).
5-79. The axle of an electric locomotive is subjected to a bend-
ing stress of 25,000 psi. At the same critical point, torsional
stress due to the transmission of power is 15,000 psi and a ra-
dial compressive stress of 10,000 psi results from the fact that
the wheel is pressed onto the axle. Would you expect yielding
at the selected critical point if the axle is made of AISI 1060
steel in the “as-rolled” condition?
5-80. A hollow tubular steel bar is to be used as a torsion spring
subjected to a cyclic pure torque ranging from 
N-m to
N-m. It is desirable to use a thin-walled tube with wall
thickness t equal to 10 percent of the outside diameter d. The
steel material has an ultimate strength of 1379 MPa, a yield
strength of 1241 MPa, and an elongation of 
.
The fatigue limit is 655 MPa. Find the minimum tube dimen-
sions that should just provide inﬁnite life. The polar moment of
inertia for a thin-walled tube may be approximated by the ex-
pression 
.
5-81. Using the “force-ﬂow” concept, describe how one would
assess the relative severity of various types of geometrical dis-
continuities in a machine part subjected to a given set of exter-
nal loads. Use a series of clearly drawn sketches to augment
your explanation.
5-82. The support bracket shown in Figure P5.82 is made of
permanent-mold cast-aluminum alloy 356.0, solution-treated
and aged (see Tables 3.3 and 3.10), and subjected to a static
pure bending moment of 850 in-lb. Would you expect the part
to fail when the load is applied?
5-83. The machine part shown in Figure P5.83 is subjected to
a completely reversed (zero mean) cyclic bending moment of
in-lb, as shown. The material is annealed 1020 steel
with 
psi, and elongation in 2
inches of 25 percent. The S-N curve for ths material is given in
Figure 5.31. How many cycles of loading would you estimate
could be applied before failure occurs?
Su = 57,000 psi, Syp = 43,000
;4000
J = pd3t/4
e150 mm2 = 15%
+1700
-60
1Su = 310 MPa, Syp = 186 MPa, e = 8
1Su = 248 MPa, Syp = 165 MPa, e = 20
302
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
5-84. a. The mounting arm shown in Figure P5.84 is to be made
of Class 60 gray cast iron with ultimate strength of 414
MPa in tension and elongation in 50 mm less than 0.5 per-
cent. The arm is subjected to a static axial force of
and a static torsional moment of
, as shown. For the dimensions shown,
could the arm support the speciﬁc loading without failure?
b. During a different mode of operation the axial force P
cycles repeatedly from 225 kN tension to 225 kN com-
pression, and the torsional moment remains zero at all
times. What would you estimate the life to be for this
cyclic mode of operation? 
5-85. An S-hook, as sketched in Figure P5.85, is being pro-
posed as a means of hanging unitized dumpster bins in a new
state-of-the-art dip-style painting process. The maximum
weight of a dumpster bin is estimated to be 300 pounds, and
two hooks will typically be used to support the weight, equally
T = 2048 N-m
P = 225 kN
290 MPa
70 MPa
35 MPa
Figure P5.78
Triaxial state of stress.
2.0 in.
4.50 in.
1.25 in.
3.0 in.
r = 0.125 in.
r = 0.150 in.
t = 0.1875 in.
M = 850
in.-lb
1.0 in.
4.0 in.
Hole;
d = 0.25 in.
Figure P5.82
Cast-aluminum support bracket subjected to pure bending
moment at the free end.
1.75 in.
2.00 in.
1.64 in.
r = 0.25 in.
3 in.
3 in.
1
2
1
in.
1
2
1
in.
3
8 in.
1
8 in.
(hole) d =
r = 0.18 in.
M = ±4000
in.-lb
Figure P5.83
Machine part subjected to completely reversed cyclic
bending moment.
50 mm D
56 mm D
T
T
P
P
r = 3 mm
Figure P5.84
Cast-iron mounting arm subjected to tension and torsion.

Problems 303
split between two lifting lugs. However, the possibility exists
that on some occasions the entire weight may have to be sup-
ported by a single hook. It is estimated that each pair of hooks
will be loaded, unloaded, and then reloaded approximately
every ﬁve minutes. The plant is to operate 24 hours per day, 7
days a week. The proposed hook material is commercially pol-
ished AM 350 stainless steel in age-hardened condition (see
Table 3.3). Preliminary considerations suggest that both yield-
ing and fatigue may be potential failure modes.
a. To investigate potential yielding failure, identify criti-
cal points in the S-hook, determine maximum stresses at
each critical point, and predict whether the loads can be
supported without failure by yielding.
b. To investigate potential failure by fatigue, identify criti-
cal points in the S-hook, determine pertinent cyclic stresses
at each critical point, and predict whether a 10-year design
life could be achieved with 99 percent reliability.
5-86. A 
-ton hydraulic press for removing and reinstalling
bearings in small to medium-size electric motors is to consist of
a commercially available hydraulic cylinder mounted vertically
in a C-frame, with dimensions as sketched in Figure P5.86. It is
being proposed to use ASTM A-48 (Class 50) gray cast iron for
the C-frame material. (See Table 3.3 for properties.) Predict
whether the C-frame can support the maximum load without
failure.
11
2
5-87. A bolted joint of the type shown in Figure P5.87A em-
ploys a “reduced-body” bolt to hold the two ﬂanged members
together. The area of the reduced-body steel bolt at critical cross
section A is 0.068 in2. The steel bolt’s static material properties
are 
psi and 
psi. The external force P
cycles from zero to 1200 lb tension. The clamped ﬂanges of the
steel housing have been estimated to have an effective axial
stiffness (spring rate) of three times the axial bolt stiffness over
its effective length 
inches.
a. Plot the cyclic force-time pattern in the reduced-body
bolt if no preload is used.
b. Using the S-N curve of Figure P5.87B, estimate bolt
life for the case of no preload.
c. Plot the cyclic force-time pattern in the reduced-body
bolt if the nut is initially tightened to induce a preload
force of 
lb in the bolt body (and a preload
force of –1000 lb in the clamped ﬂanges). A separate
analysis has determined that when the 1000-lb preload is
present, the peak external force of 1200 lb will not be
enough to cause the ﬂanges to separate. (See Example
13.1 for details.)
d. Estimate the bolt life for the case of an initial preload
force of 1000 lb in the bolt, again using the S-N curve of
Figure P5.87B.
e. Comment on the results.
Fi = 1000
L = 1.50
Syp = 36,000
Su = 60,000
1
2
1
in.
1 in.
P
P
0.31 in. diam.
round wire
Figure P5.85
S-hook of circular cross section, supported at top and
loaded at bottom by force P.
Section A-A
1.0 in.
0.7 in.
0.4 in.
0.4 in.
A
3000 lb
3 1
2 in.
R = 11
2 in.
A
Figure P5.86
Cast-iron C-frame subjected to 3000-lb separating force.
P
P
Member 1
Member 2
Reduced-body
bolt
L = 1.50 in.
Figure P5.87A
Reduced-body bolt subjected to cyclic axial loading.
5-88. Examining the rotating bending fatigue test data for 60
V-notched specimens depicted in Figure 4.22, respond to the
following questions:
a. For notched specimens that have not been pre-
stressed, if they are subjected to rotating bending tests
that induce an applied alternating stress amplitude of
20,000 psi at the notch root, what mean life might rea-
sonably be expected?
b. If similar specimens are first subjected to an axial
tensile static preload level that produces local stresses of
90 percent of notched ultimate strength, then released
and subjected to rotating bending tests that induce an
°

304
Chapter 5 / Failure Theories
applied alternating stress amplitude of 20,000 psi at
the notch root, what mean life might reasonably be 
expected?
c. If similar specimens are ﬁrst subjected to an axial com-
pressive static preload level that produces local stresses of
90 percent of notched ultimate strength, then released and
subjected to rotating bending tests that induce an applied
alternating stress amplitude of 20,000 psi at the notch root,
what mean life might reasonably be expected?
d. Do these results seem to make sense? Explain. 
Stress, S, · ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Estimated curve for bolt application
Estimated polished specimen curve
Figure P5.87B
Uniaxial S-N curve (a) for pol-
ished specimens and (b) for a
bolt as used in this application.

Geometry Determination
Chapter 6
305
6.1 The Contrast in Objectives Between Analysis and Design
The objective of analysis, within the context of machine design, is to examine machines
and/or machine elements for which sizes, shapes, and materials have already been pro-
posed or selected, so that loading severity parameters (e.g., stresses) may be calculated and
compared with critical capacities (e.g., strengths corresponding to governing failure
modes) at each critical point.1 Adjunct analyses might also be undertaken to calculate and
compare such attributes as cost, life, weight, noise level, safety risks, or other pertinent
performance parameters.
The objective of design (or synthesis) is to examine performance requirements asso-
ciated with a particular design mission, then select the best possible material and determine
the best possible shape, size, and arrangement, within speciﬁed constraints of life, cost,
weight, safety, reliability, or other performance parameters.
The contrast is clear. Analysis can be undertaken only if shapes, sizes, and materials
are already known. Analytical procedures are typiﬁed by calculating stresses from known
loading and geometry, then comparing the calculated stresses with the strengths of known
materials. On the other hand, design is undertaken to create shapes, determine sizes, and
select materials so that the speciﬁed loading may be sustained without causing failure dur-
ing the speciﬁed design lifetime. Design procedures embody the tasks of determining
probable failure modes, selecting appropriate materials, selecting an appropriate design
safety factor, calculating a design stress, and determining shapes and sizes so that maxi-
mum stresses are equal to the design stress. In a nutshell, the input requirements for analy-
sis are the same as the output results for design.
Although there is a clear contrast between the objectives of analysis and design, the
basic concepts used, the pertinent equations of mechanics, the mathematical models uti-
lized, and the useful data sources are the same for both activities. In fact, one technique
sometimes used in accomplishing the design objective is to solve a series of analysis prob-
lems, making appropriate changes in materials and/or geometry, until design requirements
are met. In the ﬁnal analysis a good designer must ﬁrst be a good analyst. A good analyst
must possess (1) the ability to reduce a complicated real problem to a pertinent but solv-
able mathematical model by making good simplifying assumptions, (2) the ability to carry
through an appropriate solution by using techniques and data sources best suited to the
task, and (3) the ability to interpret results through a basic understanding of the models,
equations, and/or software used, and their limitations.
1See 2.14 for additional discussion.

One task, however, that lies uniquely within the sphere of design activity is creation
of the best possible shape for a proposed machine part. Basic guidelines for accomplish-
ing this task are presented next.
6.2 Basic Principles and Guidelines for Creating Shape and Size
The basic principles for creating the shape of a machine part and determining its size are
1.
Create a shape that will, as nearly as possible, result in a uniform stress distribution
throughout all of the material in the part, and
2.
For the shape so chosen, ﬁnd dimensions that will produce maximum operating
stresses equal to the design stress.
Interpreting these principles in terms of the ﬁve common stress patterns discussed in
4.4, a designer should, insofar as possible, choose shapes and arrangements that will pro-
duce direct axial stress (tension or compression), uniform shear, or fully conforming sur-
face contact, and avoid bending, transverse shear, torsion, and Hertzian contact geometry.
If bending, transverse shear, torsion, or Hertzian contact cannot be avoided, the designer
should persist in developing shapes that minimize stress gradients and eliminate lightly
stressed or “lazy” material. With these basic principles in mind, several guidelines may be
stated2 in terms of identifying desirable geometric choices for shapes and arrangements of
machine parts. These conﬁgurational guidelines include:
1. Using direct load paths
2. Tailoring element shape to loading gradient
3. Incorporating triangular ot tetrahedral arrangements or shapes
4. Avoiding buckling-prone geometry
5. Utilizing hollow cylinders and I-beams to achieve near-uniform stress
6. Providing conforming surfaces at mating interfaces
7. Removing lightly stressed or “lazy” material
8. Merging different shapes gradually from one to another
9. Matching element surface strains at joints and contacting surfaces
10. Spreading loads at joints
Each of these goals is brieﬂy discussed next.
Direct Load Path Guideline
The concept of force-ﬂow lines was introduced in 4.3. To follow the direct load path guide-
line, the lines of force ﬂow should be kept as direct and as short as possible. For example,
Figure 6.1 shows two alternative conﬁgurations for a proposed machine part to transmit a
direct tensile load from joint A to joint B. Proposal 1 is a U-shaped link and Proposal 2 is
a straight link. To follow the direct load path guideline, Proposal 2 should be adopted be-
cause the lines of force ﬂow are shorter and more direct. This choice eliminates undesir-
able bending stresses from the link shown as Proposal 1, and results in a more uniform
stress distribution.
306
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
2These concepts and guidelines were ﬁrst articulated by Professor Emeritus Walter L. Starkey of The Ohio
State University in the 1950s, when he was developing an area of design activity that he termed form synthesis.
The concepts were later expanded and published in ref. 1 by K. M. Marshek in 1987. See ref. 1.

Tailored-Shape Guideline
Under some circumstances, gradients in loading or stress lead to regions of lightly stressed
material if a constant cross-sectional shape and size are maintained throughout the part.
For example, a cylindrical bar in torsion exhibits maximum torsional shear stress at the
outer ﬁbers but zero stress at the center; a beam in bending reaches maximum stress at the
outer ﬁbers, but has zero stress at the neutral axis; a cantilever beam in bending under a
transverse force at the free end experiences a maximum bending moment at the ﬁxed end
but zero moment at the free end. To follow the tailored-shape guideline, the shape of the
machine part should be tailored in proportion to the gradient in such a way that stress level
is kept as nearly constant as possible throughout the volume of the part. For example,
Figure 6.2 shows two alternative conﬁgurations for a proposed cantilever beam that must
support an end load . Proposal 1 is a beam of constant rectangular cross section having
width 
and depth 
for the whole length L of the beam. Proposal 2 is a beam
of constant depth 
, but width varies linearly from 
at the ﬁxed end to zero at the
free end. To follow the tailored shape guideline, Proposal 2 should be chosen. The rea-
soning is as follows. The maximum bending stress at the outer ﬁbers of a cantilever beam,
at any distance x from the free end, is given by [see (4-5) and Table 4.1]
(6-1)
For Proposal 1, since 
is constant,
(6-2)
For Proposal 2, since b varies linearly with x,
(6-3)
1smax2x-2 =
6PLx
ab1
L bxd 2
1
= 6PL2
b1d 2
1
1smax2x-1 = 6PLx
b1d 2
1
b = b1
1smax2x = Mxcx
Ix
= 6PLx
bd 2
b1
b
d = d1
d = d1
b = b1
P
Basic Principles and Guidelines for Creating Shape and Size 307
F
F
(a)
(b)
Proposal 1: U-shaped link.
Proposal 2: straight link.
Joint A
Joint B
Joint A
Joint B
F
F
Figure 6.1
Two alternative conﬁgurations demonstrating the direct load path guideline. Proposal 2 is preferred because it
uses a direct load path.
b1
b = b1
d = d1
d = d1
(a)
(b)
Proposal 1: constant-width cantilever beam.
Proposal 2: tapered-width cantilever beam.
P
P
L
b = L
L
x
x
b1 x
Figure 6.2
Two alternative conﬁgura-
tions demonstrating the
tailored shape guideline.
Proposal 2 is preferred 
because shape is tailored
to the loading gradient.

Comparing (6-2) with (6-3), the maximum outer-ﬁber stress for Proposal 1 varies from
at the ﬁxed end, where 
, down to zero at the free end, where 
. On the
other hand, for Proposal 2 the maximum outer-ﬁber stress remains at a constant level of
over the whole length of the beam.
Triangle-Tetrahedron Guideline
Analysis of a three-link planar, pinned-joint, triangular structure, such as the one shown
in Figure 6.3(a), shows that any equilibrium force system in the plane of the triangle,
when forces are applied solely at the joints, will result in uniformly distributed tensile
or compressive stresses in each of the links. No bending stresses will be induced, as-
suming negligible friction in the pinned joints. If, for example, a vertical load 
is to be
supported by some type of bracket attached to a vertical wall a distance 
away, two al-
ternative configurations for the support bracket are proposed in Figure 6.3(b) and 6.3(c).
Proposal 1 is a width-tapered, rectangular cross-section, cantilever beam, similar to the
one shown in Figure 6.2(b). Proposal 2 is a pinned-joint triangular truss with links of
solid compact cross section. To follow the triangle-tetrahedron guideline, Proposal 2
should be adopted. Even though the tailored-shape guideline illustrated in Figure 6.2 fa-
vors selection of a width-tapered cantilever beam when compared to a constant-width
beam, the nonuniform stress distribution from top to bottom, as depicted in Figure 4.3,
still leaves a substantial volume of lightly stressed material near the neutral axis of bend-
ing. To achieve a near-uniform stress distribution, the triangular truss of Proposal 2 is a
better choice. A modified version of the truss is illustrated as Proposal 3, shown in
Figure 6.3(d), where the pinned joint truss is replaced by a “cut-out” triangular plate that
approximates the truss geometry. The stress distribution in the cut-out plate of Proposal
3 is clearly more complicated than the pinned-joint truss of Proposal 2, but may retain
L
P
6PL>b1d 2
1
x = 0
x = L
6PL>b1d 2
1
308
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
P
P
P
L
L
L
Fy1
Fy1
Fy4
Fy3
Fy3
Fy2
Fy2
Fx1
Fx1
Fx4
Fz1
Fz4
Fx3
Fx3
Fz3
Fx2
Fx2
Fz2
Pinned joint 1
Pinned joint 3
Pinned joint 2
(a)
(b)
(c)
Triangular structure.
Proposal 1: tapered-width
cantilever beam.
Proposal 2: pinned joint
triangular truss.
(d)
(e)
Proposal 3: cut-out
triangular plate.
Tetrahedral structure.
Spherical
joint 4
Spherical
joint 2
Spherical
joint 1
Spherical
joint 3
Figure 6.3
Various conﬁgurations 
illustrating the triangle-
tetrahedron guideline.
Proposal 2 is preferred to
Proposal 1 because it 
results in more uniformly
stressed materal. A tetra-
hedral structure must be
used if loading is three- 
dimensional.

enough triangular truss “advantage” to justify eliminating the design complexities asso-
ciated with pinned joints.
Finally, it is important to recognize that a triangular pinned-joint structure is able to
support force components only in the plane of the triangle. To support out-of-plane force
components, a three-dimensional structure must be provided. The three-dimensional struc-
ture corresponding in principle to a planar triangle is a tetrahedral truss constructed of six
links joined by spherical joints, as shown in Figure 6.3(e). Any equilibrium force system,
when forces are applied solely at the joints, will result in uniformly distributed tensile or
compressive stresses in each of the links of the tetrahedral structure.
Buckling Avoidance Guideline
Euler’s equation for critical buckling load, as given by (2-75) for column buckling, gener-
ally characterizes the effects of geometry on buckling resistance. Repeating the equation,
(6-4)
where 
is the critical buckling load. To make a column more resistant to buckling, the
magnitude of 
must be increased. Hence, for a given material, the geometry should be
modiﬁed toward larger values of area moment of inertia, , and/or smaller column length,
. To achieve larger area moments of inertia, from the basic equation for area moment of
inertia about the x-axis,3
(6-5)
It may be noted from (6-5) that becomes larger when the cross-sectional shape is conﬁg-
ured to concentrate most of the material at relatively large distances from the neutral axis
of bending. To follow the buckling avoidance guideline, either the column length should
be shortened (often difﬁcult because of functional requirements) or column cross-sectional
shape should concentrate material away from the neutral axis. For example, Figure 6.4
shows two alternative cross-sectional shapes for a proposed column design application.
Both proposed cross sections have the same net cross-sectional area (same amount of ma-
terial) but Proposal 1 is a compact, solid, circular cross section of diameter 
, while
Proposal 2 is a hollow annular cross section of inner diameter 
and outer diameter
to give equal cross-sectional areas for both shapes. For these dimensions, the
area moment of inertia for the compact solid cross section of Proposal 1 is
(6-6)
I1 = pd 4
1
64
do2 = 22d1
di2 = d1
d1
y
I
Ix =
L
y2dA
L
I
Pcr
Pcr
Pcr = p2EI
L2
Basic Principles and Guidelines for Creating Shape and Size 309
do2 =
d1
A2 = A1
A1
di2 = d1
d1
(a)
(b)
Proposal 1: compact
cross section of area A1.
Proposal 2: expanded cross
section with area A2 = A1.
Figure 6.4
Two alternative cross-sectional shapes
demonstrating the buckling avoidance
guideline. Proposal 2 is preferred because
it provides a larger area moment of inertia
with the same amount of material.
3See, for example, ref. 2, Ch. 5. 

and for the expanded annular cross section of Proposal 2
(6-7)
Comparing (6-7) with (6-6), the moment of inertia for the annular shape, , is three times
as high as 
for the compact solid shape. The critical buckling load for the annular column
cross section is, therefore, three times as high as for the compact cross section using the
same amount of material.
Hollow Cylinder and I-Beam Guideline
When torsional moments are applied to solid cylindrical members, the resulting torsional
shearing stresses vary linearly from zero at the center to a maximum at the outer ﬁbers, as
illustrated in Figure 4.7. Likewise, when bending moments are applied to solid rectangu-
lar beams, the resulting bending stresses vary linearly from zero at the neutral axis to a
maximum at the outer ﬁbers, as illustrated in Figure 4.3. In both cases, to produce a more
nearly uniform stress distribution, material near the central part of the cross section could
be removed and concentrated near the outer ﬁbers. For torsional moments applied to cylin-
drical members, this may be accomplished by converting from solid to hollow cylinders
with the same net cross-sectional area, as shown in Figure 6.5(a). For bending moments
applied to rectangular cross section beams, it may be accomplished by reconﬁguring the
rectangular shape into an I-section with the same net cross-sectional area as shown in
Figure 6.5(b).4 To follow the hollow cylinder guideline then, for members in torsion, a hol-
low cylinder (such as Case 2 of Figure 6.5) should be chosen over a solid cylinder (such
as Case 1). To follow the I-beam guideline, an I-section (such as Case 4 of Figure 6.5), or
a hollow box section, should be chosen over a solid rectangular section such as Case 3. For
all cases, if the net cross-sectional area is maintained constant, moving material away from
the central region results in larger moments of inertia and reduced stress levels.
Conforming Surface Guideline
When two nonconforming surfaces are pressed into contact, the actual areas of contact
are typically very small; hence the local contact pressures are very high. The discussion
of Hertz contact stresses in 4.6 illustrates this observation for contact between spheres
and between cylinders. When two surfaces exactly conform to each other at the contact
I1
I2
I2 =
p3122d124 - d 4
14
64
= 3pd 4
1
64
310
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
Neutral axis
(a)
(b)
Cross sections in torsion.
Cross sections in bending
A2 = A1
A4 = A3
A1
A3
J2 > J1
I4 > I3
Case 1
Case 3
Case 4
Case 2
Figure 6.5
Alternative conﬁgurations
for cross sections in tor-
sion and bending. Case 2
is preferred to Case 1,
and Case 4 is preferred 
to Case 3 because in both
instances the preferred
cases provide more uni-
formly stressed material.
4An equivalent hollow box section could also be used.

interface, the contact area is taken to be the “projected area,” whether the contact geom-
etry is curved or planar. Thus conforming surfaces give larger actual areas of contact,
and consequently, lower contact pressures. To follow the conforming surface guideline,
the contact geometry at the interface between any two parts should be chosen to provide
a large actual contact area by making contact surfaces conform to each other as closely
as possible within the functional constraints on the device. For example, Figure 6.6
shows two alternative configurations for a proposed pivot joint made by placing a load-
bearing solid cylindrical bar in a cylindrical groove. Proposal 1 is for a 2.0-inch-long
steel cylinder of diameter 1.000 inch, placed in a 0.531-inch-radius semicircular groove
in a 2.0-inch-wide block of the same material. Proposal 2 is a generally similar arrange-
ment except the radius of the semicircular groove is 0.500 inch. Both proposals must
support a total vertical downward force of 4000 lb. To follow the conforming surface
guideline, Proposal 2 should be chosen since the dimensions of the circular profile of the
cylindrical bar and the mating groove exactly conform. Contact pressures may be com-
pared utilizing the Hertz contact pressure equation (4-72) for Proposal 1, and the “pro-
jected area” calculation for Proposal 2. Thus, for Proposal 1, (4-72) gives an interfacial
contact width of
(6-8)
and (4-73) then gives maximum contact pressure as
(6-9)
For Proposal 2, the contact pressure is uniform and is calculated as force divided by pro-
jected area of contact, or
(6-10)
and the choice of Proposal 2 is conﬁrmed.
Lazy-Material Removal Guideline
When preliminary proposals for the geometry of a machine part are examined carefully, it
may be found that certain regions of material are lightly stressed, or not stressed at all. To
follow the lazy-material removal guideline, regions of lightly stressed (lazy) material
pmax = F
dL =
4000
11.0212.02 = 2000 psi
pmax =
2140002
p10.013212.02 = 95,426 psi
b =
a
2140002c2a 1 - 0.32
30 *  106 b d
p12.02c
1
1.000 +
1
-1.062 d
= 0.013 inch
Basic Principles and Guidelines for Creating Shape and Size 311
(a)
(b)
Proposal 1: nonconforming contact.
Proposal 2: conforming contact.
F = 4000 lb
d = 1.000 in. (bar)
r = 0.531 in.
(groove)
Length L = 2.0 in.
F = 4000 lb
d = 1.000 in. (bar)
r = 0.500 in.
(groove)
Length L = 2.0 in.
Material: steel
E = 30 × 106 psi
 = 0.3
Figure 6.6
Two alternative conﬁgura-
tions demonstrating the con-
forming surface guideline.
Proposal 2 is preferred over
Proposal 1 because the ac-
tual contact area is larger
and the contact pressure is
lower.

should be removed in the interests of conserving weight, material, and dollars. For exam-
ple, Figure 6.7 shows alternative proposals for a member of nonuniform cross section in
tension, a beam in bending, and a bar in torsion. For each case, Proposal 1 is a simple solid
or stepped section, while Proposals 2 and 3 represent modiﬁed geometries obtained by re-
moving regions of material that support little or no stress when loaded. To follow the lazy-
material removal guideline, Proposal 2 or 3 should be chosen for each case, since little
change in stress level is induced and signiﬁcant material savings can be achieved. For the
tension member of Case 1 in Figure 6.7(a), a stepped cylindrical bar is subjected to axial
tension. The lines of force ﬂow indicate that the shoulder region is virtually unstressed and
could be removed with little consequence, as shown in Figure 6.7(b). It may be further rec-
ognized that the larger-diameter section of the bar is more lightly stressed than the smaller-
diameter section, since tensile stress is proportional to area. Thus, if functional constraints
permit, the third proposal of Figure 6.7(c) might be implemented by removing the central
core of the larger-diameter section to increase the stress there to the same level as in the
smaller-diameter section.
For Case 2 in Figure 6.7(d), a beam of solid rectangular cross section is subjected to
a bending moment, giving a linear stress gradient from maximum tension at the top to
maximum compression at the bottom [see Figure 4.3(b)]. Lazy material could be removed
from the central portion of the beam (near the neutral axis) as shown in Figure 6.7(e), leav-
ing most of the remaining material near the outer ﬁbers where the stress is higher. Possible
cross-sectional shapes that might result would include the I-shape as shown in 6.7(e), an
equivalent hollow box section, or a less-desirable asymmetric section shape such as a
channel, angle, or zee.
Case 3, shown in Figure 6.7(f), depicts a bar of solid circular cross section subjected
to a torsional moment, giving a linear shear stress gradient from zero at the center to
maximum at the outer fibers [see Figure 4.9(b)]. Lazy material could be removed from
the central core of the cylinder as shown in Figure 6.7(g) to leave material only near the
outer fibers, where the shearing stress is higher, resulting in a more efficient annular
cross section.
312
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
No force-flow lines
(lazy material)
Force-flow lines
(widely spaced)
Case 1—Tensile loading
F
F
F
F
F
F
Force-flow lines
(closely spaced)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Proposal 1: initial geometry.
Proposal 2: lazy shoulder
material removed.
Proposal 3: lazy core
material removed.
(d)
(e)
Proposal 1: initial
geometry
Proposal 2: central
material removed.
(f )
(g)
Annular cross
section
Force flow lines
uniformly spaced
Lazy material
removed
Lazy material
removed
Case 2—Bending
Case 3—Torsion
Figure 6.7
Various alternative conﬁgurations demonstrating the lazy-material removal guideline. Proposal 2 is preferred over
Proposal 1 because “lazy” material has been removed; Proposal 3 is preferred over Proposal 2 because additional
“lazy” material has been removed.

Merging Shape Guideline
From the discussions of stress concentration in 5.3, it is evident that geometric disconti-
nuities may lead to local stresses many times higher than those for a smooth, gradual tran-
sition from one section size or shape to another. For example, the stress concentration
factor charts for a shouldered shaft in Figure 5.4, a grooved shaft in Figure 5.5, and a
shouldered ﬂat bar in Figure 5.7 all clearly show that larger ﬁllet radii and smoother tran-
sitions from one section to another result in lower peak stress values. To follow the merg-
ing shape guideline, sudden changes in size or shape should be avoided, and transitions in
size or shape should be made by gradually merging from one to the other. For example,
Figure 6.8 shows alternative proposals for a shouldered shaft in tension and for a can-
tilevered bearing support in bending. In each case Proposal 1 shows a sudden change in
geometry from one region to another while Proposal 2 provides a more gradual transition.
To follow the merging shape guideline, Proposal 2 should be chosen for each case. For the
stepped shaft, a large, smooth ﬁllet provides the merging transition, and for the bearing
support, the addition of ribs to gradually distribute the load from the bearing to the sup-
porting wall provides the desired merging effect.
Strain-Matching Guideline
When loads are transferred from one machine element to another, it is important that
the lines of force flow be distributed as uniformly as possible across the entire contact
interface between the elements. If local elastic strains induced in the contacting ele-
ments are not well matched at the interface, locally high stresses may result, or relative
displacements (slip) along the contact interface may be produced. The consequence
may be unacceptably high local stresses or, if cyclic loads are involved, the conse-
quence may be slip-induced fretting damage. To follow the strain-matching guideline,
elastic strains and relative displacements between mating element surfaces should be
controlled by carefully specifying element shapes and dimensions that provide uni-
formly distributed load transfer across the interface. For example, Figure 6.9 shows two
alternative proposals for the threaded interface between a tension support rod and its
mating retention nut. In the conventional configuration of Proposal 1, shown in Figure
6.9(a), the lines of force flow tend to concentrate in threads 1, 2, and 3, with little of
the load carried across threads 4, 5, and 6. This happens because threads 1, 2, and 3 rep-
resent the shorter, stiffer load paths; therefore, in accordance with the discussions of
4.11, most of the load is transferred across these stiffer thread paths. In Proposal 2,
shown in Figure 6.9(b), the nut has been given a special tapered shape to make the nut
axially more flexible in the region of threads 1, 2, and 3, shifting more of the total trans-
ferred load to threads 4, 5, and 6. To follow the strain matching guideline, Proposal 2
should be chosen.
Basic Principles and Guidelines for Creating Shape and Size 313
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Proposal 1: shaft
with sudden step.
Proposal 2: large
fillet transition.
Proposal 1: cantilever
bearing support.
Proposal 2: ribs added
to merge geometry.
F
F
F
F
P
P
Added
ribs
Figure 6.8
Alternative conﬁgurations
demonstrating the merging
shape guideline. Proposal 2
is preferred over Proposal 1
in both instances because
gradual transitions in shape
provide more uniform
stresses and lower peak
stresses.

Load-Spreading Guideline
At joints or contacting surfaces between two machine parts, the load should be trans-
ferred as gradually and as uniformly as possible from one part to the other. To follow
the load- spreading guideline, the following techniques should be implemented when
possible:
1.
Use many small fasteners rather than a few large ones.
2.
Use generous ﬁllets or tapered sections rather than sharp reentrant corners or large
square shoulders.
3.
Use washers under bolt heads and nuts.
4.
Use ribs to distribute loads from lugs or feet to supporting walls.
5.
Use raised pads on shafting to mount hubs, gears, or bearings.
6.
Use innovative transition geometry to spread load or reduce stress concentration,
especially in critical design situations.
314
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
F
F
6
5
4
3
2
1
Force-flow lines
Engaged
threads
Force-flow lines
(a)
(b)
Proposal 1: conventional nut geometry.
Proposal 2: special nut geometry
Figure 6.9
Two alternative proposals for retention nut geometry demonstrating strain-matching guideline. Proposal 2 is
preferred over Proposal 1 because strain matching lowers peak stresses by providing more uniform load
transfer across the threaded interface. However, cost advantage may be an important argument for selecting
Proposal 1.
Example 6.1 Creating Shapes by Implementing Conﬁgurational Guidelines
An L-shaped support bracket made of two members, one generally cylindrical and one
generally rectangular, is being proposed to support the load as shown schematically in
Figure E6.1A. The cylindrical member A is attached to the support wall at one end and
press-ﬁt into the rectangular member B at the other end. Without making any calculations,
identify which of the conﬁgurational guidelines of 6.2 might be applicable in determining
an appropriate shape for each member of this bracket, and, based on these guidelines,
sketch an initial proposal for the shape of each member.
Solution
The load 
at the end of member 3 in Figure E6.1A will produce, primarily, cantilever
bending in member , and cantilever bending plus torsion in member . Transverse shear
A
B
P

is also present in both members. Reviewing the list of conﬁgurational guidelines in 6.2, the
potentially applicable guidelines for member 
would include:
2.
Tailoring shape to loading gradient (bending)
5.
Utilizing hollow cylinder shapes to achieve near-uniform stress (torsion)
6.
Providing conforming surfaces at mating interfaces
7.
Removing lazy material
8.
Merging shapes gradually from one shape to another
For member 
the applicable guidelines would include:
2.
Tailoring shape to loading gradient (bending)
5.
Utilizing I-beam shapes to achieve near-uniform stress (bending)
6.
Providing conforming surfaces at mating interfaces
7.
Removing lazy material
8.
Merging shapes gradually from one shape to another
B
A
Critical Sections and Critical Points 315
lT
lB
Load P
Rectangular
member B
Cylindrical
member A
Support
wall
Support
wall
Figure E6.1A
Basic geometry of proposed two-member
support bracket.
Blend radius between
tapered section and
raised-pad cylindrical
section
Raised-pad hollow
cylindrical section
Hollow tapered
section
Support
wall
Tapered
I-section
Corner
material
removed
Blend radius
(b)
(a)
Modified member B.
Modified member A.
Figure E6.1B
Shape modiﬁcations based
on conﬁgurational guide-
lines of 6.2 (as compared to
Figure E6.1A).
Incorporating these guidelines to reﬁne the shapes of members 
and 
sketched in
Figure E6.1A, the initial proposal for reﬁned shapes might take the form sketched in
Figure E6.1B.
B
A
6.3 Critical Sections and Critical Points
In the list of fundamental steps in the design of a machine, as outlined in Table 1.1 of
Chapter 1, step VII outlines the important aspects of designing each part. This includes
initial geometry determination, force analysis, identiﬁcation of potential failure modes,

material selection, selection of potential critical sections and critical points, safety factor
selection, and use of appropriate stress and deﬂection analyses. Based on these consider-
ations, proper dimensions of critical sections may be determined, usually through a
process of iteration. With the exception of selecting critical sections and critical points,
all of the important aspects of design just reiterated have been discussed in detail in
Chapter 2 through this point in Chapter 6. Techniques for selecting critical sections and
critical points will be addressed next.
Critical sections in a machine part are those cross sections that, because of the geom-
etry of the part and the magnitude and orientation of forces and moments on it, may con-
tain critical points. A critical point is a point within the part that has a high potential for
failure because of high stresses or strains, low strength, or a critical combination of these.
Typically, a designer ﬁrst identiﬁes the potential critical sections, then identiﬁes the possi-
ble critical points within each critical section. Finally, appropriate calculations are made to
determine the governing critical points so that the calculated dimensions will assure safe
operation of the part over its prescribed design lifetime.
The number of potential critical points requiring investigation in any given machine
part is directly dependent upon the experience and insight of the designer. A very inex-
perienced designer may have to analyze many, many potential critical points. A very ex-
perienced and insightful designer, analyzing the same part, may only need to investigate
one or a few critical points because of ingrained knowledge about failure modes, how
forces and moments reflect upon the part, and how stresses and strains are distributed
across the part. In the end, the careful inexperienced designer and the experienced ex-
pert should both reach the same conclusions about where the governing critical points
are located, but the expert designer typically does so with a smaller investment of time
and effort.
316
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
Example 6.2 Critical Point Selection
It is desired to examine member A shown in Figure E6.1B of Example 6.1, with the ob-
jective of establishing critical sections and critical points in preparation for calculating
dimensions and finalizing the shape of the part.
With this objective, select appropriate critical sections and critical points, give the ra-
tionale for the points you pick, and make sketches showing the locations of the selected
critical points.
Solution
In the solution of Example 6.1, it was established that member A is subjected to cantilever
bending, torsion, and transverse shear, giving rise to the proposed geometry shown in
Figure E6.1B. Member A is again sketched in Figure E6.2 to show the cross-sectional
geometry more clearly. Since cantilever bending produced by an end-load results in a max-
imum bending moment at the ﬁxed end, as well as uniform transverse shear along the
Fixed end
lc
do
di
lB
lT
Critical
section 1
Critical
section 2
r
P
F
(a)
(b)
(c)
Member A.
Critical section 1.
Critical section 2.
c.p.A
c.p.E
c.p.H
c.p.F
c.p.G
c.p.D
c.p.B
c.p.C
t
Figure E6.2
Potential critical sections
and critical points in
member A of the Example
6.1 bracket (c.p.  critical
point).

whole beam length, and since there is a constant torsional moment all along the beam
length, critical section 1 at the ﬁxed end is clearly a well-justiﬁed selection. Also, it may
be noted that the annular wall is thinnest where the tapered section blends into the raised
cylindrical mounting pad near the free end. At this location the bending moment is less
than at the ﬁxed end, transverse shear is the same, and torsional moment is the same as at
critical section 1, but the wall is thinner and stress concentration must be accounted for;
hence critical section 2 should also be investigated.
At critical section 1, four critical points may initially be chosen, as shown in Figure
E6.2(b). At critical points A and B, bending and torsion combine, and at critical points C
and D, torsion and transverse shear combine. In both cases potentially critical multiaxial
stress states are produced. Since the state of stress at A is the same as at B (except that
bending produces tension at A and compression at B), investigation of critical point A is
alone sufﬁcient. Also, since torsional shear stress adds to transverse shear stress at D and
subtracts at C, investigation of critical point D is alone sufﬁcient. Therefore, it is concluded
that critical points A and D should be investigated, with the knowledge that B and C are
less serious.
A similar consideration of critical section 2 leads to the similar conclusion that criti-
cal points E and H should be investigated, knowing that F and G are less serious.
Summarizing, critical points A, D, E, and H should be investigated. If a designer
has doubts about any other potential critical point within the member, it too should be
investigated.
Transforming Combined Stress Failure Theories into Combined Stress Design Equations 317
6.4 Transforming Combined Stress Failure Theories into
Combined Stress Design Equations
The state of stress at a critical point is typically multiaxial; therefore, as discussed in 5.4,
the use of a combined stress theory of failure is usually necessary in critical point analy-
sis. Further, as discussed in 2.12, dimensions are usually determined by making sure that
the maximum operating stress levels do not exceed the design-allowable stress at any crit-
ical point. A useful formulation may be obtained by transforming the combined stress fail-
ure theories given in (5-32), (5-33), (5-36), and (5-44) into combined stress design
equations, from which required dimensions may be calculated at any critical point. Such
transformations may be accomplished by using only the equal signs of the failure theory
equations, and inserting the design-allowable stress in place of the failure strength in each
equation. The resulting combined stress design equations then contain known loads,
known material strength properties corresponding to the governing failure mode, known
safety factor, and unknown dimensions. The unknown dimensions may be calculated by
inverting the applicable combined stress design equation. Details of a solution may be
complicated, often requiring iterative techniques. The rules for selecting the applicable de-
sign equation, based on material ductility, are the same as the rules for failure theory se-
lection given in 5.4.
In more detail, if a material exhibits brittle behavior (elongation less than 5 percent in
2 inches), the maximum normal stress failure theory, given by (5-32) and (5-33), would be
transformed into the maximum normal stress design equations
(6-11)
if 
is tensile, or
(6-12)
smin = -sd-c
smax
smax = sd-t

if 
is compressive, where 
and 
are, respectively, tensile and compressive de-
sign stresses, 
is the largest of the principal stresses 
, 
, and 
at the critical point,
and 
is, algebraically, the smallest principal stress. The governing equation is the one
that gives the largest required dimensions.
If a material exhibits ductile behavior (elongation of 5 percent or more in 2 inches),
the maximum shearing stress failure theory given by (5-36) would be transformed into the
maximum shearing stress design equation
(6-13)
where 
is the largest magnitude of principal shearing stress at the critical point (see 
(5-2), (5-3) and (5-4)).
Also for ductile behavior, the distortion energy failure theory given by (5-44), 
and supplemented by (5-45), would be transformed into the distortion energy design
equation
(6-14)
where 
, 
, and 
are the three principal normal stresses produced by the loading at the
critical point. In all of the above equations known loads, known material strength proper-
ties, and known safety factor would be inserted and design dimensions (the only unknowns)
would be found by solving the equation.
6.5 Simplifying Assumptions: The Need and the Risk
After the initial proposal for the shape of each of the parts and their arrangement in the
assembled machine, and after all critical points have been identiﬁed, the critical dimen-
sions may be calculated for each part. In principle, this task merely involves utilizing the
stress and deﬂection analysis equations of Chapter 4 and the multiaxial stress design
equations of 6.4. In practice, the complexities of complicated geometry, redundant struc-
ture, and implicit or higher-order mathematical models often require one or more simpli-
fying assumptions in order to obtain a manageable solution to the problem of determining
the dimensions.
Simplifying assumptions may be made with respect to loading, load distribution, sup-
port conﬁguration, geometric shape, force ﬂow, predominating stresses, stress distribution,
applicable mathematical models, or any other aspect of the design task, to make possible
a solution. The purpose of making simplifying assumptions is to reduce a complicated real
problem to a pertinent but solvable mathematical model. The coarsest simplifying as-
sumption would be to assume the “answer” with no analysis. For an experienced designer,
a routine application, light loads, and minimal failure consequences, directly assuming the
dimensions might be acceptable. The most reﬁned analysis might involve very few sim-
plifying assumptions, modeling the loading and geometry in great detail, possibly creating
in the process very detailed and complicated mathematical models that require massive
computational codes and large investments of time and effort to ﬁnd the dimensions. For
very critical applications, where loading is complicated, failure consequences are poten-
tially catastrophic, and the nature of the application will reasonably support large invest-
ments, such detailed modeling might be acceptable (but usually would be used only after
initially exercising simpler models).
s3
s2
s1
s2
eq = 1
2 31s1 - s222 + 1s2 - s322 + 1s3 - s1224 = s2
d
ƒtmaxƒ
ƒtmaxƒ = td = sd
2
smin
s3
s2
s1
smax
sd-c
sd-t
smin
318
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination

Typically, a few well-chosen simplifying assumptions are needed to reduce the real
design problem to one that can be tentatively solved with a reasonable effort. More accu-
rate analyses may be made in subsequent iterations, if necessary. The risk of making sim-
plifying assumptions must always be considered; if the assumptions are not true, the
resulting model will not reﬂect the performance of the real machine. The resulting poor
predictions might be responsible for premature failure or unsafe operation unless the
analysis is further reﬁned.
6.6 Iteration Revisited
Many details of the mechanical design process have been examined since design was ﬁrst
characterized in 1.4 as an iterative decision-making process. Now that the basic principles
and guidelines for determining shape and size have been presented, and details of material
selection, failure mode assessment, stress and deﬂection analysis, and safety factor deter-
mination have been discussed, it seems appropriate to brieﬂy revisit the important role of
iteration in design.
During the ﬁrst iteration a designer typically concentrates on meeting functional per-
formance speciﬁcations by selecting candidate materials and potential geometric arrange-
ments that will provide strength and life adequate for the loads, environment, and potential
failure modes governing the application. An appropriate safety factor is chosen to account
for uncertainties, and carefully chosen simplifying assumptions are made to implement a
manageable solution to the task of determining critical dimensions. A consideration of
manufacturing processes is also appropriate in the ﬁrst iteration. Integrating the selection
of the manufacturing process with the design of the product is necessary if the advantages
and economies of modern manufacturing methods are to be realized.
A second iteration usually establishes nominal dimensions and detailed material spec-
iﬁcations that will safely satisfy performance, strength, and life requirements. Many loops
may be embedded in this iteration.
Typically, a third iteration carefully audits the second iteration design from the per-
spectives of fabrication, assembly, inspection, maintenance, and cost. This is often ac-
complished by utilizing modern methods for global optimization of the manufacturing
system, a process usually called design for manufacture (DFM).5
A final iteration, undertaken before the design is released, typically includes the es-
tablishment of fits and tolerances for each part, and final modifications based on the
third-iteration audit. A final safety factor check is then usually made to assure that
strength and life of the proposed design meet specifications without wasting materials or
resources.
As important as understanding the iterative nature of the design process is under-
standing the serial nature of the iteration process. Inefﬁciencies generated by deeply em-
bedded early design decisions may make cost reduction or improved manufacturability
difﬁcult and expensive at later stages. Such inefﬁciencies are being addressed in many
modern facilities by implementing the simultaneous engineering approach. Simultaneous
engineering involves on-line computer linkages among all activities, including design,
manufacturing, testing, production, marketing, sales, and distribution, with early and con-
tinuous input and auditing throughout the design, development, and ﬁeld service phases of
the product. Using this approach, the various iterations and modiﬁcations are incorporated
so rapidly, and communicated so widely, that inputs and changes from all departments are
virtually simultaneous.
Iteration Revisited 319
5See 7.4.

Example 6.3 Determining Dimensions at a Selected Critical Point
Continuing the examination of member A, already described in Examples 6.1 and 6.2, it is
desired to ﬁnd dimensions of the annular cross section shown in Figure E6.2 of Example
6.2, at critical section 2. The load P to be supported is 10 kips. The distance from the ﬁxed
wall to load P is 
in, and the distance from the centerline of member A to the load
P is 
in (see Figure E6.1A of Example 6.1). The tentative material selection for this
ﬁrst cut analysis is 1020 cold-drawn steel, and it has been determined that yielding is the
probable failure mode. A preliminary analysis has indicated that a design safety factor of
is appropriate.
Determine the dimensions of member A at critical section 2.
Solution
From Figure E6.2, the dimensions to be determined at critical section 2 include outside di-
ameter 
, inside diameter , wall thickness t, and ﬁllet radius r, all unknown. The length
of the raised pad, , is also unknown, but is required for calculation of bending moment
at critical section 2. The material properties of interest for 1020 cold-drawn steel are
(from Table 3.3) and 
(from Table 3.10).
From the solution in Example 6.2, the critical points to be analyzed for section 2
are c.p. E (bending and torsion) and c.p. H (torsion and transverse shear), as shown in
Figure E6.2.
To start the solution, the following assumptions are made:
1.
The annular wall is thin, so assume 
and 
.
2.
A common proportion for bearing surfaces is to make diameter equal to length, so
assume 
.
At critical section 2, the bending moment 
and torsional moment 
may be written as
Examining c.p. E ﬁrst, the elemental volume depicting the state of stress may be con-
structed as shown in Figure E6.3A. The nominal axial stress 
, caused by bending
moment 
, and the nominal shear stress 
, caused by torsional moment , may be
written as
and
For thin annular sections,6 the area moment of inertia, I , about the neutral bending axis,
and the polar moment of inertia, J, may be approximated as
and
Stress concentration factors due to the ﬁllet may be approximated from Figure 5.4 by
initially assuming the ratios of 
and 
, to give approximate values of
D>d = 1.1
r>d = 0.05
J = pd3t
4
= pd3(0.1d)
4
= 0.079d4
I = pd3t
8
= pd3(0.1d)
8
= 0.039d4
txy-nom = T2a
J
sx-nom = M2c
I
T2
txy-nom
M2
sx-nom
T2 = PlT = 10,000(8) = 80,000 in-lb
M2 = Plc
2
= Pd
2
= 10,000d
2
= 5000d in-lb
T2
M2
lc = d
t = 0.1d
do = di = d
e(2 inches) = 15%
Syp = 51 ksi
M2
lc
di
do
nd = 2
lT = 8
lB = 10
320
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
6See ref. 2, Table 1, case 16, or use Table 4.2, case 5, to approximate I for a thin-walled tube by incorporating
and 
.
t = 0.1d
do = di = d
x
xy
z
y
x
Figure E6.3A
State of stress at c.p. E.

(for bending) and 
(for torsion). From these values, the actual bending
stress 
and shear stress 
at c.p. E may be written as
Using the stress cubic equation, (5-1), or Mohr’s circle, the principal stresses at c.p.
E may be found to be 
,
,
Recalling that 
, the material is ductile, which means we can use
the distortional energy design equation (6-14). Using the principal stresses above, equa-
tion (6-14) reduces to
Since 
and 
, 
. Using the expressions for 
and 
above, we can write 
This may be solved for d using a variety of techniques ranging from numerical equation-
solver software to iterated manual calculations. Since this equation was derived from
initial assumptions, a ﬁnal solution will involve iteration. Using a numerical equation
solver, we ﬁnd that the diameter is approximated as d
3.6 inches. Using do  d  3.6
inches in conjunction with the assumptions above results in t  0.1 d  0.1 (3.6)  0.36
inches, di  do  2t  2.88 inches, lc  D  do  2t  3.96 inches, and r  0.05(3.6) 
0.18 inch. With these dimensions we now have
and
Using these dimensions we can reﬁne the approximations for stress concentration factors
for bending and torsion to 
and 
. In addition, with inside and outside
diameters now identiﬁed, we can more accurately estimate I and 
, as
and
We can now determine the normal and shear stress to be
txy = aT2a
J bKtt = c80,000(3.6>2)
9.74
d(1.27) = 18,776 psi
sx = aM2c
I
bKtb = c5000(3.6)(3.6>2)
4.87
d(1.87) = 12,440 psi
J = 2I = 2(4.87) = 9.74 in4
I = p
64Ad4
o - d4
i B = p
64A3.64 - 2.884B = 4.87 in4
J (= 2I)
Ktt = 1.27
Ktb = 1.87
D
d = D
do
= 3.96
3.6 = 1.1
r
do
= 0.18
3.6 = 0.05
L
a1.22 * 105
d2
b
2
+ 3a6.58 * 105
d3
b
2
= (25,500)2 Q  d6 - 22.89d2 = 2000
txy
sx
sd = Syp>nd = 25,500 psi
nd = 2
Syp = 51 ksi
s2
x + 3t2
xy = s2
d
e(2 inches) = 15%
s3 = 0
s2 = sx
2 - A a
sx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy
s1 = sx
2 + A a
sx
2 b
2
+ t2
xy
txy = (txy-nom)Ktt = aT2a
J bKtt = c80,000(d>2)
0.079d4
d(1.3) = 6.58 * 105
d3
sx = (sx-nom)Ktb = aM2c
I
bKtb = c5000d(d>2)
0.039d4
d(1.9) = 1.22 * 105
d2
txy
sx
KtT = 1.3
Ktb = 1.9
Iteration Revisited 321

As before, we apply the failure criteria 
, which results in
Since the left side is greater than the right side, failure is predicted. The normal and shear
stress can be reduced by increasing the moments of inertia. This can be accomplished by
decreasing the inner radius. As a means of doing this, we will explore the state of stress at
c.p. H, which will experience two components of shearing stress and no normal stress. The
shearing stress will come from the torque 
and the transverse shear 
, as
shown in Figure E6.3B.
The shear stress due to torsion is deﬁned as before. Using case 3 from Table 4.4, the
shear stress due to transverse shear is deﬁned. The two shear stresses are written as 
and
Having established the outside diameter, we express the polar moment of inertia and the
area as
and
Based on the dimensions already established, we determine
Since both components are in the same direction, they add. The resulting shear stress is
Since the state of stress is pure shear, design equation (6-14) reduces to 
.
Therefore, we can write
Solving numerically we obtain an approximate inner diameter of 
. Using this di-
ameter and the already established 
, we determine 
, 
,
and 
. The resulting state of stress at c.p. E will be 
Application of the failure criteria 
results in
(7680)2 + 3(11,590)2 = 4.62 * 108 6 (25,500)2 = 0.65 * 109
s2
x + 3t2
xy = s2
d
txy = c80,000(3.6>2)
15.78
d(1.27) = 11,590 psi
sx = c5000(3.6)(3.6>2)
7.89
d(1.87) = 7680 psi
A = 8.07 in2
I = 7.89 in4
J = 15.78 in4
do = 3.6
di = 1.64
1.86 * 106
168 - d4
i
+ 3.23 * 104
13 - d2
i
= 25,500
23
= 14,722
3t2
xy = s2
d
txy = txy-tor + txy-ts = 1.86 * 106
168 - d4
i
+ 3.23 * 104
13 - d2
i
txy-ts
= a2P
AbKtt = a 4(2)(10,000)
p(3.62 - d2
i )
b(1.27) = 3.23 * 104
13 - d2
i
txy-tor = aT2a
J bKtt = a32(80,000)(3.6>2)
p(3.64 - d4
i )
b(1.27) = 1.86 * 106
168 - d4
i
A = p
4 Ad2
o - d2
i B = p
4 A3.62 - d2
i B
J = p
32Ad4
o - d4
i B = p
32A3.64 - d4
i B
txy-ts = a2P
AbKtt
txy-tor = aT2a
J bKtt
(txy-ts)
(txy-tor)
(12,440)2 + 3(18,776)2 = 1.21 * 109 7 (25,500)2 = 0.65 * 109
s2
x + 3t2
xy = s2
d
322
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
Example 6.3 
Continues
xz – ts
xz – tor
z
y
x
Figure E6.3B
State of stress at c.p. H.

For c.p. H we will have 
. Therefore both critical points are
considered safe. Based on these results, the dimensions recommended for critical section
2 of member A are as shown in Figure E6.3C. 
Of course, many other dimensional combinations could be found for critical section
2 that would also be safe and acceptable. Further, it remains to ﬁnd acceptable dimensions
at critical section 1 before the initial design proposal for member A is completed.
txy = 13,820 psi 6 14,722 psi
Fits, Tolerances, and Finishes 323
lc = 4.0 in.
D = 4.0 in.
lB = 10 in.
Critical section 2
r = 0.18 in.
P = 10,000 lb
Critical section 2
di = 1.64 in.
do = 3.6 in.
Figure E6.3C
Sketch showing recommended internal
and external dimensions at critical section
2 of member A of the bracket shown in
Example 6.1.
6.7 Fits, Tolerances, and Finishes
All of the discussions so far in this chapter have dealt with determination of the “macro-
geometry” of machine parts. In many cases the “microgeometry” of a machine part, or an
assembly of parts, also has great importance in terms of proper function, prevention of pre-
mature failure, ease of manufacture and assembly, and cost. The important microgeomet-
ric design issues include: (1) the speciﬁcation of the ﬁts between mating parts to assure
proper function, (2) the speciﬁcation of allowable variation in manufactured part dimen-
sions (tolerances) that will simultaneously guarantee the speciﬁed ﬁt, expedite assembly,
and optimize overall cost, and (3) the speciﬁcation of surface texture and condition that
will ensure proper function, minimize failure potential, and optimize overall cost. Some
examples of machine parts and assemblies in which one or more of the microgeometric de-
sign issues may be important are:
1.
The press ﬁt connection between a ﬂywheel hub and the shaft upon which it is mounted
(see Chapters 9 and 18). The ﬁt must be tight enough to assure proper retention, yet the
stresses generated must be within the design-allowable range, and assembly of the ﬂy-
wheel to the shaft must be feasible. Both ﬁts and tolerances are at issue.
2.
The light interference ﬁt between the inner race of a ball bearing and the shaft mount-
ing pad upon which it is installed (see Chapter 11). The ﬁt must be tight enough to
prevent relative motion during operation, yet not so tight that internal interference
between the balls and their races, generated by elastic expansion of the inner race
when pressed on the shaft, shortens the bearing life. Premature failure due to fretting
fatigue, initiated between the inside of the inner race and the shaft, might also be a
consideration, as might be operational constraints on radial stiffness or the need to
accommodate thermal expansion. Fits, tolerances, and surface textures are all impor-
tant issues.
3.
The radial clearance between a hydrodynamically lubricated plain bearing sleeve and
the mating journal of a rotating shaft, as well as the surface roughnesses of the mat-
ing bearing surfaces (see Chapter 10). The clearance must be large enough to allow
development of a “thick” ﬁlm of lubricant between the bearing sleeve and the shaft
journal, yet small enough to limit the rate of oil ﬂow through the bearing clearance

space so that hydrodynamic pressure can develop to support the load. The surface
roughness of each member must be small enough so that roughness protuberances do
not penetrate the lubricant ﬁlm to cause “metal-to-metal” contact, yet large enough to
allow ease of manufacture and a reasonable cost. Tolerances and surface texture are
issues of importance.
Important design consequences hinge upon the decisions made about ﬁts, tolerances,
and surface textures, as illustrated by the three examples just cited. Speciﬁcation of ap-
propriate ﬁts, tolerances, and surface textures is usually based upon experience with the
speciﬁc application of interest. However, it is an important design responsibility to assure
that “experience-based guidelines” meet speciﬁc application requirements such as pre-
venting the loss of interference in a press ﬁt assembly because of “tolerance stackup,” 
preventing metal-to-metal contact in a hydrodynamic bearing due to excessive surface
roughness, assuring that mating parts can be assembled and disassembled with relative
ease, assuring that interference ﬁts can sustain operating loads without separation or slip,
assuring that differential thermal expansion does not excessively alter the ﬁt, and ensuring
that speciﬁed tolerances are neither so large that interchangeability is compromised nor so
small that manufacturing cost is excessive. It is well established that increasing the num-
ber and tightness of speciﬁed tolerances causes a corresponding increase in cost and difﬁ-
culty of manufacturing, as illustrated, for example, in Figure 6.10.
The design decisions on ﬁts, tolerances, and surface texture must be accurately and un-
ambiguously incorporated into detail and assembly drawings. In some cases, for example
324
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
500
600
700
800
%
Increase in machining cost
Material: Steel FS 4340
RC 38 to 42
Machining
cost, %
Microinches
Total tolerance
2000
1000
500
250
125
63
32
16
8
4
Flame-cut
forged
as cast
sawed
As cast
and
rough
milled
Semi-
finish
turn
Finish
turn
Grind
Hone
Lap
Super
finish
lap
Rough turn
Rough milled
0.25 in.
6 mm
0.10 in.
2.5 mm
0.005 in.
0.125 mm
0.001 in.
0.025 mm
0.0001 in.
0.0025 mm
Figure 6.10
Increase in machining
costs as a function of
tighter tolerances and
ﬁner surface ﬁnishes.
(Attributed to Association
for Integrated
Manufacturing
Technology.)

cylindrical ﬁts between shafts and holes, extensive standards have been developed to aid in
speciﬁcation of proper ﬁts and tolerances for a given application.7 For reasons of cost ef-
fectiveness, primarily in manufacturing, the standards suggest lists of preferred basic sizes
that should be chosen unless special conditions exist that prevent such a choice. Therefore,
when nominal dimensions are calculated based on strength, deﬂection, or other perform-
ance requirements, the closest preferred basic size should usually be chosen from Table 6.1
(fractional inch units), Table 6.2 (decimal inch units), or Table 6.3 (SI metric units), de-
pending upon the application.8
The general term fit is used to characterize the range of “tightness” or “looseness”
that may result from a specific combination of allowances9 and tolerances10 applied
Fits, Tolerances, and Finishes 325
7See refs. 3 and 4.
8These tables are truncated versions of corresponding tables from the standards listed in ref. 3.
9Allowance is a prescribed difference between the maximum size-limit of an external dimension (shaft) and the
minimum size-limit of a mating internal dimension (hole). It is the minimum clearance (positive allowance) or
the maximum interference (negative allowance) between such parts.
10Tolerance is the total permissible variation of a size.
TABLE 6.1 Preferred Basic Sizes1 (Fractional Inch Units)
0.015625
0.4375
1.7500
0.03125
0.5000
2
2.0000
0.0625
0.5625
2.2500
0.09375
0.6250
2.5000
0.1250
06875 
2.7500
0.15625
0.7500
3
3.0000
0.1875
0.8750
3.2500
0.2500
1
1.0000
3.5000
0.3125
1.2500
3.7500
0.3750
1.5000
4
4.0000
1Additional standard preferred basic fractional inch sizes up to 20 inches are
given in ref. 3. Excerpted from ref. 3 by permission from American Society
of Mechanical Engineers.
112
38
334
114
516
312
14
314
78
316
34
532
234
1116
18
212
58
332
214
916
116
12
132
134
716
164
TABLE 6.2 Preferred Basic Sizes1 (Decimal
Inch Units)
0.010
0.08
0.60
2.40
0.012
0.10
0.80
2.60
0.016
0.12
1.00
2.80
0.020
0.16
1.20
3.00
0.025
0.20
1.40
3.20
0.032
0.24
1.60
3.40
0.040
0.30
1.80
3.60
0.05
0.40
2.00
3.80
0.06
0.50
2.20
4.00
1Additional standard preferred basic decimal inch sizes
up to 20 inches are given in ref. 3. Excerpted from ref. 3
by permission from American Society of Mechanical
Engineers.
TABLE 6.3 Preferred Basic Sizes1 (mm)
First
Second
First
Second
First
Second
First
Second
Choice
Choice
Choice
Choice
Choice
Choice
Choice
Choice
1
3
10
30
1.1
3.5
11
35
1.2
4
12
40
1.4
4.5
14
45
1.6
5
16
50
1.8
5.5
18
55
2
6
20
60
2.2
7
22
70
2.5
8
25
80
2.8
9
28
90
1Additional standard preferred basic metric sizes up to 1000 mm are given in ref. 3. Excerpted from ref. 3 by
permission from American Society of Mechanical Engineers.

in the design of mating parts. Fits are of three general types: clearance, transition, and
interference.
The designations of standard ﬁts are usually conveyed by the following letter symbols:
326
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
11See, for example, Table 6.5 or 6.7.
12For fractional and decimal inch dimensions. Similar, but slightly different, guidelines for metric dimensions
are available from ANSI B4.2, cited in ref. 3.
13For fractional and decimal inch dimensions. Similar but slightly different guidelines for metric dimensions
are available from ANSI B4.2, cited in ref. 3.
TABLE 6.4 Guidelines for Selecting Clearance Fits (Fractional and Decimal Inch)
Class of Fit
Intended Application
RC 1
Close sliding ﬁts; intended for accurate location of parts that must assemble 
without perceptible play.
RC 2
Sliding ﬁts; intended for accurate location but with greater clearance than class 
RC 1. Parts move and turn easily but are not intended to run freely. In larger 
sizes parts may seize as a result of small temperature changes.
RC 3
Precision running ﬁts; intended for precision work at slow speeds and light 
loads. About the closest ﬁt that can be expected to run freely. Not usually suit-
able if appreciable temperature changes are likely to be encountered.
RC 4
Close running ﬁts; intended for running ﬁts on accurate machinery at moderate 
speeds and loads. Provides accurate location and minimum play.
RC 5
Medium running ﬁts; intended for higher speeds and/or higher loads.
RC 6
Medium running ﬁts; intended for applications similar to RC 5 but where larger 
clearances are desired.
RC 7
Free running ﬁts; intended for use where accuracy is not essential or where 
large temperature changes are likely to be encountered, or both.
RC 8
Loose running ﬁts; intended for use where larger commercial (as-received) toler- 
ances may be advantageous or necessary.
RC 9
Loose running ﬁts; intended for applications similar to RC 8 but where even 
larger clearances may be desired. 
RC
Running or sliding clearance ﬁt
LC
Locational clearance ﬁt
LT
Locational transition clearance or interference ﬁt
LN
Locational interference ﬁt
FN
Force or shrink ﬁt
These letter symbols are used in conjunction with numbers representing the class11 of ﬁt;
for example, FN 4 represents a class 4 force ﬁt.
Standard running and sliding ﬁts (clearance ﬁts) are divided into nine classes,12 des-
ignated RC 1 through RC 9, where RC 1 provides the smallest clearance and RC 9 the
largest. Guidelines for selecting an appropriate ﬁt for any given clearance application are
shown in Table 6.4. Standard limits and clearances are tabulated in Table 6.5 for a selected
range of nominal (design) sizes.
Standard force ﬁts (interference ﬁts) are divided into ﬁve classes,13 FN 1 through FN 5,
where FN 1 provides minimum interference and FN 5 provides maximum interference.

TABLE 6.5 Selected1 Standard Limits and Clearances for Running and Sliding Fits, Using the Basic Hole System2 (thousandths of an inch)
Class RC 1
Class RC 3
Class RC 5
Class RC 7
Class RC 9
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Nom. Size
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
Range (in.)
Clearance
Hole
Shaft
Clearance
Hole
Shaft
Clearance
Hole
Shaft
Clearance
Hole
Shaft
Clearance
Hole
Shaft
0–0.12
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.6
0.6
0.6
1.0
1.0
1.0
4.0
2.5
4.0
0.45
0
0.25
0.95
0
0.55
1.6
0
1.0
2.6
0
1.6
8.1
0
5.6
0.12–0.24
0.15
0.2
0.15
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.8
1.2
1.2
1.2
4.5
3.0
4.5
0.5
0
0.3
1.2
0
0.7
2.0
0
1.3
3.1
0
1.9
9.0
0
6.0
0.24–0.40
0.2
0.25
0.2
0.5
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
1.0
1.6
1.4
1.6
5.0
3.5
5.0
0.6
0
0.35
1.5
0
0.9
2.5
0
1.6
3.9
0
2.5
10.7
0
7.2
0.40–0.71
0.25
0.3
0.25
0.6
0.7
0.6
1.2
1.0
1.2
2.0
1.6
2.0
6.0
4.0
6.0
0.75
0
0.45
1.7
0
1.0
2.9
0
1.9
4.6
0
3.0
12.8
0
8.8
0.71–1.19
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.8
0.8
1.6
1.2
1.6
2.5
2.0
2.5
7.0
5.0
7.0
0.95
0
0.55
2.1
0
1.3
3.6
0
2.4
5.7
0
3.7
15.5
0
10.5
1.19–1.97
0.4
0.4
0.4
1.0
1.0
1.0
2.0
1.6
2.0
3.0
2.5
3.0
8.0
6.0
8.0
1.1
0
0.7
2.6
0
1.6
4.6
0
3.0
7.1
0
4.6
18.0
0
12.0
1.97–3.15
0.4
0.5
0.4
1.2
1.2
1.2
2.5
1.8
2.5
4.0
3.0
4.0
9.0
7.0
9.0
1.2
0
0.7
3.1
0
1.9
5.5
0
3.7
8.8
0
5.8
20.5
0
13.5
3.15–4.73
0.5
0.6
0.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
3.0
2.2
3.0
5.0
3.5
5.0
10.0
9.0
10.0
1.5
0
0.9
3.7
0
2.3
6.6
0
4.4
10.7
0
7.2
24.0
0
15.0
4.73–7.09
0.6
0.7
0.6
1.6
1.6
1.6
3.5
2.5
3.5
6.0
4.0
6.0
12.0
10.0
12.0
1.8
0
1.1
4.2
0
2.6
7.6
0
5.1
12.5
0
8.5
28.0
0
18.0
7.09–9.85
0.6
0.8
0.6
2.0
1.8
2.0
4.0
2.8
4.0
7.0
4.5
7.0
15.0
12.0
15.0
2.0
0
1.2
5.0
0
3.2
8.6
0
5.8
14.3
0
9.8
34.0
0
22.0
9.85–12.41
0.8
0.9
0.8
2.5
2.0
2.5
5.0
3.0
5.0
8.0
5.0
8.0
18.0
12.0
18.0
2.3
0
1.4
5.7
0
3.7
10.0
0
7.0
16.0
0
11.0
38.0
0
26.0
1Data for classes RC 2, RC 4, RC 6, and RC 8, and additional sizes up to 200 inches available from ref. 3.
2A basic hole system is a system in which the design size of the hole is the basic size and the allowance, if any, is applied to the shaft.
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
327

328
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
TABLE 6.6 Guidelines for Selecting Interference Fits (Fractional and Decimal Inch)
Class of Fit
Intended Application
FN 1
Light drive ﬁts; require only light pressure to assemble mating parts to produce 
more-or-less permanent assemblies. Suitable for thin sections, long ﬁts, or cast- 
iron external members.
FN 2
Medium drive ﬁts; suitable for “ordinary” steel parts, or shrink ﬁts for light sections.
FN 3
Heavy drive ﬁts; suitable for heavier steel parts, or shrink ﬁts for medium sections.
FN 4
Force ﬁts; suitable for parts that can be highly stressed, or for shrink ﬁts where the 
heavy pressing forces required for assembly would be impractical.
FN 5
Force ﬁts; similar to FN 4 but for even higher interference pressures. 
Guidelines for selecting an appropriate ﬁt for a given force ﬁt application are shown in Table
6.6. Standard limits and interferences are tabulated in Table 6.7 for a selected range of nom-
inal (design) sizes.
Standard locational ﬁts for fractional and decimal inch dimensions14 are divided into
20 classes: LC 1 through LC 11, LT 1 through LT 6, and LN 1 through LN 3. The (exten-
sive) data for transitional ﬁts are not included in this text, but are available in the standards
cited in reference 3.
Details of dimensioning, although important, will not be discussed here since many
excellent references on this topic are available in the literature.15 In particular, the tech-
niques of true-position dimensioning and geometric dimensioning and tolerancing, em-
body important concepts that not only ensure proper function of the machine but expedite
manufacture and inspection of the product as well. Software packages have been devel-
oped for statistically analyzing tolerance “stackup” in complex two-dimensional and three-
dimensional assemblies, and predicting the impact of design tolerances and manufacturing
variations on assembly quality, before a prototype is built.16
Finally, Figure 6.11 is included to illustrate the range of expected surface roughnesses
corresponding to various production processes. It is the designer’s responsibility to strike
a proper balance between a surface texture smooth enough to assure proper function, but
rough enough to permit economy in manufacture. The roughness measure used in Figure
6.11 is the arithmetic average of deviation from the mean surface roughness height, in mi-
crometers (microinches).
14Similar but slightly different guidelines for metric dimensions are available from ANSI B4.2, cited in ref. 3.
15See, for example, refs. 5 and 6.
16See, for example, refs. 8 and 9.

TABLE 6.7 Selected1 Standard Limits and Interferences for Force and Shrink Fits, Using the Basic Hole System2 (thousandths of an inch)
Class FN 1
Class FN2
Class FN3
Class FN4
Class FN5
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Limits
Standard
Nom. Size
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
of
Limits
Range (in.)
Interference
Hole
Shaft
Interference
Hole
Shaft
Interference
Hole
Shaft
Interference
Hole
Shaft
Interference
Hole
Shaft
0–0.12
0.05
0.25
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.85
0.3
0.4
0.95
0.3
0.6
1.3
0.5
0
0.3
0.85
0
0.6
0.95
0
0.7
1.3
0
0.9
0.12–0.24
0.1
0.3
0.6
0.2
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.5
1.2
0.5
0.7
1.7
0.6
0
0.4
1.0
0
0.7
1.2
0
0.9
1.7
0
1.2
0.24–0.40
0.1
0.4
0.75
0.4
0.6
1.4
0.6
0.6
1.6
0.5
0.9
2.0
0.75
0
0.5
1.4
0
1.0
1.6
0
1.2
2.0
0
1.4
0.40–0.56
0.1
0.4
0.8
0.5
0.7
1.6
0.7
0.7
1.8
0.6
1.0
2.3
0.8
0
0.5
1.6
0
1.2
1.8
0
1.4
2.3
0
1.6
0.56–0.71
0.2
0.4
0.9
0.5
0.7
1.6
0.7
0.7
1.8
0.8
1.0
2.5
0.9
0
0.6
1.6
0
1.2
1.8
0
1.4
2.5
0
1.8
0.71–0.95
0.2
0.5
1.1
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.8
0.8
2.1
1.0
1.2
3.0
1.1
0
0.7
1.9
0
1.4
2.1
0
1.6
3.0
0
2.2
0.95–1.19
0.3
0.5
1.2
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.8
0.8
2.1
1.0
0.8
2.3
1.3
1.2
3.3
1.2
0
0.8
1.9
0
1.4
2.1
0
1.6
2.3
0
1.8
3.3
0
2.5
1.19–1.58
0.3
0.6
1.3
0.8
1.0
2.4
1.0
1.0
2.6
1.5
1.0
3.1
1.4
1.6
4.0
1.3
0
0.9
2.4
0
1.8
2.6
0
2.0
3.1
0
2.5
4.0
0
3.0
1.58–1.97
0.4
0.6
1.4
0.8
1.0
2.4
1.2
1.0
2.8
1.8
1.0
3.4
2.4
1.6
5.0
1.4
0
1.0
2.4
0
1.8
2.8
0
2.2
3.4
0
2.8
5.0
0
4.0
1.97–2.56
0.6
0.7
1.8
0.8
1.2
2.7
1.3
1.2
3.2
2.3
1.2
4.2
3.2
1.8
6.2
1.8
0
1.3
2.7
0
2.0
3.2
0
2.5
4.2
0
3.5
6.2
0
5.0
2.56–3.15
0.7
0.7
1.9
1.0
1.2
2.9
1.8
1.2
3.7
2.8
1.2
4.7
4.2
1.8
7.2
1.9
0
1.4
2.9
0
2.2
3.7
0
3.0
4.7
0
4.0
7.2
0
6.0
3.15–3.94
0.9
0.9
2.4
1.4
1.4
3.7
2.1
1.4
4.4
3.6
1.4
5.9
4.8
2.2
8.4
2.4
0
1.8
3.7
0
2.8
4.4
0
3.5
5.9
0
5.0
8.4
0
7.0
1Data for additional sizes up to 200 inches available from ref. 3.
2A basic hole system is a system in which the design size of the hole is the basic size and the allowance, if any, is applied to the shaft.
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
329

330
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
Process
(2000)(1000)(500) (250) (125) (63) (32) (16)
(8)
(4)
(2)
(1)
(0.5)
50
25
12.5
6.3
3.2
1.6
0.80 0.40 0.20 0.10 0.05 0.025 0.012
Arithmetic average rougness height rating, m ( in)
Flame cutting
Snagging
Sawing
Planing, shaping
Drilling
Chemical milling
Elect. discharge mach.
Milling
Broaching
Reaming
Electron beam
Laser
Electro-chemical
Boring, turning
Barrel finishing
Electrolytic grinding
Roller burnishing
Grinding
Honing
Electro-polish
Polishing
Lapping
Super finishing
Sand casting
Hot rolling
Forging
Perm. mold casting
Investment casting
Extruding
Cold rolling, drawing
Die casting
The ranges shown above are typical of the processes listed.
Higher or lower values may be obtained under special conditions.
Average application
Less frequent
application
Rougher texture
lower cost
Smoother texture
higher cost
Figure 6.11
Surface roughness ranges
produced by various 
manufacturing processes. 
(From ref. 7, by permission
of the McGraw-Hill
Companies.)
6-1. List the basic principles for creating the shape of a ma-
chine part and determining its size. Interpret these principles in
terms of the ﬁve common stress patterns discussed in 4.4.
6-2. List 10 conﬁgurational guidelines for making good geo-
metric choices for shapes and arrangements of machine parts.
6-3. In Proposal 1 shown in Figure 6.1(a), a “U-shaped” link is
suggested for transferring direct tensile force F from joint A to
joint B. Although the direct load path guideline clearly favors
Proposal 2 shown in Figure 6.1(b), it has been discovered that a
rotating cylindrical drive shaft, whose center lies on a virtual
line connecting joints A and B, requires that some type of U-
shaped link must be used to make space for the rotating drive
shaft. Without making any calculations, identify which of the
conﬁgurational guidelines of 6.2 might be applicable in deter-
mining an appropriate geometry for the U-shaped link, and,
based on these guidelines, sketch an initial proposal for the
overall shape of the link.
6-4. Referring to Figure 16.4, the brake system shown is actu-
ated by applying a force 
at the end of an actuating lever, as
shown. The actuating lever is to be pivoted at point C. Without
making any calculations, identify which of the conﬁgurational
guidelines of 6.2 might be applicable in determining an appro-
priate shape for the actuating lever, and, based on these guide-
lines, sketch an initial proposal for the overall shape of the
lever. Do not include the shoe, but provide for it.
6-5. Figure P6.5 shows a sketch of a proposed torsion bar
spring, clamped at one end to a rigid support wall, supported by
a bearing at the free end, and loaded in torsion by an attached
lever arm clamped to the free end. It is being proposed to use a
split-clamp arrangement to clamp the torsion bar to the ﬁxed
Fa
Problems

support wall and also to use a split-clamp conﬁguration to at-
tach the lever arm to the free end of the torsion bar. Without
making any calculations, and concentrating only on the torsion
bar, identify which of the conﬁgurational guidelines of 6.2
might be applicable in determining an appropriate shape for this
torsion bar element. Based on the guidelines listed, sketch an
initial proposal for the overall shape of the torsion bar.
6-6. a. Referring to the free-body diagram of the brake actuat-
ing lever shown in Figure 16.4(b), identify appropriate
critical sections in preparation for calculating dimensions
and ﬁnalizing the shape of the part. Give your rationale.
b. Assuming that the lever will have a constant solid cir-
cular cross section over the full length of the beam, select
appropriate critical points in each critical section. Give
your reasoning.
6-7. a. Figure P6.7 shows a channel-shaped cantilever bracket
subjected to an end load of 
lb, applied verti-
cally downward as shown. Identify appropriate critical
sections in preparation for checking the dimensions
shown. Give your rationale.
b. Select appropriate critical points in each critical sec-
tion. Give your reasoning.
c. Can you suggest improvements on shape or conﬁgura-
tion for this bracket?
P = 8000
Problems 331
6-8. The short tubular cantilever bracket shown in Figure P6.8
is to be subjected to a transverse end load of 
ver-
tically downward. Neglecting possible stress concentration ef-
fects, do the following:
a. Identify appropriate critical sections in preparation for
determining the unspeciﬁed dimensions.
b. Specify precisely and completely the location of all po-
tential critical points in each critical section identiﬁed.
Clearly explain why you have chosen these particular
points. Do not consider the point where force 
is applied
to the bracket.
c. For each potential critical point identiﬁed, sketch a
small volume element showing all nonzero components of
stress.
d. If AISI 1020 cold-drawn steel has been tentatively se-
lected as the material to be used, yielding has been identi-
ﬁed as the probable governing failure mode, and a safety
factor of 
has been chosen, calculate the re-
quired numerical value of .
6-9. The cross hatched critical section in a solid cylindrical bar
of 2024-T3 aluminum, as shown in the sketch of Figure P6.9, is
subjected to a torsional moment of 
N-m, a bending
moment of 
N-m, and a vertically downward trans-
verse force of 
kN.
Fz = 400
My = 5700
Tx = 8500
di
nd = 1.20
F
F = 130 kN
Rigid support
wall
Clamp screw
Clamp screw
Bearing support
Lever arm
P
Torsion bar
L
C
L
C
Figure P6.5
Sketch of a torsion bar spring arrangement.
Fixed
do = 80 mm
di
l = 40 mm
F = 130 KN
Figure P6.8
Short tubular cantilever bracket subjected to transverse
end load.
L = 6 in.
2.0
0.86 in.
h = 4.0
t
2 = 0.16 in.
1.72 in.
t = 0.32 in.
(typ.)
X
Y
P = 8000 lb
Figure P6.7
Channel-shaped cantilever bracket subjected to transverse
end load.
Tx = 8500 N-m
My = 5700 N-m
Cross section
of interest
Fz = 400 kN
d
2024-T3
Aluminum
z
y
x
Figure P6.9
Solid cylindrical bar subjected to torsion, bending, and
transverse shear.

a. Clearly establish the location(s) of the potential critical
point(s), giving logic and reasons why you have selected
the point(s).
b. If yielding has been identiﬁed as the probable govern-
ing failure mode, and a safety factor of 1.15 has been cho-
sen, calculate the required numerical value of diameter .
6-10. A ﬁxed steel shaft (spindle) is to support a rotating idler
pulley (sheave) for a belt-drive system. The nominal shaft di-
ameter is to be 50 mm. The sheave must rotate in a stable man-
ner on the shaft, at relatively high speeds, with the smoothness
characteristically required of accurate machinery. Write an ap-
propriate speciﬁcation for the limits on shaft size and sheave
bore, and determine the resulting limits of clearance. Use the
basic hole system.
6-11. A cylindrical bronze bearing sleeve is to be installed into
the bore of a ﬁxed cylindrical steel housing. The bronze sleeve
has an inside diameter of 2.000 inches and nominal outside di-
ameter of 2.500 inches. The steel housing has a nominal bore di-
ameter of 2.500 inches and an outside diameter of 3.500 inches.
To function properly, without “creep” between the sleeve and
the housing, it is anticipated that a “medium drive ﬁt” will be re-
quired. Write an appropriate speciﬁcation for the limits on
sleeve outer diameter and housing bore diameter, and determine
the resulting limits of interference. Use the basic hole system.
6-12. For a special application, it is desired to assemble a phos-
phor bronze disk to a hollow steel shaft, using an interference
ﬁt for retention. The disk is to be made of C-52100 hot-rolled
phosphor bronze, and the hollow steel shaft is to be made of
cold-drawn 1020 steel. As shown in Figure P6.12, the proposed
nominal dimensions of the disk are 10 inches for outer diame-
ter and 3 inches for the hole diameter, and the shaft, at the
mounting pad, has a 3-inch outer diameter and a 2-inch inner
diameter. The hub length is 4 inches. Preliminary calculations
have indicated that in order to keep stresses within an accept-
able range, the interference between the shaft mounting pad and
the hole in the disk must not exceed 0.0040 inch. Other calcu-
lations indicate that to transmit the required torque across the
interference ﬁt interface the interference must be at least 0.0015
inch. What class ﬁt would you recommend for this application,
and what dimensional speciﬁcations should be written for the
shaft mounting pad outer diameter and for the disk hole diame-
ter? Use the basic hole system for your speciﬁcations.
d
6-13. It is desired to design a hydrodynamically lubricated
plain bearing (see Chapter 11) for use in a production line con-
veyor to be used to transport industrial raw materials. It has
been estimated that for the anticipated operating conditions and
the lubricant being considered, a minimum lubricant ﬁlm thick-
ness of 
mm can be sustained. Further, it is being pro-
posed to ﬁnish-turn the bearing journal (probably steel) and
ream the bearing sleeve (probably bronze). An empirical rela-
tionship has been found in the literature (see Chapter 11) that
claims satisfactory wear levels can be achieved if
where
Rj  arithmetic average asperity peak height above
mean bearing journal surface (mm)
Rb  arithmetic average asperity peak height above
mean bearing sleeve surface (mm)
Determine whether bearing wear levels in this case would be
likely to lie within a satisfactory range.
6-14. You have been assigned to a design team working on the
design of a boundary-lubricated plain bearing assembly (see
Chapter 10) involving a 4340 steel shaft heat-treated to a hard-
ness of Rockwell C 40 (RC 40), rotating in an aluminum-
bronze bushing. One of your colleagues has cited data that seem
to indicate that a 20 percent improvement in wear life might be
achieved by grinding the surface of the steel shaft at the bear-
ing site, as opposed to a ﬁnish-turning operation, as currently
proposed. Can you think of any reasons not to grind the shaft
surface?
ho Ú 0.51Rj + Rb2
ho = 0.12
332
Chapter 6 / Geometry Determination
3.0
in. D
4 in.
2.0
in. D
10.0
in. D
Figure P6.12
Sketch showing the nominal conﬁguration of an interference
ﬁt assembly.

Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing and
Maintenance Requirements
Chapter 7
333
7.1 Concurrent Engineering
To avoid the potential penalties of locking in early design decisions, the strategy of con-
current engineering deserves careful consideration. The objective of concurrent engineer-
ing, or concurrent design, is to organize the information ﬂow among all project
participants, from the time marketing goals are established until the product is shipped.
Information and knowledge about all of the design-related issues during the life cycle of
the product are made as available as possible at all stages of the design process. Concurrent
engineering strategy, especially in mass production industries, is typically implemented by
using a team approach to involve engineers and others working on every phase of the entire
life cycle of the product, to communicate changes as they develop. Participating groups
may include design, tooling, fabrication, assembly, processing, maintenance, inspection,
marketing, shipping, and recycling or disposal. For the concurrent design strategy to be
effective, team members from downstream processes must be continuously and deeply
involved in the discussions and decision making all along the way, starting at the prelimi-
nary design stage; company management must also support the strategy. Interactive
computer systems, including CAD (computer-aided design) software for product data
management, and solid modeling software form the cornerstones for implementation of
concurrent engineering strategy. The technique allows on-line review and update of the
current design conﬁguration by any team member at any time.1 Properly executed, this
approach prevents the need for costly redesigns and capitalizes upon the availability of
modern ﬂexible manufacturing systems and automation technology.
Concurrent engineering strategy is sometimes referred to as Design for “X” (DFX)
strategy, where “X” is the symbol for any of the engineering design issues associated
with the product, including function, performance, reliability, manufacture, assembly,
disassembly, maintenance, inspection,2 and robustness.3 The approach is to evaluate
each of the issues, qualitatively and quantitatively, with the goal of optimizing perform-
ance, manufacturing, and maintenance requirements, as well as minimizing life cycle
1For example, Windchill software, a product of Parametric Technology, Inc., automatically resizes products
when one dimension is changed, and uses the Internet to link computerized design with purchasing, outsourc-
ing, manufacturing, and long-term maintenance. (See ref. 14.)
2Inspection here refers not only to the ability to examine manufactured parts for compliance with speciﬁcations
and tolerances, but, of equal importance, the ability to access and examine potential failure initiation sites
throughout the life of the machine.
3Robustness is a term that refers to the ability of a product or system to perform properly in the presence of
variations in the manufacturing process, variations in environmental operating conditions, or service-induced
changes in geometry or material properties.

costs for the overall system. A brief discussion of some of the DFX issues follows next,
with emphasis on the concept that input from as many downstream system activities as
possible, as early as possible, is important in avoiding or minimizing expensive design
changes.
7.2 Design for Function, Performance, and Reliability
The traditional design responsibilities of making sure that a proposed machine or system
fulfills all of the specified functions, performs efficiently over the design lifetime, and
does not fail prematurely are universally accepted. Chapters 1 through 6 of this textbook
are devoted to detailed discussions of design procedures aimed at reaching these goals.
It only remains to be stated that these design responsibilities must continue to be met as
other DFX demands are introduced to implement and optimize downstream processes.
An ongoing review of potential changes in functionality, performance, and reliability,
generated by downstream process-improvement activity, is essential to the successful
design, production, and marketing of a competitive end product. It is equally true that a
careful ongoing review of material selection, part geometry, and overall configuration is
essential to efficient cost-effective fabrication, assembly, and maintenance of the final
product.
7.3 Selection of the Manufacturing Process
Changing the shape and size of available stock or bulk raw material into parts with the
sizes, shapes, and ﬁnishes speciﬁed by the designer is the objective of any manufacturing
process. It will often be true that more than one manufacturing method is available for
producing a particular part. Selection of the best process may depend upon one or more of
the following factors:
1. Type, form, and properties of raw material
2. Desired properties of ﬁnished part, including strength, stiffness, ductility, and toughness
3. Size, shape, and complexity of ﬁnished part
4. Tolerances required and surface ﬁnishes speciﬁed
5. Number of parts to be produced
6. Availability and cost of capital equipment required
7. Cost and lead time for tooling required
8. Scrap rate and cost of reworking
9. Time and energy requirements for the overall process
10. Worker safety and environmental impact
In essence, all manufacturing processes may be categorized as methods for changing
shape or size by one of ﬁve basic means: (1) ﬂow of molten material, (2) fusion of com-
ponent parts, (3) plastic deformation of ductile solid material, (4) selectively removing
material by machining or chip-forming action, or (5) sintering powdered metal particles.
Attributes and examples of each of these process categories are brieﬂy summarized in
Table 7.1.
A designer should give consideration to the selection of an appropriate manufacturing
process for each part, early in the design stage. Details of material selection, size and shape
334
Chapter 7 / Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing and Maintenance Requirements

of a part, number to be produced, and strength requirements all have an impact on selection
of the manufacturing process best suited to a particular part. In turn, design decisions on de-
tails of shape, orientation, retention, or other features are, in many cases, dependent upon the
selected manufacturing process. A designer is well advised to consult with manufacturing
Selection of the Manufacturing Process 335
TABLE 7.1 Attributes of Manufacturing Process Categories
Special
Relative 
Process
Processing
Processing
Capital
Special
Strength
Examples 
Process
Category
Power
Time
Equipment
Tooling
of
of 
Category
Symbol
Required
Required
Costs
Costs
Product
Process1
Flow of molten
C
relatively
relatively
relatively
relatively
generally
Sand casting
material
low
low
high
low
poorest
Shell mold casting
(casting process)
Ceramic mold
casting
Permanent mold
casting
Die casting
Centrifugal casting
Investment casting
Others
Fusion of
W
moderate
moderate
relatively
relatively
moderate
Arc welding
component parts
low
low
Gas welding
by local applica-
Resistance welding
tion of heat
Electron beam
(welding process)
welding
Others
Plastic deforma- 
F
relatively
relatively
relatively
relatively
generally
Hammer forging
tion of ductile
high
low
high
high
best
Press forging
solid material
Rolling
(forming process)
Drawing
Extruding
Bending
Deep drawing
Spinning
Stretching
Others
Material removal
M
moderate
relatively
relatively
relatively
second
Turning
by chip-forming
high
low
low
best
Facing
action (machining
Boring
process)
Milling
Drilling
Grinding
Sawing
Others
Sintering of
S
moderate
moderate
moderate
relatively
Diffusion bonding
powdered metal
high
Liquid-phase
particles (sintering
sintering
process)
Spark sintering
Hot isostatic 
processing (HIP)
1For detailed discussion of processes see, for example, refs. 1, 2, or 3.

engineers early in the design stage to avoid later problems. Concurrent engineering strategy
directly supports effective design decision making in this context.
Preliminary guidelines for selecting appropriate manufacturing processes are summa-
rized in Table 7.2. Although these guidelines are very useful for a designer, it is empha-
sized that a team approach involving manufacturing engineers and materials engineers
usually pays dividends. Table 3.17 should be checked to make sure the process selected is
compatible with the proposed material.
336
Chapter 7 / Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing and Maintenance Requirements
TABLE 7.2 Selection of Manufacturing Process Based on Application
Characteristics
Application Description
Process Category 
Characteristic
or Requirement
Generally Best Suited1
Shape
uniform, simple
M, F, S
intricate, complex
C, W
Size
small
M, F, S
medium
M, F, C, W
large
C, M, W
Number to be produced
one or a few
M, W
low mass production
M, F, C, S, W
high mass production
F, C
Strength required
minimal
C, F, M, S
average
F, M, W
maximum available
F
1See Table 7.1 for deﬁnition of process category symbols.
Example 7.1 Tentative Selection of Manufacturing Process
The frame sketched in Figure 20.1(c) is to be used for an experimental fatigue testing ma-
chine that will operate in a laboratory environment. It is anticipated that three such ma-
chines will be constructed. Utilizing Tables 7.1 and 7.2, tentatively select an appropriate
manufacturing process for producing the frame, assuming that low-carbon steel will be
chosen as the preferred material.
Solution
Evaluating each of the “characteristics” included in Table 7.2 in terms of the correspon-
ding assessment of the “application description” best describing the frame sketched in
Figure 20.1(c), and using “process category” symbols deﬁned in Table 7.1, the preliminary
evaluation shown in Table E7.1 may be made. Tallying the results from column three of
Table E7.1, the frequency of citation for “applicable process categories” may be listed as
follows:
M:
3 times
F:
1 time
C:
2 times
S:
0 times
W:
4 times
Welding appears to be the most appropriate manufacturing process, and will tenta-
tively be selected. From Table 3.17, this selection is compatible with low-carbon steel.

7.4 Design for Manufacturing (DFM)
After the materials have been selected and processes identiﬁed, and after the sizes and
shapes have been created by the designer to meet functional and performance require-
ments, each part, and the overall machine assembly, should be scrutinized for compliance
with the following guidelines for efﬁcient manufacture.
1.
The total number of individual parts should be minimized.
2.
Standardized parts and components should be used where possible.
3.
Modular components and subassemblies with standardized interfaces to other compo-
nents should be used where possible.
4.
Individual part geometry should accommodate the selected manufacturing process to
minimize waste of material and time.
5.
Near net shape manufacturing processes should be speciﬁed where possible to mini-
mize the need for secondary machining and ﬁnishing processes.
6.
Parts and component arrangements should be designed so that all assembly maneu-
vers may be executed from a single direction during the assembly process, preferably
from the top down to capitalize on gravity-assisted feeding and insertion.
7.
As far as possible, the function-dictated sizes, shapes, and arrangements of parts in the
assembly should be augmented by geometric features that promote ease of alignment,
ease of insertion, self-location, and unobstructed access and view during the assembly
process. Examples of such features might include well-designed chamfers, recesses,
guideways, or intentional asymmetry.
8.
The number of separate fasteners should be minimized by utilizing assembly tabs,
snap-ﬁts, or other interlocking geometries, where possible.
Again, as the designer strives to comply with these guidelines, he or she would be well
advised to engage in frequent consultations with manufacturing and materials engineers.
7.5 Design for Assembly (DFA)
The assembly process often turns out to be the most inﬂuential contributor in determining
the overall cost of manufacturing a product, especially for higher production rates. For this
reason the assembly process has been intensively studied over the past two decades, and
several techniques, including both qualitative and quantitative approaches, have been
developed for evaluating and choosing the best assembly method for a given product.4
Design for Assembly (DFA) 337
TABLE E7.1 Manufacturing Process Suitability
Application
Applicable Process
Characteristic
Description
Category
Shape
intricate, complex
C, W
Size
medium
M, F, C, W
Number to be produced
a few
M, W
Strength required
average
F, M, W 
4See refs. 3 through 10 for detailed discussions.

Basically, all assembly processes may be classiﬁed as either manual (performed by people)
or automated (performed by mechanisms). Manual assembly processes range from bench
assembly of the complete machine at a single station to line assembly, where each person
is responsible for assembling only a small portion of the complete unit as it moves from
station to station along a production line. Automated assembly may be subcategorized into
either dedicated automatic assembly or ﬂexible automatic assembly. Dedicated assembly
systems involve the progressive assembly of a unit using a series of single-purpose ma-
chines, in line, each dedicated to (and capable of) only one assembly activity. In contrast,
ﬂexible assembly systems involve the use of one or more machines that have the capabil-
ity of performing many activities, simultaneously or sequentially, as directed by computer-
managed control systems.
The design importance of knowing early in the design stage which assembly process
will be used lies in the need to conﬁgure parts5 for the selected assembly process. Table
7.3 provides preliminary guidelines for predicting which assembly process will probably
be used to best meet the needs of the application. Realistically, it is imporant to note that6
only 10 percent of products are suitable for line assembly, only 10 percent of products are
suitable for dedicated automatic assembly, and only 5 percent of products are suitable for
ﬂexible assembly. Clearly, manual assembly is by far the most widely used assembly
process.
To facilitate manual assembly, the designer should attempt to conﬁgure each part so
that it may be easily grasped and manipulated without special tools. To accomplish this,
parts should not be heavy, sharp, fragile, slippery, sticky, or prone to nesting or tangling.
Ideally, parts should be symmetric, both rotationally and end-to-end, so that orientation
and insertion are fast and easy. For effective automatic assembly, parts should have the
ability to be easily oriented, easily fed, and easily inserted. They should therefore not be
very thin, very small, very long, very ﬂexible, or very abrasive, and they should not be hard
to grasp. In the ﬁnal analysis, the designer would be well advised to engage in frequent
dialogues with manufacturing engineers throughout the design process.
338
Chapter 7 / Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing and Maintenance Requirements
TABLE 7.3 Preliminary Guidelines for Selection of Assembly Process Based on
Application Characteristics
Application Characteristic
Assembly Method
Characteristic
or Requirement
Generally Best Suited1
Total number of parts
low
M
in one assembly
medium
M, D, F
high
D, F
Projected production
low
M, F
volume
medium
M, D, F
high
D, F
Cost of available
low
M
labor
moderate
M, D, F
high
D, F
Difﬁculty in handling 
little
D, F
(acquiring, orienting,
moderate
M, D, F
and transporting parts)
great
M
and insertion
1M  manual assembly
D  dedicated automatic assembly
F  ﬂexible automatic assembly
5Assuming that the proposed part conﬁguration also meets functional speciﬁcations.
6See ref. 4, p. 24.

7.6 Design for Critical Point Accessibility, Inspectability,
Disassembly, Maintenance, and Recycling
In 1.8 the heavy dependence of both fail-safe design and safe life design upon regular in-
spection of critical points was emphasized. Nevertheless, designers have rarely considered
inspectability of critical points at the design stage. To prevent failure, and minimize down-
time, it is imperative that designers conﬁgure machine components, subassemblies, and
fully assembled machines so that the critical points established during the functional design
process are accessible and inspectable. Further, inspection should be possible with a mini-
mum of disassembly effort. Also, maintenance and service requirements should be carefully
examined by the designer as early as possible in the design stage to minimize downtime
(especially unscheduled downtime) and maintain functionality throughout the life cycle.
As design calculations proceed, a list of governing critical points (see 6.3) should be
compiled, prioritized, and posted. As subassembly and machine assembly layout drawings
are developed, careful attention should be given to accessibility of the governing critical
points to inspection. These considerations are especially important for high-performance
machines and structures such as aircraft, spacecraft, high-speed rail vehicles, off-shore oil
platforms, and other devices operating under highly loaded conditions or in adverse envi-
ronments. To provide appropriate accessibility to critical point inspection it is important
for a designer to have a working knowledge of nondestructive evaluation (NDE) tech-
niques, and equipment7 that might be utilized to implement the inspection process.
Potential NDE techniques, which range from very simple to very complex, include:
1. Direct visual examination
2. Visual examination using inspection mirrors or optical magniﬁcation
3. Use of borescopes or ﬁber-optic bundles
4. Use of liquid or dye penetrant ﬂaw-detection techniques
5. Use of electromagnetic ﬂaw-detection techniques
6. Use of microwave techniques
7. Use of ultrasonic or laser ultrasonic examination
8. Use of eddy-current techniques
9. Use of thermographic techniques
10. Use of acoustic emission procedures
A designer would be well advised to consult, as early as is practical in the design
process, specialists in NDE methods to help choose wise approaches for inspecting the
governing critical points. When inspection methods have been selected, it is important to
conﬁgure components, subassemblies, and machines so that supporting equipment can be
easily maneuvered to each critical site with a minimum of effort and as little disassembly
as possible. The provision of access ports, inspection plates, line-of-sight corridors, in-
spection mirror clearance, borescope access, and clearance for transducers or other sup-
porting inspection equipment is a direct responsibility of the designer. Consideration of
these requirements should begin as early as possible to avoid costly design changes later.
Life cycle maintenance and service requirements should also be examined by the
designer with the objective of configuring components, subassemblies, and the overall
assembly so that maintenance and service are as easy as is practical. In this context, vir-
tual assembly and disassembly software8 may be useful at the design stage to identify
Design for Critical Point Accessibility, Inspectability, Disassembly, Maintenance, and Recycling 339
7See, for example, ref. 11.
8See, for example, refs. 12 and 13.

and correct potential problems—such as assembly and disassembly interference; insuf-
ficient clearances for wrenches, pullers, or presses; the need for special tools; or the need
for assembly or disassembly sequence improvement—before hardware prototypes exist.
Consideration should be given to assuring that expendable or recyclable maintenance
items such as filters, wear plates, belts, and bearings are easily replaceable. Some addi-
tional guidelines in designing for more efficient maintenance include:
1.
Providing appropriate access ports and inspection plates
2.
Providing accessible gripping sites, jacking sites, recesses or slots for pullers, or other
clearances to simplify the disassembly process
3.
Providing bosses, recesses, or other features to facilitate pressing bearings in and out,
pulling or pressing gears and seals off and on, or other required assembly and disas-
sembly tasks
4.
Using integral fasteners, such as studs or tabs, to replace loose parts that are easily lost
5.
If possible, avoiding permanent or semipermanent fastening methods such as staking,
welding, adhesive bonding, or irreversible snap-ﬁts
Finally, in accord with the deﬁnition of mechanical design given in 1.4, design for
resource conservation and minimization of adverse environmental impact are increasingly
important responsibilities to be addressed at the design stage. Design for recycling, repro-
cessing, and remanufacturing can often be enhanced simply by considering the need dur-
ing the design stage. Not only must a designer compete in the marketplace by optimizing
the design with respect to performance, manufacturing, and maintenance requirements, but
he or she must respond responsibly to the clear and growing obligation of the global tech-
nical community to conserve resources and preserve the earth’s environment.
340
Chapter 7 / Design-Stage Integration of Manufacturing and Maintenance Requirements
7-1. Deﬁne the term “concurrent engineering” and explain how
it is usually implemented.
7-2. List the ﬁve basic methods for changing the size or shape
of a work piece during the manufacturing process and give two
examples of each basic method.
7-3. Explain what is meant by “near net shape” manufacturing.
7-4. Basically, all assembly processes may be classiﬁed as ei-
ther manual, dedicated automatic, or ﬂexible automatic assem-
bly. Deﬁne and distinguish among these assembly processes,
and explain why it is important to tentatively select a candidate
process at an early stage in the design of a product.
7-5. Explain how “design for inspectability” relates to the con-
cepts of fail-safe design and safe life design described in 1.8.
7-6. Give three examples from your own life-experience in
which you think that “design for maintenance” could have been
improved substantially by the designer or manufacturer of the
part or machine being cited.
7-7. The gear support shaft depicted in Figure 8.1(a) is to be
made of AISI 1020 steel. It is anticipated that 20,000 of these
shafts will be manufactured each year for several years.
Utilizing Tables 7.1 and 7.2, tentatively select an appropriate
manufacturing process for producing the shafts.
7-8. It is being proposed to use AISI 4340 steel as the material
for a high-speed ﬂywheel such as the one depicted in Figure
18.10. It is anticipated that 50 of these high-speed ﬂywheels
will be needed to complete an experimental evaluation pro-
gram. It is desired to achieve the highest practical rotational
speeds. Utilizing Tables 7.1 and 7.2, tentatively select an ap-
propriate manufacturing process for producing these high-
speed rotors.
7-9. The rotating power screw depicted in Figure 12.1 is to be
made of AISI 1010 carburizing-grade steel. A production run of
500,000 units is anticipated. Utilizing Tables 7.1 and 7.2, tenta-
tively select an appropriate manufacturing process for produc-
ing the power screws.
7-10. Figure 8.1(c) depicts a ﬂywheel drive assembly. Studying
this assembly, and utilizing the discussion of 7.5, including
Table 7.3, suggest what type of assembly process would proba-
bly be best. It is anticipated that 25 assemblies per week will
satisfy market demand. The assembly operation will take place
in a small midwestern farming community.
Problems

341
8.1 Uses and Characteristics of Shafting
Virtually all machines involve the transmission of power and/or motion from an input
source to an output work site. The input source, usually an electric motor or internal com-
bustion engine, typically supplies power as a rotary driving torque to the input shaft of the
machine under consideration, through some type of a coupling (see 8.8.) A shaft is typi-
cally a relatively long cylindrical element supported by bearings (see Chapters 10 and 11),
and loaded torsionally, transversely, and/or axially as the machine operates. The opera-
tional loads on a shaft arise from elements mounted on or attached to the shaft, such as
gears (see Chapter 14 and 15), belt pulleys (see Chapter 17), chain sprockets (see Chapter
17), or ﬂywheels (see Chapter 18), or from bearings mounted on the shaft that support
other operational subassemblies of the machine. Some schematic examples of typical
shafting conﬁgurations are shown in Figure 8.1.
Most power transmission shafts are cylindrical (solid or hollow), and often are
stepped. In special applications, shafts may be square, rectangular, or some other cross-
sectional shape. Usually the shaft rotates and is supported by bearings attached to a ﬁxed
frame or machine housing. Sometimes, however, the shaft is ﬁxed to the housing, so that
the bearings of idler gears, pulleys, or wheels may be mounted upon it. Short, stiff, ﬁxed
cantilever shafts, such as those used to support the nondriving wheels of an automobile,
are usually called spindles.
Since power transmission shafting is so widely required in virtually all types of
machinery and mechanical equipment, its design or selection may be the most frequently
encountered design task. In most cases, the approximate positions of gears, pulleys,
PART TWO
Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, 
Keys, and Splines
Chapter 8
DESIGN APPLICATIONS

sprockets, and supporting bearings along the shaft axis are dictated by the functional spec-
iﬁcations for the machine. The initial position layout of these elements is the ﬁrst step in
the design of a shaft. Next, a conceptual sketch of the shaft conﬁguration is made, show-
ing the main features required for the mounting and positioning of the elements along the
shaft. The need to consider locating shoulders for accurate axial positioning of bearings or
342
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Input shaft
Coupling
Running seal
Plain bearing
with thrust collar
Gearcase wall
Gearcase wall
Plain bearing
Static seal
Taper pin
Drive gear
Woodruff key
(a) Gear support shaft.
Actuator
spring
Snap ring
Spline
Actuator
Friction material
Output shaft
Clutch
Throw out bearing
Support
bearings
Pillow block
support
Bearing
retaining nut
V-belt drive pulley
Spacer
(b) Clutch drive shaft.
(c) Flywheel drive shaft.
Tapered roller bearings
Bearing support
Bearing support
Bearing
retainer
Flywheel
Bearing
retainer
Drive sprocket
Key
Set screw
Square key
Figure 8.1
Sketches of some typical shafting
conﬁgurations.

gears, raised mounting pads to facilitate pressing gears or bearings on or off the shaft, and
progressive increases in shaft diameter inward from the two ends (to permit assembly) is
important, even at this early stage. The contemplated use of other mounting or retention
features, such as keys, splines, pins, threads, or retaining rings, may also be included in the
conceptual sketch of the shaft, even before any design calculations have been made. The
generation of a ﬁrst conceptual sketch for a new shaft design application is illustrated in
Figure 8.2.
8.2 Potential Failure Modes
Most shafts rotate. Transverse loads from gears, sprockets, pulleys, and bearings that are
mounted upon a rotating shaft result in completely reversed cyclic bending stresses. In
some cases, transverse loads may also result in completely reversed transverse shearing
stresses. In addition, axial loads, such as those from helical gears or preloaded bearings,
may produce both axial stresses and/or superposed bending moments that are usually
steady, but sometimes ﬂuctuating. Transmitted shaft torques induce torsional shearing
stresses. These torsional shearing stresses are usually steady, but may sometimes ﬂuctuate,
depending on the application. From these observations, and the discussions of Chapter 5,
it is clear that fatigue is a very important potential failure mode for power transmission
shafting.
Furthermore, excessive misalignments in gear meshes, bearings, cams, sprockets, or
seals may lead to failure of these elements to function properly. Bending deﬂections or
Potential Failure Modes 343
L
Pinion
(5 in.
pitch
diam.)
L
Right
bearing
L
Shaft
L
Shaft
L
Shaft
L
Left
bearing
L
Spur gear
(20 in.
pitch
diam.)
Pinion pad
Right bearing pad
Gear pad
Left bearing
pad
Threads for
bearing retention
Keyway
Bearing shoulder
Blend radius
Snap ring
groove
Keyway
(a) Position layout of gears and bearings as dictated
by functional requirements of machine.
(b)
(c)
Sketch of shaft mounting features
required for gears and bearings.
Completion of first-cut shaft sketch by connecting the mounting
features and adding shoulders, fillets, and retention features.
15 in.
15 in.
6 in.
L
C
L
C
L
C
L
C
L
C
L
C
L
C
Figure 8.2
Generation of a ﬁrst-cut conceptual sketch
for a new shaft design application.

shaft slopes that lead to excessive misalignment may be said to induce failure by force-
induced elastic deformation (see Chapter 2). If plain bearing journals, gear teeth, splines,
or cam lobes are integral features of a shaft, wear must also be considered as a potential
failure mode (see Chapter 2).
Because shafts are nearly always part of a dynamic system of interacting springs and
masses, it is important to examine the possibility that operation at certain critical speeds
may excite intolerable vibrations. If not adequately damped, vibration amplitudes may
suddenly increase and may destroy the system.1 The response of any vibrating system to
an exciting force or motion is dependent upon the springs, masses, and dampers in the sys-
tem, and how they are supported and coupled. Since a shaft may be regarded as a spring
element, both in ﬂexure and torsion (and sometimes axially), with attached mass elements
(such as gears, pulleys, ﬂywheels, and the mass of the shaft itself), and possible damping
due to friction, windage, or lubrication, the accurate modeling of shaft vibration response
may become a complex task. A designer is well advised to consult with a specialist in
mechanical vibrations to help analyze complex vibrational systems. However, simple
preliminary estimates of the fundamental natural frequency2 of the system usually can be
made, and then compared with the system forcing frequency3 to make sure that resonance4
(or near resonance) is avoided. The critical speed of a shaft is usually deﬁned to be the
lowest shaft speed that excites a resonant condition in the system. Higher critical speeds
may also exist, but are usually less serious.
It is an important design responsibility to assure that the shaft stiffness is great enough
to keep the fundamental natural frequency well above the forcing frequency (related to
shaft speed) so that excessive deﬂections (force-induced elastic deformations) are not 
induced.
Summarizing, the primary potential failure modes to be considered when designing a
power transmission shaft are:
1.
Fatigue failure
2.
Force-induced elastic deformation failure (either misalignments or critical speed
resonances)
3.
Wear failure (when bearing journals, gear teeth, or cams are integral shaft features)
8.3 Shaft Materials
Following the material selection guidelines discussed in Chapter 3, and recognizing the
potential failure modes suggested in 8.2, candidate materials for power transmission shaft-
ing typically should have good strength (especially fatigue strength), high stiffness, low
cost, and, in some applications, good wear resistance. Steel materials meet the strength,
stiffness, and cost criteria. If case hardening or through hardening alloys are utilized, such
steel materials can meet the wear resistance criterion as well.
Most power transmission shafting is made of low- or medium-carbon steel, either hot-
rolled or cold-drawn. Materials such as AISI 1010, 1018, 1020, or 1035 steel are com-
monly chosen for shafting applications. If higher strength is required, low-alloy steels such
344
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
1Almost no details about the mechanical vibrations of spring-mass systems are presented in this book. 
For vibration details see, for example, refs. 1, 2, or 3.
2Fundamental natural frequency is the lowest frequency assumed by an undamped vibrating system when 
displaced from its equilibrium position and released to oscillate naturally.
3System forcing frequency is the input frequency to the system provided by the time-varying applied loads.
4Resonance is the condition existing when the forcing frequency corresponds to a natural frequency.

as AISI 4140, 4340, or 8640 may be selected, using appropriate heat treatment to achieve
the desired properties. For forged shafting, such as for automotive crankshafts, 1040 or
1045 are commonly chosen steels. If case hardening of selected surfaces is necessary to
achieve acceptable wear resistance, carburizing steels such as 1020, 4320, or 8620 may be
used to support case-hardened surfaces at the required sites.
In applications where special design conditions or environments must be accommo-
dated, the methods of Chapter 3 should be used to select an appropriate shaft material. If
conditions such as corrosive environment or elevated temperature are present, for exam-
ple, materials such as stainless steel, titanium, or Inconel might be required in spite of
higher cost or greater difﬁculty in fabrication.
8.4 Design Equations—Strength Based
As suggested in 8.2, the state of stress at a selected critical point on the surface of a rotating
power transmission shaft may involve torsional shearing stress, transverse shearing stress,
bending stress, or axial stress components, any or all of which may be ﬂuctuating about zero
or nonzero mean values. In general, therefore, shaft design equations must be based on mul-
tiaxial states of stress produced by ﬂuctuating loads, as discussed in Chapters 5, and 6. The
procedure is illustrated in detail for a relatively simple shaft loading case in Example 5.21.
As a practical matter, many shaft design cases involve a reasonably simple state of stress,
often characterized as a steady torsional shearing stress component produced by a steady
operating torque, and a completely reversed bending stress component produced by steady
transverse forces on the rotating shaft. This simpliﬁed characterization has led to the tradi-
tional shaft design equations found in most machine design textbooks, and also forms the
basis for the current ANSI/ASME standard for the design of power transmission shafting.5
Before using any of these equations or standards, a designer is responsible for making sure
that the state of stress actually produced in any speciﬁc application is well approximated by
the simpliﬁed case of steady torsional shear together with completely reversed cyclic bend-
ing stresses. Otherwise, the more general methods for analyzing multiaxial states of stress
under ﬂuctuating loads must be utilized.
In shafts, there are two primary sources of stress, bending and torsion. Stresses due to
axial loads are also frequently present, but typically negligible. So, assuming only bend-
ing and torsion, let Ma and Mm be the alternating and mean bending moments, and let Ta
and Tm be the alternating and mean torques, respectively. Frequently, for a steady, rotating
shaft (i.e., rotating at constant speed with constant loads), the torque can be treated as
steady (i.e., Ta  0) and the moment can be treated as completely reversed due to the shaft
rotation (Mm  0). However, keeping the equations general6, the alternating and mean
bending stresses are given as (which act along the axis of the shaft) 
(8-1)
Likewise, for the alternating and mean torsional shear stress as
(8-2)
txy-a = Tac
J
= Ma(d>2)
pd4>32
= 16Ta
pd3
and
txy-m = 16Tm
pd3
sx-a = Mac
I
= Ma(d>2)
pd4>64
= 32Ma
pd3
and
sx-m = 32Mm
pd3
Design Equations—Strength Based 345
5Design of Transmission Shafting, ANSI/ASME B106.1M-1985, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
345 East 47th St., New York, NY 10017.
6See, for example, refs. 3, 4, and 5.

Recall that for highly local stress concentrations, for static loadings a stress concentration
factor is not applied 
, however, for cyclic loadings, we apply Kf, the fatigue stress
concentration factor using 
Note that q is different for bending and torsion as found in Figure 5.46, and Kt is deter-
mined from the appropriate graph, (Figures 5.4 to 5.12).
As before, the amplitude and mean of the equivalent stress are calculated by substi-
tuting the amplitudes and means of the stress components into Equation (5-47), yielding
Kf = q(Kt - 1) + 1
(Kt : 1)
346
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
seq-a = A
1
23(sx-a - sy-a)2 + (sy-a - sz-a)2 + (sz-a - sx-a)2 + 6(t2
xy-a + t2
yz-a + t2
zx-a)4
seq-m = A
1
23(sx-m - sy-m)2 + (sy-m - sz-m)2 + (sz-m - sx-m)2 + 6(t2
xy-m + t2
yz-m + t2
zx-m)4
(8-3a)
(8-3b)
or, for plane stress,
(8-4a)
(8-4b)
Substituting Equations (8-1) and (8-2) into the equations for the effective alternating and
mean stresses (8-3a) and (8-3b), and applying the appropriate stress concentration factors
results in
(8-5a)
and
(8-5b)
where Kfb and Kft are the fatigue stress concentration factors in bending and torsion,
respectively. Substituting into Equation (5-72) yields
(8-6)
The safety factor guarding against fatigue failure is then
(8-7)
where SN is the fatigue strength and is equal to Sf for inﬁnite life. Note, since the stress con-
centration factors were used to adjust the stress in this case, the fatigue strength should not
be adjusted by the stress concentration factors (always only adjust one or the other, but not
nd =
SN
seq-CR
seq-CR =
seq-a
1 -
seq-m
Su
=
Suseq-a
Su - seq-m
=
SuC(2KfbMa)2 + 3(KftTa)2D
12
pd3
16 Su - C(2Mm)2 + 3T2
mD
12
seq-m =
16
pd3C(2Mm)2 + 3T2
mD
12
seq-a =
16
pd3C(2KfbMa)2 + 3(KftTa)2D
12
seq-m = 2s2
x-m + s2
y-m + sx-msy-m + 3t2
xy-m
seq-a = 2s2
x-a + s2
y-a + sx-asy-a + 3t2
xy-a

both); thus, the fatigue strength modifying factor should be taken to be 
in this case.
For shaft design, (8-6) and (8-7) can be solved for the shaft diameter giving
(8-8)
where
d  required shaft diameter for a life of N cycles
nd  selected design safety factor
Kfb  fatigue stress concentration factor for bending
Kft  fatigue stress concentration factor for torsion
Ma  alternating bending moment
Mm  mean bending moment
Ta  alternating torsional moment
Tm  steady torsional moment
SN  fatigue strength for a design life of N cycles (SN  Sf for inﬁnite life)
It is also important to check for yield. Using the maximum bending moment Mmax and the
maximum torque Tmax, the equivalent uniaxial maximum stress is
(8-9)
and compute the factor of safety against yielding as
(8-10)
For a completely reversed bending moment Mm  0
and for steady torsion Ta  0
For this case we see that Equation (8-8) reduces to 
(8-11)
Equation (8-11) gives a valid estimate for the shaft diameter for the case of steady
torque and completely reversed bending, applied to a solid rotating shaft of circular cross
section and made of ductile material. Equations (8-8) and (8-11) apply to shafts subjected
to fatigue loading only and do not apply to the static analysis of shafts. For the static analy-
ses of shafts, the failure theories of section 5.4. can be applied. For more complicated mul-
tiaxial states of stress the methods of Chapters 5, and 6 should be used in an iterative
solution for shaft diameter. In such cases (8-11) is sometimes used to calculate initial val-
ues of shaft diameter to start the iteration. Since most shafting applications involve stepped
shafts with many different diameters (see Figures 8.1 and 8.2, for example) it is usually
necessary to calculate diameters at many different critical points along the length of a
shaft, even during preliminary design calculations.
d = a16
p e2Kfb(nd)Ma
SN
+ 23Tm
Su
f b
1>3
txy-m = 16Tm
pd3
sx-a = Mac
I
= 32Ma
pd3
ny =
Syp
seq- max
seq- max =
16
pd3 C(2M max)2 + 3T2
max D
12
d = a 16
pSu
e ndSu
SN C(2KfbMa)2 + 3(KftTa)2D
12 + C(2Mm)2 + 3T2
mD
13f b
13
Kf = 1
Design Equations—Strength Based 347

Example 8.1 Designing a Shaft for Strength
A proposed shaft is to be supported on two bearings spaced 30 inches apart. A straight spur
gear with a pitch diameter7 of 20 inches is to be supported midway between bearings, and
a straight spur pinion having a pitch diameter of 5 inches is to be supported 6 inches to the
right of the right-hand bearing. The 
involute gears are to transmit 150 horsepower at a
rotational speed of 150 rpm. The proposed shaft material is hot-rolled 1020 steel with
psi, 
psi, 
percent elongation in 2 inches, and fatigue
properties as shown for 1020 steel in Figure 5.31. Shoulders for gears and bearings are to
be a minimum of 0.125 inch (0.25 inch on the diameter). Design the shaft using a design
safety factor 
.
Solution
The ﬁrst step is to make a ﬁrst-cut conceptual sketch of the new shaft. Following the guide-
lines illustrated in Figure 8.2, the conceptual sketch of Figure E8.1A is proposed. Next, a
coordinate system is established, and a stick-sketch made of the shaft, gears, and bearings,
so that all forces and moments on the shaft (and the attached gears) may be shown.
For the initial set of design calculations, cross sections of the shaft at sections A, B,
C, and D of Figure E8.1B will be selected as critical sections.
The next step is to perform a force analysis to determine the magnitudes and direc-
tions for all forces and moments on the shaft. Because straight spur gears are used in this
proposed system, no axial ( -direction) forces are developed, so only x- and z-force com-
ponents will exist, as shown in Figure E8.1B.
y
nd = 2.0
e = 36
Syp = 43,000
Su = 65,000
20°
348
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
7See Chapter 15 for deﬁnitions and discussions relating to spur gear meshes.
20° involute spur gear;
Dp = 20 in.
20° involute pinion;
Dp = 5 in.
15 in.
15 in.
6 in.
36 in.
Left bearing
Right bearing
Figure E8.1A
First-cut conceptual sketch.
Dp =
20 in.
z
z
z
z
RAz
RAx
RCz
RCx
FBz
FDz
FDx
FBx
x
x
x
y
y
y
y
x
A
B
C
D
Driver
pinion
Dp = 5 in.
Driven gear
Figure E8.1B
Coordinate system and force notation.

From (4-39) the transmitted torque may be calculated as
This torque is transmitted from the driver pinion at , through the shaft, to the driven
gear at .
Forces may be calculated as follows: The tangential force 
(force at 
in the 
-direction) at the pitch radius is
Using (15-26) from Chapter 15, the radial separating force, 
, for an involute tooth
proﬁle with a pressure angle 
, is given by
Similarly,
and
Next, summing moments about the -axis at 
giving
Summing forces in the -direction
or
Finally, summing moments about the -axis at 
gives
and summing forces in the -direction
Again stick-sketching a free-body diagram for the shaft and attached gears (based
on Figure E8.1B), the actual force magnitudes, directions, and locations, based on the
RAz = 6302 - 33,403 + 25,210 = -1891 lb
z
RCz =
15163022 + 36125,2102
30
= 33,403 lb
A
x
RAx = 2294 - 9176 + 9864 = 2982 lb
RAx + RCx + FDx - FBx = 0
x
RCx =
15122942 - 36191762
30
= -9864 lb
15FBx - 30RCx - 36FDx = 0
A
z
FDx = 25,210 tan 20 = 9176 lb
FDz = 63,025
2.5
= 25,210 lb
FBx = FBz tan w = 6302 tan 20 = 2294 lb
w = 20°
FBx
FBz =
T
a
Dp
2 b
= 63,025
10
= 6302 lb
z
B
FBz
D
B
T =
63,0251hp2
n
=
63,02511502
150
= 63,025 in-lb
Design Equations—Strength Based 349

calculations just made, may be shown as indicated in Figure E8.1C. From Figure E8.1C,
bending moments 
and torques 
may be calculated at each of the critical sections A,
B, C, and D. Symmetry about the shaft axis allows vector addition of bending force com-
ponents. Thus,
Applying shaft design equation (8-11) to each critical section in turn gives the fol-
lowing approximations for diameters at A, B, C, and D. Since diametral dimensions are
still unknown, stress concentration factors cannot be accurately found from the charts of
5.3. However, values may be estimated for a ﬁrst-cut calculation by examining Figures
5.4(a) and 5.5(a), since grooves and ﬁllets are the shaft features of concern. Assuming
that D/d values are close to unity, and r/d values tend to be small, an estimate of 
seems appropriate. From Figure 5.46, for a steel with 
psi, a 
value around
0.8 seems reasonable.
q
Su = 65,000
Kt = 1.7
MD = 0
MC = 62125,21022 + 1917622 = 160,968 in-lb 
MB = 1521298222 + 1189122 = 52,966 in-lb 
MA = 0
TB-D = 63,025 in-lb 
TA-B = 0
T
M
350
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
A
B
C
D
x
z
y
10 in.
2982
2294
6302
25,210
9176
2.5 in.
33,403
9864
1891
15 in.
15 in.
6 in.
Figure E8.1C
Stick-sketch showing direction, magnitude,
and point of application of forces on the pro-
posed shaft.
Example 8.1 
Continues
Then, from (5-92), 
may be estimated as
When shaft dimensions become better known, more accurate estimates of 
may be
made.
At Critical Section A
Using information now known or estimated, at section A (8-11) becomes, for inﬁnite life
design (
psi),
Clearly this is not a reasonable result since the bearing at A must support the loads
shown in Figure E8.1C, and a zero-diameter shaft cannot do that. Reexamining the as-
sumptions leading to (8-11), transverse shear was assumed to be negligible; for critical
d = a16
p e2(1.6)(2)
(0)
33,000 + 23
(0)
65,000 f b
13
= 0
SN = Sf = 33,000
Kfb
Kfb = q1Kt - 12 + 1 = 0.811.7 - 12 + 1 L 1.6
Kfb

section A the transverse shear is evidently not negligible, and must be introduced into
(8-11). From case 2 of Figure 4.3,
Substituting this back into (8-4a) for 
gives
or
where 
is the resultant radial force at . Thus, 
It is appropriate to again note that a designer is always responsible for making sure that the
assumptions used in developing a design equation are met before using the equation. If the
assumptions are not met, an appropriate modiﬁcation must be made, or a new equation
must be developed.
At Critical Section B
Using (8-11)
At Critical Section C
Again using (8-11),
At Critical Section D
First using (8-11), noting 
,
Since transverse shear is not included at critical section D, and since results at critical
section A suggest that it may be signiﬁcant, then transverse shear along with torsional
shear needs to be considered. Using (8-4a) gives for transverse shear
seq-a = 23t2
ts-a = B3a 16FD
3pd2
D
b
2
= 13a 16FD
3pd2
D
b
dD = a16
p e(1.6)(2)
(0)
33,000 + 23(63,025)
65,000 f b
1>3
= 2.05 inches
MD = 0
dC = a16
p e2(1.6)(2)(160,968)
33,000
+ 23(63,025)
65,000 f b
1>3
= 5.51 inches
dB = a16
p e2(1.6)(2)(52,966)
33,000
+ 23(63,025)
65,000 f b
1>3
= 3.93 inches
dA = C
162312.0221298222 + 1189122
3p133,0002
= 0.79 inch
A
F
dA = B
1613 ndF
3pSN
seq-a = 23tts-a = A3a 16F
3pd2
A
b = sd = SN
nd
txy
tts = 4
3
F
A =
16F
3pd 2
A
Design Equations—Strength Based 351

and for torsional shear (8-4b) gives
Applying (5-72) yields
or
or
or
This implicit expression for 
may be solved by iteration or by using programs such as
MAPLE or MATLAB,  hence,
In this case the estimate 
, which does not include transverse shear,
results in a shaft diameter about approximately 26 percent smaller than 
,
which does include transverse shear. Again, a designer is responsible for deciding whether
(8-8) is accurate enough for a ﬁrst-cut calculation of shaft diameter at this critical section
or whether a more reﬁned estimate should be made.
Next, using the diameters just calculated at sections A, B, C, and D, and the shoulder
restrictions from the problem statement, the ﬁrst-cut sketch of Figure E8.1A may be up-
dated and modiﬁed to obtain the second-cut sketch of Figure E8.1D.
With the updated sketch of Figure E8.1D, a new set of critical sections should be cho-
sen (for example, E, F, G, H, I, J, K) for a second round of design calculations using the
new shaft diameters, ﬁllet radii, and groove dimensions from Figure E8.1D. Before start-
ing this second round of design calculations, however, several other design issues should
probably be addressed, including the following:
1.
It is advisable to produce a scale drawing of the shaft sketch shown in Figure E8.1D. A
scale drawing often helps a designer to “intuitively” identify potential trouble spots in
the conﬁguration. (Either CAD programs or manual drafting may be used at this stage.)
2.
Tentative bearing selections should be made for sections A and D, using the calculated
loads at those sites together with the speciﬁed shaft speed (see Chapters 11 and 12).
dD = 2.80 inches
dD = 2.58 inches
dD = 2.80 inches
dD
dD =
3
C
1623
p
a 63,025
65,000 + 22(25,210)2 + (9176)2
3(33,000)
dDb =
328.55 + 4.78 dD
dD =
3
B
1613
p
aTD
Su
+ FDnd
3SN
dDb
1623 SuFD
3pd2
D
+ 1623 TD
pd3
D
a SN
nd
b = SNSu
nd
seq-CR =
seq-a
1 -
seq-m
Su
=
23a 16FD
3pd2
D
b
1 -
23a16TD
pd3
D
b
Su
= SN
nd
seq-m = 23t2
xy-m = B3a16TD
pd3
D
b
2
= 23a16TD
pd3
D
b
352
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Example 8.1 
Continues

In some cases, the required bearing size will force a signiﬁcant change in shaft di-
mensions, overriding the shaft strength–based diameters. Such changes should be in-
corporated in the updated scale drawing of the shaft before second-round design
calculations are made.
3.
Tentative keyway dimensions should probably be established (see 8.8) so that more
accurate stress concentration factors can be used in the second-round design
calculations.
4.
Tentative retaining ring selections should probably be made so that a more accurate
stress concentration factor can be used at those critical points.
5.
Potential pinion mounting problems at critical section D should be examined since a
ﬁve-inch pitch-diameter pinion mounted on a 
-inch shaft leaves little radial
space for a mounting hub on the pinion. If this can’t be worked out, an integral pin-
ion may be a viable option at this location. In turn, an integral pinion would probably
require case hardening of tooth surfaces, and a review of shaft material.
The iterative nature of shaft design is evident in this example.
dD = 2.80
Design Equations—Deﬂection Based 353
A
B
C
D
E
F
G H
I J K
dA = 0.79 in.
dB = 3.93 in.
5.51 in.
dC = 5.46 in.
dD = 2.80 in.
4.21 in.
Keyway
Keyway
Retaining
ring groove
for bearing
retention
Taper
3.93 in.
to 1.04 in.
Threads
for bearing
retention
Figure E8.1D
Second-cut sketch of shaft showing
principal dimensions (not to scale).
8.5 Design Equations—Deﬂection Based
As noted in 8.2, misalignments in gear meshes, bearings, cams, sprockets, seals, or other
shaft-mounted elements may result in malfunction of these items due to nonuniform pres-
sure distribution, interference, backlash, excessive wear, vibration, noise, or heat genera-
tion. Excessive shaft bending deﬂection or excessive shaft slope may therefore lead to
failure of such shaft-mounted elements. Before continuing with the strength-based design
reﬁnements discussed in 8.4, it is usually advisable to estimate the shaft deﬂection (and/or
slope) at deﬂection-critical locations along the shaft. Using the ﬁrst-cut shaft dimensions
based on strength calculations (e.g., Example 8.1), the bending deﬂection and slope cal-
culations may be made (with whatever accuracy the designer desires). Rough approxima-
tions are often accurate enough at the early design stage, but more accurate calculations
are usually required as the design is ﬁnalized.
A ﬁrst-cut estimate of the bending deﬂection and slope of a stepped shaft may be
made by ﬁrst approximating the proposed stepped-shaft as a shaft of uniform diameter
(“eye-balled” to be a little smaller than the average stepped-shaft diameter), then using or
superposing the appropriate beam-bending equations (see Table 4.1) to ﬁnd the deﬂections
or slopes of interest.

If force components exist in two coordinate directions (as in x- and z-directions of
Example 8.1), calculations must be made separately for the x- and the z-directions, and re-
sults combined vectorially. In some cases, it may be useful to make a somewhat more ac-
curate estimate by assuming two or three diametral steps along the shaft.
Calculations of slopes and deﬂections for a stepped-shaft model are more complicated
since both moment 
and cross-sectional moment of inertia 
change along the shaft
length. These changing values require the use of graphical integration,8 area-moment
methodology,9 numerical integration,10 transfer matrix methods,11 or, possibly, a ﬁnite el-
ement solution12 (usually reserved until ﬁnal design iterations are being made). Graphical
and numerical integration methods are based on successive integration of the differential
equation for the elastic beam-deﬂection curve given in (4-49). Thus, to ﬁnd slope and de-
ﬂection, the expressions
(8-12)
(8-13)
(8-14)
are the working equations. The integrations may be performed either analytically, graphi-
cally, or numerically.
Torsional deﬂections may also be of interest in some applications. If a shaft has a uni-
form diameter over its whole length, the angular displacement may be readily calculated
from (4-48), repeated here as
(8-15)
where 
is angular deﬂection in radians, 
is applied torque, 
is shaft length between
torque application sites, 
is shear modulus of elasticity, and 
(see Table 4.5) is equal to
the polar moment of inertia for a circular cross section.
For a stepped shaft, the different-diameter shaft sections may be regarded as torsional
springs in series. Hence, from (4-90) and (4-82), the angular deﬂection of a circular-
section shaft with steps, each of length 
, having polar moments of inertia , may be
calculated from
(8-16)
ustepped = T
GaL1
J1
+ L2
J2
+ Á + Li
Ji
b
Ji
Li
i
J
K
G
L
T
u
u = TL
KG
u
y =
O
M
EI dx dx  1deflection2
u = dy
dx =
L
M
EI dx  1slope2
d 2y
dx2 = M
EI
I
M
354
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
8See, for example, ref. 6.
9See, for example, ref. 8, pp. 552–556.
10See, for example, ref. 7, pp. 11.14–11.17, or ref. 9, pp. 347–352.
11See, for example, ref. 13.
12See, for example, ref. 14, Ch. 7.
Example 8.2 Estimating Shaft Deﬂection and Slope
From a strength-based analysis for a proposed steel shaft, the approximate dimensions
have been determined as shown in Figure E8.2A. Estimate the maximum deﬂection of the
shaft and indicate approximately where along the shaft it occurs. Also estimate the shaft
slope at each of the bearing sites. In addition, determine the actual deﬂection along the
span of the shaft.

Solution
A ﬁrst estimate for maximum shaft deﬂection may be made by approximating the stepped
shaft as a shaft of “equivalent” uniform diameter 
, subjected to loads 
and 
, and sim-
ply supported by bearings at sections A and F. Selection of an “equivalent” diameter be-
comes easier with experience. Bending deﬂection may be calculated by using case 2 from
Table 4.1 twice, once for load 
and again for load 
, separately, then superposing the
results.
The 120-mm diameter extends over nearly half the shaft length; therefore, a reason-
able guess is that 
be the average diameter of the two sections. This results in
. Using this, the area moment of inertia for the shaft is
For load 
acting alone, 
, 
, and 
. From case 2
from Table 4.1
This deﬂection occurs at
For 
acting alone, case 2 may be applied again with 
, 
, and
.
This deﬂection occurs at 
. Although more than 120
mm separates 
and 
, we will assume they are close enough to each other so that the
maximum deﬂections for loads 
acting alone and 
acting alone will be superposed
without further reﬁnement. Thus,
y max = y max -P1 + y max -P2 = 0.0000438 + 0.000121 = 0.000165 m = 0.165 mm
P2
P1
xP2
xP1
xP2 = 23(0.64 - 0.09)4>3 = 0.428 m
y max -P2 ==
PbAL2 - b2B3>2
923EIL
=
20 * 103(0.30)(0.64 - 0.09)3>2
15.588A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.80)
= 0.000121 m
L = 800 mm
b = 300 mm
a = 500 mm
P2
x' = A
L2 - b2
3
= A
0.64 - 0.36
3
= 0.306 m
y max -P1 =
PbAL2 - b2B3>2
923EIL
=
10 * 103(0.60)(0.64 - 0.36)3>2
15.588A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.80)
= 0.0000438 m
L = 800 mm
b = 600 mm
a = 200 mm
P1
I = pd4
e>64 = p(0.1125)4>64 = 7.86 * 10-6 m4
de = (100 + 125)>2 = 112.5 mm
de
P2
P1
P2
P1
de
Design Equations—Deﬂection Based 355
125 mm
100 mm
200 mm
200 mm
800 mm
RA (bearing)
RF (bearing)
F
E
D
C
B
A
y
P1 = 10 kN
P2 = 20 kN
200 mm
100 mm
100 mm
Figure E8.2A
Sketch of proposed shaft showing
loads and nominal dimensions.

The slopes at A and F can also be determined by superposition of the slopes resulting from
loads 
acting alone and 
acting alone. For 
acting alone we use 
,
, and 
. Thus,
For 
acting alone, we use 
, 
, and 
The total slope at each point is approximated as
and
More accurate estimates of shaft deﬂection can be made using superposition and account-
ing for the variations of EI along the span of the shaft. Alternately, direct integration can
be used to determine both slope and displacement. In using direct integration, one of the
easiest approaches is to use singularity functions13 to deﬁne the bending moment variation
along the beam. Using singularity functions and referring to Figure E8.2B:
uF = uF-P1 + uF-P2 = 0.000654 rad
uA = uA-P1 + uA-P2 = 0.000638 rad
uF-P2 =
A20 * 103B(0.5)
6A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.8)
(0.64 - 0.25) = 0.0005 rad
uA-P2 =
A20 * 103B(0.3)
6A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.8)
(0.64 - 0.09) = 0.000423 rad
L = 800 mm
b = 300 mm
a = 500 mm
P2
uF-P1 =
Pa
6EIL(L2 - a2) =
A10 * 103B(0.2)
6A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.8)
(0.64 - 0.04) = 0.000154 rad
uA-P1 =
Pb
6EILAL2 - b2B =
A10 * 103B(0.6)
6A207 * 109B A7.86 * 10-6B(0.8)
(0.64 - 0.36) = 0.000215 rad
L = 800 mm
b = 600 mm
a = 200 mm
P1
P2
P1
356
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
13See, for example, ref. 15
20 kN
10 kN
x = 0.8
x = 0.2
x = 0.5
C
B
A
D
E
F
x
RR
RL
y
Figure E8.2B
Model for determining shaft displacement
using singularity functions.
Example 8.2 
Continues
The reactions on the left and right end of the shaft are
Using singularity functions, the moment variation is 
. The deﬂection is related to the bending moment as shown in (8-12)
EId2y
dx2 = M(x) = 158x91 - 108x - 0.291 - 208x - 0.591
- 208x - 0.591
M(x) = 158x91 - 108x - 0.291
aFy
= 0:  RL - 10 - 20 + 15 = 0
RL = 15 kN
aMA = 0:  0.8RR - 0.5(20) - 0.2(10) = 0
RR = 15 kN

Integrating this equation twice results in
Using the boundary condition 
results in 
. Using the boundary condition
y(0.8) = 0
C2 = 0
y(0) = 0
EIy(x) = 15
6 8x93 - 10
6 8x - 0.293 - 20
6 8x - 0.593 + C1x + C2
EIdy
dx
= EIu(x) = 15
2 8x92 - 10
2 8x - 0.292 - 20
2 8x - 0.592 + C1
Design Equations—Deﬂection Based 357
–0.25
–0.2
–0.15
–0.1
–0.05
0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
x (m)
Displacement (mm)
Actual shaft
Constant diameter shaft
Figure E8.2C 
Shaft displacement 
predicted using a constant
diameter model and 
actual shaft dimensions.
0 = 15 000
6
(0.8)3 - 10 000
6
(0.8 - 0.2)3 - 20 000
6
(0.8 - 0.5)3 + 0.8C1 :  C1 =
- 1037.5
The slope and displacement along the span of the shaft are
(1)
(2)
From Figure E8.2A, we determine 
The displacement for a uniform diameter shaft (
) and the actual shaft dis-
placement as defined by (2) is shown in Figure E8.2C. The “spikes” in the actual dis-
placement are due to the transition between the two shaft diameters and the change in
EI. The approximations using superposition and an “equivalent” shaft diameter are seen
to predict a shaft displacement that is approximately 30 percent lower than the actual
displacement. Slope estimates using the uniform shaft diameter are similar to those of
displacement. Using an “equivalent” shaft diameter to model shaft displacement should
be considered a first approximation and never used for the final design analysis.
de = 87.5 mm
EICE = A207 * 109B ap(0.125)4
64
b = 2.48 * 106 N-m2
EIAC = EIEF = A207 * 109B ap(0.1)4
64
b = 1.05 * 106 N-m2
EIy(x) = 15
6 8x93 - 10
6 8x - 0.293 - 20
6 8x - 0.593 - 1037.5x
EIu(x) = 15
2 8x92 - 10
2 8x - 0.292 - 20
2 8x - 0.592 - 1037.5

358
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
One rule of thumb14 suggests that shaft deﬂections generally should not exceed 0.001 in
(0.0254 mm) per ft (0.305 m) of shaft between bearing supports. According to this criteria,
the maximum displacement for this shaft should not exceed 
. For the shaft
considered here, the maximum displacement is 
, which indicates a stiffer
shaft is required in order to meet the stated criteria. An increased stiffness is easily accom-
plished by changing the shaft diameter. Since the stiffness is a function of 
, we can approx-
imate the required shaft diameter by evaluating a simple ratio
Obviously this is simply a ﬁrst approximation and more rigorous evaluation would have to
be made prior to establishing ﬁnal shaft diameters.
0.23
d4
= 0.067
(0.10)4 Q  d L 136 mm
d4
ymax = 0.23 mm
ymax = 0.067 mm
Example 8.2 
Continues
14See, ref. 6
15See, for example, ref. 1.
8.6 Shaft Vibration and Critical Speed
As discussed in 8.2, rotating shafts are nearly always part of a dynamic system of springs
and masses. Because of imperfections in the manufacture and assembly of shafts and
mounted components, as well as static deﬂections caused by the weights of these elements,
the center of mass does not coincide exactly with the center of rotation of the system.
Consequently, as the rotational speed increases, the rotating centrifugal forces on the ec-
centric mass centers increase. In turn, the “whirling” eccentricities also increase, produc-
ing even higher rotating centrifugal forces. If the actual rotational shaft speed approaches
any of the critical speeds of the system (see 8.2), a violent bending-mode vibration may
result, and it may destroy the system. This self-excited vibrational phenomenon is called
shaft whirl. The lowest (fundamental) critical speed for a simply supported shaft with 
mounted masses may be estimated from the following equation based on Rayleigh’s
Energy Method15
(8-17)
or
(8-18)
Operating a rotating shaft at or near the critical speed(s) must be avoided. If possible,
the operating shaft speed should be kept safely below the lowest (fundamental) critical
yi = static displacement of ith mass center from centerline of rotation, inch
Wi = weight of ith mass, lb
where  ncr = critical shaft speed, rpm
ncr = 187.7
T
aWi yi
aWi y2
i
ncr = 60
2p 
T
g amiyi
amiy2
i
i

speed (typically by a factor of 2 or 3). If, for some reason, the system cannot be operated
below the lowest critical speed, it may be possible to accelerate quickly through resonance
to avoid the destructive self-excited vibration at the fundamental critical speed. Operation
at speeds above the lowest critical speed (but below higher resonant speeds) may then be
satisfactory, but each shutdown and startup cycle must be carefully monitored to avoid
damage as the system passes through resonance. A designer is well advised to consult with
a specialist in vibration and modal analysis to avoid problems in these areas.
In some systems, torsional vibration of the shaft and its associated components may
be excited by ﬂuctuating torques on the rotating system. In principle, estimating the fun-
damental torsional resonant frequency for a simple system is not difﬁcult, but most shaft-
ing systems involve many torsional mass moments of inertia and many springs. The spring
rates and masses of stepped shafts, gear meshes, and bearings, in addition to other system
components, must be properly modeled to produce a reasonable estimate of critical tor-
sional frequencies. It is advisable to consult a vibration specialist when making these 
estimates.
Shaft Vibration and Critical Speed 359
Example 8.3 Shaft Critical Speed
The stepped shaft of Example 8.2 rotates at 1200 rpm. Using the results from Example 8.2,
estimate the fundamental critical speed for the three-step shaft shown in Figure E8.2A, and
comment on its acceptability.
Solution
The critical frequency of this shaft may be estimated from (8-17). To use the equation, it is
necessary to calculate the weight of each stepped segment of the shaft, and ﬁnd the static
deﬂection of the shaft at the mass center of each segment. From Table 3.4, the weight den-
sity of steel is 
. The static deﬂections at the mass centers of each segment
, 
, and 
can be approximated from Figure E8.2C. The rel-
evant data is presented in Table E8.3.
Using (8-17), we substitute the 
from Table E8.3 for 
in (8-17). In addition, we use
from the table for 
in the equation. Retaining 
, the units under the radical
will be 
. This gives
ncr = 9.549A9.81
0.0674
7.769 * 10-6 L 2780 rpm
= 9.549A(9.81) 181.3(.000144) + 377.1(0.000101) + 60.3(0.000052)
181.3(.000144)2 + 377.1(0.000101)2 + 60.3(0.000052)2
ncr = 60
2pAg amiyi
amiy2
i
1/s2
g = 9.81 m/s2
mi
Wi
yi
ƒyiƒ
x = 0.75 m)
x = 0.5 m
(x = 0.15 m
76.81 kN/m3
TABLE E8.3 Weight and Deﬂection Estimates for Three Stepped Shaft Segments
Mass Center
Volume
Weight
Deﬂection 
at 
Segment
x (m)
(m)3
(kN)
mass center (mm)
A-C
0.15
0.00236
0.1813
0.144
C-E
0.50
0.00491
0.3771
0.101
E-F
0.75
0.000785
0.0603
0.052
Wi = 76.81Vi
Vi = pd2
i Li>4
yi

Comparing the critical speed of 1645 rpm with the proposed operating speed of 1200 rpm,
we note that
This does meet recommended minimum of 2 or 3. The stiffness of the support bearings,
usually an important consideration, has not been included in the estimate, nor have the
masses of any of the attached components. A vibration specialist should be consulted in
this case before proceeding with more reﬁned stress analyses because the shaft size will
probably need to be increased to avoid problems with the shaft whirl or lateral vibrations.
ncr
nop
= 2780
1200 = 2.32
360
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Example 8.3 
Continues
8.7 Summary of Suggested Shaft Design Procedure; General
Guidelines for Shaft Design
Based on the discussions of 8.1 through 8.6, the procedural steps in developing a success-
ful shaft design may be summarized as follows:
1.
Based on functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, generate a
ﬁrst conceptual sketch for the shaft (see Figure 8.2).
2.
Identify potential failure modes (see 8.2).
3.
Select a tentative shaft material (see 8.3).
4.
Based on loads and geometry, determine the state of stress at each potential critical
point (see Chapter 4 and 8.4).
5.
Select an appropriate design safety factor (see Chapter 2).
6.
Calculate a tentative shaft diameter for each critical section along the length of the
shaft, based on stress, strength, and failure prevention considerations (see 8.4).
7.
Check deﬂections and slopes of the tentative strength-based shaft design, to assure
proper function of shaft-mounted components such as gears and bearings (see 8.5).
8.
Check critical speed and vibrational characteristics to assure that failure does not occur
due to shaft whirl, resonant vibration, excessive noise, or heat generation.
As a new shaft is designed by following these steps, the following experience-based guide-
lines may also be useful:
1.
Try to make the shaft as short, stiff, and light as possible. This may imply hollow
shafting in some cases and the use of high-modulus-of-elasticity materials such as
steel.
2.
Try to use a straddle-mounted bearing support conﬁguration if possible (simply sup-
ported beam concept). If it is necessary to design a shaft that overhangs the bearing
support (cantilever beam concept), minimize the length of the overhang.
3.
Try to place shaft support bearings close to the lateral bending loads on the shaft.
4.
Try to avoid the use of more than two support bearings for the shaft. Three or more
bearings require high-precision alignment to avoid potentially large “built-in” dis-
placement-induced bending moments on the shaft.
5.
Try to conﬁgure the shaft so that stress concentration sites do not coincide with high
nominal stress regions. The use of generous radii for ﬁllets and relief grooves, smooth

surfaces, and, in critical applications, the use of shot-peening or cold-rolling may be
appropriate.
6.
Consider potential failure problems due to excessive deﬂection or shaft slope at
mounting sites for gears, bearings, sprockets, cams, and shaft seals. Typically, gear
mesh separation should not exceed 0.005 inch and relative slope at the mesh site
should not exceed 0.03 degree. For rolling element bearings the slope should be less
than 0.04 degree unless the bearings are self-aligning. For plain bearings the shaft
slope should be small enough that end-to-end radial displacement of the journal rela-
tive to the sleeve is small compared to lubricant ﬁlm thickness. Speciﬁc manufactur-
ing guidelines should be followed where available.
8.8 Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Power transmission to or from a rotating shaft is accomplished either by (1) coupling the
rotating shaft end-to-end with a power source (such as an electric motor or internal com-
bustion engine), or end-to-end with the input shaft of a power-dissipating system (such as
a machine tool or automobile), or (2) by attaching power input or output components
(such as pulleys, sprockets, or gears) to the shaft using keys, splines, or other retention
devices.
The basic design requirements for both couplings and component retention devices
are the same; rated shaft torque must be transmitted without slip, and premature failure
must not be induced in any part of the operating machine. In the case of couplings, it may
be necessary to accommodate shaft misalignments16 to prevent premature failures.
Rigid Couplings
Mechanical couplings used to connect rotating shafts are typically divided into two broad
categories: rigid couplings and ﬂexible couplings. Rigid couplings are simple, inexpensive,
and relatively easy to design, but require precise colinear alignment of the mating shafts.
Also, the shafts must be well supported by bearings located near the coupling. Another ad-
vantage of a rigid coupling is that it provides high stiffness across the joint. This results in
small relative torsional displacements, so the phase relationship between the power source
and driven machine can be accurately preserved if necessary. Rigid couplings also provide
higher torsional critical speeds for the system.
The major disadvantage of installing a rigid coupling is that when the ﬂange bolts are
tightened, any misalignment between the two shafts has the potential to cause large forces
and bending moments that may overload the coupling, the shafts, the bearings, or the sup-
port housing.
The typical geometry of a rigid coupling involves two similar halves, each with a hub
to accommodate attachment to its respective shaft, a piloted boss for precise alignment,
and attachment bolts on a bolt circle to lock the two halves together. Figure 8.3(a) illus-
trates the geometry of a simple, ﬂange-type, rigid coupling. An outer protective rim is of-
ten added to the ﬂanges to provide a safety shield for the bolt heads, as illustrated in Figure
8.3(b). The protective rim also provides a means of dynamic balancing after assembly (by
drilling or removing small slugs of material to restore balance).
If transmitted torque is steady, and no vibration is induced, the probable governing
failure mode for a rigid coupling is yielding. If torque ﬂuctuates, or vibration is present, or
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 361
16Parallel centerline offset, nonparallel (angular) centerlines, or both may contribute to shaft misalignments.

if there is signiﬁcant misalignment in the rotating shaft system, fatigue and fretting fatigue
become the probable governing failure modes.
Attachment of the rigid coupling hubs to the shafts may be accomplished by using
keys, taper-lock sleeves, or interference ﬁts (requires pressing at assembly). Figures 8.3(a)
and 8.3(c) illustrate the use of keys. Figure 8.3(c) shows a “ribbed” coupling in which one
long common key is held in place along both shafts by a “coupler housing” bolted in place
on the rotating shafts. Taper-lock sleeves are illustrated in the sketch of a compression-type
rigid coupling shown in Figure 8.3(b). Each axially-split tapered sleeve is wedged against
its shaft by tightening the ﬂange bolts, in turn providing a frictional drive torque capabil-
ity. Such couplings may be installed or removed easily but are limited to low or moderate
torque applications.
Design of a rigid coupling such as the one shown in Figure 8.3(a) typically involves
an investigation of the following potentially critical areas:
1.
Shear and bearing in the key
2.
Shear and bearing in the ﬂange attachment bolts, including the inﬂuence of ﬂange bolt
preloading and/or bolt bending, if applicable
3.
Bearing on the ﬂange at attachment bolt interfaces
4.
Shear in the ﬂange at the hub
Flexible Couplings
In coupling applications, misalignment is the rule rather than the exception. To accommo-
date small misalignments betwen two shafts, ﬂexible couplings are usually chosen. Since
a wide variety of ﬂexible couplings are commercially available, a designer typically selects
a suitable coupling for the application by referring to manufacturer’s catalogs, rather than
designing one from scratch. A few of the many types of commercially available ﬂexible
362
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Attachment
bolt circle
Key
Key
Set screw
Set screw
(a) Simple rigid flange coupling.
(b) Rigid flange coupling with safety rim.
(c) Rigid ribbed coupling.
Safety rim
Clamp bolt
Tapered
bushing
Split in
tapered
bushing
Bolt-up
flange
Common key
Pilot
Figure 8.3
Three types of rigid couplings
for shafts.

couplings are illustrated in Figure 8.4. The couplings shown may be grouped into three ba-
sic categories, according to the way in which shaft misalignments are accommodated.
These are:
1.
Misalignment accommodated by an interposed solid element that slides, or introduces
small clearances (backlash) beween shafts
2.
Misalignment accommodated by one or more interposed ﬂexible metallic elements
3.
Misalignment accommodated by an interposed ﬂexible elastomeric element
Sketches (a), (b), and (c) of Figure 8.4 represent examples of the ﬁrst category. In the slid-
ing disk coupling of Figure 8.4(a), two facing slotted ﬂanges are coupled by an intermedi-
ate disk with mating cross-keys having enough clearance to allow sliding motion between
the disk and the ﬂanges. Such couplings, intended for low-speed high-torque drives, typi-
cally accommodate angular misalignments up to about 
degree, and shaft-centerline
parallel misalignments up to 
inch. Fretting fatigue and fretting wear are potential fail-
ure modes.
The gear coupling of Figure 8.4(b) is probably the most widely used type of shaft cou-
pling. It consists of two mounting hubs with external gear teeth that engage internal teeth
in a captured sleeve that ﬁts over both hubs. Curved teeth are often used to accommodate
larger angular misalignments. Backlash in the engaged gears typically allows up to about
one degree of angular misalignment for straight teeth, and up to three degrees if the hub
teeth are curved. However, good shaft-centerline alignment is required.
Figure 8.4(c) illustrates a roller chain coupling, in which sprockets are attached at
adjacent ends of the two abutting shafts, then wrapped together by a common roller
chain segment that spans both sprockets. Clearance between the chain and the sprock-
ets allows up to 
degrees of angular shaft-centerline misalignment and up to about
0.010 inch parallel shaft-centerline misalignment. Roller chain couplings are low-cost,
high-torque devices, but may be noisy. Wear or fretting wear are potential failure
modes.
Figures 8.4(d), (e), and (f) illustrate three examples of flexible couplings where mis-
alignments are accommodated by metallic flexure elements. Spring couplings typically
accommodate angular misalignments up to about four degrees, and parallel shaft mis-
alignments of up to about 
inch. Flexible disk couplings allow about one degree of an-
gular misalignment, and around 
inch of parallel shaft misalignment. A bellows
coupling may allow up to about nine degrees of angular misalignment, and 
inch of
parallel shaft misalignment, but is typically limited to low-torque applications. Fatigue
is the probable governing failure mode for all couplings in the flexible metallic element
category.
Figures 8.4(g), (h), and (i) are examples of the third category of ﬂexible couplings, in
which an elastomeric element in compression, bending, or shear provides the means of ac-
commodating misalignment. In Figure 8.4(g), two shaft-mounted ﬂanges, each with con-
centric internal and external teeth, are coupled by a mating elastomeric sleeve. This
arrangement gives high torsional ﬂexibility, and tends to attenuate shock and vibration.
Angular misalignment up to about one degree can be tolerated as well. The bonded elas-
tomeric disk coupling of Figure 8.4(h) places the elastomeric disk in shear, and is typically
limited to low-torque applications. The rubber cap coupling of Figure 8.4(i) captures the
rubber element compressively in each ﬂange cavity, and transmits the torque by shear of
the elastomeric coupling element. Such couplings are available in high-torque capacities,
and may accommodate up to one degree of angular misalignment and up to 
-inch paral-
lel shaft misalignment. The probable failure mode for elastomeric element couplings is
fatigue.
14
14
116
18
112
14
12
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 363

364
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
(a) Sliding disk coupling; to assemble, engage
slotted flanges with cross-key disk.
(b) Gear coupling; to assemble, engage mounting
hubs with captured sleeve.
(c) Roller chain coupling; to assemble, move sprockets together,
wrap double roller chain, and pin in place.
Slotted
flange
Cross-key disk
Gear teeth
Captured sleeve
Mounting
hub
Sprocket
Double roller chain
Close-wound helical coil spring
Flexible disks
Thin-walled flexible bellows
(d) Spring coupling.
(e) Flexible disk coupling.
Flange
Elastomeric sleeve
(f) Bellows coupling.
Rubber cap
(g) Flexible sleeve coupling; to assemble, engage
toothed sleeve with both flanges.
(h) Bonded elastomeric disk coupling.
(i) Rubber cap coupling.
Figure 8.4
Conceptual sketches of various types of ﬂexible couplings for shafts.

If power transmission shafts must intersect at angles larger than can be accommodated
by ﬂexible couplings (just described), universal joints (U-joints) may sometimes be used
to couple the shafts. Figure 8.5(a) illustrates a single universal joint and 8.5(b) a double
universal joint conﬁguration. Typical applications for U-joints include automotive drive
shafts, articulating farm tractors, industrial rolling mill drives, and mechanical control
mechanisms, among others. The single universal joint conﬁguration embodies a splined-
hub driving yoke, a splined-hub driven yoke, and a cross-link (sometimes called a spider)
connecting the two yokes through pivot bearings (usually needle bearings), as shown in
Figure 8.5(a). Angular misalignments up to about 15 degrees between shaft centerlines are
readily accommodated, and up to 30 degrees in special circumstances. One important ob-
servation is that the angular velocity ratio between the input shaft and output shaft of a
simple U-joint is not constant, raising the potential for torsional vibration problems in the
system. If a double U-joint system is used, such as the one shown in Figure 8.5(b), varia-
tions in angular velocity ratio are very slight because variables in the second joint tend to
compensate for those in the ﬁrst joint. Shaft-centerline offset can also be accommodated
by the double U-joint arrangement. Constant velocity ratio universal joints (CV joints)
have been developed and are commercially available, but are more expensive. Potential
governing failure modes for universal joints include fretting wear in the needle bearings
that connect the yokes to the cross-link (because of small-amplitude oscillatory motion)
and fretting fatigue in the splined connections between each yoke and its mating shaft.
Keys, Splines, and Tapered Fits
When power is to be transmitted to, or supplied from, a rotating shaft, it is necessary to at-
tach components such as pulleys, sprockets, or gears to the shaft. To prevent relative rota-
tion between the shaft and an attached component, the connection between the
component’s hub and the shaft must be secured. Retention devices such as keys, splines,
or tapered ﬁts are commonly used to prevent such relative rotation. For lighter-duty appli-
cations, pins or setscrews may be used, sometimes in conjunction with retaining rings to
provide axial constraint of the shaft-mounted component. Of the keys shown in Figure 8.6,
the parallel square key and the Woodruff key are probably used more widely than the oth-
ers. Recommendations for key size and keyway depth, as a function of shaft diameter, are
provided by ASME/ANSI Standards B17.1-1967 and B17.2-1967, as illustrated in
abridged form in Tables 8.1 and 8.2. For parallel keys it is common practice to use
setscrews to prevent backlash between the key and keyway, especially if ﬂuctuating
torques occur during operation. Recommended setscrew sizes are included in Table 8.1. In
some applications two setscrews are used, one bearing directly on the key, and a second
one located at 
away from the keyway, where it bears directly on the shaft (usually
where a local shallow ﬂat has been machined).
90°
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 365
(b) Double universal joint system.
(a) Single universal joint.
1
2
1 = 2
Cross link
A
A
Driving yoke
Driven yoke
Splined hub
Splined hub
Needle
bearing
(4 req’d)
Section A-A
Figure 8.5
Simple universal joint arrangements.

The potential failure modes for keyed connections include yielding or ductile rupture,
or, if ﬂuctuating loads or torques are involved, fatigue or fretting fatigue of the key or the
shaft near the end of the keyway. Parallel keyways machined in the shaft have either a
“sled runner” geometry or a proﬁled geometry, as shown in Figure 8.7.
Keyways in hubs are machined all the way through the hub, usually by a broaching
operation. Stress concentration factors for standard shaft keyways, when the shaft is sub-
jected to bending, are about 
for a proﬁled keyway and 
for a sled runner
Ktb L 1.4
Ktb L 1.8
366
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
TABLE 8.1 Recommendations for Selection of Standard
Square Parallel Keys (abridged from ANSI
Standard B17.1-1967)
Shaft Diameter
Nominal Key
Nominal Set Screw
Range, in
Size, in
Size, in
–
10–32
–
–20
–
–18
–
–16
–
–14
–
–13
–
–12
–
–11
–
–10
–
–9
–
1
1–8
–
–7
–
–6
114
112
612
5916
118
114
512
4916
412
31316
78
78
334
3516
34
34
314
21316
58
58
234
2516
916
12
214
11316
12
38
134
1716
716
516
138
1516
38
14
114
1516
516
316
78
58
14
18
916
12
#
332
716
516
Round key.
Flat key.
Square key.
L
w
w
w
2
w
w
h
h
d
d
h
2
w ≈ d/4
w ≈ d/4; h ≈ 3w/4
Key usually has drive
fit; is often tapered
Usually tapered (1/8 in/ft)
giving tight fit when driven into
place; gib head facilitates removal
(c)
(d) Woodruff key.
(b)
(a)
(e)
( f )
Gib-head key.
Kennedy keys
Keys are tapered and
driven tightly; for
heavy-duty service
Figure 8.6
Various types of shaft keys. 

keyway.17 If the shaft is subjected to torsion, the torsional stress concentration factor is usu-
ally around 
for both proﬁled and sled runner keyways. Stress concentration fac-
tors for Woodruff keyways in the shaft are similar to those for the sled runner keyway.
It is often desirable to “size” a key so that it will shear off by ductile rupture in the event
an overload occurs in or on the machine. Using an inexpensive shaft key as a “mechanical
safety fuse” in this way protects the shaft and other more expensive machine elements from
damage. Typically, therefore, the selected key material is soft, ductile, low carbon steel,
cold-rolled to standard keystock sizes, and custom cut to an appropriate length. Design of
the key for such an application must assure that operational torques will be transmitted
without failure, while torques produced by overload conditions, such as jamming or seizure
of a system component, do cause the key to shear off across the shaft-hub interface.
A keyed connection between a shaft and a hub is illustrated in Figure 8.8. For the case
shown the key width is , its radial height is , and its length is . The torque-induced force
is trasmitted from the shaft through the key to the hub, where it is reacted by force 
.
Because the distance 
between force vectors 
and 
is small compared to radius 
for the shaft, it may be assumed that
(8-19)
It may also be assumed that forces 
act at the mean radius, 
.
D>2
F
Fs = Fh K F
D>2
Fh
Fs
h>2
Fh
Fs
l
h
w
Ktt = 1.7
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 367
TABLE 8.2 Recommendations for Selection of Wodruff Keys
(abridged from ANSI Standard B17.2-1967)
Shaft Diameter
Key
Nominal Key
Nominal Key
Range, in
Number1
Size 
in
Height h, in
–
305

0.250
–
405

0.250
–
506

0.312
–
608

0.437
–
809

0.484
–
1212

0.641
1Last two digits give nominal key diameter in eighths. Digits preceding the last two give
nominal width in thirty-seconds.
112
38
212
178
118
14
134
114
1
316
1316
1
34
532
1516
1316
58
18
34
1116
58
332
12
716
w * L,
w
w
(a)
(b)
Profiled keyway.
Sled runner keyway.
Figure 8.7
Keyway geometry. Keyways may be embedded in the
shaft (as shown) to capture the key, or may run out at
the end of the shaft.
Hub
Shaft
Key
h
w
D
Fs
Fh
l
Figure 8.8
Sketch of a keyed connection between a shaft and a hub.
17See ref. 10, p. 245 ff.

For the key, potential critical sections include (1) the shear plane between shaft and
hub at radius 
, and (2) the contact planes between the sides of the key and the sides of
the keyway. If the torque to be transmitted from shaft to hub is deﬁned to be , the torque-
induced force 
may be calculated as
(8-20)
The area of the shearing plane of the key is
(8-21)
so, the average shearing stress across the shearing plane may be written as
(8-22)
For the contact plane between the side of the key and the side of the keyway, the
contact area is
(8-23)
The compressive bearing stress on the contact plane therefore becomes
(8-24)
For a square key, 
, so from (8-24)
(8-25)
Using the concepts of 5.2, it may be noted that the maximum principal stress on the
shear plane is twice the shear stress. In other words, for uniaxial compression (or
tension), the principal stress is twice the shear stress (the radius of Mohr’s circle). As a
result, (8-22) and (8-25) are equally critical. Hence, only (8-22) need be used for further
analysis.
The design-allowable torque for the key may be found from (8-22) to be
(8-26)
where 
is the design-allowable shearing stress (corresponding to the governing fail-
ure mode) for the key.
The design-allowable torque for the shaft, based on (4-37), may be found from
(8-27)
where 
is the design-allowable shearing stress (corresponding to the governing fail-
ure mode) for the shaft, and 
is the theoretical shearing stress concentration factor for
the shaft keyway (usually 
for static loading). A few values of fatigue stress con-
centration factor are given in Table 8.3.
Ktt L 1.7
Ktt
td-shaft
Tshaft-allow =
pD3td-shaft
16Ktt
td-key
Tkey-allow =
td-keyDwl
2
sc =
4T
Dwl
h = w
sc = F
Ac
= 4T
Dhl
Ac = h
2l
ts = F
As
=
2T
Dwl
As = wl
F =
T
D>2 = 2T
D
F
T
D>2
368
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines

If the design-allowable stress for the shaft and the key are the same,
(8-28)
To provide equal strength for the shaft and the key under these assumptions, (8-26)
and (8-27) may be equated and solved for the key length , giving, for equal strength,
(8-29)
Recommended proportions18 for square keys suggest that 
, so for a square key 
(8-29) becomes
(8-30)
and if 
is a fair estimate of the shaft stress concentration factor at the keyway under tor-
sion,19 the key length for equal strength of shaft and key is
(8-31)
If it is desired to use the key as a “mechanical fuse” to protect the shaft from failure, the
key length should be reduced by an appropriate factor (perhaps to 80% of 
), giving
(8-32)
As usual, it is the designer’s responsibility to assure that the assumptions made in de-
veloping (8-31) and (8-32) are sufﬁciently accurate for the particular application at hand,
making appropriate modiﬁcations otherwise.
lfuse L 0.7D
leq-str
leq-str =
pD
211.72 L 0.9D
Ktt
leq-str = pD
2Ktt
w = D>4
leq-str =
pD2
8wKtt
l
td-key = td-shaft K td
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 369
TABLE 8.3 Fatigue Stress Concentration Factors for Keyways1
Annealed Steel
Hardened Steel
Type of Keyway
Bending
Torsion
Bending
Torsion
Proﬁle
1.6
1.3
2.0
1.6
Sled runner
1.3
1.3
1.6
1.6
1From ref. 11.
18Based on ANSI Standard B17.1-1967.
19Recall, however, that for static loads, ductile materials, and highly local stress concentration, the actual value
of 
is reduced because of local plastic ﬂow.
Ktt
Example 8.4 Designing a Rigid Coupling
A proposed power drive shaft must transmit 150 horsepower at a speed of 1200 rpm. The
shaft may be accurately approximated as a solid cylindrical member, well supported by
bearings placed near each end of the shaft. The proposed material for the shaft is hot-rolled
1020 steel having 
psi, 
psi, 
 36 percent elongation in 2
inches,  and 
psi. It is desired to couple this drive shaft, end-to-end, to a gear
transmission input shaft of the same diameter and same material. It is desired to use a sim-
ple, rigid ﬂange coupling, similar to the one shown in Figure 8.3(a). It is further desired to
S¿f = 33,000
e
Syp = 43,000
Su = 65,000

use the keyed connection between the coupling hub and the transmission input shaft as a
mechanical safety fuse to protect the transmission input shaft and internal transmission
components. (The internal transmission components are known to have strengths equal to
or greater than the transmission input shaft.) A design safety factor of two has been cho-
sen for this application, no signiﬁcant bending moments are expected on the coupling, and
long life is desired. Design a simple, rigid ﬂange coupling for this application.
Solution
Using the basic conﬁguration of the rigid coupling sketched in Figure 8.3(a), Figure E8.4
shows the dimensions to be determined. As discussed earlier under “Rigid Couplings,” the
critical areas to be investigated include:
1.
Shear and bearing in the keys
2.
Shear and bearing in the ﬂange attachment bolts
3.
Bearing on the ﬂange at attachment bolt interfaces
4.
Shear in the ﬂange at the hub
Using (4-39) and the speciﬁcations above,
and since there are no signiﬁcant bending moments, the power drive shaft diameter may
be calculated from
or
The allowable shear value is
tdrive-allow = 0.5
Syp
nd
= 0.5a43,000
2
b = 10,750 psi
ddrive = A
3
16T
ptdriv-allow
tdrive-allow = Tr
J =
16T
pd3
drive
T = 63,025(hp)
n
= 63,025(150)
1200
= 7878 in-lb
370
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
ddrive
din
dh
df
db
Attachment
bolt circle
Pilot
Square key
Square
key
Setscrew
Setscrew
leq-str
lfuse
tf = tfh
(view rotated from
true position over key,
both sides)
Figure E8.4
Sketch of proposed rigid ﬂange coupling.
Example 8.4 
Continues

Hence,
It is worth remembering here that this includes a torsional stress concentration factor of
, based on the concept that static load, ductile material, and highly local stress
concentration permits local plastic ﬂow that alleviates stress concentration effects with-
out adverse consequences. To be more conservative, a larger stress concentration factor
than unity could be included as a torsional shearing stress multiplier.
From Table 8.1, for a 1.55-in-diameter shaft, a 
-inch square key is recommended.
Following this recommendation, selecting the same material for the key as speciﬁed for the
shaft, and using (8-30), gives a key length for the drive shaft connection to the coupling
hub of
The key between the coupling hub and the transmission input shaft is to be used as a
mechanical safety fuse, so its length must be reduced by a selected factor, say 80 percent
of 
. Thus, in Figure E8.4, 
Since 
is 1.55 in, a reasonable value for hub diameter dh may be chosen from a
scaled layout. The value chosen here is
Also, a reasonable bolt circle diameter, dB, would appear to be
And a reasonable outer ﬂange diameter df would seem to be
A reasonable choice of six 
-inch-diamter bolts on the bolt circle also appears to be
reasonable. Based on the above design decisions, a ﬂange thickness tf at the bolt circle may
be calculated as follows:
The torque-induced force at the bolt circle is
Assuming the force to be distributed among three of the six bolts (a judgment call),
the compressive bearing stress between each contacting bolt and ﬂange interface is
and setting 
equal to the design stress
43,000
nd
= 43,000
2.0
= 5593
tf
sc-bf
sc-bf =
FB
3(Ac) =
5252
3(0.313)(tf) = 5593
tf
FB = 2T
dB
= 2(7878)
3.00
= 5252 lb
516
df = 4.00 inches
dB = 3.00 inches
dh = 2.13 inches
ddrive
lfuse = 0.8(2.4) = 1.9 inches
leq-str
leq-str = p(1.55)
2(1.0)
= 2.4 inches
38
Ktt = 1
ddrive = A
3 16(7,878)
p(10,750)
= 1.55 inches
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 371

gives
The required shearing area for the bolts, Asb, may be found using (6-13) as
giving
If three of the six bolts carry the load (as assumed above), the nominal bolt diameter should be
hence, 0,5-inch bolts should probably be used rather than 
-inch bolts.
Finally, the ﬂange thickness at the edge of the hub, tfh, based on shear in the ﬂange at
the hub, may be checked. Again, using (6-13),
Thus,
and
The 0.25-inch ﬂange thickness already chosen is therefore adequate.
Summarizing, the following dimensional recommendations are made for the preliminary
design dimensions of the rigid ﬂange coupling shown in Figure E8.4.
key size
-inch square
setscrew size
ﬂange bolts: use six bolts 0.25-14, grade 1, equally spaced
tf = 0.25 inches
df = 4.0 inches
dB = 3.00 inches
dh = 2.13 inches
lfuse = 1.9 inches
leq-str = 2.4 inches
= 12 - 13
= 38
ddrive = din = 1.55 inches
tfh =
0.69
p(2.13) = 0.103 inch
Ash =
Fh
10,750 = 7878>(2.13>2)
10,750
= 0.69 in2
tfh = Fh
Ash
= (sd>nd)
2
= (43,000>2)
2
= 10,750 psi
516
dbolt = A
4(0.488>3)
p
= 0.46 inch
Asb =
5252
10,750 = 0.489 in2
tsb = 5252
Asb
= sd
2 = (43,000>nd)
2
= (43,000>2)
2
tf L 0.26 inch
372
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
Example 8.4 
Continues

In applications where higher torques must be transmitted, keys may not have enough
capacity. In such cases splines are often used. In essence, splines are integral keys uni-
formly spaced around the outside of shafts or inside of hubs, as illustrated in Figure 8.9(a).
Shaft splines are often cut into raised pads to reduce stress concentration effects. Splines
may be either straight sided, as illustrated in Figure 8.9(b), or have involute tooth proﬁles,
as shown in Figure 8.9(c).
Like keyed connections, the potential failure modes for splines include yielding for
steady torque applications, or, if fluctuating loads or torques are involved, fatigue or fret-
ting fatigue. In addition, wear or fretting wear may govern in some cases, since cyclic
axial sliding is common in splined connections.
Three classes of ﬁt for straight splines have been standardized as follows:
1.
Class A ﬁt: permanent connection—not to be moved after installation.
2.
Class B ﬁt: accommodates axial sliding when no torque is applied.
3.
Class C ﬁt: accommodates axial sliding with load torque applied.
Dimensions for straight splines operating under any of these conditions may be deter-
mined from Table 8.4.
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 373
D
4 spline
6 spline
10 spline
16 spline
w
w
w
d
d
d
h
h
h
h
d
w
Circular pitch
Pitch diameter
Side-fit spline
Internal member
External member
Major
diameter
fitted
Side
fitted
(a)
(b)
(c)
Typical splined connector.
Standard straight spline cross sections.
Involute spline cross sections.
Figure 8.9
Spline geometry.
TABLE 8.4 Standard Dimensions for Straight Spline Teeth1
Class B Fit
Class C Fit 
No. of
Class A Fit
(to slide
(to slide 
Spline
w
(permanent)
without load)
with load)
Teeth
(for all ﬁts)
h
d
h
d
h
d
Four
0.241D
0.075D
0.850D
0.125D
0.750D
—
—
Six
0.250D
0.050D
0.900D
0.075D
0.850D
0.100D
0.800D
Ten
0.156D
0.045D
0.910D
0.070D
0.860D
0.095D
0.810D
Sixteen
0.098D
0.045D
0.910D
0.070D
0.860D
0.095D
0.810D
1See Figure 8.9(b) for deﬁnitions of symbols.

For typical manufacturing tolerances, experience has shown that only about 25 per-
cent of the teeth in a splined connection actually carry the load. Based on this assumption,
the required spline engagement length, 
, to provide equal strength for spline and shaft,
may be estimated in essentially the same way that equal-strength keyed connections were
estimated [see (8-30)]. Thus the shearing stress 
at the root of the spline may be equated
to the design stress 
, giving
(8-33)
or, assuming root diameter and pitch diameter nearly equal,
(8-34)
so the allowable torque for the spline becomes
(8-35)
From (8-27) the allowable shaft torque, assuming the shaft diameter to be equal to the
root diameter of the spline, is
(8-36)
Equating (8-35) to (8-36) gives the spline engagement length 
, for equal strength of shaft
and spline, as
(8-37)
Stress concentration factor data for an 8-tooth straight spline in torsion are given in
Figure 5.6(c). For standard involute splines in torsion, the value of 
seems to be about
2.8.20 Recalling once again that for static loads, ductile materials, and highly local stress
concentrations, local plastic ﬂow reduces the actual stress concentration factor toward a
value near unity, a designer may sometimes choose to set 
.
Involute splines are widely used in modern practice. They are typically stronger, tend
to be more self-centering, and are easier to cut and ﬁt than straight splines. The teeth have
an involute proﬁle similar to gear teeth, usually with a 
pressure angle (see Chapter 15),
and half the depth of a standard gear tooth. Internal splines are typically machined by
broaching or shaping, and external splines by hobbing or shaping. Splines are “ﬁtted” ei-
ther at the major diameter or at the sides, as shown in Figure 8.9(c). Spline dimensions and
tolerances have been standardized.21
Tapered fits are sometimes used to mount a power input or output component at the
end of a shaft. Typically, a threaded stub and nut are used to secure the component by
axially forcing the taper to tighten, as illustrated in Figure 8.10. Tapered fits provide
good concentricity but only moderate torque transmission capacity. Torque capacity can
30°
Ktt = 1
ktt
lsp =
d
Ktt
lsp
Tshaft-allow = pd3td
16Ktt
Tsp-allow =
pd 2lsptd
16
dr L dp K d
tsp =
Fs
0.25As
=
2T
0.25dpapdr
2 blsp
= td
td
tsp
lsp
374
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
20See ref. 10, pp. 248–249.
21See ANSI Standard B92.1 and B92.2M.

be increased, however, by augmenting the tapered connection with a key. Precise axial
location of a component on the shaft is not possible when a tapered connection is used.
Typical tapers used in these connections are self-locking (i.e., 
, where 
is
the included angle of the tapered section, and 
is static coefficient of friction), so a de-
signer should provide a means of inserting or attaching a “puller” to facilitate disassem-
bly of the tapered joint if necessary.
In some applications, interference ﬁts may be used to mount a power-input or -output
component on a shaft to provide torque transfer by friction at the interface. The interfer-
ence ﬁt may be produced by axially pressing on to the shaft a component with a hub hole
slightly smaller than the shaft mounting diameter, or by heating the hub, cooling the shaft,
or both, to facilitate assembly. The shaft mounting diameter is usually raised above the
overall shaft diameter to minimize stress concentration and permit precision machining of
the mounting diameter. A shaft shoulder is usually provided to assure accurate axial posi-
tioning. The frictional torque transfer capacity, , for such a joint, depends upon the inter-
facial pressure , the diameter of the shaft , the hub length , and the friction coefﬁcient
. Transmitted torque is given by
(8-38)
The interfacial pressure 
may be found from (9-48) or, in some cases, (9-49).
For lighter-duty applications, setscrews or pins may be used to transfer the torque be-
tween the mounted component and the shaft. Setscrews are threaded fasteners that are
tightened into radial threaded holes in the hub, bearing against the outer surface of the
shaft to provide frictional resistance to motion between shaft and hub. Often, a shallow
ﬂat is machined on the shaft to receive the setscrew point so that local burrs do not inter-
fere with disassembly. Various types of points for setscrews are commercially available,
as illustrated in Figure 8.11. The cup point is probably the most commonly used, prima-
rily with ductile shafting. The oval point is used for similar applications, but typically re-
quires a groove or keyway for spotting it on the shaft. The cone point is used when no
adjustment of the hub position relative to the shaft is anticipated. When hardened-steel
shafts are used, or if frequent adjustment is anticipated, a ﬂat point setscrew would usually
p
Tf =
Ff ds
2
= mppd 2
slh
2
m
lh
ds
p
Tf
m
a
a … 2tan -1m
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 375
Hub
Washer
Nut

Shaft
Taper = 1.50 in/ft
Key
Figure 8.10
Typical tapered ﬁt connection between shaft
and hub.
Cup
point
Flat
point
Half-dog
point
Oval
point
Cone
point
Figure 8.11
Common types of setscrew points.

be used. The half-dog point is used for cases where relative position of the hub on the
shaft must be preserved; a properly registered mating hole is drilled in the shaft to receive
the dog point.
Setscrew sizes are usually chosen to be about 
the mating shaft diameter, with a
nominal length equal to about 
the shaft diameter. The holding power of a setscrew is
the frictional resistance to slip (a tangential friction force) between shaft and hub, created
by the tightened setscrew. Table 8.5 gives estimated values of holding power for cup point
setscrews when they are installed using the seating torques indicated. Torque capacity can
be increased substantially by utilizing two setscrews side by side. The frequently en-
countered problem of setscrew loosening under ﬂuctuating or vibrational loads may be
alleviated somewhat by using setscrews with deformable locking plastic inserts in the
thread engagement region, or by tightening a second setscrew on top of the ﬁrst to lock it
in place.
Pins of various types may also be used in lighter-duty applications to provide torque
transfer between mounted components and the shaft. To utilize any type of pin requires
that a diametral hole be drilled through the shaft to accommodate the pin, creating a sig-
niﬁcant stress concentration at the site of the hole [see Figure 5.6(a)]. Several types of
commercially available pins are sketched in Figure 8.12. Clevis pins are usually used in
cases where quick detachment of the mounted component is desired, and they may be
made of ductile low-carbon steel to provide a safety shear pin that will protect the machine
from damage. Dowel pins are usually hardened and ground for accurate dimensions and
are used in applications where precise location is required. Taper pins are similar to dowel
pins, but are ground to a slight taper that matches a taper-reamed, diametral hole through
12
14
376
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
TABLE 8.5 Holding Power of Cup-Point Socket Set Screws
Against a Steel Shaft1
Size, in
Seating Torque, in-lb
Holding Power, lb
0
1.0
50
1
1.8
65
2
1.8
85
3
5
120
4
5
160
5
10
200
6
10
250
8
20 
385
10
36
540
87
1000
165
1500
290
2000
430
2500
620
3000
620
3500
1325
4000
2400
5000
5200
6000
1
7200
7000
1From ref. 5, p. 366.
78
34
58
916
12
716
38
516
14
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#

the shaft. Taper pins are self-locking and must be driven out to permit disassembly.
Grooved pins are inexpensive, easy to install, and very popular. Many different styles of
grooved pins are commercially available, in addition to the one shown in Figure 8.12(d).
Spring pins (roll pins) are widely used and economical. They are easily installed, and hole
tolerances are less critical than for solid pins. This is because the springy cross section de-
forms elastically to allow assembly. Frictional resistance created by the radial spring force
keeps the spring pin in place. Of course the hollow cross section provides less shear
strength than a solid pin with similar material properties, as shown in Table 8.6. Spiral
spring pins have similar characteristics to the standard axially slotted spring pins, but have
better shock load resistance and better fatigue resistance, and produce a tighter ﬁt in the
receiving drilled hole. Table 8.6 provides comparative data for a pin’s nominal failure
load, as a function of size (based on double shear), for the various pin types illustrated in
Figure 8.12.
Couplings, Keys, and Splines 377
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(d)
Clevis pin.
Dowel pin.
Taper pin.
Spiral spring pin.
Spring pin (roll pin).
Grooved pin.
Groove
Figure 8.12
Various types of commercially available pins.
TABLE 8.6 Nominal Failure Loads for Commercially Available Pins in Double
Shear (also see Figure 8.12)
Nominal Failure Load in Double Shear,1 lb
Nominal Pin
Spiral,
Diameter,2
Heavy
in
Clevis3
Dowel4
Taper3
Grooved4
Spring4
Duty4
0.031
—
—
—
200
—
—
0.062
—
800
700
780
425
450
0.125
—
3200
2900
3120
2100
2100
0.188
6400
7200
6600
6990
4400
4400
0.250
11,330
12,800
11,800
12,430
7200
7700
0.375
25,490
28,700
26,400
27,950
17,600
17,600
0.500
45,320
51,000
46,900
49,700
25,800
30,000
0.625
70,810
79,800
73,400
—
46,000
46,000
0.750
101,970
114,000
104,900
—
66,000
66,000
0.875
138,780
156,000
143,500
—
—
—
1.000
181,270
204,000
187,700
—
—
—
1Tangential force at shaft–hub interface that will shear off the pin assuming the load to be equally distributed
between the two shear areas.
2Other standard sizes available.
3Based on 1095 steel quenched and drawn to Rockwell C 42 (see Table 3.3). Other materials are available.
4Selected data excerpted from ref. 12.

378
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
8-1. A drive shaft for a new rotary compressor is to be supported
by two bearings, which are 200 mm apart. A V-belt system drives
the shaft through a V-sheave (see Figure 17.9) mounted at
midspan, and the belt is pretensioned to Po kN, giving an verti-
cally downward force of 2Po at midspan. The right end of the
shaft is directly coupled to the compressor input shaft through a
ﬂexible coupling. The compressor requires a steady input torque
of 5700 N-m. Make a ﬁrst cut conceptual sketch of a shaft con-
ﬁguration that would be appropriate for this application.
8-2. The drive shaft of a rotary coal grinding mill is to be
driven by a gear reducer through a ﬂexible shaft coupling, as
shown in Figure P8.2. The main shaft of the gear reducer is to
be supported on two bearings mounted 10 inches apart at A and
C, as shown. A 
spur gear mesh drives the shaft. The 
spur gear is mounted on the shaft at midspan between the bear-
ings, and has a pitch diameter of 9 inches. The pitch diameter
of the drive pinion is 3 inches. The grinder is to be operated at
600 rpm and requires 100 horsepower at the input shaft. The
shaft material is to be AISI 1060 cold-drawn carbon steel (see
Table 3.3). Shoulders for gears and bearings are to be a mini-
mum of 
inch (
inch on the diameter). A design safety fac-
tor of 1.5 is desired. Do a ﬁrst-cut design of the shaft, including
a second-cut sketch showing principal dimensions.
14
18
20°
1:3
factor of 1.7 is desired, what diameter would be required
to provide inﬁnite life?
8-4. Repeat problem 8-3 except that the shaft is to be made of
AISI 1095 steel, quenched and drawn to Rockwell C 42 (see
Table 3.3).
8-5. A pinion shaft for a helical gear reducer (see Chapter 15)
is sketched in Figure P8.5, where the reaction forces on the pin-
ion are also shown. The pinion shaft is to be driven at 1140 rpm
by a motor developing 14.9 kW.
a. Construct load, shear, and bending moment diagrams
for the shaft, in both the horizontal and the vertical plane.
Also make similar diagrams for axial load and for tor-
sional moment on the shaft, assuming that the bearing at
the right end (nearest the gear) supports all thrust (axial)
loading.
b. If the shaft is to be made of 1020 steel (see Figure
5.31), and a design safety factor of 1.8 is desired, what di-
ameter would be required at location 
to provide inﬁnite
life?
8-6. A power transmission shaft of hollow cylindrical shape is
to be made of hot-rolled 1020 steel with 
psi,
psi, 
percent elongation in 2 inches, and
fatigue properties as shown for 1020 steel in Figure 5.31. The
shaft is to transmit 85 horsepower at a rotational speed of
rpm, with no ﬂuctuations in torque or speed. At the
critical section, midspan between bearings, the rotating shaft is
also subjected to a pure bending moment of 2000 in-lb, ﬁxed in
a vertical plane by virtue of a system of symmetrical external
forces on the shaft. If the shaft outside diameter is 1.25 inches
and the inside diameter is 0.75 inch, what operating life would
be predicted before fatigue failure occurs?
8-7. A solid cylindrical power transmission shaft is to be made
of AM 350 stainless steel for operation in an elevated tempera-
ture air environment of 540C (see Table 3.5). The shaft is to
transmit 150 kW at a rotational speed of 3600 rpm, with no
n = 1800
e = 36
Syp = 43,000
Su = 65,000
B
Problems
z
z
z
x
x
x
y
y
y
A
B
C
1800 rpm
600 rpm
Tc
Figure P8.2
Schematic arrangement and coordinate system for gear 
reducer main shaft. 
Horizontal
7200 N
r = 380 mm
r = 380 mm
450 mm
450 mm
WB = 900 N
WD = 900 N
6750 N
2250 N
2700 N
A
B
C
D
Vertical
225 mm
Figure P8.3
Schematic sketch of a belt-driven jack-shaft.
8-3. A belt-driven jack-shaft is sketched schematically in
Figure P8.3.
a. Construct load, shear, and bending moment diagrams
for the shaft in both the horizontal and the vertical plane.
b. Develop an expression for the resultant bending mo-
ment on the shaft segment between the left pulley and the
right bearing.
c. Find the location and magnitude of the minimum value
of bending moment on the shaft segment between the left
pulley and the right bearing.
d. Calculate the torque in the shaft segment between pul-
leys.
e. If the shaft is to be made of hot-rolled 1020 steel (see
Figure 5.31), is to rotate at 1200 rpm, and a design safety

Problems 379
ﬂuctuations in torque or speed. At the critical section, midspan
between bearings, the rotating shaft is also subjected to a pure
bending moment of 280 N-m, ﬁxed in a vertical plane by a sys-
tem of symmetrical external forces on the shaft. If the shaft di-
ameter is 32 mm, predict a range within which the mean
operational life would be expected to fall.
8-8. A shaft of square cross section, 2.0 inches by 2.0 inches,
is being successfully used to transmit power in an application
where the shaft is subjected to constant steady pure torsion
only. If the same material is used and the same safety factor is
desired, and for exactly the same application, what diameter
should a solid cylindrical shaft be made for equivalent per-
formance?
8-9. A shaft with a raised bearing pad, shown in Figure P8.9,
must transmit 75 kW on a continuous basis at a constant rota-
tional speed of 1725 rpm. The shaft material is annealed AISI
1020 steel. A notch-sensitivity index of 
may be as-
sumed for this material. Using the most accurate procedure you
know, estimate the largest vertical midspan bearing force 
that
can be applies while maintaining a safety factor of 1.3 based on
inﬁnite-life design.
8-10. A solid circular cross-section shaft made of annealed
AISI 1020 steel (see Figure 5.31) with an ultimate strength of
57,000 psi and yield strength of 43,000 psi is shouldered as
shown in Figure P8.10. The shouldered shaft is subjected to a
pure bending moment 
in-lb, and rotates at a speed
of 2200 rpm. How many revolutions of the shaft would you pre-
dict before failure takes place?
8-11. A rotating solid cylindrical shaft must be designed to be
as light as possible for use in an orbiting space station. A safety
factor of 1.15 has been selected for this design, and the tenta-
tive material selection is Ti-150a titanium alloy. This shaft will
Mb = 1600
P
q = 0.7
35 mm
z
z
z
x
x
y
y
B
x
y
A
C
Driving pinion
Tm
FCx = 3571 N
FCz = 1502 N
FCy = –2047 N
140 mm
65 mm
Figure P8.5
Pinion shaft for helical gear reducer.
P (midspan bearing)
r = 3 mm
r = 2mm
1725 rpm
200 mm
200 mm
250 mm
500 mm
RL
(left bearing)
RR
(right bearing)
32 mm D
(both ends)
38 mm D
Figure P8.9
Shaft with a raised bearing pad.
Mb = 1600 in.-lb
Ns = 2200 rpm
r = 0.025 in.
d = 1.00 in.
D = 1.50 in.
Figure P8.10
Shouldered shaft.

380
Chapter 8 / Power Transmission Shafting; Couplings, Keys, and Splines
be required to rotate a total of 200,000 revolutions during its de-
sign life. At the most critical section of the shaft, it has been de-
termined from force analysis that the rotating shaft will be
subjected to a steady torque of 1024 rpm and a bending moment
of 1252 N-m. It is estimated that the fatigue stress concentration
factors for this critical section will be 1.8 for bending and 1.4
for torsion. Calculate the required minimum shaft diameter at
this critical section.
8-12. The sketch in Figure P8.12 shows a shaft conﬁguration
determined by using a now-obsolete ASME shaft code equation
to estimate several diameters along the shaft. It is desired to
check the critical sections along the shaft more carefully.
Concentrating attention on critical section E-E, for which the
proposed geometry is speciﬁed in Figure P8.12, a force analy-
sis has shown that the bending moment at E-E will be 100,000
in-lb, and the torsional moment is steady at 50,000 in-lb. The
shaft rotates at 1800 rpm. Tentatively, the shaft material has
been chosen to be AISI 4340 ultra-high-strength steel (see
Table 3.3). A safety factor of 1.5 is desired. Calculate the min-
imum diameter the shaft should have at location E-E if inﬁnite
life is desired.
8-13. One of two identical drive shafts for propelling a 600 N
radio controlled robot is shown in Figure P8.13. The shaft is
supported by bearings at A and C and driven by gear B. The
chains attached to sprockets D and E drive the front and rear
wheels (not shown). The tight side chain tensions on sprockets
D and E make an angle 
with the horizontal z axis. The
gear and sprocket forces are as shown. The shaft is to be made
of AISI cold-drown medium carbon stell with ultimate and
yield strenghts of 621 MPa and 483 MPa, respectively. The
u = 5°
robot is being designed for a yearly competion, so long term fa-
tigue is not a primary consideration. However, since the robotic
competition generally involves multiple incidents of hight im-
pact, you decide to include fatigue considerations and assume
and 
. Neglecting stress concentration
factors, calculate an appropriate shaft diameter.
8-14. At a weekly design review meeting someone suggests
that perhaps the shaft in problem 8.13 will undergo to much de-
ﬂection at end E. Therefore it is suggested that an addition bear-
ing support be placed 20 mm to the right of the sprocket at E,
thus extending the shaft length to 120 mm. Assuming the same
material and design constrains as in Problem 8.13, determine
the required diameter for this shaft.
8-15. To obtain a quick-and-dirty estimate for maximum slope
and deﬂection of the steel shaft shown in Figue P8.15. It is be-
ing proposed to approximate the stepped shaft by an “equiva-
lent” shaft of unifrom diameter d  100 mm. The shaft may be
assume to be simply supported by bearings at locations A and
G, and loaded as shown. Estimate the maximum deﬂection of
the equivalent-uniform-diameter shaft and the slopes at bearing
locations A and G.
nd = 1.5
SN = 300 MPa
r = 0.25 in.
4.00 in. D
(first estimate)
3.50 in. D
(first estimate)
E
E
T
T
N = 1800 rpm
Figure P8.12
Shaft design conﬁguration established using an “old’’
ASME code equation.
D4 = 75 mm
D3 = 125 mm
D1 = 75 mm
125 mm
275 mm
375 mm
525 mm
600 mm
1000 mm
D2 = 100 mm
9 KN
36 KN
RR
RL
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure P8.15
Simply supported stepped shaft with transverse loads.
Figure P8.13
Shaft for radio controlled robot drive train.
3600 N
40 mm Dia.
60 mm Dia.
FD = 1200 N
FBz = 3200 N
FBy = 3600 N
FE = 1200 N
20 mm
30 mm
y
A
B
C
x
z
y
D
E
8-16. For the stepped steel shaft of problem 8-15, use integra-
tion to determine the maximum displacement and slope of the
shaft at A and G.
8-17. A rotating hollow shaft having a 5.00-cm outside diameter
and a 6.0-mm-thick wall is to be made of AISI 4340 steel. The
shaft is supported at its ends by bearings that are very stiff, both
radially and in their ability to resist angular deﬂections caused by
shaft bending moments. The support bearings are spaced 60 cm
apart. A solid-disk ﬂywheel weighing 450 N is mounted at
midspan, between the bearings. What limiting maximum shaft
speed would you recommend for this application, based on the
need to avoid lateral vibration of the rotating system?
8-18. Repeat problem 8-17 using a solid shaft of the same out-
side diameter instead of the hollow shaft.
8-19. A 2-inch-diameter solid cylindrical 1020 steel shaft is
supported on identical rolling-element bearings (see Chapter
11) spaced 90 inches apart, as sketched in Figure P8.19. A
rigid coupling weighing 80 lb is incorporated into the shaft at

Problems 381
location A, 30 inches from the left bearing, and a small solid-
disk ﬂywheel weighing 120 lb (see Chapter 18) is mounted on
the shaft at location B, 70 inches from the left bearing. The
shaft is to rotate at 240 rpm. The bearings are not able to resist
any shaft bending moments.
a. Neglecting any radial elastic deﬂection in the support
bearings, and neglecting the mass of the shaft, estimate the
critical speed for lateral vibration of the rotating system
shown. If this estimate of critical speed is correct, is the
proposed design acceptable?
b. Reevaluate the critical speed estimate of (a) by includ-
ing the mass of the shaft in the calculation. If this new es-
timate of critical speed is correct, is the proposed design
acceptable?
c. Reevaluate the critical speed estimate of (b) if the radial
elastic deﬂections of the bearings (the spring rate of each
bearing has been provided by the bearing manufacturer as
lb-in) are included in the calculation. Does this
new estimate of critical speed, if correct, support the pos-
tulate that the system is adequately designed from the
standpoint of lateral vibration?
8-20. For the proposed rigid coupling sketched in Figure
P8.20, evaluate the following aspects of the proposed conﬁgu-
ration if a design safety factor of 2.0 is desired.
a. Shear and bearing in the keys
b. Shear and bearing in the ﬂange attachment bolts
c. Bearing on the ﬂange at attachment bolt interfaces
d. Shear in the ﬂange at the hub
5 * 105
The input shaft has a nominal diameter of 2.25 inches, and
supplies a steady input of 50 hp at 150 rpm. The bolt circle di-
ameter is 
. Cold-drawn AISI 1020 steel is be-
ing proposed as the material for the coupling components,
including the bolts,  and also the material for the key (see Table
3.3). Is the coupling design acceptable as proposed?
8-21. As a new engineer, you have been assigned the task of
recommending an appropriate shaft coupling for connecting the
output shaft of an 8.95 kW gear-motor drive unit, operating at
600 rpm, to the input shaft of a newly designed seed-corn clean-
ing machine ordered by a farm-supply depot. Based on the ca-
pabilities within your company’s production facility, it has been
estimated that the parallel centerline misalignment between the
motor drive shaft and the input shaft of the seed cleaning ma-
chine may be as much as 0.8 mm, and the angular misalignment
between shafts may be as much as 
. What type of coupling
would you recommend?
8-22. a. A chain drive (see Chapter 17) delivers 110 horse-
power to the input shaft of an industrial blower in a paint
manufacturing plant. The drive sprocket rotates at 1700
rpm, and has a bore diameter of 2.50 inches and a hub
length of 3.25 inches. Propose an appropriate geometry for
a standard square key, including width and length dimen-
sions, if the key is to be made of 1020 cold-drawn steel
having 
psi and 
psi. The key
material may be assumed to be weaker than either the mat-
ing shaft material or hub material. A design safety factor
of 3 is desired.
b. Would it be possible to use a standard Woodruff key of
the same material in this application?
8-23. Repeat problem 8-22, except that the drive sprocket ro-
tates at 800 rpm.
8-24. For the chain drive speciﬁcations given in problem 8-22,
and for the same sprocket dimensions, select the minimum size
of grooved pin that could be used to attach the sprocket to the
shaft, assuming the grooved pin to be made of 1095 steel
quenched and drawn to Rockwell C 42 (see Table 3.3).
8-25. The hub of a gear is keyed to an 80-mm diameter shaft
using a 30 mm long square key. The shaft is required to operate
at 1800 rpm. The shaft and key are made from the same alloy
steel, with 
and 
a. Determine the power that can be transmitted by the key.
b. Determine the power capacity of the shaft assuming
8-26. a. A V-pulley is to be mounted on the steel 1.0-inch-
diameter engine drive-shaft of a lawn tractor. The pulley
must transmit 14 horsepower to the drive-shaft at a speed
of 1200 rpm. If a cup point setscrew were used to attach
the pulley hub to the shaft, what size setscrew would be re-
quired? A design safety factor of 2 is desired.
b. What seating torque would be recommended to prop-
erly tighten the setscrew so that it will not slip when power
is being transmitted? 
Ktr = 1.8.
tall = 140 MPa
Sy = 350 MPa
Syp = 51,000
Su = 61,000
2°
dB = 6.0 inches
30 in.
40 in.
20 in.
RL
RR
A
B
Coupling
Flywheel
80 lb
120 lb
2 in. D
Figure P8.19
Rotating shaft system with attached masses.
6 in.
2 1
4 in.
1
2 in.
1
4
3 1
2 in.
in.
5
8 in.
6 bolts,
4 1
4 in.
P8.20
Proposed shaft coupling conﬁguration.

Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Chapter 9
9.1 Uses and Characteristics of Pressurized Cylinders
Containment vessels for pressurized ﬂuids may be spherical, ellipsoidal, toroidal, cylin-
drical, or combinations of these shapes. In spite of the fact that spherical vessels are more
favorably stressed than the others, the practical advantage of easy fabrication makes the
cylindrical pressure vessel, by far, the most widely used shape.
In practice, cylindrical pressure vessels may be either internally pressurized or externally
pressurized, may be thin-walled or thick-walled, and may be open at the ends or closed at the
ends. They may be fabricated as monolithic cylindrical shells, multilayered shrink-ﬁt concen-
tric cylindrical shells, ﬁlament-wound cylindrical shells, or wire-wrapped cylindrical shells.
Filament-wound composite shells are made by wrapping a ﬁlamentary material, such as ﬁber-
glass, on a cylindrical mandrel and impregnating it with a polymer, curing the resulting ﬁla-
mentary composite, and removing the mandrel. Wire-wrapped cylindrical shells are made by
tightly wrapping a high-strength steel wire around the cylindrical vessel for reinforcement.
Applications involving pressurized cylinders include tanks, hoops, pipes, gun barrels,
rocket-engine thrust chambers, and hydraulic and pneumatic actuators, as well as the re-
lated applications embodying interference ﬁts between a cylindrical hub and mating shaft.
Geometrical discontinuities in pressure vessels require special attention from the de-
signer, just as all other stress concentration sites do. The juncture between the cylindrical
vessel and the end closures, whether ﬂat, semiellipsoidal, or hemispherical, must be eval-
uated. Openings (nozzles) in the vessel wall to allow inward and outward ﬂow, manholes
for inspection and cleaning, attached support ﬂanges, weld seams, and thickness transition
sites must also be carefully considered in the safe design of a pressure vessel. All of these
discontinuities produce complicated states of stress and uncertainties in failure analysis.
For these reasons, a designer is well advised to consult appropriate pressure vessel design
codes when analyzing pressure vessels. In most states, conformance with the ASME Boiler
and Pressure Vessel Code1 is required by law. Code design procedures integrate genera-
tions of failure prevention experience with applicable theoretical analyses to maximize the
reliability and safety of the structure.
9.2 Interference Fit Applications
The relationship between cylindrical pressure vessels and interference ﬁts is direct. When
the cylindrical hub of a shaft-mounted component is assembled to the shaft by pressing it
382
1See ref. 1.

in place, or when differential thermal expansion techniques are used for assembly (see
8.8), an interfacial pressure is generated between the shaft and the hub. The state of stress
produced in the hub by the interference-ﬁt-induced internal pressure is completely analo-
gous to the state of stress induced in the wall of an internally pressurized cylindrical ves-
sel. Likewise, if the shaft is hollow, the state of stress in the shaft is analogous to that in
the wall of an externally pressurized cylindrical vessel. Because the friction torque trans-
mitted by an interference ﬁt assembly is directly related to interfacial pressure [see (8-35)],
the diametral interference required to provide a speciﬁed friction torque may be calculated,
and the resulting states of stress in the hub and the shaft may be determined as well. The
strategy here will be to ﬁrst develop expressions for stress distributions in pressurized hol-
low cylinders, as a function of pressure, dimensions, and material properties, then adapt
these expressions to the case of interference ﬁts.
9.3 Potential Failure Modes
Depending upon the application, the pressure level, the temperature level, the environment,
and the composition of the pressurizing ﬂuid, pressure vessels are vulnerable to potential
failure by many possible modes. Reviewing the failure modes listed in 2.3, pressure ves-
sel failure might occur by yielding, ductile rupture, brittle fracture (even if the material is
nominally ductile), fatigue (including low-cycle, thermal, or corrosion fatigue), stress-
corrosion-cracking, creep, or combined creep and fatigue. In interference ﬁt applicaitons,
such as a hub pressed on a shaft, failure modes might include yielding, ductile rupture,
brittle fracture (perhaps induced by a poorly chosen diametral interference), fretting
fatigue at the interface, or fatigue initiated at end-of-hub stress concentration sites. It is
worth noting that interference ﬁt failures are sometimes generated by designer inattention
to the important task of specifying proper tolerances on the shaft diameter and mating hub
bore. Usually, a designer must investigate both the tolerance-dictated minimum interfer-
ence condition (to ensure that torque transfer requirements are met) and the tolerance-
dictated maximum interference condition (to assure that stress levels are within safe ranges).
Any differential expansion or contraction induced by operational temperature changes
must also be evaluated in terms of consequential tolerance changes.
9.4 Materials for Pressure Vessels
Considering the potential failure modes suggested in 9.3, and utilizing the material selec-
tion guidelines of Chapter 3, it may be observed that candidate materials for pressurized
cylinders should have good strength (including good fatigue strength), high ductility, good
formability, good weldability, and low cost. In elevated temperature applications, the
selected material should also have good strength at the operating temperature, good creep
resistance, and in many cases, good corrosion resistance. Steel materials typically meet
most of these criteria, and therefore steel materials are widely used in fabrication of pres-
sure vessels. In special circumstances, other materials might be selected, however, espe-
cially if light weight, very high temperatures, or speciﬁc corrosive environments must be
accommodated. In the case of interference ﬁt applications, 8.3 provides additional mate-
rial selection insights.
If, as suggested in 9.1, the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code is consulted, an
extensive catalog of material speciﬁcations and related code-speciﬁed design stresses may
be found for an array of pressure vessel and piping materials. This list of materials includes
carbon and low-alloy steels, nonferrous alloys, high-alloy steels, cast iron, and ferritic
Materials for Pressure Vessels 383

steels. Information is provided for plates, sheets, castings, forgings, weldments, end clo-
sures, hoops, and layered construction. Table 9.1 illustrates the type of information avail-
able in the code for a few selected steel pressure vessel plate materials. Table 9.2 illustrates
the type of information available for code-speciﬁed design-allowable stress, as a function
of metal operating temperature. Designers of pressure vessels are well advised to famil-
iarize themselves with the scope of the code, even if code design is not legally required.
9.5 Principles from Elasticity Theory
When designers investigate stresses and strains in a machine element, they base their
analyses either upon a strength of materials model or a theory of elasticity model. In us-
ing the strength of materials approach, simplifying assumptions are made about the stress
distributions and strain distributions within the body. The familiar assumptions that (1)
planes remain plane, (2) bending stress is proportional to distance away from the neutral
axis, or (3) the hoop stress in the wall of a thin-walled pressurized cylinder is uniform
across the wall thickness are cases in point. On the other hand, use of the more complicated
(but more accurate) theory of elasticity model permits a determination of the distributions
of stresses and strains within the body. In cases where the simplifying assumptions of the
384
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Table 9.1 ASME Code Speciﬁcations for Selected Steel Pressure Vessel Plate
Materials1
Tensile
Min. Yield
Elongation
Type of
Speciﬁcation
Thickness,
Strength,
Strength,
in 2 Inches,
Steel
No.
Grade
in
ksi
ksi
percent
Carbon
SA-285/
2
SA-285M
A
maximum
45–65
24
30
Carbon
B
50–70
27
28
Carbon
C
55–75
30
27
Mn-Si
SA-299/
up to
SA-299M
—
1
75–95
42
19
Mn-Si
—
1 to 8
75–95
40
19
Mn-Mo
SA-302/
SA 302M
A
0.25 to 8
75–95
45
19
Mn-Mo
B
80–100
50
18
Mn-Mo-Ni
C
80–100
50
20
Mn-Mo-Ni
D
80–100
50
20
1Hundreds of additional material speciﬁcations, both ferrous and nonferrous, are included in the ASME Boiler
and Pressure Vessel Code. See ref. 1.
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Table 9.2 Example Listing of ASME Code Speciﬁcation for Maximum Allowable
Stress (ksi) as a Function of Temperature (F)
Maximum Allowable Stress, ksi
Spec.
20 to
up to
up to
up to
up to
up to
up to
up to
No.1
Grade
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
SA 285
A
11.3
11.0
10.3
9.0
7.8
6.5
—
—

B
12.5
12.1
11.2
9.6
8.1
6.5
—
—

C
13.8
13.3
12.1
10.2
8.4
6.5
—
—
1See Table 9.1.

Thin-Walled Cylinders 385
strength of materials approach are too inaccurate, such as for a thick-walled pressurized
cylinder, the theory of elasticity approach is recommended.
The basic relationships from elasticity theory2 needed to analyze thick-walled cylin-
ders include:
1.
Differential equations of force equilibrium
2.
Force-displacement relationships, for example, Hooke’s Law
3.
Geometrical compatibility relationships
4.
Boundary conditions
The requirements of force equilibrium are familiar (see 4.2). Likewise, Hooke’s Law
is familiar (see 5.2). Geometrical compatibility requires material continuity; that is, no
voids may be torn open and no material may “bunch up.” Boundary conditions require that
forces associated with stress distributions within the body must be in equilibrium with the
external forces on its boundaries. The use of these four principles of elasticity will be
demonstrated in developing the thick-walled cylinder equations in 9.7.
9.6 Thin-Walled Cylinders
For purposes of analysis, pressurized cylinders are often categorized as either thin-walled
or thick-walled. To qualify as a thin-walled cylindrical pressure vessel, the wall must be
thin enough to satisfy the assumption that the radial stress component in the wall, 
, is
negligibly small compared to the tangential (hoop) stress component 
, and that 
is uni-
form across the thickness. Typically, if the thickness t is 10 percent of the diameter d, or
less, the pressure vessel may be accurately analyzed as a thin-walled vessel. For thick-
walled pressure vessels, both
and 
vary (nonlinearly) across the wall thickness. Of
course, any pressure vessel may be correctly analyzed as thick-walled, but if the thin-
walled assumptions are valid, a signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation results in the analysis.
Referring to Figure 9.1(a), the through-the-thickness volume element shown is sub-
jected to a biaxial state of stress, because by the thin-walled assumption3
(9-1)
sr = 0
st
sr
st
st
sr
2
d
P
pi
pi
Psin 
Pcos 
d

ttl
ttl
l
t

90 – 
(c)
(b)
(a)
Pressure-induced force components
on d arc of thin shell.
Semicylinder as a free body.
Pressurized thin cylinder showing
stresses on elemental volume.
l
t
d
Fpv
pi
Figure 9.1
Analysis of a thin-walled cylinder.
2See, for example, ref. 2.
3Furthermore, radial pressures are nearly always negligibly small compared to the
tangential and longitudinal stresses.

Taking the upper half of the internally pressurized thin-walled cylinder as a free body,
as shown in Figure 9.1(b), vertical force resolution gives
(9-2)
The vertical force component 
produced by the pressure 
may be found by inte-
grating the vertical component of pressure-induced force, 
, over the semicircular sur-
face. Thus (9-2) may be rewritten, based on Figure 9.1(c), as
(9-3)
giving
(9-4)
The product 
is deﬁned as projected area, a concept also used in analyzing plain
bearings (see Chapter 10) and certain other machine elements. From (9-4) it may be found
that the tangential stress component is
(9-5)
If the pressure vessel is closed at the ends, the longitudinal stress component 
may
be found from a free-body diagram, constructed by passing a cutting plane through the
cylinder, perpendicular to the cylinder axis, and writing an axial force resolution to give
(9-6)
From (9-6), the longitudinal stress component is
(9-7)
Comparing (9-5) with (9-7), it may be noted that the tangential (hoop) stress 
in a
thin-walled pressure vessel is twice the longitudinal stress 
. Because a biaxial state of
stress exists, it is necessary to utilize an appropriate failure theory.4 Also, it is important to
understand that the stress calculations just developed are valid only in the cylindrical wall
at a sufﬁcient distance away5 from joints with end closures, nozzles, or supports, as dis-
cussed in 9.1. Local stresses must be separately determined in the vicinity of any stress
concentration site.
9.7 Thick-Walled Cylinders
If thin-walled assumptions are not valid, it becomes necessary to employ the principles of
elasticity from 9.5 to properly determine the stress distributions for 
and . Figure 9.2(a)
shows a cross-sectional view of a thick-walled cylinder of length l. It will be initially as-
sumed that there are no axial forces on the cylinder; hence the state of stress at any point
within the wall is biaxial. If axial forces do exist, the associated longitudinal stress com-
ponent 
may be superposed later.
sl
st
sr
sl
st
sl = pid
4t
piapd 2
4 b = sl1pdt2
sl
st = pid
2t
1d21l2
pidl - 2sttl = 0
2
L
p>2
0
cpiad
2dubld sinu - 2sttl = 0
pidA
pi
Fpv
Fpv - 21sttl2 = 0
386
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
4See 5.4.
5Based on St. Venant’s principle, which, in essence, states that if a system of forces acts on a small
local portion of an elastic body, the stresses are changed only locally in the immediate vicinity of the force 
application, and remain virtually unchanged in other parts of the body.

Because a cylinder is symmetrical about a central axis, plane sections remain plane
when the cylinder is pressurized, automatically satisfying the geometrical compatibility re-
quirement. The thick-walled cylinder shown in Figure 9.2(a) is subjected to both an inter-
nal pressure 
and an external pressure 
. An elemental ring of radial thickness 
may
be deﬁned as shown in Figure 9.2(a). The ring has a mean radius 
that lies between the
inner cylinder-wall radius and the outer cylinder-wall radius . Taking the upper half of
the elemental ring as a free body, the forces on the chosen free body may be deduced from
the discussions of 9.6 and the stress state shown in Figure 9.2(b). The differential equation
of force equilibrium may be written by taking a vertical force resolution to give (using the
projected area concept of 9.6)
(9-8)
or
(9-9)
To solve for the two unknowns, 
and 
, requires another independent relationship. For
linear elastic material behavior, the force-displacement relationships, expressed as
Hooke’s Law, satisfy this need. Thus (5-15), (5-16), and (5-17) may be simpliﬁed for a bi-
axial state of stress (
= 0), to give
(9-10)
(9-11)
(9-12)
where , , and 
are, respectively, normal radial strain, normal tangential strain, and nor-
mal longitudinal strain. It is worth noting that 
is not zero, in spite of the fact that 
is
zero.
Rewriting (9-12),
(9-13)
where
(9-14)
2C1 K -EPl
v
sr + st = 2C1
sl
el
el
et
er
el = 1
E3-v1sr + st24
et = 1
E3st - vsr4
er = 1
E3sr - vst4
st
st
sr
st - sr - r dsr
dr = 0
sr12r2l - 1sr + dsr2321r + dr24l + 2stldr = 0
b
a
r
dr
po
pi
Thick-Walled Cylinders 387
a
t
r
r + dr
t
(b)
(a)
dr
r
b
r
dr
po
pi
Figure 9.2
Analysis of a thick-walled cylinder.

Subtracting (9-13) from (9-9) gives
(9-15)
Next, multiplying by r and rearranging,
(9-16)
or
(9-17)
Integrating (9-17) gives
(9-18)
where 
is a constant of integration.
Solving (9-18) for 
(9-19)
Combining (9-19) with (9-13) then gives
(9-20)
Boundary conditions of interest may be formulated from Figure 9.2 as
(9-21)
(9-22)
Inserting these boundary conditions, one at a time, into (9-19) gives
(9-23)
and
(9-24)
These two equations may be solved simultaneously for 
and 
, then the values of
and 
inserted into (9-19) and (9-20) to give, ﬁnally,
(9-25)
and
(9-26)
In these equations () stress is tension and () stress is compression.
st =
pia2 - pob2 - aa2b2
r 2 b1po - pi2
b2 - a2
sr =
pia2 - pob2 + aa2b2
r 2 b1po - pi2
b2 - a2
C2
C1
C2
C1
-po = C1 + C2
b2
-pi = C1 + C2
a2
sr = -po    at  r = b
sr = -pi    at  r = a
st = C1 - C2
r 2
sr = C1 + C2
r 2
sr
C2
r 2sr = r 2C1 + C2
d
dr 1r 2sr2 = 2rC1
r 2dsr
dr + 2rsr = 2rC1
-2sr = r dsr
dr - 2C1
388
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits

In many applications, the pressure vessel is subjected to internal pressure only
(po  0), giving
(9-27)
(9-28)
For internally pressurized vessels, the peak stress magnitudes of 
and 
both occur
at the inner radius6 r  a, where
(9-29)
(9-30)
The forms of the stress distributions for 
and 
for the case of an internally pressurized
cylinder are sketched in Figure 9.3(a).
If an internally pressurized thick-walled cylindrical pressure vessel is closed at both
ends, the resulting longitudinal stress 
may be found by adapting the equilibrium con-
cepts leading to (9-6) as
(9-31)
It should be noted that the pressure vessel stresses 
, 
, and 
are all principal stresses.
In some applications, it may be found that the pressure vessel is subjected to external
pressure only (pi  0), giving
(9-32)
(9-33)
For externally pressurized vessels the peak stress magnitudes of r and t do not oc-
cur at the same radius. The peak magnitude of r occurs at the inner radius, r  a. The
st =
-b2po
b2 - a2 a1 + a2
r 2 b
sr =
-b2po
b2 - a2 a1 - a2
r 2 b
sl
st
sr
sl = pia
a2
b2 - a2 b
sl
st
sr
stƒ r=a = piab2 + a2
b2 - a2 b
srƒ r=a = -pi
st
sr
st =
a2pi
b2 - a2 c1 + b2
r 2 d
sr =
a2pi
b2 - a2 c1 - b2
r 2 d
Thick-Walled Cylinders 389
6Since the maximum tensile tangential stress 
occurs at the inner surface of the pressure vessel wall, the
more likely crack initiation sites are on the inside surface of a thick-walled cylindrical pressure vessel. This 
demands special attention to the task of choosing an appropriate inspection technique for crack detection. See 7.6.
1st2max
t
t
r
r
(a)
(b)
Internally pressurized.
Externally pressurized.
po = 0
po
po
po = 0
pi
pi
pi = 0
pi = 0
Compression
Compression
Tension
Tension
Figure 9.3
Radial and tangential stress distributions across the wall thickness of internally and externally
pressurized thick-walled cylinders.

forms of the stress distributions for and for the case of an externally pressurized cylinder
are sketched in Figure 9.3(b).
Example 9.1 Designing the Pressurized Shell of a Thick-Walled Cylindrical
Hydraulic Actuator
A single-acting vertical-lift hydraulic actuator is to be designed to operate at an ambient
temperature of 900F. The proposed material for the cylindrical outer shell is 1020 steel.
As shown in Figure E9.1, the actuator must have the ability to vertically lift a static max-
imum load of 14,000 pounds, and hold it in place. The available pressure supply pro-
vides 2000 psi fluid pressure to the actuator. A pressure release valve allows the load to
retract the actuator when desired. The outer diameter of the steel cylinder must not
exceed 4.0 inches because of clearance restrictions, but the smaller the better. Perform
the initial design calculations to determine pertinent dimensions for the cylindrical shell,
disregarding for now the complications of stress concentration. A design safety factor of
2.5 is desired.
Solution
The pertinent dimensions required are inner diameter di and outer diameter do. The solution
strategy will be to ﬁrst ﬁnd the piston diameter di required to support the load, and then ﬁnd
the outer diameter do to provide a design safety factor of nd  2.5 at the critical point.
Since the maximum load is W  14,000 pounds, and the supply pressure is 2000 psi,
the required piston area 
may be found as
Ai = W
pi
= 14,000
2000
= 7.0 in2
Ai
390
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
1020 steel cylinder
di
Fixed support pivot
Guide bushing
Wrist pivot
T = 900°F
Vent
(do)max = 4.0 in.
Hydraulic fluid
supply port
Minimum pi
= 2000 psi
Rod
Piston
Maximum static
load W = 14,000 lb
Figure E9.1
Conceptual sketch of high-temperature
hydraulic actuator.

whence the inside diameter required to lift the load is
Examining Figure E9.1, it may be noted from the concept conﬁguration that the cylin-
der walls carry no axial load because the pressure-induced axial force on the piston is
transmitted directly to the load as the rod slides through the guide bushing. Hence for this
design calculation
resulting in a biaxial state of stress throughout the cylinder wall. Since this is a case of in-
ternal pressure only, the critical points all lie on the inner wall where the radial and tan-
gential stresses both peak in magnitude, as given by (9-29) and (9-30). Further, there are
no shearing stress components on volume elements at radius 
, making 
and 
principal stresses by deﬁnition.
Since the 1020 steel material is ductile, the state of stress is multiaxial (biaxial), and
the loading is static, the distortion energy design equation (6-14) is appropriate for use.
Reducing (6-14) to the biaxial case, we desire
The governing failure mode for this case is judged to be yielding at an ambient tem-
perature of 900F. From Table 3.5, the yield strength of 1020 steel at 900F is found to be
hence the design stress becomes
At the inner radius, 
 1.5 inches, so (9-29) and (9-30) give
and
Inserting these into the failure criteria gives
Perhaps the most expedient way to solve this fourth-order implicit equation for 
is
by trial and error. Since the physical constraints limit 
to a maximum value of 4.0 inches,
we may try this value ﬁrst. Using the above we may iterate as follows, ﬁrst dividing both
sides by the term (2000)2/2.
From Table E9.1, the initial design recommendations are
ro
ro
1
2ca2000e r 2
o + 1.52
r 2
o - 1.52f - {-2000}b
2
+ 1-200022 + a2000e r 2
o + 1.52
r 2
o - 1.52fb
2
d = 1960022
stƒ r=1.5 = 2000 cr 2
o + 1.52
r 2
o - 1.52 d
srƒ r=1.5 = -2000 psi
ri
sd =
Syp-900
nd
= 24,000
2.5
= 9600 psi
Syp-900 = 24,000 psi
1
231st - sr22 + s2
r + s2
t 4 = s2
d
st
sr
ri = di>2
sl = 0
di = A
4Ai
p
= A
417.02
p
= 3.0 inches
Thick-Walled Cylinders 391
Table E9.1 Iteration Summary
Left side
Right side
Comment
2.0
4.0
34.65
46.08
no solution
1.8
3.24
74.59
46.08
no solution
1.9
3.61
47.75
46.08
close enough
r 2
0
r0

As a matter of interest, the ratio of wall thickness to mean diameter is
so, from the discussions of 9.6, the solution of this design problem using the thin-walled
assumptions would have been marginal to unsatisfactory in terms of making an accurate
assessment of the wall-thickness requirement.
9.8 Interference Fits: Pressure and Stress
As discussed in 9.2, the stress distributions in the hub and the shaft of an interference ﬁt
assembly may be readily found from (9-29) and (9-30) for the hub, and from (9-32) and
(9-33) for the shaft. To ﬁnd the interfacial pressure p as a function of materials and geom-
etry of the shaft-hub assembly, the four basic principles from elasticity theory, presented
in 9.5, may again be utilized. Considering the shaft and hub to be concentric cylinders,
assembled one upon the other with an interference ﬁt, as illustrated in Figure 9.4, the
requirements of geometrical compatibility may be written as
(9-34)
where
(9-35)
The radii of shaft and hub before and after assembly, as shown in Figure 9.4, are de-
ﬁned as follows:
g = hub outer radius after assembly
f = common interfacial radius after assembly
e = shaft inner radius after assembly
d = shaft outer radius before assembly
c = shaft inner radius before assembly
b = hub outer radius before assembly
a = hub inner radius before assembly
¢ K  diametral interference
ƒ f - a ƒ + ƒ d - f ƒ = ¢
2
R =
t
dm
= 0.4
3.4 = 0.12
do = 2ro = 3.8 inches
di = 3.0 inches
392
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Example 9.1 
Continues
(b)
(a)
(c)
Hub before
assembly.
Hollow shaft
before assembly.
Shaft and hub
after assembly.
a b
g
f
c
d
e
Figure 9.4
Sketches showing dimensions of a
hollow shaft and a hub before and
after assembly.

The following subscript notation will be utilized to expedite development of an expression
for interfacial pressure p:
To proceed, the magnitudes of tangential (circumferential) strains in the hub and the
shaft, respectively, at radius f in the assembly, may be expressed as
(9-36)
and
(9-37)
Next, writing Hooke’s Law equations (valid for both hub and shaft at their common 
radius f ),
(9-38)
and
(9-39)
Also, by equilibrium, at radius f
(9-40)
and
(9-41)
assuming the length of shaft and hub to be equal. (Usually they are not equal in length and
it becomes necessary to introduce an end-of-hub stress concentration factor.)
Rewriting (9-30) for the hub,
(9-42)
and from (9-29)
(9-43)
where p is the interfacial pressure resulting from the interference ﬁt assembly of the hub
on the shaft.
Likewise, for the shaft, (9-33) gives
(9-44)
and from (9-32)
(9-45)
Inserting (9-36) and (9-37) into (9-34) gives
(9-46)
ƒethaƒ + ƒetsdƒ = ¢
2
srs = -p
sts = -pad2 + c2
d2 - c2b
srh = -p
sth = pab2 + a2
b2 - a2 b
slh = sls = 0
srh = srs
ets = 1
Es
3sts - vs1srs + sls24
eth = 1
Eh
3sth - vh1srh + slh24
ƒetsƒ = `
2pd - 2pf 
2pd
` = `
d - f 
d
`
ƒethƒ = `
2pf - 2pa
2pa
` = `
f - a
a
`
l = longitudinal
r = radial
t = tangential
s = shaft
h = hub
Interference Fits: Pressure and Stress 393

Substituting (9-42), (9-43), (9-44), and (9-45) into (9-38) and (9-39), then placing the
resulting expressions into (9-46), gives
(9-47)
which may be solved for interfacial pressure p as
(9-48)
By using the value of p from (9-48), the radial and tangential stresses in the hub and
in the shaft may be found using (9-27), (9-28), (9-29), and (9-33).
If the shaft and hub are made of the same material, 
, and 
.
Also, if the shaft is solid, 
and 
, to good approximation. Under these circum-
stances (9-48) simpliﬁes to
(9-49)
In cases where the hub length is shorter than the shaft (the usual case) stress concen-
tration occurs at the hub ends due to the sudden change in geometry. Figure 4.7 gives end-
of-hub stress concentration factors for this condition.7 As a practical matter, a raised pad,
with generous blending ﬁllet radii, is nearly always speciﬁed for the shaft at the site where
the interference ﬁt hub is mounted. This practice greatly reduces stress concentration
effects at the hub ends and expedites assembly (the hub slips easily over the shaft until it
arrives at the raised diameter).
Example 9.2 Designing an Interference Fit Assembly
For a special application, it is desired to assemble a phosphor bronze disk to a hollow steel
shaft, using an interference ﬁt for retention. The disk is to be made of C-52100 hot-rolled
phosphor bronze, and the hollow steel shaft is to be made of 1020 cold-drawn steel. As
shown in Figure E9.2, the proposed nominal dimensions of the disk are 250 mm for the
outer diameter and 75 mm for the hole diameter, and for the shaft and mounting pad, 75 mm
outer diameter and 50 mm inner diameter. The hub length is 100 mm. The decision has
been made that the maximum stress in the disk should not exceed one-half the tensile yield
strength of the disk material.
a.
What is the maximum diametral interference that should be speciﬁed for the ﬁt be-
tween the phosphor bronze disk and the steel shaft?
p = E¢
4a  c1 - a2
b2 d
a = d
c = 0
ns = nh K n
Es = Eh K E
p =
¢
2 c a
Eh
ab2 + a2
b2 - a2 + vhb + d
Es
ad 2 + c2
d 2 - c2 - vsb d
` a
Eh cpab2 + a2
b2 - a2b - 1-p2vhd ` + ` d
Es c -pad 2 + c2
d 2 - c2 b - 1-p2vsd ` = ¢
2
394
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
7See also ref. 3, ¶5.5.
75 mm D
100 mm
50 mm D
250 mm D
Figure E9.2
Sketch showing nominal conﬁguration of
the interference ﬁt assembly.

b.
If the coefﬁcient of friction between the phosphor bronze and steel is about 0.34 dry
or 0.17 greasy (see Appendix Table A.1), what torque would you estimate could be
transferred from shaft to disk with no slippage?
c.
Approximately what hydraulic press capability would you estimate might be needed
to press the shaft out of the disk after it has been assembled using the interference
speciﬁed in (a)?
Solution
The material properties of interest may be found in Tables 3.3, 3.9, and 3.10. For each
material, there are:
Commercial bronze (52100): 
, 
, 
, 
,
Cold-drawn 1020 steel: 
, 
, 
, 
,
a.
For the phosphor bronze disk, from (9-29) and (9-30)
and   
Since the state of stress is biaxial at the inner radius of the disk, and the material is
ductile, the distortional energy design equations (6-14) reduces to
Then using (9-48)
1
2C(1.2p - (-p))2 + (-p)2 + (1.2p)2D = a165
2 b
2 :  p = 1870 MPa
1
2C(st - sr)2 + s2
r + s2
t D = a165
2 b
2
stƒr=37.5 = pc(125)2 + (37.5)2
(125)2 - (37.5)2 d = 1.20p
srƒr=37.5 = -p
e(50 mm) = 25%
n = 0.30
E = 207 GPa
Syp = 352 MPa
Su = 421 MPa
e(50 mm) = 70%
n = 0.35
E = 110 GPa
Syp = 165 MPa
Su = 379 MPa
Interference Fits: Pressure and Stress 395
1870 * 106 =
¢
2c
0.0375
110 * 109 a(0.125)2 + (0.0375)2
(0.125)2 - (0.0375)2 + 0.35b +
0.0375
207 * 109 a(0.0375)2 + (0.025)2
(0.0375)2 - (0.025)2 + 0.30b d
which gives
As the maximum recommended diametral interference to satisfy the specified
requirements.
b.
The friction torque capacity of an interference ﬁt joint is given by (8-38) as
Since it is common practice to lubricate the shaft and hub surfaces before pressing
them together, the “greasy” friction coefﬁcient 
should be used to give
c.
The axial force required to press the shaft out of the hub is 
Fax = mN = mpA = mppdslh
Tf = 0.17(1870 * 106)p(0.075)2(0.10)
2
= 281 kN-m
m = 0.17
Tf = mppd2
slh
2
¢ = 0.00197 m = 1.97 mm L 2 mm

So as to not underestimate the hydraulic press capacity requirement, the “dry” friction
coefﬁcient 
should be used, giving
If the assembly has been in service, the axial force required for removal might even
be higher because of fretting or corrosion.
To be conservative, a hydraulic press capacity of 15 MN is estimated for disassembly.
9.9 Design for Proper Interference
Interference ﬁts are obtained by machining the bore of a hub to a slightly smaller diame-
ter than the mating shaft, then assembling the two parts. Assembly may be accomplished
by forcefully pressing them together (press ﬁtting), or by heating the hub or cooling the
shaft (shrink ﬁtting). The counterposing elastic deﬂections of shaft and hub create poten-
tially large normal interfacial pressures and slip-resisting frictional forces between them
(see 9.8). The question becomes, How much diametral interference should be speciﬁed for
proper performance? The factors to be considered by a designer in answering this question
include:
1.
The torque transfer requirement or frictional resistance requirement to meet design
speciﬁcations
2.
The state of stress at the critical point in the shaft-hub assembly, under operating con-
ditions
3.
The materials being used
4.
The probable governing failure mode
5.
Speciﬁed machining tolerances for both the shaft mounting pad diameter and the hub
bore diameter
Usually, the torque transfer requirement and the nominal shaft and hub sizes are prede-
termined by power, speed, loading, and conﬁguration speciﬁcations for the application. From
these, the required interfacial pressure may be calculated by using (8-38) or some similar re-
lationship, and the desired diametral interference 
may be found from (9-48) or (9-49).
It often turns out that the speciﬁcation of proper tolerances on shaft and bore diame-
ters is just as important as speciﬁcation of the diametral interference. This is true because
the “spring rates” of the shaft and hub are so stiff that the calculated interference 
is of-
ten of the same order as typical machining tolerances for carefully controlled ﬁts.
Consequently, “in-tolerance” shafts and hubs may produce variations in assembly inter-
ference that result in signiﬁcant numbers of ﬁeld failures. The failures may range from
slippage or fretting because of excessively loose ﬁts, to premature fatigue failure or hub
yielding because of excessively tight ﬁts. A designer is well advised to carefully examine
the potential failure consequences of inadequate tolerance speciﬁcations but to remain
mindful of the cost of unnecessarily restrictive tolerancing.
Example 9.3 Assessing Failures in a Press Fit Assembly
A small manufacturer of light industrial conveyors has been experiencing numerous ﬁeld
failures at the input drive sprocket of a new conveyor. About 1 of every 5 installations
seems to exhibit rapid galling at the press ﬁt interface between the drive sprocket hub and
¢
¢
Fax = 0.34(1870 * 106)p(0.075)(0.10) = 14 980 kN
m = 0.34
396
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Example 9.2 
Continues

the shaft, and the sprocket then twists loose from the shaft after only a few hours of oper-
ation. You are asked to evaluate the cause of failure and recommend corrective action.
Information supplied for your use in as follows:
Both the shaft and hub are made of 1020 steel. The mounting diameter of
the hole is speciﬁed as 1.2500 inches and the mating shaft diameter is speciﬁed
as 1.2510 inches. Based on power and speed, the torque to be transmitted has
been calculated as 1250 in-lb. The outer diameter of the hub is 2.00 inches, and
hub length is 1.25 inches.
The project design engineer reports that he has used a factor of safety of two
on required torque transfer at the interference ﬁt, in calculating the speciﬁed di-
ametral interference 
inch, yet these galling failures are occurring.
Check the design engineer’s calculations, suggest possible causes of failure, and sug-
gest corrective actions.
Solution
To check the design engineer’s calculation, ﬁrst impose the safety factor of two on the
operational torque transfer requirement to ﬁnd the design value of friction torque as
The required interfacial pressure then is, using (8-38),
where coefﬁcient of friction 
has been taken as the “typical” value for lubricated
mild steel on mild steel, from Appendix Table A.1. Since shaft and hub are both made of
1020 steel, (9-45) gives required diametral interference 
as
(1)
Thus the design engineer’s speciﬁcation of 0.0010 in interference appears to be cor-
rect, giving a hole diameter of 1.2500 and shaft diameter of 1.2510.
Next, the hub stress levels may be checked by using (9-25) and (9-30) to give
and
Assuming that yielding is the governing failure mode, the yield strength for 1020 steel
may be read from Table 3.3 as
which gives a design stress, using a design safety factor of 2, of
Since the material is ductile, the distortion energy design equation (6-14) is appropri-
ate for investigating this biaxial state of stress. From (6-14), check to see if
1
23116,910 - {-7410}22 + 1-741022 + 116,910224 …
?
125,50022
sd = 51,000
2
= 25,500 psi
Syp = 51,000 psi
sth = c2.02 + 1.252
2.02 - 1.252 d7410 = 16,910 psi
srh = -7410 psi
¢ = 7410 ≥
4a1.25
2 b
30 * 106a1 - 1.252
2.02 b
¥ = 0.0010 inch
¢
m = 0.11
p =
2125002
10.112p11.252211.252
= 7410 psi
Tfd = 2112502 = 2500 in-lb
¢ = 0.0010
Design for Proper Interference 397

or, if
The condition is satisﬁed, so the hub stress levels are acceptable.
What then might be the reason for the ﬁeld failures? The potential inﬂuence of toler-
ances on the ﬁt is worth examining. The title block on the shaft and hub drawings includes
the following tolerance speciﬁcations:
Unless otherwise noted, dimensions are in inches and tolerances are:
.XX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.03
.XXX . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.005
.XXXX . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.0005
With these tolerances, the allowable ranges of hole and shaft diameters are found to
be
Examining diametral interference for the smallest shaft paired with the largest hole
gives the minimum potential interference as
and pairing the largest shaft with the smallest hole gives the maximum potential interfer-
ence as
Clearly, 
is unacceptable since no friction torque can be transferred under such
circumstances.
As a matter of further concern, the state of stress under maximum interference condi-
tions should be examined. For 
inch, adapting (1),
giving, from (9-29) and (9-30),
and
Substituting these values into the failure equation, check to see if
or if
The condition is not satisﬁed, so hub stress levels exceed design stress levels (and, in fact,
exceed yield strength levels as well). Consequently, 
inch is unacceptable
since yielding leads to loss of ﬁt and possible inability to transfer operating torques.
¢max = 0.0020
1.86 * 109 …
?
6.50 * 108
1
23133,820 - {-14,800}22 + 1-14,80022 + 133,820224 …
?
125,50022
sth = 33,820 psi
srh = -14,800 psi
p = 14,800 psi
¢max = 0.0020
¢min = 0
¢max = 1.2515 - 1.2495 = 0.0020 inch
¢min = 1.2505 - 1.2505 = 0.0000 inch
ds = 1.2515 to 1.2505  1shaft2
dh = 1.2495 to 1.2505  1hole2
;
;
;
4.66 *  108 …
?
6.5 * 108
398
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Example 9.3 
Continues

Summarizing, inadequate tolerance speciﬁcation in this application leads to the po-
tential for failure at both the minimum interference condition and the maximum interfer-
ence condition. Tighter tolerances are therefore recommended, in spite of increased
production costs.
Before making ﬁnal recommendations it would be well to explore potential effects of
other possible variables, including the range of operating temperatures (not likely to be a
problem since shaft and hub are the same material) and the validity of the value of friction
coefﬁcient used in the calculations.
Example 9.4 Feasibility of Using an Interference Fit to Transmit Torque
The initial shaft design developed in Example 8.1 is being considered for a slightly differ-
ent application in which SI units are to be used. A segment of the shaft is shown in Figure
E9.4. It has been suggested that an interference ﬁt be used to mount a 125-mm pitch diam-
eter, 20 involute, straight spur gear at location D of the shaft. A torque of 
is required to be transferred across the interference ﬁt. It has been determined that the pin-
ion can be approximated as a toothless disk of 1020 steel with a 118 mm outer diameter and
an axial length of 70 mm. Make a recommendation regarding the feasibility of using an in-
terference ﬁt if the coefﬁcient of friction is 
and a design safety factor of 1.5 is de-
sired.
Solution
Imposing a design safety factor of 1.5 on the torque means that the friction torque required
at D is
The required interfacial pressure may be determined from (8-38) as
From Appendix Table A.1, since the shaft and the hub are made of the same material, (9-49)
may be used to determine the diametral interference 
as
¢
p =
2Tfd
mpd2
slh
=
2(9000)
(0.11)p(0.080)2(0.070)
= 116 MPa
Tfd = 1.5(6000) = 9000 N-m
m = 0.11
T = 6000 N-m
Design for Proper Interference 399
D
dD = 80 mm
C
¢ = p
4a
Ec1 - aa
b b
2
d
= A116 * 106B
4(0.080/2)
207 * 109c1 - a0.080
0.118 b
2
d
= 0.000166 m = 0.166 mm
Figure E9.4
Segment of shaft being resized for export.

Calculating the stresses in the hub using (9-29) and (9-30) at the interface,
and   
Assuming that yielding is the governing failure mode, the yield strength of 1020 steel is
, which results in a design stress of 
Since the material is ductile, the distortional energy design equation (6-14) is appropriate
for investigating this biaxial state of stress. From (6-14) we check to see if
.
or if    
Since the expression is not satisﬁed, the stresses are too high and the minimum required
value of 
causes yielding of the hub and cannot be sustained.
One possibility of reducing the high stress might be to increase the outer diameter of
the toothless disk used to approximate the gear mounted at location D. Equations (9-29)
and (9-30) may be used along with 
to ﬁnd a new outer diameter for the gear
disk. Leaving the outside radius as an unknown, the stresses are expressed as
and
The failure criteria is then expressed as
This may be solved by iterating to determine 
, meaning that
In order to meet both the requirements of torque transfer and acceptable stress levels,
the pinion diameter would have to be about 190 mm, which is approximately 50% percent
larger than the original 125 mm diameter. Based on these calculations, the original shaft
may also experience similar problems and should also be checked. Whether the size in-
crease is acceptable or not must be carefully evaluated before proceeding.
do = 2r0 = 2(0.095) = 0.19 m = 190 mm
r0 L 0.095 m
L J
r 2
o + 0.0016
r 2
o - 0.0016 K
+ 1
M
2
+ 1 + J
r 2
o + 0.0016
r 2
o - 0.0016 K
2
… 2a245
116 b
2
sth = 116
J
r 2
o + (0.08>2)2
r 2
o - (0.080>2)2 K
srh = -116 MPa
sd = 245 MPa
¢ min = 0.166 mm
0.133 * 106 … 0.12 * 106
(313 - (-116))2 + (-116)2 + (313)2 … 2(245)2
(sth - srh)2 + s2
rh + s2
th … 2s2
d
sd =
Syp
nd
= 352
1.5 = 245 MPa
Syp = 352 MPa
sth = 116c(59)2 + (40)2
(59)2 - (40)2 d = 313 MPa
srh = -116 MPa
400
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
Example 9.4 
Continues
9-1. When stresses and strains in a machine element or a struc-
ture are investigated, analyses are based on either a “strength of
materials” approach or a “theory of elasticity” model. The the-
ory of elasticity model facilitates determining the distributions
of stresses and strains within the body rather than assuming the
distributions as required by the strength of materials approach.
List the basic relationships from elasticity theory needed to
determine the distributions of stresses and strains within elastic
solids subjected to externally applied forces and displacements.
9-2. Equations for stresses in thin-walled cylinders are less
complicated than equations for stresses in thick-walled cylin-
ders because of the validity of two simplifying assumptions
made when analyzing thin-walled cylinders. What are these two
assumptions?
Problems

Problems 401
9-3. a. A thin-walled cylindrical pressure vessel with closed ends
is to be subjected to an external pressure 
with an internal
pressure of zero. Starting with the generalized Hooke’s Law
equations, develop expressions for radial, transverse (hoop),
and longitudinal (axial) strain in the cylindrical vessel wall
as a function of pressure 
, diameter d, wall thickness t,
Young’s modulus E, and Poisson’s ratio .
b. Assume the vessel is made from AISI 1018 hot-
rolled steel [
, 
, 
,
, and 
] and if the external
pressure is 
. If the vessel has an outer diam-
eter of 125 mm, wall thickness of 6 mm, and length of
400 mm, determine if the vessel length increases or de-
creases and by how much. 
c. Determine if the vessel thickness changes (increase or
decrease) and by how much.
d. Would you predict yielding of the vessel wall? (Neglect
stress concentrations and clearly support your prediction
with appropriate calculations.)
9.4. A thin-walled, closed-end pressure vessel has an outer di-
ameter of 200 mm, a wall thickness of 10 mm, and length of
600 mm. The vessel is subjected to an internal pressure of 30
MPa and an external tensile axial force F. Assume the vessel is
made form a steel alloy with 
, 
,
, 
, and 
. Determine the
largest force F that can be applied before yielding occurs.
9-5. Based on the concepts utilized to derive expressions for
the stresses in the wall of a thin-walled cylindrical pressure ves-
sel, derive expressions for the stresses in the wall of a thin-
walled spherical pressure vessel.
9-6. A steel hydraulic cylinder, closed at the ends, has an inside
diameter of 3.00 inches and an outside diameter of 4.00 inches.
The cylinder is internally pressurized by an oil pressure of 2000
psi. Calculate (a) the maximum tangential stress in the cylinder
wall, (b) the maximum radial stress in the cylinder wall, and (c)
the maximum longitudinal stress in the cylinder wall.
9-7. A cylindrical pressure vessel made of AISI hot-rolled steel
plate is closed at the ends. The cylindrical wall has an outside di-
ameter of 12.0 inches and an inside diameter of 8.0 inches. The
vessel is internally pressurized to a gage pressure of 15,000 psi.
a. Determine, as accurately as you can, the magnitudes of
maximum radial stress, maximum tangential stress, and
maximum longitudinal stress in the cylindrical pressure
vessel wall.
b. Making the “usual” thin-walled assumptions, and using
a mean cylindrical wall diameter of 10.0 inches for your
calculations, again determine the magnitude of the maxi-
mum radial stress, the maximum tangential stress, and the
maximum longitudinal stress in the cylindrical pressure
vessel wall.
c. Compare results of (a) and (b) by calculating percent-
age errors as appropriate, and comment on the results of
your comparison.
e(50 mm) = 25%
E = 207 GPa
n = 0.30
Syp = 270 MPa
Su = 460 MPa
po = 20 MPa
e(50 mm) = 25%
E = 207 GPa
n = 0.30
Syp = 220 MPa
Su = 400 MPa
n
po
po
9.8. A closed end cylindrical pressure vessel made form AISI
1018 hot-rolled steel [
, 
,
, 
, and 
] has in inside
diameter of 200 mm and a wall thickness of 100 mm. It is re-
quired to operate with a design factor of safety of 
.
Determine the largest internal pressure that can be applied be-
fore yielding occurs.
9-9. Calculate the maximum tangential stress in the steel hub
of a press ﬁt assembly when pressed upon the mounting diam-
eter of a hollow steel shaft. The unassembled hub dimensions
are 3.0000 inches for the inside diameter and 4.00 inches for
the outside diameter, and the unassembled dimensions of the
shaft at the hub mounting site are 3.0300 inches outside diam-
eter and 2.00 inches for the inside diameter. Proceed by ﬁrst
calculating the interfacial pressure at the mating surfaces
caused by the press ﬁt, then calculating the hub tangential stress
caused by this pressure.
9.10. The hub of an aluminum [
, 
,
, 
] pulley has an inside diameter of 100 mm
and an outside diameter of 150 mm. It is pressed onto a 100.5-
mm-diameter hollow steel [
, 
,
, 
] shaft with an unknown inner diameter.
Determine the allowable inside diameter of the steel shaft assum-
ing a design factor of safety of 
9-11. In the design of a jet cargo aircraft, the tail stabilizer, a
horizontal ﬂight-control surface, is to be mounted high up on
the tail rudder structure, and is to be controlled by two actuator
units. The aft unit is to provide the major large-amplitude
movement, while the forward unit is to provide the trim action.
The forward actuator consists essentially of a power-screw (see
Chapter 12) driven by an electric motor, with, for dual-unit
safety purposes, an alternative drive consisting of a hydraulic
motor that can also drive the screw. In addition, a hand drive is
provided in case both the electric drive and the hydraulic drive
unit should fail.
The screw consists of a hollow tube of high-strength steel
with threads turned on the outer surface, and, for fail-safe dual-
load-path purposes, a titanium tube is to be shrink-ﬁtted inside
of the hollow steel tube. For preliminary design purposes, the
screw may be considered to be a tube of 4 inches inside diam-
eter and 
-inch wall thickness. The proposed titanium tube
would have a 4-inch nominal outside diameter and 1-inch-thick
wall. The tubes are to be assembled by the hot-and-cold shrink
assembly method. The linear coefﬁcient of thermal expansion
for the steel material is 
in/in/
, and the linear coef-
ﬁcient of thermal expansion for the titanium is 
in/
in/
.
a. Determine the actual dimensions at 70
that should be
speciﬁed if the diametral interference must never, at any
temperature within the expected range, be less than 0.002
inch. Expected temperatures range between the extremes
of 
and 
. Also, the steel tube must not exceed
a tangential stress level of 120,000 psi at either tempera-
ture extreme.
145°F
-60°F
°F
°F
3.9 * 10-6
°F
6.5 * 10-6
12
nd = 1.25
E = 207 GPa
n = 0.30
Syp = 350 MPa
Su = 420 MPa
E = 71 GPa
n = 0.33
Syp = 76 MPa
Su = 186 MPa
nd = 2.5
e(50 mm) = 25%
E = 207 GPa
n = 0.30
Syp = 220 MPa
Su = 400 MPa

402
Chapter 9 / Pressurized Cylinders; Interference Fits
b. Determine the temperature to which the screw must be
heated for assembly purposes if the titanium tube is cooled
by liquid nitrogen to 
, and if the diametral clear-
ance between tubes for assembly purposes should be about
0.005 inch.
9-12. A component in a machine used to assure quality control
consists of several disks mounted to a shaft. As parts pass un-
der the disks, the acceptable parts pass through, while the un-
acceptable parts do not. The disks themselves are subject to
wear and require frequent replacement. Replacement time has
typically been a lengthy process which affects productivity. In
order to decrease replacement time you have been asked to in-
vestigate the feasibility of a “quick change” shaft in which the
disks are slid onto a shaft, which is then subjected to internal
pressure, causing it to expand and create a tight ﬁt with the disk.
The disk is required to support a friction torque of 100 N-m.
The disks are made of brass [
, 
,
, 
] and the shaft is made of aluminum
[
, 
, 
, 
]. The
hub of the brass disks have an inside diameter of 25 mm and an
outside diameter of 50 mm, and a hub length of 25 mm. We ini-
tially assume a coefﬁcient of friction between brass and alu-
minum to be 
and an outside shaft diameter of 24.5
mm. Perform a “ﬁrst pass” assessment of the feasibility of this
design idea.
9-13. A steel gear is to be shrink-ﬁtted over a mounting diam-
eter on a solid steel shaft, and its hub abutted against a shoulder
to provide axial location. The gear hub has a nominal inside di-
ameter of 
inches and a nominal outer diameter of 3 inches.
The nominal shaft diameter is 
inches. To transmit the
torque, it has been estimated that a class FN5 force ﬁt (see
Table 6.7) will be required. Stresses in the hub must not exceed
the yield strength of the hub material, and a design safety fac-
tor of at least 2, based on yielding, is desired.
Two ductile candidate steel materials have been proposed
for the gear: AISI 1095 steel quenched and drawn to a hardness
of Rockwell C 42, and AISI 4620 hot-rolled steel (with case-
hardened teeth). Evaluate these two materials for the proposed
application, and decide which material to recommended (see
Table 3.3).
9-14. A steel gear has a hub with a nominal bore diame-
ter of 1.0 inch, outer hub diameter of 2.0 inches, and hub
112
112
m = 0.25
E = 71 GPa
n = 0.33
Syp = 76 MPa
Su = 186 MPa
E = 105 GPa
n = 0.35
Syp = 414 MPa
Su = 510 MPa
-310°F
length of 1.5 inches. It is being proposed to mount the gear on
a steel shaft of 1.0-inch diameter using a class FN4 force ﬁt
(see Table 6.7).
a. Determine the maximum tangential and radial stresses
in the hub and the shaft for the condition of loosest ﬁt.
b. Determine the maximum tangential and radial stresses
in the hub and the shaft for the condition of tightest ﬁt.
c. Estimate the maximum torque that could be transmitted
across the press ﬁt connection before slippage would occur
between the gear and the shaft.
9-15. The 60-mm-long hub of a steel [
,
, 
, 
] pulley has a rectan-
gular strain gauge rosette applied. Strain gauges A and C are
perpendicular and gauge B is at 
to the other two gauges, as
illustrated in Figure P9.15. The outside diameter of the hub is
50 mm and the inside diameter is 25 mm. Each strain gauge is
zeroed prior to the pulley being press ﬁt to the shaft. The pulley
is ﬁt onto a solid steel shaft made from the same material as
the pulley with a diametral interference of 
.
Determine the strains indicated by each strain gauge after the
shaft and pulley are assembled. 
¢ = 0.04 mm
45o
E = 207 GPa
n = 0.30
Syp = 350 MPa
Su = 420 MPa
50 mm
25 mm
60 mm
A
B
C
Figure P 9.15
Strain gauge location of aluminum pulley mounted to a
steel shaft.

Plain Bearings and Lubrication
Chapter 10
403
10.1 Types of Bearings
Bearings are machine elements that permit directed relative motion between two parts,
while transmitting forces from one part to the other without allowing motion in the direc-
tion of the applied loads. For example, each of the shafting applications shown in Figure
8.1 requires a set of bearings to stably support the shaft and its applied loads, while at the
same time permitting the shaft to rotate freely. The applied loads on a shaft are typically
generated by shaft-mounted gears, belts, chain drives, ﬂywheels, or other specialized ele-
ments. Every mechanical device with moving parts requires at least one bearing of some
type to permit the desired relative motion while providing the necessary constraints and
load-carrying capability.
All bearings may be broadly classiﬁed as one of two types:
1.
Plain (sliding) bearings
2.
Rolling element (antifriction) bearings
Plain bearings, characterized by the sliding of one moving surface upon another, are dis-
cussed in detail in the following sections of this chapter. Rolling element bearings, char-
acterized by interposed elements such as balls or rollers between the moving surfaces, are
discussed in Chapter 11.
10.2 Uses and Characteristics of Plain Bearings
Plain bearing applications include reciprocating sliders, rotating or oscillating cylindrical
members sliding in annular sleeves, and rotating or rotationally oscillating disks sliding on
mating disks. These various types of plain bearings are illustrated conceptually in Figure
10.1. Advantages of plain bearings over rolling element bearings, when properly designed,
include:1
1.
Lower ﬁrst cost
2.
Simple design of both shaft and housing
3.
Small radial space required
4.
Quiet operation
5.
Not very sensitive to dust or grit
1For advantages of rolling element bearings, see Chapter 11.

6.
Less subject to fatigue failure
7.
Less subject to fretting fatigue failure when small-amplitude, cyclic, relative motion
is involved
8.
Relatively lightweight
9.
Easy to replace
Most plain bearing applications involve the use of a lubricant at the sliding interface
to reduce frictional drag and power loss, support the transmitted load (sometimes), and
help dissipate the heat generated. In fact, plain bearings are usually subclassiﬁed with re-
spect to the types of lubricating conditions that prevail at the sliding interface. As dis-
cussed in detail in 10.5, plain bearing lubrication categories include hydrodynamic
lubrication, boundary lubrication, hydrostatic lubrication, and solid ﬁlm lubrication.
10.3 Potential Failure Modes
Depending upon the speciﬁc application, the character of the relative sliding motion, the
type of lubrication regime at the sliding interface, and the environment, plain bearings may
be vulnerable to failure by several possible modes. From the list of possible failure modes
described in 2.3, plain bearing failure might occur by yielding, corrosion, adhesive wear,
abrasive wear, corrosive wear, surface fatigue wear, fretting wear, creep, or galling and
seizure. For example, if the radial bearing loads are high on a journal and sleeve type of
plain bearing, especially when at rest, signiﬁcant yielding might possibly occur at the con-
tact site (see discussion of Hertz contact stresses in 4.6). Acid formation during oxidation
of a lubricant, or outside contamination, may induce unacceptable corrosion of bearing
surfaces. If the lubricant ﬁlm is so thin that metal-to-metal contact occurs at the bearing
interface (often the case during initial startup), adhesive wear may damage the bearing sur-
faces. Foreign particles from the operating environment, or oxidized wear particles, may
produce damaging abrasive wear that could, in serious cases, result in galling and seizure.
Depending upon the materials used, the corresponding friction-generated heating at the
bearing interface, and the heat dissipation capability of the design conﬁguration, resulting
elevated temperatures could induce failures such as creep, lubricant breakdown, or unac-
ceptable temperature-induced changes in dimensions or clearances. If loads or relative
404
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
(c)
Load (constrained
to move vertically)
Rotary lift screw
(threads into load)
Rotary sliding
thrust bearing
Thrust bearing
(b) Rotary bearing
(a) Reciprocating slider bearing
Journal (shaft)
Sleeve
(bushing,
bearing)
Fixed


Fixed
Fixed
Reciprocating
sliding
Rotary
sliding
Figure 10.1
Conceptual sketches of
various types of plain
bearings.

sliding motions are cyclic, and the sliding amplitudes are small, surface fatigue wear or
fretting wear may damage the mating surfaces, ultimately leading to failure.
10.4 Plain Bearing Materials
Keeping in mind the potential failure modes highlighted in 10.3, and the material selec-
tion guidelines of Chapter 3, candidate material pairs for plain bearings should have, in
the aggregate, adequate compressive strength, good fatigue strength, low shear strength
(to facilitate smoothing of surface asperities), low elastic modulus (to accommodate mis-
alignment and deﬂection), good ductility and low hardness (to promote embedding of
small abrasive foreign particles), high thermal conductivity (to dissipate friction-induced
heat), and compatible thermal expansion coefﬁcients (to minimize binding due to differ-
ential thermal expansion). Under most circumstances, a bearing pair consists of a hard
material, such as a steel shaft, sliding against a soft, ductile material, such as a bronze
sleeve (often regarded as a replaceable wear element).
Shafting material selection was discussed in 8.3. Materials typically used for the softer
wear element include bronze bearing alloys (e.g. leaded bronze, tin bronze, aluminum
bronze, beryllium copper), babbitt metal (lead based, tin based), sintered porous metals
(bronze, tin, aluminum), and self-lubricating nonmetallic materials (teﬂon, nylon, acetal,
phenolic, or polycarbonate, any of which may be ﬁlled with graphite or molybdenum
disulﬁde). Silver is occasionally used as a bearing surface, usually as a very thin layer
plated on a higher-strength substrate. In special applications, such as for water-immersed
bearings, ﬂuted rubber or other elastomers are sometimes chosen.
10.5 Lubrication Concepts
Ideally, lubrication of plain bearings involves supplying a sufﬁcient quantity of clean, un-
contaminated lubricant (usually oil) to the sliding interface in the hope of separating the
two rubbing surfaces enough so that no asperity contacts occur during operation. If the lu-
bricated bearing system is able to operate under the applied loads with no asperity contacts
between the two moving surfaces, the lubricant (oil) ﬁlm is called a thick ﬁlm or a full ﬁlm.
If asperities of one surface do contact asperities of the other surface through the lubricant
ﬁlm, it is called a thin ﬁlm or a partial ﬁlm. If circumstances are such that no lubricant at
all can ﬁnd its way into the contacting interface, a zero ﬁlm condition is said to exist.
If a thick ﬁlm can be developed and maintained during the operation of a bearing, no
wear is expected. For this case, the predicted bearing life would be inﬁnite (at least, very
long). In practice, even when a bearing system is designed for thick ﬁlm operation, peri-
ods of thin ﬁlm (or zero ﬁlm) operation may exist. For example, when a shaft ﬁrst starts to
rotate from rest, or when periodic high load peaks occur, a brief thin ﬁlm event nearly al-
ways occurs. Under thin ﬁlm conditions bearing damage usually occurs, and bearing life
is usually shortened.
The lubricant ﬁlm between two sliding bearing surfaces may be developed either by
providing a sufﬁcient quantity of externally pressurized lubricant to the interface, so that
the surfaces separate, or by taking advantage of the viscous2 character of the oil, the rela-
tive motion of the surfaces, and the geometry of the interface to produce pressure locally
that can separate the surfaces. When externally pressurized lubrication is utilized, no relative
Lubrication Concepts 405
2Viscous ﬂuids exhibit a resistance to shear; hence, in this application, the oil is “dragged’’ into the interfacial
region by the relative motion (see 10.7).

motion is required to separate the surfaces, and the bearing is classiﬁed as hydrostatic.
When a viscous lubricant is “pumped” into the wedge-shaped zone of a journal bearing by
the rotating shaft (see Figure 10.5), the bearing is classiﬁed as hydrodynamic.
A special subcategory of hydrodynamic lubrication, called elastohydrodynamic lubri-
cation, or squeeze ﬁlm lubrication, has been recognized in recent years as an important
phenomenon. The potential for elastohydrodynamic lubrication exists when highly loaded,
nonconforming, lubricated surfaces, such as rolling element bearings, gear teeth, or cams,
pass through zones of rolling contact. In these circumstances, the lubricated surfaces rap-
idly approach each other to “squeeze” the lubricant ﬁlm. Due to the extremely high pres-
sures generated in the squeezed ﬁlm, elastic deformations of the bearing surfaces may
become signiﬁcant, and sometimes the effective oil viscosity increases in the region of
contact by as much as 20 orders of magnitude. For such cases, asperity contacts through
the oil ﬁlm may not occur.3
If a plain bearing has a surface area that is too small or too rough, or if the relative ve-
locity is too low, or if the volume of lubricant supplied is too small, or if temperatures in-
crease too much (so that viscosity is lowered too much), or if loads become too high,
asperity contacts may be induced. In this case, load sharing between the solid asperity con-
tact sites and the pressurized lubricant ﬁlm may change the lubrication behavior signiﬁ-
cantly. Such a lubrication scenario is often referred to as boundary lubrication.
An additional lubrication category, solid ﬁlm lubrication, is usually designated for
cases where dry lubricants, such as graphite or molybdenum disulﬁde, or self-lubricating
polymers, such as Teﬂon or nylon, are used.
10.6 Boundary-Lubricated Bearing Design
If loads are light, it is often possible to utilize a simple, low-cost, boundary-lubricated
bearing to meet design requirements. Electric motor shaft bearings, ofﬁce machinery bear-
ings, electric fan bearings, power screw support bearings, and home appliance bearings are
examples of successful boundary-lubricated bearing designs. The lubricant in such cases
may be supplied by hand oilers, drip or wick oilers, grease ﬁttings, oil-impregnated
porous-metal bearings, graphite- or molybdenum disulﬁde–impregnated (or ﬁlled) bear-
ings, or self-lubricated polymeric bearings.
Design of boundary lubricated bearings is largely an empirical process based on doc-
umented user experience. The primary design parameters are unit bearing load , sliding
velocity 
and operating temperature 
at the sliding interface. Conceptually, the equi-
librium operating temperature may be calculated by equating the heat generated per unit
time at the sliding interface to the heat dissipated per unit time to the surroundings (by con-
duction, convection, and/or radiation), then solving for the temperature rise 
at the slid-
ing interface. As a practical matter, wide variations in conﬁguration and operating
conditions make estimating the heat dissipation extremely complex, and nearly impossible
to reduce to a simple procedure. The heat balance equation takes the general form
(10-1)
From this, it may be observed that the PV product serves as an index to temperature rise
at the sliding interface, and it is widely used as a design parameter for boundary-lubricated
bearings. Table 10.1 lists experience-based design-limiting values of PV for many materi-
als, along with design-limiting values for P, V, and 
. For an acceptable bearing design
™
¢™= f 1geometry, material, friction coefficient21PV2
¢™
™
V,
P
406
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
3See, for example, ref. 9.

conﬁguration, operating values of P, V, and PV must all be less than the limiting values
shown in Table 10.1. The parameters P, V, and PV may be calculated as
(10-2)
(10-3a)
or
(10-3b)
and
(10-4)
The unusual mixed units for 
have become traditional. Variables in (10-2), (10-3), and
(10-4) are deﬁned as follows:
N = journal speed relative to sleeve, rpm
L = sleeve length, inches
d = journal diameter, inches
W = total radial bearing load, lb
PV
PV = 1P21V2 psi-ft
min
= pd
12 a w
2pbf = wfd
24
ft
min
Vosc = average sliding velocity for oscillatory motion 
Vcont = sliding velocity for continuous motion = pdN
12
ft
min
P =
bearing load
projected area = W
dL psi
Boundary-Lubricated Bearing Design 407
Table 10.1 Design Limits for Boundary-Lubricated Bearings Operating in Contact with Steel
Shafts (Journals)1
Max. Allowable
Approx. Max.
Bearing Sleeve
Max. Allowable
Sliding Velocity
Max. Allowable 
Allowable Op.
Material
Unit Load, Pmax
Load, Vmax
Product (PV)max
Temp.2
ksi
MPa
ft/min
m/min
ksi-ft/min
MPa-m/min
F
C
Porous bronze
2.0
13.8
1200
365.8
50
105.1
450
232.2
Porous lead-bronze
0.8
5.5
1500
457.2
60
126.1
450
232.2
Porous iron
3.0
20.7
400
121.9
30
63.0
450
232.2
Porous bronze-iron
2.5
17.2
800
243.8
35
73.6
450
232.2
Porous lead-iron
1.0
6.9
800
243.8
50
105.1
450
232.2
Aluminum
2.0
13.8
1200
365.8
50
105.1
250
120.8
Phenolics
6.0
41.4
2500
762.0
15
31.5
200
93.2
Nylon
2.0
13.8
600
182.9
3
6.3
200
93.2
Teﬂon
0.5
3.5
50
15.2
1
2.1
500
259.9
Filled Teﬂon
2.5
17.2
1000
304.8
10
21.0
500
259.9
Teﬂon fabric
60.0
413.7
150
45.7
25
52.5
500
259.9
Polycarbonate
1.0
6.9
1000
304.8
3
6.3
220
104.3
Acetal
2.0
13.8
600
182.9
3
6.3
200
93.2
Carbon-Graphite
0.6
4.1
2500
762.0
15
31.5
750
398.8
Rubber
0.05
0.34
4000
1219.2
—
—
150
65.4
Wood
2.0
13.8
2000
609.6
12
25.2
160
71
1See ref. 1.
2If lubricant breakdown temperature is lower, it should be used as limiting temperature.
™max

One preliminary design procedure that may be utilized to initially size a boundary-
lubricated plain bearing is:
1.
Calculate the journal (shaft) diameter d using a strength-based analysis
2.
Find the resultant radial bearing load W by performing a system force analysis
3.
Select tentative materials for journal and sleeve
4.
Calculate sliding velocity V from (10-3), and compare to 
from Table 10.1. If
, redesign is required
5.
For selected materials ﬁnd limiting value 
from Table 10.1
6.
Using results of steps 4 and 5, calculate P and compare to 
from Table 10.1. If
, redesign is required
7.
Using the result of step 6, and known values of W and d, calculate L from (10-2)
8.
It is useful to observe that most successful bearing conﬁgurations have length/diameter
ratios in the range
(10-5)
If the result of step 7 lies within this range, the preliminary design is complete. If it
does not lie within the range, a design decision must be made as to whether additional
redesign is required.
Meeting all of the criteria just discussed is typically an iterative process, and, at best,
provides only a preliminary design conﬁguration. Experimental veriﬁcation of any new
design for a boundary-lubricated bearing application is recommended.
Example 10.1 Preliminary Design of a Boundary-Lubricated Plain Bearing
From a strength-based analysis, the shaft diameter has at one of the bearing sites has been
found to be 20 mm. The resultant radial load on this bearing was found to be 16 kN, the
axial load zero, and the shaft rotates at 150 rpm. No torque is transmitted through this por-
tion of the shaft. The shaft is to be made of 1020 hot-rolled steel.
It is desired to design a plain bearing for this location. A porous metal sleeve im-
pregnated with oil is the ﬁrst choice of management since low cost and low maintenance
have been included as requirements in the design speciﬁcation. Conduct a preliminary
design investigation of the feasibility of using such a bearing in this application and, if
necessary, propose alternatives.
Solution
Since this is a case of continuous rotation, the sliding velocity V may be calculated from
(10-3a) as
This is well within the limiting 
(from Table 10.1) for a porous bronze
sleeve. Also from Table 10.1, for a porous bronze sleeve
From (10-4)
P = 105.1
9.4
= 11.1 MPa
PVmax = 105.1 MPa-m/min
Vmax = 365.8 m/min
Vcont = pdN = p(0.020)(150) = 9.4 m/min
1
2 … L
d … 2
P 7 Pmax
Pmax
1PV2max
V 7 Vmax
Vmax
f = oscillating frequency, osc/min
w = total angle swept each oscillation, rad
408
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications

This is below the limiting unit load 
(from Table 10.1) for a porous
bronze sleeve and therefore acceptable. Finally, from (11-2)
From this, the 
ratio is 
.This value for 
is well outside the rec-
ommended range deﬁned by (10-5). To adjust the sleeve conﬁguration, the upper bound
may be selected using (10-5), to give 
, which results in a new shaft diameter of
. Using this shaft diameter, the new unit load P, velocity V, and 
product are
These are all below the maximum allowable values given in Table 10.1 for porous bronze.
The preliminary design may be summarized as follows:
1.
Increase the local shaft diameter at this bearing site to approximately 
.
2.
Make the bearing length at this location approximately 
.
3.
Make the bearing sleeve of porous bronze, oil impregnated.
10.7 Hydrodynamic Bearing Design
In contrast to the design of boundary-lubricated bearings, as just discussed, hydrodynam-
ically lubricated bearings depend upon the development of a thick ﬁlm of lubricant be-
tween the journal and the sleeve so that surface asperities do not make contact through the
ﬂuid ﬁlm. Since there is no asperity contact in ideal hydrodynamic lubrication, the mate-
rial properties of the journal and the sleeve become relatively unimportant, but the proper-
ties of the lubricant in the clearance space between the journal and sleeve become very
important.4 Discussion of lubricant properties and their measurement and detailed devel-
opment of hydrodynamic lubrication theory are readily available in a wide variety of text-
books.5 Only the essential concepts needed for the design of hydrodynamic bearings will
be included here.
Ultimately, the basic objectives of the designer are to choose the bearing diameter and
length, specify the surface roughness and clearance requirements between journal and
sleeve, and determine acceptable lubricant properties and ﬂow rates that will assure sup-
port of speciﬁed design loads and minimize frictional drag. The ﬁnal design speciﬁcations
must also produce an acceptable design life without premature failure, while meeting cost,
weight, and space envelope requirements.
L = 72 mm
d = 36 mm
PV = 6.2(15.1) = 93.6 MPa-m/min
Vcont = p(0.032)(150) = 15.1 m/min
P =
16 000
(0.036)(0.072) = 6.2 MPa
PV
d = 72>2 = 36 mm
L>d = 2
L>d
L>d = 72>20 = 3.6
L>d
L = W
Pd =
16 000
A11.1 * 106B(0.020)
= 0.072 m = 72 mm
Pmax = 13.8 MPa
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 409
4However, for nonconforming bearing surfaces, such as rolling element bearings, cams, and meshing gear
teeth, elastohydrodynamic lubrication sometimes prevails. For elastohydrodynamic lubrication, the elastic 
deformations (hence, the material properties) of the lubricated surfaces become signiﬁcant, in addition to the
properties of the lubricant ﬁlm.
5See, for example, refs. 2, 3, 4, or 5.

Lubricant Properties
A lubricant is any substance that tends to separate the sliding surfaces, reduce friction and
wear, remove friction-generated heat, enhance smooth operation, and provide an accept-
able operating lifetime for bearings, gears, cams, or other sliding machine elements. Most
lubricants are liquids (e.g., petroleum-based mineral oils), but may be solids or gasses.
Additives are often used to tailor lubricating oils to speciﬁc applications by retarding oxi-
dation, dispersing contaminants, improving viscosity, or modifying the pour point.6
The lubricant property of greatest importance in designing hydrodynamically lubri-
cated bearings is absolute (dynamic) viscosity
, usually just called viscosity. Viscosity is
a measure of the internal shear resistance of a ﬂuid (analogous to shear modulus of elas-
ticity for a solid). When a layer of ﬂuid is interposed between a solid ﬂat plate moving with
steady velocity U, and a ﬁxed ﬂat plate, as illustrated in Figure 10.2, experimental results
indicate that when the rate of shear 
is plotted versus applied shearing stress , curves
of different shapes result for different lubricants. If a resulting curve is linear, the ﬂuid
is said to be Newtonian (most lubricating oils are Newtonian). Based on Figure 10.2,
Newtonian behavior may be modeled as
(10-6)
The viscosity 
fully characterizes a Newtonian ﬂuid, and is a constant for any ﬁxed
combination of temperature and pressure. Typically, changes in viscosity for lubricating
oils are negligibly small with pressure change, but very signiﬁcant with temperature
change. Figure 10.3 shows a widely published plot of viscosity as a function of tempera-
ture for several standard SAE (Society of Automotive Engineers) numbered oils.7
Loading, Friction, and Lubricant Flow Relationships
The viscous drag equation (10-6) for the case of parallel ﬂat plates may be adapted to the
hypothetical case of a cylindrical journal under no load, rotating concentrically within a
bearing sleeve. This is accomplished, conceptually, by “wrapping” the plates into a cylin-
drical geometry for which the moving plate becomes the rotating journal, the ﬁxed plate
h
t = shearing stress, psi
A = area of moving plate in contact with oil film, in2
h = lubricant film thickness, in
U = steady velocity of the moving plate, in/sec
h = viscosity of the lubricant, lb-sec/in2 1reyns2
where  F = friction force, lb
t = F
A = h du
dy = h U
h
t
du>dy
h
410
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
y
A
F
h
x
u = 0
u = U
y
u
Figure 10.2
Illustration of linear velocity gradient across
the ﬁlm thickness in a Newtonian ﬂuid layer
between parallel ﬂat plates.
6The temperature at which an oil will just start to ﬂow under prescribed conditions.
7From ref. 6.

becomes the ﬁxed sleeve, and the ﬁlm thickness 
becomes the uniform oil-ﬁlled radial
clearance , as illustrated in Figure 10.4. If the resulting journal has diameter 
and
length , the ﬁlm contact area 
becomes
(10-7)
Substituting (10-7) and 
into (10-6), and solving for F, gives
(10-8)
where F is the tangential friction force. If the tangential friction force per unit bearing
length is deﬁned as 
, (10-8) may be rewritten as
(10-9)
This equation, known as Petroff’s equation, while valid only for the hypothetical case of
zero radial load and zero eccentricity (see Figure 10.9), establishes two important dimen-
sionless parameters useful in bearing design.
a F1
hUb a c
r b = 2p
F1 = F>L
F = 2pLhUr
c
h = c
A = pdL = 2prL
A
L
d = 2r
c
h
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 411
Oil temperature, o,F
30
50
100
150
250
300
200
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
10
2
3
4
5
102
2
3
5
2
3
5
103
104
60
50
30
40
20
10
SAE 70
Recommended
maximum oil
temperature, (o)max
Absolute viscosity, , rehns (1 rehn = 10–6 rehns = 10–6 lb-sec/in2)
Note: 1 rehn = 6895 Pa-s
5W
Figure 10.3
Viscosity as a function of tempera-
ture for several SAE numbered
oils. (From ref. 6.)
c
r
T = Fr
Viscous
oil film
L
U = 2rn
Figure 10.4
Illustration of viscous fric-
tion torque for nonloaded
concentric journal bear-
ing (Petroff’s analysis).

Early experiments by Tower8 revealed that loaded hydrodynamic journal bearings ex-
perience a pressure buildup within the lubricant ﬁlm when the journal is rotating, and that
the average pressure multiplied times the projected bearing area is equal to the supported
bearing load.
Tower’s experimental results were analyzed by Reynolds9 under the assumption that
the rotating journal tends to move the viscous ﬂuid into a narrow wedge-shaped zone of
lubricant10 between the journal and sleeve, as depicted in Figure 10.5(c). The development
of the wedge-shaped zone is depicted by the sequence of events shown in Figure 10.5.
First, the journal is shown at rest, and in metal-to-metal contact with the sleeve. Next, as
the journal starts to rotate, it climbs up the sleeve surface, sustained for a while by dry fric-
tion. Finally, the journal slips back, shifts center position, and reaches a new equilibrium
position associated with the operating conditions for the application. When running at
equilibrium, a wedge-shaped zone of oil with a ﬁlm thickness of 
at its apex is estab-
lished, as shown in Figure 10.5(c). To write equilibrium equations for an elemental vol-
ume of oil in the wedge-shaped zone dx-dy-dz, the forces on the element may be expressed
as shown in Figure 10.5(d). The resulting differential equation of equilibrium reduces to
(10-10)
This equation was ﬁrst developed by Reynolds11 using the following assumptions:12
1.
The lubricant is a Newtonian ﬂuid
2.
Inertia forces produced by the moving ﬂuid are negligible
3.
The lubricant is an incompressible ﬂuid
4.
The lubricant viscosity is constant throughout the ﬂuid ﬁlm
5.
There is no pressure variation in the axial direction
6.
There is no lubricant ﬂow in the axial direction
dp
dx = 0t
0y
h0
412
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
u = 0
u = –U
 + 
t
dxdz
pdydz
dxdz
dy
p + p
x
dydz
dx
W
W
W
ho
n
e
1
1
2
2
(a) At rest
(b) Starting
(c) Running
(d) Enlarged view of elemental cube
dxdydz in viscous lubricant film
x
y
z
Figure 10.5
Schematic sketch showing relative position change of shaft in the sleeve, starting from rest and increasing to steady-state
rotational speed.
8See ref. 7.
9See ref. 8.
10A lubricant ﬁlm between two parallel ﬂat plates, or two concentric cylindrical surfaces, will not support a
bearing load. To support a load, the plates must be slightly nonparallel, or the journal center must be slightly
eccentric with respect to the sleeve to form a wedge-shaped zone. See ref. 6.
11See ref. 8.
12See ref. 2, pp. 32 ff, or ref. 10, pp. 487 ff.

7.
The ﬁlm pressure is constant in the -direction (pressure is a function of only)
8.
Lubricant particle velocity is a function of and only (no side ﬂow)
Using these assumptions, (10-10) may be integrated, evaluating constants of integra-
tion by imposing appropriate boundary conditions, to yield the expression
(10-11)
This differential equation is known as the classical Reynolds equation for one-
dimensional ﬂow, neglecting side leakage. In a similar development, Reynolds utilized a
reduced form of the general Navier-Stokes equations13 to derive a differential equation,
similar to (10-11), that does include the side leakage in the -direction. This equation is
(10-12)
Other than for the case of a journal bearing of inﬁnite length, analytical solutions of
(10-12) have not been found. Various approximate solutions have been developed, includ-
ing an important solution by Sommerfeld14 and a computer-based ﬁnite difference solution
by Raimondi and Boyd.15 Selected results plotted from reference 6 are included here as
Figures 10.6 through 10.14. These plots will be used as the basis for hydrodynamic bear-
ing design in this textbook. Data are included here only for 
full journal bearings and
partial bearings. Additional data for 
and 
partial bearings may be found in
reference 6. The design curves in Figures 10.6 through 10.14 are plotted for 
ratios
(length/diameter ratios) of 
, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.25, and take into account the possibility that
rupture of the lubricant ﬁlm may occur due to subatmospheric pressure developed in cer-
tain portions of the ﬁlm.
If values of any of the load functions, friction functions, or flow functions plotted in
Figures 10.6 through 10.14 are desired for 
ratios other than the four plotted, the
following interpolation equation may be used for any value 
of 
between 
and 
.16
(10-13)
where 
, 
, 
, and 
are the values of the function read from the pertinent plot for
ratios of 
, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.25, respectively. The various functions in Figures 10.6
through 10.14 are plotted versus the eccentricity ratio , where
(10-14)
and
eccentricity (see Figure 10.5)
radial thickness of uniform oil-ﬁlled clearance space between concentric journal
and sleeve
c =
e =
e = e
c
e
q
L>d
f0.25
f0.5
f1.0
fq
  - 1
4a1 - L
d b a1 - 4L
d b f0.5 + 1
24a1 - L
d b a1 - 2L
d b f0.252d
fi =
1
aL
d b
3 c -1
8a1 - L
d b a1 - 2L
d b a1 - 4L
d b fq + 1
3 a1 - 2L
d b a1 - 4L
d b f1.0
q
14
L>d
i
L>d
q
L>d
60°
120°
180°
360°
0
0x ah3
h
0p
0x b -
0
0z ah3
h
0p
0z b = -6U 0h
0x
z
d
dxah3
h
dp
dx b = -6Udh
dx
y
x
x
y
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 413
13See for example, ref. 11.
14See ref. 12.
15See ref. 6.
16See ref. 6.

The load function 
and friction function 
in Figures 10.6 through 10.9 may be
plotted in terms of basic bearing design parameters, or, alternatively, in terms of the
Sommerfeld Number, S, also called bearing characteristic number, where
(10-15)
with
L = bearing length, in
W = radial bearing load, lb
P =
W
2rL = unit bearing load, psi
n = journal rotational speed, rev/sec
h = viscosity, rehns
c = uniform radial clearance, in
r = journal radius, in
S = a r
cb
2hn
P
fF1
fW1
414
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
fW1 = load function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
W1
U
c
r
2
1
S
=
L
d = ∞
1.0
0.5
0.25
Figure 10.6
Load characteristics of 180º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)
fW1 = load function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
W1
U
c
r
2
1
S
=
L
d = ∞
1.0
0.5
0.25
Figure 10.7
Load characteristics of 360º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)

For design purposes, 
and 
are more conveniently deﬁned in terms of basic bear-
ing parameters; hence they will be used here in the form
(10-16)
and
(10-17)
The relationship between eccentricity ratio 
and Sommerfeld Number S is shown in
Figure 10.14 for 
journal bearings. An optimal design region is deﬁned in Figure 10.14
360°
e
F = tangential friction force, lb
F1 = F>L = tangential friction force per unit length, lb/in
U = 2prn = relative surface speed, in/sec
where  W1 = W>L = bearing load per unit length, lb/in
fF1 = F1
hUac
r b
fW1 = W1
hUac
r b
2
fF1
fW1
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 415
fF1 = friction function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0
3.0
2.0
5.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
60.0
50.0
40.0
80.0
100.0
F1
U
c
r

S
=
r
c
L
d = ∞
0.25
1.0
0.5
Figure 10.8
Friction characteristics of 180º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)
fF1 = friction function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0
3.0
2.0
5.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
60.0
50.0
40.0
80.0
100.0
F1
U
c
r

S
=
r
c
L
d = ∞
0.25
Petroff
solution
1.0
0.5
Figure 10.9
Friction characteristics of 360º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)

between a minimum friction loss boundary (left boundary) and a maximum load capacity
boundary (right boundary). Depending upon the priorities in a speciﬁc application, and for
a particular length-to-diameter ratio, the eccentricity ratio for minimum friction loss, 
,
may be read from the chart, as well as the eccentricity ratio for maximum load-carrying
capacity, 
. An optimal value of eccentricity ratio may then be chosen (between
and 
), depending upon the relative importance of low friction loss compared
to maximum load capacity.
Thermal Equilibrium and Oil Film Temperature Rise
Because lubricant viscosity changes signiﬁcantly with temperature, and because most com-
monly used mineral oils tend to break down rapidly above about 
, it is important to
be able to estimate oil ﬁlm temperature 
at equilibrium operating conditions. Although
external cooling coils may be used in demanding applications, it is more usual for a bear-
ing to be “self-cooling,” dissipating its friction-generated heat to the ambient air, primarily
by convection from the exposed metal surface area of the bearing (and sump) housing.
Under equilibrium operating conditions, the rate at which heat is generated by ﬂuid
friction drag within the rotating bearing must be equal to the rate at which heat is dissi-
pated to the ambient atmosphere. The equilibrium oil ﬁlm temperature at which this bal-
ance is reached must be satisfactory in terms of both equilibrium viscosity and limiting
maximum oil temperature. It is relatively easy to estimate the friction-generated heating
rate, but accurate estimation of the heat dissipation rate is difﬁcult, and the results are
™o
180°F
emax-load
emin-fr
emax-load
emin-fr
416
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
0
fQ = total flow function = 
Eccentricity ratio = 
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
0.5
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Q
rcnL
1.0
0.25
0.5
L
d = ∞
Figure 10.10
Total ﬂow characteristics of 180º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)
fQ = total flow function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
Q
rcnL
L
d = ∞
0.25
1.0
0.5
Figure 10.11
Total ﬂow characteristics of 360º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)

Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 417
fQs = side flow function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Qs
Q
L
d = ∞
0.25
1.0
0.5
Figure 10.12
Side ﬂow characteristics of 180º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)
fQs = side flow function =
Eccentricity ratio = 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Qs
Q
L
d = ∞
0.25
1.0
0.5
Figure 10.13
Side ﬂow characteristics of 360º journal bearings.
(Plotted from data tabulated in ref. 6.)
Eccentricity ratio = 
Bearing characteristic number, S =
0
0.01
0.02
0.04 0.06
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
1.0
2
4
6
8 10
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
r
c
2 n
P
Max. load
l/d = ∞
1
1/2
1/4
M
i
n
.
fr
i
c
ti
o
n
Figure 10.14
Deﬁnition of optimal de-
sign region between
curved boundary on the
left corresponding to min-
imum friction loss and
curved boundary on the
right corresponding to
maximum load-carrying
capacity. Chart is for 360º
journal bearings. (Plotted
from data tabulated in
ref. 6.)

uncertain. Although the estimates presented here are widely used for preliminary design
purposes, experimental validation of the proposed bearing conﬁguration is recommended.
The friction-generated heating rate, 
, may be calculated as
(10-18)
The heat dissipation rate, 
, may be estimated from Newton’s law of cooling17 as
(10-19)
At equilibrium it must be true that
(10-20)
or
(10-21)
To utilize this equilibrium relationship, it is necessary to evaluate or estimate 
, 
,
and 
). Typical preliminary design estimates for 
are, for “standard” ambient air,
and for 500-feet-per-minute forced air ﬂow, respectively,
(10-22)
and
(10-23)
The exposed surface area of the housing may be roughly estimated as a function of
the projected area of the bearing, giving
(10-24)
where the surface area factor ranges from about 5 to about 15, depending upon the design
conﬁguration.
The mean temperature rise of the housing surface is often estimated to be about one-
half the mean temperature rise of the oil ﬁlm, giving
(10-25)
1™s - ™a2 = 1
21™o - ™a2
Ah = ChAp = Ch1pdL2
1k12500 fpm = 3
Btu
hr-ft2-°F
= 3.86 * 10-4 
Btu
min-in2-°F
a17.0
W
m2-°C
b
1k12std = 2
Btu
hr-ft2-°F
= 2.31 * 10-4
Btu
min-in2-°F
a11.3
W
m2-°C
b
k1
1™s - ™a
Ah
k1
60UF1L
J™
= k1Ah1™s - ™a2
Hg = Hd
™a = ambient air temperature, °F
™s = housing surface temperature, °F
Ah = exposed surface area of housing, in2
where  k1 = modified overall heat transfer coefficient, Btu/min-in2-°F
Hd = k1Ah1™s - ™a2Btu
min
Hd
J™= mechanical equivalent of heat = 9336 in-lb/Btu 1103 N-m/W-s2
L = bearing length, in
F1 = tangential friction force per unit length, lb/in
n = journal rotational speed, rev/sec
where  U = journal surface speed, in/sec
Hg =
2pr160n21F1L2
J™
= 60UF1L
J™
Btu
min
Hg
418
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
17See ref. 2, p. 56 ff.

Clearly, the values given in (10-22) and (10-23) are only ballpark estimates at best,
making experimental validation of the resulting design conﬁguration important.
Design Criteria and Assumptions
To implement a rational design procedure for hydrodynamic journal bearings, it is useful
to clearly identify performance criteria, life criteria, and assumptions made. Based on the
discussions just presented, these may be summarized as follows:
I. Performance criteria:
A. Support the load
(10-26)
B. Minimize frictional drag
(10-27)
C. Meet space, weight, and cost constraints.
II. Life criteria:
A. Prevent overheating
(10-28)
as determined by the heat balance equation
(10-29)
B. Maintain acceptable viscosity
(10-30)
C. Prevent excessive wear; maintain a minimum ﬁlm thickness that is greater than
combined surface asperity heights of journal and sleeve, by setting
(10-31)
minimum ﬁlm thickness, in
radial clearance, in
eccentricity ratio
arithmetic average asperity peak height above mean journal surface,
in (see Figure 6.11)
arithmetic average asperity peak height above mean bearing surface,
in (see Figure 6.11)
constants relating “predominant peak roughness” heights to arith-
metic average peak heights; take both equal to 5.0 unless more ac-
curate information is available
III. Assumptions:
A. Overall heat transfer coefﬁcient, depending upon ambient conditions, is either
(10-32)
or
(10-33)
1k12500 fpm = 3.86 * 10-4
Btu
min-in2-°F
a17.0
W
m2-°C
b
1k12std = 2.31 * 10-4
Btu
min-in2-°F
a11.3
W
m2-°C
b
r1, r2 =
Rb =
Rj =
e =
c =
where  ho =
ho = c11 - e2 Ú r1Rj + r2Rb
h = f 1oil, ™o2
60UF1L
J™
= k1Ah1™s - ™a2
™o … 180°F
F1
hUac
r b = fF1ae,L
d b
W1
hUac
r b
2
= fW1ae,L
d b
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 419

B. Housing surface area factor
(10-34)
C. Housing surface temperature rise
(10-35)
Based on these criteria and assumptions, a step-by-step design procedure may be 
deﬁned.
Suggested Design Procedure
To meet the basic objectives of hydrodynamic bearing design, namely, choosing bearing
diameter and length, specifying surface roughness and clearance requirements between
journal and sleeve, and deﬁning acceptable lubricant properties and lubricant ﬂow rates,
the following procedure may be followed:
1. Choose an 
ratio between 
and 2.
2. Select an appropriate 
ratio for the design application, utilizing Table 10.2 as a
guideline.
c>r
12
L>d
™s - ™a = 1
2 1™o - ™a2
Ch = 8    1typical range is 5 to 152
420
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
Table 10.2 Recommended Bearing Clearances for Various Design Applications
Running Clearance in inches
(millimeters
), for Shaft Diameter Under
0.5 inch
1 inch
2 inches
3.5 inches
5.5 inches 
(12.5 mm)
(25 mm)
(50 mm)
(90 mm)
(140 mm)
Precision spindle practice—
0.25–0.75
0.75–1.5
1.5–2.5
2.5–3.5
3.5–5.0
hardened and ground
(6.35–19.05)
(19.05–38.1)
(38.1–63.5)
(63.5–88.9)
(88.9–127)
spindle lapped into bronze
bushing. Below 500 ft/min
(152 m/min) and 500 psi 
(3.5 MPa)
Precision spindle practice—
0.50–1.0
1.0–2.0
2.0–3.0
3.0–4.5
4.5–6.5
hardened and ground
(12.7–25.4)
(25.4–50.8)
(50.8–76.2)
(76.2–114.3)
(114.3–165.1)
spindle lapped into bronze
bushing. Above 500 ft/min
(152 m/min) and 500 psi
(3.5 MPa)
Electric motor and
0.50–1.5
1.0–2.0
1.5–3.5
2.0–4.0
3.0–6.0
generator practice—
(12.7–38.1)
(25.4–50.8)
(38.1–88.9)
(50.8–101.6)
(76.2–152.4)
ground journal in
broached or reamed
babbit bushing.
General machine practice
2.0–4.0
2.5–4.5
3.0–5.0
4.0–7.0
5.0–8.0
(continuous rotating
(50.8–101.6)
(63.5–114.3)
(76.2–127)
(101.6–177.8)
(127–203.2)
motion)—turned steel or
cold-rolled steel journal in
bored and reamed bronze
or poured and reamed
babbit bushing.
* 10-3
* 10-3

3. Choose an appropriate eccentricity ratio 
for high load-carrying capacity (large ),
low friction drag (small ), or a suitable compromise between load-carrying capacity
and frictional drag (intermediate ). See Figure 10.14 to match the choice of 
to
application priorities.
4. Select tentative machining processes for journal and sleeve, and determine correspon-
ding arithmetic average roughness peak heights 
and 
from Figure 6.11.
5. Write expressions for , 
, , 
, and , all in terms of .
6. Read values of 
and 
from Figures 10.6 through 10.9, for selected values of and
. If necessary, use interpolation function from (10-13).
7. Use the load function equation (10-26) to determine
(10-36)
8. Use the friction drag equation (10-27), together with life criteria equations (10-28),
(10-29), and (10-30), to determine
(10-37)
9. Combine (10-36) and (10-37) to obtain
(10-38)
10. Refer to Figure 10.3, which provides another (graphical) relationship for
(10-39)
11. Select from Figure 10.3 one or more candidate oils, and ﬁnd (by trial and error) com-
binations of 
and 
that simultaneously satisfy (10-38) and (10-39), specifying,
ﬁnally, the resulting combination of selected oil, , and 
.
12. Calculate required bearing diameter from either (10-36) or (10-37), and bearing length
from step 1. Check the value of diameter 
against the corresponding recommended
clearance values in Table 10.2, and again iterate steps 1 through 12 if necessary.
13. Impose wear criterion (10-31) to assure that 
exceeds the combined predominant
peak roughness height by an acceptable margin.
ho
d
L
d
™o
h
™o
h
h = fgr1™o, oil2
h = f31™o2
d = f21h,™o2
d = f11h2
fi
L>d
e
fF1
fW1
d
c
Ah
U
W1
L
Rb
Rj
e
e
e
e
e
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 421
Table 10.2 (Continued )
Running Clearance in inches
(millimeters
), for Shaft Diameter Under
0.5 inch
1 inch
2 inches
3.5 inches
5.5 inches
(12.5 mm)
(25 mm)
(50 mm)
(90 mm)
(140 mm)
General machine practice
2.5–4.5
2.5–4.5
3.0–5.0
4.0–7.0
5.0–8.0
(oscillating motion)—
(63.5–114.3)
(63.5–114.3)
(76.2–127)
(101.6–177.8)
(127–203.2)
journal and bearing
materials as above
Rough machine practice—
3.0–6.0
5.0–9.0
8.0–12.0
11.0–16.0
14.0–20.0
turned steel or cold-rolled
(76.2–152.4)
(127–228.6)
(203.2–304.8)
(279.4–406.4)
(355.6–508)
steel journal in poured
babbit bushing
Automotive crankshaft—
babbit bearing
—
—
1.5(38.1)
2.5(63.5)
—
Cadmium-silver-copper
—
—
2.0(50.8)
3.0(76.2)
—
bearing Copper-led bearing
—
—
1.4(35.6)
3.5(88.9)
—
* 10-3
* 10-3

14. Calculate lubricant ﬂow rate requirement, and corresponding side leakage ﬂow rate,
using Figures 10.10 through 10.13.
15. Summarize results, specifying , , 
, oil speciﬁcation, , and 
.
Example 10.2 Preliminary Design of a Hydrodynamically Lubricated Plain Bearing
It is desired to design a hydrodynamically lubricated, 
partial-plain-bearing for use in
a production line conveyor to be used to transport industrial raw materials. The vertical
bearing load is essentially constant at 500 pounds downward, and the journal is to rotate
at a constant speed of 600 rpm. High load-carrying capacity is regarded as more important
than low friction loss in the bearing. Conduct a preliminary design investigation to deter-
mine a combination of dimensions and lubricant parameters suitable for the proposed ap-
plication.
Solution
Following the suggested design procedure step by step, and using engineering judgment
where necessary, the following sequence of calculations may be made:
1.
Choose
2.
Referring to Table 10.2, the proposed industrial conveyor falls into the category “gen-
eral machine practice (continuous rotating motion).” For this category, clearance val-
ues 
from Table 10.2 are shown in Table E10.2A as a function of shaft diameter,
together with corresponding 
ratio values.
From the options given in Table E10.2A, ﬁrst try:
3.
From Figure 10.14, for 
, read values of 
and 
.
Since high load-carrying capacity has a high priority in this application, ﬁrst try an ec-
centricity ratio of
4.
Make a tentative design decision to turn the journal (probably steel) and ream the
bearing sleeve (probably bronze). Using midrange average surface roughness values
from Figure 6.11,
Rj = 63 m-in
e = 0.5
emax-load = 0.47
emin-fr = 0.7
L>d = 1.0
c
r = 0.003
c>r
c
L
d = 1.0
180°
Qs
Q
™o
L
d
422
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
Table E10.2A Conveyor Bearing Clearance Data
d, in
r, in
c, in
c/r
0.25
0.0020–0.0040
0.008–0.016
1
0.50
0.0025–0.0045
0.005–0.009
2
1.00
0.003–0.005
0.003–0.005
1.75
0.004–0.007
0.002–0.004
2.75
0.005–0.008
0.002–0.003 
512
312
12

and
5.
Writing all pertinent variables in terms of diameter :
6.
Using 
and 
, read values of 
and 
for a 
partial bearing
from Figures 10.6 and 10.8, giving
and
7.
From (10-26) and 
or
giving
8.
Combining (10-29), (10-32), (10-35), L,U, and 
, and assuming the ambient factory
air temperature to be 
,
Also, from (10-27) and 
F1 =
fF1hU
ac
r b
=
4.80h131.42d2
0.003
= 5.03 * 104hd
fF1
= 1.44 * 10-21™o - 852
F1 =
k1Ah1™s - ™a2J™
60UL
=
2.31 * 10-418pd22a ™o - 85
2
b9336
60131.42d21d2
™a = 85°F
Ah
d = A
50010.00322
1.65131.422h = A
8.68 * 10-5
h
1500>d2
h131.42d2 10.00322 = 1.65
W1
hUac
r b
2
= 1.65
fW1,
fF1 = 4.80
fW1 = 1.65
180°
fF1
fW1
e = 0.5
L>d = 1.0
c = ac
r b a d
2b = 0.003d
2
= 0.0015d
Ah = Ch1pdL2 = 8pd2 in2
U = pdn = pda600
60 b = 31.42d in
sec
W1 = W
L = 500
d
lb
in
L = aL
d bd = 11.02d = d
d
Rb = 63 m-in
Hydrodynamic Bearing Design 423

Equating the two equations for 
whence
9.
Equating the two equations for d
gives
10. From Figure 10.3, the graphical data provide the relationship
11. To solve the two equations for 
simultaneously, select a candidate oil (repeat for
other oils if necessary) and compile Table E10.2B by iteration until the selected oil
and the mean oil ﬁlm temperature 
simultaneously satisfy both 
expressions.
From this table, tentatively select SAE 10 oil, which has a viscosity of
reyns at a mean oil ﬁlm temperature of 
.
12. Required bearing diameter 
may be calculated from either equation for d. Using the
ﬁrst equation for d
Checking this value against the recommended clearance data of Table E10.2A, is at
the boundary of the tabled data, but will be judged acceptable for now. Thus
13. From (10-31), 
, 
, and c, check
or
Thus the minimum ﬁlm thickness 
is more than seven times the predominant peak
roughness height of the journal and sleeve combined, an acceptable value.
ho
0.0046 Ú
?
0.0006
ho = 0.001516.14211 - 0.52 Ú
?
5163 * 10-6 + 63 * 10-62
Rb
Rj
L = d = 6.14 inches
c
d = A
8.68 * 10-5
2.3 * 10-6 = 6.14 inches
d
™o = 134°F
h = 2.3 * 10-6
h
™o
h
h = fgr1™o, oil2
h = 9.42 * 10-101™o - 8522
A
8.68 * 10-5
h
= 2.86 * 10-7
h
1™o - 852
d = 2.86 * 10-7
h
1™o - 852
1.44 * 10-21™o - 852 = 5.03 * 104hd
F1
424
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
Table E10.2B Oil Film Temperature and Viscosity Data
, rehns
, rehns 
Oil Speciﬁcation
F
from (21)
from Fig. 10.3
Comment
SAE 10
130
No Good
SAE 10
135
Close
SAE 10
134
Good 
2.30 * 10-6
2.26 * 10-6
2.23 * 10-6
2.36 * 10-6
2.45 * 10-6
1.91 * 10-6
™o,°
h
h
Example 10.2
Continues

14. From Figure 10.10, for 
and 
,
whence
is the required oil ﬂow that must be supplied to the bearing clearance space. Also,
from Figure 10.12, for 
and 
,
or
This means that about half the oil ﬂow into the bearing clearance space leaves the
bearing as side ﬂow.
15. Summarizing, the preliminary design investigation indicates that an acceptable con-
ﬁguration for this bearing design project should result if the following combination of
dimensions and lubricant parameters are speciﬁed:
To emphasize it again, many approximations were used in reaching these values,
so experimental validation is recommended before ﬁnalizing the design. Also, it is
well to recognize that the solution presented here is not unique; many other poten-
tially satisfactory combinations of dimensions and lubricants could be found.
10.8 Hydrostatic Bearing Design
As just discussed, in hydrodynamic bearing lubrication the motion of the journal rotating
within the sleeve creates a pressurized thick oil ﬁlm that can support the bearing load with-
out surface asperity contact. In some applications, it may not be possible to sustain a hy-
drodynamic oil ﬁlm between the moving elements of the bearing. For example, the motion
may be very slow, reciprocating, or oscillating, or loads may be very high, or it may be de-
sired to have very low frictional drag at startup. In such cases it may become necessary to
utilize hydrostatic lubrication, where lubricant from a positive displacement pump is
forced into a recess, or pool, in the bearing surface. The externally pressurized lubricant
™o = 134°F
Q = 5.77 in3/sec 1about 1.5 gal/min2
 oil = SAE 10
surface roughness … 63 microinches 1same for both journal and sleeve2
c = 0.009 inch 1nominal2
L = 6.14 inches
d = 6.14 inches
Qs = 0.515.772 = 2.88 in3
sec
fQs = 0.5 = Qs
Q
L>d = 1.0
e = 0.5
Q = 3.411.702 = 5.77in3
sec
fQ = 3.4 =
Q
rcnL =
Q
a6.14
2 b10.0092110216.142
=
Q
1.70
L>d = 1.0
e = 0.5
Hydrostatic Bearing Design 425

426
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
lifts the load, even when the journal is not rotating, allowing the lubricant to ﬂow out of
the recess through the clearance space between the separated surfaces, returning to a sump
for recirculation.
The main elements of a hydrostatic bearing system are a positive displacement pump,
an oil reservoir, and a supply manifold to supply oil to all the bearing pad recesses in the
system. Flow control oriﬁces are used to meter the ﬂow so that balanced pressure may be
achieved among the supporting pools to allow each pad to lift its share of the load. When
operating at equilibrium, the pump-supplied lubricant ﬂow just matches the total outﬂow
from the supporting pools, producing a ﬁlm thickness 
between bearing surfaces great
enough so that surface asperities do not make contact through the oil ﬁlm.
Although the principles of hydrostatic bearing design are relatively simple, the details
are highly empirical and experience based. For example, the number, shape, and size of the
recesses required for stability and adequate load capacity, the clearances and tolerances,
the surface ﬁnishes, the pumping capacity and power required, and system cost can best
be determined by specialists in hydrostatic bearing design. Further details of hydrostatic
bearing design are beyond the scope of this text.18
h
18For additional information, see, for example, ref. 13.
10-1. Plain bearings are often divided into four categories, ac-
cording to the prevailing type of lubrication at the bearing in-
terface. List the four categories, and brieﬂy describe each one.
10.2. From a strength-based shaft design calculation, the shaft
diameter at on of the bearing sites on a steel shaft has been
found to be 38 mm. The radial load at this bearing site is 675 N,
and the shaft rotates at 500 rpm. The operating temperature of
the bearing has been estimated to be about 90C It is desired to
use a length-to-diameter ratio of 1.5 for this application. Based
on environmental factors, the material for the bearing sleeve has
been narrowed down to a choice between nylon and ﬁlled
Teﬂon. Which material would you recommend?
10-3. It is being proposed to use a nylon bearing sleeve on a
ﬁxed steel shaft to support an oscillating conveyor tray at equal
intervals along the tray, as shown in Figure P10.3. Each bearing
bore is to be 12.5 mm, bearing length is to be 25 mm, and it is
estimated that the maximum load to be supported by each bear-
ing is about 2 kN. Each bearing rotates 
per oscillation on
its ﬁxed steel journal, at a frequency of 60 oscillations per
minute. Would the proposed nylon bearing sleeve be acceptable
for this application?
10-4. A local neighborhood organization has become inter-
ested in replicating a waterwheel-driven grist mill of the type
that had been used in the community during the nineteenth
;10o
Problems
Oscillating support link;
four shown. Each link rotates
± 10° each oscillation.
Conveyor tray
Outflow
Conveyor tray
Nylon
sleeve
Fixed
steel
journal
Typical bearing
configuration
Supply
tank
Figure P10.3
Schematic arrangement of an oscillating conveyor.

Problems 427
century, but they have not been able to locate any detailed con-
struction plans. One of their concerns is with the bearings
needed to support the rotating waterwheel. To give an authentic
appearance, they would like to use an oak bearing on each side
of the waterwheel to support a cast-iron waterwheel shaft. The
waterwheel weight, including the residual weight of the re-
tained water, is estimated to be about 12,000 lb, and the wheel
is to rotate at about 30 rpm. It has been estimated on the basis
of strength that the cast-iron shaft should be no less than 3
inches in diameter. The bearings need to be spaced about 36
inches apart. Propose a suitable dimensional conﬁguration for
each of the two proposed oak bearings so that bearing replace-
ment will rarely be needed. It is anticipated that 
river wa-
ter will be used for lubrication.
10-5. The shaft shown in Figure P10.5 is part of a transmission
for a small robot. The shaft supports two spur gears loaded as
indicated, is supported by bearings at A and D, and rotates at
1200 rpm. A strength-based analysis has been performed and it
has been determined that a shaft diameter of 10 mm would be
adequate for the steel shaft. You are considering the use of
boundary-lubricated bearings for which 
. A porous
bronze-bearing sleeve has been proposed. Determine if this
bearing selection is adequate.
L = 1.5d
68°F
can you ﬁnd a polymeric bearing material other than nylon that
will meet established design guidelines and function properly
with a diameter of 1.50 inches?
10-8. A plain bearing is to be designed for a boundary-lubricated
application in which a 75-mm-diameter steel shaft rotating at
1750 rpm must support a radial load of 1 kN. Using established
design guidelines for boundary-lubricated bearings and Table 10.1
as your resource, select an acceptable bearing material for this
application.
10-9. A plain bearing is to be designed for a boundary-lubri-
cated application in which a 0.5-inch-diameter steel shaft rotat-
ing at 1800 rpm must support a radial load of 75 lb. Using
established design guidelines for boundary-lubricated bearings,
and using Table 10.1 as your resource, select an acceptable
bearing material for this application if the operating tempera-
ture is estimated to be about 
.
10-10. A proposed ﬂat belt drive system (see Chapter 17) is
being considered for an application in which the driven steel
shaft is to rotate at a speed of 1440 rpm, and the power to be
transmitted is 800 W. As shown in Figure P10.10, the power is
transmitted to the 10-mm-diameter (driven) shaft by a ﬂat belt
running on a shaft-mounted pulley. The pulley has a nominal
pitch diameter of 60 mm, as sketched in Figure P10.10. It is de-
sired to support the driven shaft using two grease-lubricated
plain bearings, one adjacent to each side of the pulley (see
Figure P10.10). The two bearings share the belt load equally. It
has been determined that the initial belt tension, 
, should be
150 N (in each side of the belt) to achieve optimum perform-
ance, and it may reasonably be assumed that the sum of tight
side and slack side belt tension will remain approximately
equal to 
for all operating conditions. Select satisfactory
plain bearings for this application, including their diameter,
their length, and an acceptable material from which to make
them (see Table 10.1).
2T0
T0
350°F
500 N
30 mm dia.
20 mm dia.
200 N
750 N
300 N
20 mm
20 mm
A
C
D
10 mm
B
Figure P10.5
Steel shaft supporting two spur gears.
10-6. From a strength-based analysis, a shaft diameter at one of
its support bearing sites must be at least 1.50 inches. The max-
imum radial load to be supported at this location is estimated to
be about 150 lb. The shaft rotates at 500 rpm. It is desired to use
a nylon bearing sleeve at this location. Following established
design guidelines for boundary-lubricated bearings, and keep-
ing the bearing diameter as near to the 1.50-inch minimum as
possible, propose a suitable dimensional conﬁguration for the
bearing.
10-7. A preliminary result obtained as a possible solution for
problem 10-6 indicates that the smallest acceptable bearing
diameter for the speciﬁcations given is about 3.3 inches.
Engineering management would prefer to have a bearing diam-
eter of about 1.50 inches (the minimum based on shaft strength
requirements), and they are asking whether it would be possible
to ﬁnd another polymeric bearing material that might be satis-
factory for this application. Using Table 10.1 as your resource,
Flat belt
Key
Steel shaft
Grease fitting;
one each side
400 W
load
Plain
bearing
n = 1440 rpm
dp = 60 mm
ds = 10 mm
T0 = 150 N
T0 = 150 N
Figure P10.10
Flat belt drive system.

428
Chapter 10 / Plain Bearings and Lubrications
10.11. It is desired to use a hydrodynamically lubricated 
babbit-metal plain bearing for use in supporting the crankshaft
(see Chapter 19) of an automotive-type internal combustion
engine for an agricultural application. Based on strength and
stiffness calculations, the minimum nominal journal diameter
is 50 mm, and a length-to-diameter ratio of 1.0 has been cho-
sen. The maximum radial load on the bearing is estimated to be
3150 N and the journal rotates in the bearing sleeve at 1200 rpm.
High load-carrying ability is regarded as much more important
than low friction. Tentatively, an SAE 30 oil has been chosen,
and the average bearing operating temperature has been deter-
mined to be about 
. Estimate the power loss due to bear-
ing friction.
10-12. In an automotive crankshaft application, a hydrodynamic
full 
journal bearing must be 2 inches in nominal diameter
based on strength requirements, and the bearing length being
considered is 1.0 inch. The journal is to be made of steel and the
bearing sleeve is to be made of a copper-lead alloy (see Table
10.2). The bearing must support a radial load of 1000 lb, and the
journal rotates at 3000 rpm. The lubricant is to be SAE 20 oil,
and the average operating temperature at the bearing interface
has been estimated to be about 
. Load-carrying ability and
low friction loss are regarded as about equally important.
a. Find the minimum ﬁlm thickness required for this ap-
plication.
b. What manufacturing processes would you recommend
for ﬁnishing the journal and the sleeve to provide hydro-
dynamic lubrication at the bearing interface? Justify your
recommendations. (Hint: Examine Figure 6.11.)
c. Estimate the power loss resulting from bearing friction.
d. What oil ﬂow rate must be supplied to the bearing
clearance space?
10-13. A hydrodynamic journal bearing rotates at 3600 rpm.
The bearing sleeve has a 32-mm diameter and is 32 mm long.
The bearing radial clearance space is to be 20 
, and the ra-
dial load on the bearing is to be 3 kN. The lubricant chosen is
SAE 10 oil supplied at an average temperature of 
C.
Estimate the friction-generated heating rate in this bearing if the
eccentricity ratio has been determined to be 0.65.
10-14. It is desired to design a hydrodynamically lubricated
plain bearing for a special factory application in which a
360°
60°
mm
130°F
360°
65oC
360o
rotating steel shaft must be at least 3.0 inches nominal diameter
and the bushing (sleeve) is to be bronze, reamed to size. The ra-
dial bearing load is to be 1000 lb. The desired ratio of length to
diameter is 1.5. The shaft is to rotate at a speed of 1000 rpm. It
has been estimated that an eccentricity ratio of 0.5 should be a
good starting point for designing the bearing, based on an eval-
uation of the optimal design region of Figure 10.14 for a length-
to-diameter ratio of 1.5.
Conduct a preliminary design investigation to determine a
combination of dimensions and lubricant parameters suitable
for the proposed application.
10-15. For the design result you found in solving problem 
10-14,
a. Find the friction drag torque.
b. Find the power dissipated as a result of friction drag.
10-16. A hydrodynamically lubricated 
plain bearing is to
be designed for a machine tool application in which a rotating
steel spindle must be at least 1.00 inch nominal diameter, the
bushing is to be bronze, and the steel spindle is to be lapped into
the bronze bushing. The radial bearing load is 40 lb, and the
spindle is to rotate at 2500 rpm. The desired ratio of length to
diameter is 1.0. Conduct a preliminary design study to deter-
mine a combination of dimensions and lubricant parameters
suitable for this application.
10-17. For your proposed design result found in solving prob-
lem 10-16,
a. Find the friction drag torque.
b. Find the power dissipated as a result of friction drag.
10-18. A hydrodynamically lubricated 
plain bearing is to
be designed for a conveyor-roller support application in which
the rotating cold-rolled steel shaft must be at least 100 mm
nominal diameter and the bushing is to be made of poured bab-
bitt, reamed to size. The radial bearing load is to be 18.7 kN.
The desired ratio of length to diameter is 1.0. The shaft is to ro-
tate continuously at a speed of 1000 rpm. Low friction drag is
regarded as more important than high load-carrying capacity.
Find a combination of dimensions and lubricant parameters
suitable for this conveyor application.
10-19. For your proposed design result found in solving prob-
lem 10-18, ﬁnd the friction drag torque. 
360°
360°

Rolling Element Bearings
Chapter 11
429
11.1 Uses and Characteristics of Rolling Element Bearings
As for the case of plain bearings (see Chapter 10), rolling element bearings are designed
to permit relative motion between two machine parts, usually a rotating shaft and a ﬁxed
frame, while supporting the applied loads. In contrast to the sliding interface that charac-
terizes plain bearings, for rolling element bearings the rotating shaft is separated from the
ﬁxed frame by interposed rolling elements, so that rolling friction prevails rather than slid-
ing friction. Consequently, both startup torque and operational friction losses are typically
much lower than for plain bearings.
Rolling element bearing applications range from tiny instrument bearings with bore
diameters of only a few millimeters to huge special bearings such as drag-line trunnion
bearings with bores of 20 feet.
A wide array of sizes and types between these extremes is commercially available,
and a large percentage of consumer products embody rolling element bearings. In addition
to the more common rotational conﬁgurations, rolling element bearing concepts have been
extended to linear, linear-rotary, and curved-path applications by using recirculating loops,
circuits, or guideways for the rolling elements.1
Advantages of rolling element bearings include (see Chapter 10 for advantages of
plain bearings):
1.
High reliability with minimum maintenance
2.
Minimum lubrication required. Lubricant can often be sealed in for the “lifetime” of
the bearing
3.
Good for low-speed operation
4.
Low starting friction and low power loss due to frictional drag
5.
Can readily support radial, thrust, or combined radial and thrust loads
6.
Small axial space required
7.
Nearly universal interchangeability among manufacturers due to industry-wide stan-
dardized sizes and closely controlled tolerances
8.
Can be preloaded to eliminate internal clearances, improve fatigue life, or increase
bearing stiffness (see 4.8 and Figure 11.7)
9.
Increase in operational noise level warns of impending failure
1Applications include ball splines, linear ball bearings, ﬂat-way linear bearings, and ball screws. 
See, for example, ref. 1.

11.2 Types of Rolling Element Bearings
Rolling element bearings may be broadly classiﬁed as either ball bearings (spherical
rolling elements) or roller bearings (nominally cylindrical rolling elements). Within each
of these broad categories there are a host of geometrical conﬁguraitons commercially
available. Rolling element bearings are almost universally standardized2 (cooperatively)
by the American Bearing Manufacturers Association3 (ABMA), American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), and the International Standards Organizaiton (ISO).
As illustrated in Figure 11.1 the typical structure for rolling element bearings involves
an inner race, an outer race, rolling elements captured between the races, and a separator
(or cage) used to space the rolling elements so they do not rub each other during opera-
tion. The nomenclature shown in Figure 11.1 is widely used for both ball and roller bear-
ings, except that the outer race of a tapered roller bearing is usually called a cup and the
inner race a cone. Other exceptions include thrust bearings (typical conﬁguration is not
consistent with the nomenclature of Figure 11.1) and needle bearings (small-diameter
rollers, often retained in a thin outer shell, and sometimes used with the needle rollers di-
rectly in contact with a hardened steel shaft surface).
Figure 11.2 illustrates a few selected examples from the wide variety of commercially
available ball bearing conﬁgurations. Most bearing manufacturers publish engineering
manuals containing extensive descriptions of the various types and sizes available, and
procedures for making appropriate selections.4 The single-row deep-groove (Conrad) ball
bearing, shown in Figure 11.2(a), is probably the most widely utilized rolling element
bearing because it can support both radial loads and moderate thrust loads in either direc-
tion. This is made possible by using continuous shoulders uninterrupted by ﬁlling notches.
Further, these bearings are relatively inexpensive and operate smoothly over a wide speed
range. Deep-groove ball bearings are manufactured by moving the inner race to an eccen-
tric position, inserting as many balls as possible, repositioning the inner race to a concen-
tric location, spacing the balls uniformly, and assembling the separator to maintain ball
spacing with minimum frictional drag. To increase the radial load capacity, a ﬁlling notch
is sometimes cut into one side of each bearing race, permitting more balls to be inserted
than is possible for the Conrad design. This maximum-capacity design, illustrated in
Figure 11.2(b), achieves the maximum radial capacity possible for a single-row ball
430
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Cage (separator)
Ball (rolling element)
Outer race (outer ring)
Inner race (inner ring)
Width
Outside diameter
Bore
Figure 11.1
Bearing nomenclature. A ball bearing is illus-
trated, but roller bearing nomenclature is 
substantially the same.
2See, for example, ANSI/AFBMA standards 9-1990 for ball bearings (ref. 2) and 11-1990 for roller bearings
(ref. 3).
3Formerly Antifriction Bearing Manufacturers Association (AFBMA).
4See, for example, ref. 5.

bearing, but thrust capacity is reduced by the shoulder discontinuities caused by the ﬁlling
notches.
Double-row deep-groove ball bearings, shown in Figure 11.2(c), can support heavier
combinations of radial and thrust loads, and, by grinding a spherical raceway surface in the
outer race, they can be made internally self-aligning, as shown in Figure 11.2(d).
Externally self-aligning bearings, having two-piece outer races with matched spherical in-
terfaces, are also commercially available [see Figure 11.2(e)].
Higher thrust capacity in one direction is achieved in single-row angular contact ball
bearings by conﬁguring the grooves so that the centerline of contact between balls and
raceways is at an angle with respect to a plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation, as il-
lustrated in Figure 11.2(f). One side of the outer race is counter bored to remove most of
the raceway shoulder, while a higher shoulder is provided on the opposing thrust face.
Thermal expansion of the outer race is utilized to assemble a maximum ball complement,
resulting in a nonseparable bearing after cooling. Angular contact ball bearings are usually
used in pairs, arranged face-to-face [shown in Figure 11.2(g)], back-to-back, or in tandem
with controlled axial preloading to obtain desired bearing stiffness (see 11.7). Double-row
angular contact ball bearings with “built-in” preload (one row of balls is axially preloaded
against the other) are available as shown in Figure 11.2(h). Ball thrust bearings are com-
mercially available, as illustrated in Figure 11.2(i).
Types of Rolling Element Bearings 431
(a) Single row
deep-groove
radial
(Conrad).
(b) Single row
maximum
capacity radial
(filling notch).
(f) Single row
angular
contact.
(g) Duplex
angular
contact
(face-to-face).
(h) Double row
angular
contact.
(i) Grooved
race
thrust.
(c) Double row
deep-groove
radial.
(d) Double row
deep-groove
internally
self-aligning.
(e) Single row
deep-groove
externally
self-aligning.
Figure 11.2
Selected examples from the many types of commercially available ball bearings.
Some examples of bearings.

In addition to the basic bearing types, many specialty and custom-designed bearings
can be ordered, including bearings with two-piece inner races, diametrally split ball bear-
ings for difﬁcult mounting conﬁgurations, extended inner race design with locking collars,
integral mounting ﬂange conﬁgurations, and others. Bearings with seals, shields, or both,
installed on one or both sides, are available in many cases, as well as snap ring grooves for
outer race retention.
In contrast with ball bearings, straight roller bearings are unable to support thrust
loads, and are usually made so that the races can be axially separated, as shown in Figure
11.3(a). They can, therefore, readily accommodate small axial displacements of a shaft rel-
ative to the housing. Such a displacement might occur, for example, because of differen-
tial thermal expansion between the shaft and the housing. A small axial thrust capacity can
be incorporated into straight roller bearings for locational purposes [by incorporating
shoulders as shown in Figure 11.3(b)], and heavier radial load support can be achieved
with double-row roller bearings, as illustrated in Figure 11.3(c).
If combined radial and thrust loads must be accommodated, tapered roller bearings,
such as the one shown in Figure 11.3(d), may be used. The conically angled raceways al-
low tapered roller bearings to carry combinations of radial and thrust loads. By the same
token, even when a purely radial external load is applied to a tapered roller bearing, a thrust
(axial) load is induced within the bearing because of the taper. Hence, as for the case of
angular contact ball bearings discussed earlier, tapered roller bearings are usually used in
pairs (or sometimes in four-row conﬁgurations) to resist the thrust reaction or to provide
desired stiffness. Such bearings can be obtained in various two- and four-row arrange-
ments, such as the two-row double-cup single-cone assembly illustrated in Figure 11.3(e).
Self-aligning (spherical) roller bearings are available, as illustrated in Figure 11.3(f)
and (g), where barrel rollers with a spherical outer race or hourglass rollers with a spheri-
cal inner race provide the self-aligning capability.
When radial space is limited, needle roller bearings are sometimes used. One of many
needle bearing conﬁgurations is shown in Figure 11.3(h). Various types of roller, tapered
roller, and needle thrust bearings are also available as shown, for example, in Figures
11.3(i) and ( j).
432
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
(a) Single row
straight
roller bearing,
separable
outer race
(nonlocating).
(f) Single row
spherical
roller bearing;
barrel rollers
(self-aligning).
(g) Double row
spherical
roller bearing;
hourglass
rollers
(self-aligning).
(h) Needle
roller bearing,
drawn cap,
open end.
(i) Tapered
roller
thrust
bearing.
(j) Needle roller
thrust bearing.
(b) Single row
straight
roller bearing
(axially
locating).
(c) Double row
straight
roller bearing,
separable
outer race
(nonlocating).
(d) Single row
tapered
roller bearing.
(e) Two row
double cup
tapered
roller bearing
(single cones).
Figure 11.3
Selected examples from the
many types of commercially
available roller bearings.

11.3 Potential Failure Modes
Rolling element bearings may be vulnerable to failure by any of several possible modes, de-
pending upon the speciﬁed operating loads and speeds. Under typical operating conditions,
surface fatigue failure is the most likely failure mode (see 2.3). The cyclic subsurface
Hertzian shear stresses produced by the curved surfaces in rolling contact may initiate and
propagate minute cracks that ultimately dislodge particles and generate surface pits.
Typically, the raceways pit ﬁrst, generating progressively intensifying noise, vibration, and
heat. If bad bearings are not replaced, races may fracture, bearings may jam, and serious
damage to other machine elements may result. In some cases, static loads on a bearing dur-
ing idle nonrotating segments of a duty cycle may cause brinelling of the races, resulting in
subsequent generation of noise, vibration, and heat as the rolling elements pass the local dis-
continuities in the raceway (see 2.3). When selecting bearings, designers must routinely ex-
amine both the ability of a bearing to resist surface fatigue failure (basic dynamic load rating)
and the ability of a bearing to resist brinelling failure (basic static load rating). Which of these
two failure modes governs will depend upon the speciﬁc details of the duty cycle.
It is worth noting that for lightly loaded bearings the initiation of surface fatigue crack
nuclei may not occur, and very long operating lives may be achieved. This is true since, in
effect, the cyclic Hertzian stresses are below the fatigue endurance limit of the ferrous
bearing alloys (see 5.6 and Figure 5.30). At least one bearing manufacturer5 now provides
fatigue load limit data, for which fatigue load limit is deﬁned as the bearing load below
which fatigue failure will not occur for that particular bearing, assuming contaminant-free,
ideal lubrication between rolling elements and raceways.
In some applications, fretting wear may be the governing failure mode (see 2.3).
Notably, if bearings are operated with small-amplitude reversing cyclic motion, even when
loads are light, the ensuing fretting conditions may produce signiﬁcant local fretting wear,
and ultimately result in unacceptable noise, vibration, or heat, as well as contamination of
the bearing lubricant from accumulated fretting debris. The failure of needle bearings in
automotive universal joints provides a common example of the potential for fretting wear
failure of a needle roller bearing.
As for power transmission shafting (see 8.2), rolling element bearings are usually an
integral part of a dynamic system of springs and masses. Hence, it is important to exam-
ine the possibility that operation at certain critical speeds may excite destructive vibra-
tional behavior. Experience has shown that typical spring rates of rolling element bearings
are low (soft) compared to many other machine elements, and therefore bearing stiffness,
in some cases, may dominate the vibrational behavior of a machine (see 4.7). It is an im-
portant design responsibility to assure that installed bearing stiffness is great enough to
keep the fundamental natural frequency of the system well above the forcing frequency6
so that excessive deﬂection ( force-induced elastic deformation failure) does not result.
Proper preloading is a means of improving the failure resistance of rolling element bear-
ings to force-induced elastic deformation (see 11.6).
11.4 Bearing Materials
Rolling element bearings are probably the most highly reﬁned, carefully engineered, precisely
produced, statistically tested devices of all the machine elements. For these reasons the re-
sponsibility for achieving the keystone design objectives (selection of best material and deter-
mination of best geometry) lies with the specialized designer working in the bearing industry.
Most designers need only be concerned with the selection of an appropriate bearing from
Bearing Materials 433
5See ref. 5.
6See 8.2 for deﬁnitions.

commercially available inventory. This discussion of bearing materials is, accordingly, brief,
since in most cases bearing manufacturers will have already selected the optimum materials.
Most ball bearings, including both balls and races, are made from vacuum-degassed high-
carbon chrome steel, hardened and tempered for optimum strength and toughness, sometimes
stabilized for precise dimensional control. Stainless-steel alloys are sometimes used when
corrosion resistance is needed or moderately elevated temperatures must be accommodated.
For higher-temperature applications, cobalt base alloys may be used. AISI 52100 steel is
widely used for both races and balls, and is typically through-hardened to Rockwell C61–C64.
Stainless-steel alloys 400 C or 440 CM may be used for special applications. Separator
materials include phenolic, bronze, phosphor bronze, or alloy steels such as AISI 4130.
In the case of roller bearings, races and rollers are usually manufactured from low-
carbon carburizing-grade, electric furnace, vacuum-degassed alloy steels. They are then
case-carburized and heat-treated to produce a hard, fatigue-resistant case encompassing a
tough ductile core. In this context, case-hardened AISI 3310, 4620, and 8620 are often
used. Specialty steels may be used for critical applications.
11.5 Bearing Selection
In selecting an appropriate bearing for any given application, design decisions must be
made about bearing type, size, space allocation, mounting methods, and other details.
Typically, a unique bearing choice will not be possible for a given application because of
overlapping bearing capabilities. As usual, designer experience plays an important role in
the selection process. Most bearing manufacturers provide technical assistance in this area.
Table 11.1 provides overall guidance in selecting an appropriate bearing type, but to use
434
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Table 11.1 Bearing Characteristics That May Inﬂuence the Selection of Bearing Type1
Radial
Thrust
Limiting
Radial
Axial
Bearing Type
Capacity
Capacity
Speed
Stiffness
Stiffness
Deep-groove ball
moderate
moderate—both
high
moderate
low
directions
Maximum-capacity
moderate (plus)
moderate—one
high
moderate (plus)
low (plus)
ball
direction
Angular contact
moderate
moderate (plus)—
high (minus)
moderate
moderate
ball
one direction
Cylindrical roller
high
none
moderate (plus)
high
none
Spherical roller
high
moderate—both
moderate
high (minus)
moderate
directions
Needle roller
moderate to
none
moderate to very
moderate to
none
high
high
high
Single-row tapered
high (minus)
moderate (plus)—
moderate
high (minus)
moderate
roller
one direction
Double-row tapered
high
moderate—both
moderate
high
moderate
roller
directions
Four-row tapered
high (plus)
high—both
moderate (minus)
high (plus)
high
roller
directions
Ball thrust
none
high—one direction
moderate (minus)
none
high
Roller thrust
none
high (plus)—one
low
none
high (plus)
direction
Tapered roller
locational
high (plus)—one
low
none
high (plus)
thrust
only
direction
1Adapted from Torrington bearing catalog data.

the table a designer must ﬁrst summarize the speciﬁc design requirements at the bearing
site in terms of radial loading spectrum, thrust loading spectrum, operating speeds, design
life requirements, stiffness requirements, and operating environment.
After a preliminary selection of the type of bearing to be used, determination of the
bearing size may be accomplished by following the procedures outlined in the following
paragraphs. These procedures are representative of those recommended by many bearing
manufacturers.
Before detailing bearing selection procedures, however, it is important to understand
the concepts of basic dynamic load rating, 
, and basic static load rating, 
, universally
used by bearing manufacturers in characterizing the load-carrying capacity of all types of
rolling element bearings. Also of interest are the data-based relationship between the load
and number of rotations to failure, and the inﬂuence on the selection process of reliability
requirements higher than the standard 90 percent.
Basic Load Ratings
Basic load ratings have been standardized7 by the bearing industry as a uniform means of
describing the ability of any given rolling element bearing to resist failure by (1) surface
fatigue and (2) brinnelling (see 11.3). The basic dynamic load rating, 
, is a measure of
resistance to surface fatigue failure. The basic static load rating, 
, is a measure of resist-
ance to failure by brinnelling. Typically, values of 
and 
are published for each bear-
ing listed in a manufacturer’s catalog.8
Basic dynamic radial load rating 
(90) is deﬁned to be the largest constant station-
ary radial load that 90 percent of a group of apparently identical bearings will survive for
1 million revolutions (inner race rotating, outer race ﬁxed) with no evidence of failure by
surface fatigue. Based on extensive experimental data, the relationship between radial
bearing load 
and bearing life 
(revolutions to failure) for any given bearing is
(11-1)
where 
for ball bearings and 
for roller bearings.9
Basic static radial load rating 
is deﬁned to be the largest stationary radial load that
will produce signiﬁcant brinnelling evidence at the most heavily loaded rolling element
contact site. “Signiﬁcant brinnelling evidence” is deﬁned to be any plastic deformation
diameter (or width) greater than 0.0001 of the diameter of the rolling element.
Reliability Speciﬁcations
Values of dynamic load rating corresponding to a reliability of 
percent, 
,
are routinely published by all bearing manufacturers. While 90 percent reliability is ac-
ceptable for a wide variety of industrial applications, higher reliabilities are sometimes de-
sired by a designer. Reliability-adjustment factors, based on actual failure rate data, allow
a designer to select bearings for reliability levels higher than 90 percent.10 Although it is
possible to express reliability adjustment as either a load factor or a life factor, current
practice is to use a reliability life-adjustment factor, 
. Thus the basic bearing rating life,
KR
Cd 1902
R = 90
Cs
a = 103
a = 3
L
106 = aCd
P b
a
L
P
Cd
Cs
Cd
Cs
Cd
Cs
Cd
Bearing Selection 435
7See refs. 2 and 3.
8See, for example, Tables 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7.
9See refs. 2 and 3; also note that some manufacturers recommend the value 
for both ball and roller
bearings.
10Recall that reliability 
in percent is equal to 
, where 
is probability of failure in percent.
P
100 - P
R
a = 103

revolutions (corresponds to 
or 
), may be adjusted to any chosen
higher reliability 
using
(11-2)
where the value of 
is read from Table 11.2. 
is called the reliability-adjusted rating
life (revolutions). The 
life is sometimes called the 
life.
Suggested Selection Procedure for Steady Loads
The procedure followed by a designer when selecting an appropriate bearing for a speciﬁc
application usually involves the following steps:
1.
First, design the shaft by taking it as a free body, perform a complete force analysis,
and employ appropriate shaft design equations to determine a tentative strength-based
shaft diameter at the bearing site (See Chapter 8).
2.
From the force analysis, calculate the radial load
and axial thrust load 
to be sup-
ported by the proposed bearing.
3.
Determine the design life requirement, 
, for the bearing.
4.
Determine the reliability R appropriate to the application, and select the correspon-
ding life-adjustment factor, 
.
5.
Assess the severity of any shock or impact associated with the application so that an
impact factor, IF, may be determined (see Table 11.3 and review 2.6 of Chapter 2).
KR
Ld
Fa
Fr
B10
L10
LP
KR
LP = KRL10
R
R = 90
P = 10
L10 = 106
436
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Table 11.2 Reliability Life-Adjustment Factor KR for
Bearing Reliabilities Different from R  90%
Reliability R,
Probability of Failure P,
percent
percent
50
50
5.0
90
10
1.0
95
5
0.62
96
4
0.53
97
3
0.44
98
2
0.33
99
1
0.21
KR
Table 11.3 Estimated Impact Factors for Various Applications1
Type of Application
Impact Factor IF
Uniform load, no impact
1.0–1.2
Precision gearing
1.1–1.2
Commercial gearing
1.1–1.3
Toothed belts
1.1–1.3
Light impact
1.2–1.5
Vee belts
1.2–2.5
Moderate impact
1.5–2.0
Flat belts
1.5–4.5
Heavy impact
2.0–5.0
1See also 2.6 in Chapter 2.

6.
Tentatively select the type of bearing to be used (see Table 11.1).
7.
Calculate a dynamic equivalent radial load
from the following empirical relationship11
(11-3)
dynamic radial load factor, based on bearing geometry (see Table 11.4)
dynamic axial (thrust) load factor, based on bearing geometry (see
Table 11.4)
The combinations 
, 
, and 
, 
should both be calculated, and whichever com-
bination gives the larger value for 
should be used.
8.
Using (11-1) as a basis, calculate the basic dynamic load rating requirement corre-
sponding to the reliability level selected in step 4, as
(11-4)
required radial dynamic load rating to give a bearing relia-
bility of R percent
design life, revolutions
Ld =
where  3Cd1R24req =
3Cd1R24req = c
Ld
KR11062
d
1>a
1IF2Pe
Pe
Yd2
Xd2
Yd1
Xd1
Yd =
where  Xd =
Pe = XdFr + YdFa
Pe
Bearing Selection 437
Table 11.4 Approximate Radial Load Factors for Selected Bearing Types1
Dynamic
Static
Bearing Type
Single-row radial ball bearing
1
0
0.55
1.45
1
0
0.6
0.5
Single-row angular contact ball bearing
1
0
0.45
1.2
1
0
0.5
0.45
(shallow angle)
Single-row angular contact ball bearing
1
0
0.4
0.75
1
0
0.5
0.35
(steep angle)
Double-row radial ball bearing
1
0
0.55
1.45
1
0
0.6
0.5
Double-row angular contact ball bearing
1
1.55
0.7
1.9
1
0
1
0.9
(shallow angle)
Double-row angular contact ball bearing
1
0.75
0.6
1.25
1
0
1
0.65
(steep angle)
Self-aligning single-row ball bearing2
1
0
0.4
0.4cot
1
0
0.5
0.2cot
Self-aligning double-row ball bearing
1
0.4cot
0.65
0.65cot
1
0
1
0.45cot
Straight roller bearing2 (
0); (cannot
1
0
—
—
1
0
1
0
take thrust)
Single-row roller bearing3 (
)
1
0
0.4
0.4cot
1
0
0.5
0.2cot
Double-row roller bearing (
)
1
0.45cot
0.65
0.65cot
1
0
1
0.45cot
Self-aligning single-row roller bearing
1
0
0.4
0.4cot
1
0
0.5
0.2cot
Self-aligning double-row roller bearing
1
0.45cot
0.65
0.65cot
1
0
1
0.45cot
1For more accurate values, see refs. 2 and 3.
2Nominal contact angle 
is the angle between a plane perpendicular to the bearing axis and the nominal line of action of the resultant force
transmitted from a bearing race to a rolling element.
3These values may be used for preliminary selection of tapered roller bearings, but mounting details and preloading have signiﬁcant inﬂuence;
manufacturer’s catalogs should be consulted. See also Table 11.7.
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
a Z 0
a
a
a Z 0
=
a
a
a
a
a
a
Ys2
Xs2
Ys1
Xs1
Yd2
Xd2
Yd1
Xd1
11Some sources recommend the use of a “race rotation’’ factor that increases 
for any case in which the outer
race rotates, instead of the inner race. However, a race rotation factor is not used here, because the bearing
manufacturers supplying the selection data for Tables 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7 are not currently using it.
Pe

438
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
reliabiliy adjustment factor from Table 11.2
application impact factor from Table 11.3
equivalent radial load from (11-3)
exponent equal to 3 for ball bearings or 
for roller bearings
9.
With the result from (11-4), enter a basic load rating table for the type of bearing se-
lected in step 6 and tentatively select the smallest bearing with a basic radial load rat-
ing 
of at least 
. Such tables may be found for all types of bearings in
bearing manufacturers’ catalogs.12 Illustrative examples of bearing selection tables are
included here as Tables 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7.
Tables 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7 include not only basic dynamic and static load ratings,
but boundary dimensions for the listed bearings as well. The ABMA has formulated
a plan13 for standardized boundary dimensions for bearings, including standard com-
binations of bore, outside diameter, width, and ﬁllet sizes for shaft and housing shoul-
ders. For a given bore, an assortment of standard widths and outside diameters are
available, giving great ﬂexibility in choosing a bearing geometry suitable to most ap-
plications. Figure 11.4 illustrates the ABMA plan for a selection of bearing boundary
dimension speciﬁcations. Bearings are identiﬁed by a two-digit number called the di-
mension-series code. The ﬁrst digit is from the width series (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6). The
second digit is from the (outside) diameter series (8, 9, 0, 1, 2, 3, or 4). Figure 11.4
shows several samples of bearing proﬁles that may be obtained for a given bore size.
Tables 11.5 and 11.6 illustrate the resulting dimensions for several selected series of
ball and roller bearings, and Table 11.7 provides similar information for tapered roller
bearings.
Not only have bearing dimensions been standardized, but dimensional tolerances
have also been standardized for shaft and housing ﬁts at several levels of precision.13
These range from the “usual” ABEC-1 ball bearing tolerances and RBEC-1 roller
bearing tolerances recommended for most applications to the ABEC-9 and RBEC-9
tolerances available (at higher cost) for exceptionally high-precision applications such
as machine tool spindles.
Similar (but not exactly the same) precision tolerance levels for tapered roller bear-
ings are provided by six tolerance classes.14 To establish appropriate precision toler-
ance levels, bearing manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted.
10. Check to make sure operating speed lies below limiting speed for the tentatively se-
lected bearing. If not, select another bearing that meets both the dynamic load rating
requirement and the limiting speed requirement. Remember that the speed is the ab-
solute rotational speed of the inner race relative to the outer race.
3Cd1R24req
Cd
103
a =
Pe =
IF =
KR =
12See, for example, refs. 5 and 6.
13See ref. 4.
14See ref. 6.
00
02
03
04
10
12
13
20
22
23
30
31
32
33
0
1
2
3
4
Width series
Dimension
series
Diameter
series
Bore
OD
0
1
2
3
r
r
Figure 11.4
Illustration of selected exam-
ples from ABMA standard
boundary dimensions for ball
bearings, and for straight
and spherical roller bearings.
Boundaries shown are not
valid for tapered roller bear-
ings or for “inch-series”
bearings.

Bearing Selection 439
11. Calculate a static equivalent radial load rating 
from the following empirical rela-
tionship
(11-5)
static radial load
static axial load
static radial load factor, based on bearing geometry (see Table 11.4)
static axial (thrust) load factor, based on bearing geometry (see
Table 11.4)
The combination 
, 
or 
, 
should both be calculated, and whichever combina-
tion gives the larger value of 
should be used.
12. Check bearing selection tables to make sure that 
does not exceed the basic static
radial load rating 
for the bearing that was tentatively selected in step 10.
13. Check to make sure the bore of the tentatively selected bearing will ﬁt over the
strength-based shaft diameter found in step 1. If not, select a larger bearing bore that
will just ﬁt over the shaft. Recheck 
, 
, and limiting speed for the newly selected
larger bearing. (Depending upon the dimension series, bearings with larger bores may
have lower basic load ratings.)
14. Using the ﬁnal bearing selection, increase the shaft diameter at the bearing site to the
nominal bearing bore size, using proper mounting dimensions and tolerances, as spec-
iﬁed by the bearing manufacturer.
Example 11.1 Rolling Element Bearing Selection for Steady Loading
A gleaning-cylinder support shaft for a proposed “new concept” agricultural combine has
been stress-analyzed to ﬁnd that the minimum required strength-based shaft diameter is
1.60 inches at one of the proposed bearing sites. From the associated force analysis and
other design speciﬁcations, the following information has been assembled:
1.
Radial bearing load 
lb (steady).
2.
Axial bearing load 
lb (steady).
3.
Shaft speed 
rpm.
4.
Design life speciﬁcation is 10 years of operation, 50 days/year, 20 hr/day.
5.
Design reliability speciﬁcation is 
percent.
6.
The shaft is to be V-belt driven.
Select a rolling element bearing for this application.
Solution
To select appropriate candidate bearings, the 14-step selection procedure just outlined may
be utilized as follows:
1. Strength-based shaft diameter is (from problem statement)
2. From problem speciﬁcations, the radial and axial applied load components are
Fa = 130 lb
Fr = 370 lb
1ds2str = 1.60 inches
R = 95
n = 350
Fa = 130
Fr = 370
Cs
Cd
Cs
Pse
Pse
Ys2
Xs2
Ys1
Xs1
Ys =
Xs =
Fsa =
where  Fsr =
Pse = XsFsr + YsFsa
Pse

440
Table 11.5 Dimensions and Load Ratings for Selected Single-Row Radial Deep-Groove (Conrad Type) Ball Bearings: Series 60, 62, and 63
(Data courtesy of SKF
Min Shaft
Approximate Limiting
Outside
Max Fillet
Abutment
Basic Load Rating3
Fatigue Load Speed,5
Bore
Diameter
Width
Radius1
Diameter2
With
Bearing
103
103
103
Grease/
Number
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
kN
lbf
kN
lbf
kN
lbf
Oil
6000
10
0.3937
26
1.0236
8
0.3150
0.3
0.012
12
0.472
4.62
1.04
1.96
0.44
0.08
0.019
30/36
6200
30
1.1811
9
0.3543
0.6
0.024
14
0.551
5.07
1.14
2.36
0.53
0.10
0.023
24/30
6300
35
1.3780
11
0.4331
0.6
0.024
14
0.551
8.06
1.81
3.40
0.76
0.14
0.032
20/26
6002
15
0.5906
32
1.2598
9
0.3543
0.3
0.012
17
0.669
5.59
1.26
2.85
0.64
0.12
0.027
22/28
6202
35
1.3780
11
0.4331
0.6
0.024
19
0.748
7.80
1.75
3.75
0.84
0.16
0.036
19/24
6302
42
1.6535
13
0.5118
1
0.039
20
0.787
11.40
2.56
5.40
1.21
0.23
0.051
17/20
6004
20
0.7874
42
1.6535
12
0.4724
0.6
0.024
24
0.945
9.36
2.10
5.00
1.12
0.21
0.048
17/20
6204
47
1.8504
14
0.5512
1
0.039
25
0.984
12.70
2.86
6.55
1.47
0.28
0.063
15/18
6304
52
2.0472
15
0.5906
1
0.039
26.5
1.043
15.90
3.57
7.80
1.75
0.34
0.075
13/16
6005
25
0.9843
47
1.8504
12
0.4724
0.6
0.024
29
1.142
11.20
2.52
6.55
1.47
0.28
0.062
15/18
6205
52
2.0472
15
0.5906
1
0.039
30
1.181
14.00
3.15
7.80
1.75
0.34
0.075
12/15
6305
62
2.4409
17
0.6693
1
0.039
31.5
1.240
22.50
5.06
11.60
2.61
0.49
0.110
11/14
6006
30
1.1811
55
2.1654
13
0.5118
1
0.039
35
1.378
13.30
2.99
8.30
1.87
0.36
0.080
12/15
6206
62
2.4409
16
0.6299
1
0.039
35
1.378
19.50
4.38
11.20
2.52
0.48
0.107
10/13
6306
72
2.8346
19
0.7480
1
0.039
36.5
1.437
28.10
6.32
16.00
3.60
0.67
0.151
9/11
6007
35
1.3780
62
2.4409
14
0.5512
1
0.039
40
1.575
15.90
3.57
10.20
2.29
0.44
0.099
10/13
6207
72
2.8346
17
0.6693
1
0.039
41.5
1.634
25.50
5.73
15.30
3.44
0.66
0.147
9/11
6307
80
3.1496
21
0.8268
1.5
0.059
43
1.693
33.20
7.46
19.00
4.27
0.82
0.183
8.5/10
6008
40
1.5748
68
2.6772
15
0.5906
1
0.039
45
1.772
16.80
3.78
11.60
2.61
0.49
0.110
9.5/12
6208
80
3.1496
18
0.7087
1
0.039
46.5
1.831
30.70
6.90
19.00
4.27
0.80
0.180
8.5/10
6308
90
3.5433
23
0.9055
1.5
0.059
48
1.890
41.00
9.22
24.00
5.40
1.02
0.229
7.5/9
Pf
Cs
Cd
®

441
6009
45
1.7717
75
2.9528
16
0.6299
1
0.039
50
1.969
20.80
4.68
14.60
3.28
0.64
0.144
9/11
6209
85
3.3465
19
0.7480
1
0.039
51.5
2.028
33.20
7.46
21.60
4.86
0.92
0.206
7.5/9
6309
100
3.9370
25
0.9843
1.5
0.059
53
2.087
52.70
11.90
31.50
7.08
1.34
0.301
6.7/8
6010
50
1.9685
80
3.1496
16
0.6299
1
0.039
55
2.165
21.60
4.86
16.00
3.60
0.71
0.160
8.5/10
6210
90
3.5433
20
0.7874
1
0.039
56.5
2.224
35.10
7.89
23.20
5.22
0.98
0.220
7/8.5
6310
110
4.3307
27
1.0630
2
0.079
59
2.323
61.80
13.90
38.00
8.54
1.60
0.360
6.3/7.5
6011
55
2.1654
90
3.5433
18
0.7087
1
0.039
61.5
2.421
28.10
6.32
21.20
4.77
0.90
0.202
7.5/9
6211
100
3.9370
21
0.8268
1.5
0.059
63
2.480
43.60
9.80
29.00
6.52
1.25
0.281
6.3/7.5
6311
120
4.7244
29
1.1417
2
0.079
64
2.520
71.50
16.10
45.00
10.10
1.90
0.427
5.6/6.7
6012
60
2.3622
95
3.7402
18
0.7087
1
0.039
66.5
2.618
29.60
6.65
23.20
5.22
0.98
0.220
6.7/8
6212
110
4.3307
22
0.8661
1.5
0.059
68
2.677
47.50
10.70
32.50
7.31
1.40
0.315
6/7
6312
130
5.1181
31
1.2205
2
0.079
71
2.795
81.90
18.40
52.00
11.70
2.20
0.495
5/6
6016
80
3.1496
125
4.9213
22
0.8661
1
0.039
86.5
3.406
47.50
10.70
40.00
8.99
1.66
0.373
5.3/6.3
6216
140
5.5118
26
1.0236
2
0.079
89
3.504
70.20
15.80
55.00
12.40
2.20
0.495
4.5/5.3
6316
170
6.6929
39
1.5354
2
0.079
91
3.583
124.00
27.90
86.50
19.50
3.25
0.731
3.8/4.5
6020
100
3.9370
150
5.9055
24
0.9449
1.5
0.059
108
4.252
60.50
13.60
54.00
12.10
2.04
0.459
4.3/5
6220
180
7.0866
34
1.3386
2
0.079
111
4.370
124.00
27.90
93.00
20.90
3.35
0.753
3.4/4
6320
215
8.4646
47
1.8504
2.5
0.098
113
4.449
174.00
39.10
140.00
31.50
4.75
1.070
3/3.6
6030
150
5.9055
225
8.8583
35
1.3780
2
0.079
161
6.339
125.00
28.10
125.00
28.10
3.90
0.877
2.6/3.2
6230
270
10.6299
45
1.7717
2.5
0.098
163
6.417
174.00
39.10
166.00
37.30
4.90
1.100
2/2.6
6330
320
12.5984
65
2.5591
3
0.118
166
6.535
276.00
62.10
285.00
64.10
7.80
1.750
1.9/2.4
6040
200
7.8740
310
12.2047
51
2.0079
2
0.079
211
8.307
216.00
48.60
245.00
55.10
6.40
1.440
1.9/2.4
6240
360
14.1732
58
2.2835
3
0.118
216
8.504
270.00
60.70
310.00
69.70
7.80
1.750
1.7/2
6340
420
16.5354
80
3.1496
4
0.157
220
8.661
377.00
84.80
465.00
105.0
11.2
2.520
1.5/1.8
1Maximum allowable ﬁllet radius at shaft (and housing) abutment.
2For housing dimensions see manufacturer’s catalogs.
3
4Equivalent radial load below which inﬁnite life may be expected; analogous to fatigue endurance limit; contact SKF
for more accurate values.
5Absolute rotational speed of the inner race relative to the outer race.
®
Cs
Cd

442
Table 11.6 Dimensions and Load Ratings for Selected Single-Row Cylindrical Roller Bearings: Series 20, 22, and 30 (Data courtesy of SKF
USA Inc., Norristown, PA)
Min Shaft
Approximate Limiting
Outside
Max Fillet
Abutment
Basic Load Rating3
Fatigue Load Speed,5
Bore
Diameter
Width
Radius1
Diameter2
Limit4
103 rpm
With
Bearing
103
103
103
Grease/
Number
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
kN
lbf
kN
lbf
kN
lbf
Oil
202
15
0.5906
35
1.3780
11
0.4331
0.6
0.024
17
0.669
12.5
2.81
10.2
2.29
1.22
0.27
18/22
302
42
1.6535
13
0.5118
1
0.039
19
0.748
19.4
4.36
15.3
3.44
1.86
0.42
16/19
204
20
0.7874
47
1.8504
14
0.5512
1
0.039
24
0.945
25.1
5.64
22.0
4.95
2.75
0.62
13/16
2204
47
1.8504
18
0.7087
1
0.039
24
0.945
29.7
6.68
27.5
6.18
3.45
0.78
13/16
304
52
2.0472
15
0.5906
1
0.039
24
0.945
30.8
6.92
26.0
5.85
3.25
0.73
12/15
205
25
0.9843
52
2.0472
15
0.5906
1
0.039
29
1.142
28.6
6.43
27.0
6.07
3.35
0.75
11/14
2205
52
2.0472
18
0.7087
1
0.039
29
1.142
34.1
7.67
34.0
7.64
4.25
0.96
11/14
305
62
2.4409
17
0.6693
1
0.039
31.5
1.240
40.2
9.04
36.5
8.21
4.55
1.02
9.5/12
206
30
1.1811
62
2.4409
16
0.6299
1
0.039
34
1.339
38.0
8.54
36.5
8.21
4.55
1.02
9.5/12
2206
62
2.4409
20
0.7874
1
0.039
34
1.339
48.4
10.9
49.0
11.0
6.10
1.37
9.5/12
306
72
2.8346
19
0.7480
1
0.039
36.5
1.437
51.2
11.5
48.0
10.8
6.20
1.39
9/11
207
35
1.3780
72
2.8346
17
0.6693
1
0.039
39
1.535
48.4
10.9
48.0
10.8
6.10
1.37
8.5/10
2207
72
2.8346
23
0.9055
1
0.039
39
1.535
59.4
13.4
63.0
14.2
8.15
1.83
8.5/10
307
80
3.1496
21
0.8268
1.5
0.059
41.5
1.634
64.4
14.5
63.0
14.2
8.15
1.83
8/9.5
208
40
1.5748
80
3.1496
18
0.7087
1
0.039
46.5
1.831
53.9
12.1
53.0
11.9
6.70
1.51
7.5/9
2208
80
3.1496
23
0.9055
1
0.039
46.5
1.831
70.4
15.8
75.0
16.9
9.65
2.17
7.5/9
308
90
3.5433
23
0.9055
1.5
0.059
48
1.890
80.9
18.2
78.0
17.5
10.2
2.29
6.7/8
209
45
1.7717
85
3.3465
19
0.7480
1
0.039
51.5
2.028
60.5
13.6
64.0
14.4
8.15
1.83
6.7/8
Pf
Cs
Cd
®

443
2209
85
3.3465
23
0.9055
1
0.039
51.5
2.028
73.7
16.6
81.5
18.3
10.6
2.38
6.7/8
309
100
3.9370
25
0.9843
1.5
0.059
53
2.087
99.0
22.3
100.0
22.5
12.9
2.90
6.3/7.5
210
50
1.9685
90
3.5433
20
0.7874
1
0.039
56.5
2.224
64.4
14.5
69.5
15.6
8.8
1.98
6.3/7.5
2210
90
3.5433
23
0.9055
1
0.039
56.5
2.224
78.1
17.6
88.0
19.8
11.4
2.56
6.3/7.5
310
110
4.3307
27
1.0630
2
0.079
59
2.323
110.0
24.7
112.0
25.2
15.0
3.37
5/6
211
55
2.1654
100
3.9370
21
0.8268
1.5
0.059
61.5
2.421
84.2
18.9
95.0
21.4
12.2
2.74
6/7
2211
100
3.9370
25
0.9843
1.5
0.059
61.5
2.421
99.0
22.3
118.0
26.5
15.3
3.44
6/7
311
120
4.7244
29
1.1417
2
0.079
64
2.520
138.0
31.0
143.0
32.2
18.6
4.18
4.8/5.6
212
60
2.3622
110
4.3307
22
0.8661
1.5
0.059
68
2.677
93.5
21.0
102.0
22.9
13.4
3.01
5.3/6.3
2212
110
4.3307
28
1.1024
1.5
0.059
68
2.677
128.0
28.8
153.0
34.4
20.0
4.50
5.3/6.3
312
130
5.1181
31
1.2205
2
0.079
71
2.795
151.0
34.0
160.0
36.0
20.8
4.68
4.3/5
216
80
3.1496
140
5.5118
26
1.0236
2
0.079
89
3.504
138.0
31.0
166.0
37.3
21.2
4.77
4/4.8
2216
140
5.5118
33
1.2992
2
0.079
89
3.504
187.0
42.0
245.0
55.1
31.0
6.97
4/4.8
316
170
6.6929
39
1.5354
2
0.079
91
3.583
260.0
58.5
290.0
65.2
36.0
8.09
3.2/3.8
220
100
3.9370
180
7.0866
34
1.3386
2
0.079
111
4.370
251.0
56.4
305.0
68.6
36.5
8.21
3.2/3.8
2220
180
7.0866
46
1.8110
2
0.079
111
4.370
336.0
75.5
450.0
101.0
54.0
12.1
3.2/3.8
320
215
8.4646
47
1.8504
2.5
0.098
113
4.449
391.0
87.9
440.0
98.9
51.0
11.5
2.4/3
230
150
5.9055
270
10.6299
45
1.7717
2.5
0.098
163
6.417
446.0
100.0
600.0
135.0
64.0
14.4
1.9/2.4
2230
270
10.6299
73
2.8740
2.5
0.098
163
6.417
627.0
141.0
930.0
209.0
100.0
22.5
1.9/2.4
330
320
12.5984
65
2.5591
3
0.118
166
6.535
781.0
176.0
965.0
217.0
100.0
22.5
1.7/2
240
200
7.8740
360
14.1732
58
2.2835
3
0.118
216
8.504
765.0
172.0
1060.0
238.0
106.0
23.8
1.5/1.8
2240
360
14.1732
98
3.8583
3
0.118
216
8.504
1230.0
277.0
1900.0
427.0
190.0
42.7
1.5/1.8
340
420
16.5354
80
3.1496
4
0.157
220
8.661
990.0
223.0
1320.0
297.0
125.0
28.1
1.3/1.6
1Maximum allowable ﬁllet radius at shaft (and housing) abutment shoulder.
2For housing dimensions see manufacturer’s catalogs.
3
is basic dynamic radial load rating for R  90%; 
is basic static radial load rating.
4Equivalent radial load below which inﬁnite life may be expected; analogous to fatigue endurance limit; contact SKF
for more accurate values.
5Absolute rotational speed of the inner race relative to the outer race.
®
Cs
Cd

Table 11.7 Dimensions and Load Ratings for Selected Single-Row Tapered Roller Bearings: Series 302, 303, and 3231 (Data Source: Timken
Company
, Canton, Ohio)
Min Shaft
Basic Load Rating4
Dynamic
Thrust
Outside
Max Fillet
Abutment
Axial Load Ratio6
Bearing
Bore
Diameter
Width
Radius2
Diameter3
103
103
Factor5
Number
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
kN
lbf
kN
lbf
30204
20
0.7874
47
1.8504
15.25
0.6004
1
0.039
25.5
1.004
28.3
6.37
29.2
6.56
1.74
0.28
30304
52
2.0472
16.25
0.6398
1.5
0.059
27
1.063
35.6
8.01
34.5
7.76
2.00
0.24
32304
52
2.0472
22.25
0.8760
1.5
0.059
28
1.102
46.4
10.4
48.3
10.9
2.00
0.24
30205
25
0.9843
52
2.0472
16.25
0.6398
1
0.039
30.5
1.201
31.6
7.11
34.4
7.74
1.60
0.30
30305
62
2.4409
18.25
0.7185
1.5
0.059
32.5
1.280
50.2
11.3
50.1
11.3
2.00
0.24
32305
62
2.4409
25.25
0.9941
1.5
0.059
35
1.328
67.0
15.1
72.3
16.3
2.00
0.24
30206
30
1.1811
62
2.4409
17.25
0.6791
1
0.039
36
1.417
40.5
9.12
43.8
9.86
1.60
0.30
30306
72
2.835
20.75
0.8169
1.5
0.059
38
1.496
59.5
13.40
60.6
13.6
1.90
0.25
32306
72
2.835
28.75
1.1319
1.5
0.059
39.5
1.555
81.1
18.2
89.8
20.2
1.90
0.25
30207
35
1.3780
72
2.835
18.25
0.7185
1.5
0.059
42.5
1.673
53.4
12.0
59.2
13.3
1.60
0.30
30307
80
3.150
22.75
0.8957
2
0.079
44
1.732
80.4
18.1
85.6
19.2
1.90
0.25
32307
80
3.150
32.75
1.2894
2
0.079
46
1.811
107.0
24.1
123.0
27.7
1.90
0.25
30208
40
1.5748
80
3.150
19.75
0.7776
1.5
0.059
48
1.890
59.9
13.5
65.4
14.7
1.60
0.30
30308
90
3.543
25.25
0.9941
2
0.079
50
1.969
91.4
20.6
102.0
23.0
1.74
0.28
32308
90
3.543
35.25
1.3878
2
0.079
55
2.165
123.0
27.7
150.0
33.7
1.74
0.28
30209
45
1.7717
85
3.346
20.75
0.8169
1.5
0.059
53
2.087
64.8
14.6
74.7
16.8
1.48
0.33
30309
100
3.937
27.25
1.0728
2
0.079
56
2.205
114.0
25.6
130.0
29.2
1.74
0.28
32309
100
3.937
38.25
1.5059
2
0.079
57
2.244
143.0
32.1
172.0
38.6
1.74
0.28
30210
50
1.9685
90
3.346
21.75
0.8563
1.5
0.059
59
2.323
73.6
16.6
87.5
19.7
1.43
0.34
30310
110
4.331
29.25
1.1516
2.5
0.098
62
2.441
131.0
29.4
150.0
33.8
1.74
0.28
32310
110
4.331
42.25
1.6634
2.5
0.098
65
2.559
173.0
38.9
211.0
47.5
1.74
0.28
30211
55
2.1654
100
3.937
22.75
0.8957
2
0.079
64
2.520
94.9
21.3
114.0
25.7
1.48
0.33
30311
120
4.724
31.5
1.2402
2.5
0.098
68
2.677
150.0
33.7
172.0
38.6
1.74
0.28
32311
120
4.724
45.5
1.7913
2.5
0.098
70
2.756
211.0
47.4
265.0
59.7
1.74
0.28
30212
60
2.3622
110
4.331
23.75
0.9350
2
0.079
70
2.756
99.1
22.3
117.0
26.2
1.48
0.33
30312
130
5.118
33.5
1.3189
3
0.118
74
2.913
186.0
41.9
221.0
49.8
1.74
0.28
32312
130
5.118
48.5
1.9094
3
0.118
78
3.071
244.0
55.0
310.0
69.8
1.74
0.28
30216
80
3.1496
140
5.512
28.25
1.1122
2.5
0.098
92
3.543
151.0
34.0
187.0
42.0
1.43
0.34
30220
100
3.9370
180
7.087
37
1.4567
3
0.118
119
4.685
278.0
62.6
375.0
84.2
1.43
0.34
1First digit, 3, indicates tapered roller bearing; second and third digits refer to width series and diameter series.
2Maximum allowable ﬁllet radius at shaft (and housing) abutment shoulder.
3For housing dimensions see manufacturer’s catalogs.
4
is basic dynamic radial load rating for R
90%; 
is basic static radial load rating.
5See also Table 11.4.
6Ratio of induced axial thrust force to applied radial load for radially loaded bearings, assuming 180 roller contact zone when radially loaded.
°
Cs
=
Cd
Yd2
Cs
Cd
®
444
1Fa2i
Fr

Bearing Selection 445
3. Design life requirement is
4. Using Table 11.2 for the speciﬁed reliability of 
percent,
5. Using Table 11.3, since a V-belt drive is speciﬁed, a midrange impact factor may be
selected as
6. By evaluating the characteristics of this application (radial load, thrust load, low
speed), it may tentatively be deduced, from Table 11.1, that appropriate bearing types
would be
a. single-row, deep-groove ball bearing
b. single-row, tapered roller bearing (probably paired with another similar bearing at
other end of the shaft)
7. Considering ﬁrst a deep-groove ball bearing, the dynamic equivalent radial load 
may be calculated from (11-3) as
where, from Table 11.4, for a single-row radial ball bearing,
and
Hence
and
since 
,
8. The basic dynamic radial load rating requirement for 
percent may be calcu-
lated from (11-4) as
For ball bearings 
; hence
9. Entering Table 11.5, bearing number 6306 would be an appropriate choice for the
“smallest” candidate, since 6306 has the smallest outside diameter (72 mm) and the
smallest bore (30 mm) of any bearing that can support the load.
3Cd 19524req = c2.1 * 108
0.6211062
d
1>3
11.9213922 = 5192 lb
a = 3
3Cd 19524req = c 2.1 * 108
0.6211062
d
1>a
11.9213922
R = 95
Pe = 1Pe22 = 392 lb
1Pe22 7 1Pe21
1Pe22 = 10.55213702 + 11.45211302 = 392 lb
1Pe21 = 11213702 + 10211302 = 370 lb
Xd2 = 0.55    Yd2 = 1.45
Xd1 = 1    Yd1 = 0
Pe = XdFr + YdFa
Pe
IF = 1.9
KR = 0.62
R = 95
Ld = 10 yra50days
yr b a20 hr
day b a60min
hr b350 rev
min = 2.1 * 108 revolutions

10. The limiting speed for both bearings is far above the required operating speed of 350
rpm.
11. The static equivalent rating load for this application may be calculated from (11-5) as
where, from Table 11.4,
hence
and therefore
12. Checking 
against the basic static load ratings in Table 11.5 for candidate bearing
6306 (
), it has an acceptable static load rating.
13. Checking bore diameters of bearings 6306 (
in), it is clear that it can not
be mounted on the minimum shaft diameter of 1.6 inches speciﬁed in step 1. Entering
Table 11.5 again, the smallest acceptable available bore is 45 mm, exhibited by bear-
ing numbers 6009, 6209, and 6309. Of these, the smallest acceptable value of basic
dynamic radial load rating (greater than 5192 lb) is bearing number 6209. The basic
static load rating for this bearing is also acceptable (
), and limiting speed
is satisfactory as well.
14. The ﬁnal selection of a ball bearing candidate, therefore, is bearing number 6209. The
nominal shaft mounting diameter at this bearing site should be increased to
and manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted to determine appropriate tolerances.
The minimum abutment diameter for the shaft shoulder at this bearing site may also
be found in Table 11.5 as 2.087 inches, and the maximum ﬁllet radius where shaft
mounting diameter meets the abutment shoulder is 
inch.
Going back now to step 6, a similar selection procedure may be carried through for a
tapered roller bearing candidate as follows:
1–6.Same as steps 1–6 just above for the deep-groove ball bearing.
7. Considering a tapered roller bearing (single row), the dynamic equivalent radial load
may be calculated from (11-3) as
where, from Table 11.4, for a single-row roller bearing (
)
Xd1 = 1    Yd1 = 0
a Z 0
Pe = XdFr + YdFa
Pe
r = 0.039
d = 1.7717 inches
4860 7 287
d = 1.1811
Cs = 3600 lb
PSE
Pse = 370 lb
1Pse22 = 0.613702 + 0.511302 = 287 lb
1Pse21 = 113702 + 011302 = 370 lb
Xs2 = 0.6    Ys2 = 0.5
Xs1 = 1.0    Ys1 = 0
Pse = XsFsr + YsFsa
446
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Example 11.1 
Continues

and
The value of 
is a function of , unknown until the bearing has been selected. Hence
an iterative process is indicated. One approach is to utilize 
values given in Table
11.7, noting that for all bearings in the size range of interest,
Hence,
and
8. The basic dynamic load rating requirement for 
percent may be calculated
from (11-4), using 
, as
9. Entering Table 11.7, it may be noted that all bearings in the table meet the basic dy-
namic load rating requirements.
10. No tabled values of limiting speed are available. Generally, manufacturers’ catalogs
should be consulted. In this particular application, the operating speed of 350 rpm is
so low that no problems would be anticipated. (Rough estimates of limiting speed
may also be extracted from Table 11.6 for straight roller bearings.)
11. The static equivalent radial load, using (11-5) and Table 11.4 (noting 
), is
hence
12. Checking 
against the basic static load rating in Table 11.7, all bearings in the table
are acceptable.
13. As for the ball bearing candidate, 45 mm (1.7717 in) is the smallest acceptable value
for the available bore sizes given in Table 11.7.15 Hence bearing number 30209 would
be the tentative choice. Comparing 
for bearing number 30209 with the as-
sumed value of 
from (25), the difference in 
is small, 
still gov-
erns, as shown in (26), and no recalculation is necessary.
14. The ﬁnal selection for a tapered roller bearing candidate therefore is bearing number
30209. The nominal shaft mounting diameter at the bearing site should be increased to
d = 1.7717 inches
1Pe21
1Pe22
Yd2 = 1.5
Yd2 = 1.48
Pse
Pse = 370 lb
1Pse22 = 0.513702 + 0.7511302 = 283 lb
1Pse21 = 113702 + 011302 = 370 lb
Ys2 = Yd2>2
3Cd 19524req = c2.1 * 108
0.6211062
d
3>10
11.9213702 = 4036 lb
a = 103
R = 95
1Pe22 = 10.4213702 + 11.5211302 = 343 lb
1Pe21 = 11213702 + 10211302 = 370 lb
Yd2 L 1.5
Yd2
a
Yd2
Xd2 = 0.4    Yd2 = 0.4 cot a
Bearing Selection 447
15Actually, from complete catalog listings (see ref. 6) a bearing bore of 1.6137 could be selected.

and manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted to determine appropriate tolerances.
From Table 11.7, the minimum shaft-shoulder-abutment diameter is given as 2.087
inches, and the maximum ﬁllet radius between shaft mounting diameter and abutment
shoulder is 
inch. The bearing OD is 3.3465 inches and bearing width is
0.6853 inch.
The ﬁnal choice between the ball bearing candidate and the tapered roller bearing
candidate would typically depend upon cost, availability, and other factors such as
stiffness requirements or system vibrational characteristics.
Suggested Selection Procedure for Spectrum Loading
If a bearing is subjected to a spectrum of different applied load levels during each duty cy-
cle in the operation of a machine, one approach to bearing selection would be to assume that
the largest load is applied to the bearing every revolution, even when the actual load may
be smaller during some segments of operation. Then the 14-step selection procedure out-
lined above would be followed. However, in high-performance design applications, where
weight and space are at a premium, the cumulative damage concepts of 2.6 may be utilized
to obtain a more efﬁcient bearing selection. From (11-1) the bearing life 
under applied
load , for a given bearing, is related to the basic dynamic radial load rating as follows:
(11-6)
If a duty cycle, such as the one illustrated in Figure 11.5, contains a total of n cycles,
of which 
occur under applied load , 
occur under , and so on, then
(11-7)
and the fraction of cycles at each applied load level 
may be deﬁned as
(11-8)
ai = ni
n K fraction of cycles at Pi
o
a2 = n2
n K fraction of cycles at P2
a1 = n1
n K fraction of cycles at P1
Pi
n1 + n2 + Á + ni = n
P2
n2
P1
n1
1063Cd19024a = LiP i
a = L1P 1
a = L2P 2
a = Á
Pi
Li
r = 0.059
448
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
n1
n
n
n3
n2
P3
P1
P2
Load
Cycles
One duty cycle
Figure 11.5
Example of spectrum loading on a rolling element
bearing.
Example 11.1
Continues

Also, by deﬁnition,
(11-9)
Based on (11-8), the total cycles of operation at load 
may be expressed in terms of
design life 
as
(11-10)
Utilizing the Palmgren-Miner linear damage rule of (2-47), incipient failure is pre-
dicted if
(11-11)
However, from (11-6),
(11-12)
so (11-11) becomes
(11-13)
or, incipient failure is predicted if
(11-14)
Utilizing the same concepts of equivalent radial loads, service impact factors, and re-
liability-adjustment factors, (11-14) may be solved to give the basic radial load rating re-
quirement 
as
(11-15)
This basic radial load rating requirement may be used for bearing selection under spectrum
loading conditions in the same way as for the case of steady loading, as described earlier.
Example 11.2 Rolling Element Bearing Selection for Spectrum Loading
From a complete force analysis of a newly proposed rotating shaft, stresses have been de-
termined from a strength-based calculation that indicates the shaft diameter at one bearing
site must be at least 1.63 inches. Also, from the force analysis and other design speciﬁca-
tions, a duty cycle is well approximated by three segments, each segment having the char-
acteristics deﬁned in Table E11.2A.
The total design life for the bearing is to be 
revolutions and the desired reliability
is 97 percent. A single-row deep-groove ball bearing is preferred.
a.
Select an appropriate bearing for this application using the spectrum loading procedure.
107
3Cd1R24req = c
Ld
KR11062
d
1>a
A
a aai31IF2i1Pe2i4a
3Cd1R24req
a1P a
1 + a2P a
2 + Á + aiP a
i =
1063Cd 19024a
Ld
a
1aiLd2Pa
i
1063Cd 19024a = 1
Li =
1063Cd19024a
Pa
i
a
aiLd
Li
= 1
aiLd = total cycles at Pi
Ld
Pi
Li = cycles to failure if all cycles were loaded at Pi
o
L2 = cycles to failure if all cycles were loaded at P2
L1 = cycles to failure if all cycles were loaded at P1
Bearing Selection 449

b.
Compare the result of (a) with a bearing selection for this site using the steady load
procedure, under the assumption that a constant load equal to the largest spectrum
load remains on the bearing throughout all segments of its operation.
Solution
a.
Using the speciﬁcations just given, and applying the concepts developed earlier in this
chapter, the tabulation in Table E11.2B may be made.
Also, from Table 11.2, for R  97 percent,
and the design life is speciﬁed as
Ld = 107 revolutions
KR = 0.44
450
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Table E11.2B Segment-by-Segment Data
Variable
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
2000
1000
5000
500
2000
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0.55
0.55
0.55
1.45
1.45
1.45
1
1
1
0
0
0
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
2000
1000
5000
0.55
1.45
1825
3450
2750
2000
3450
5000
2000
1000
5000
0.6
0.5
1450
1600
3000
2000
1600
5000
1000
2000
100
/3100
0.32
0.65
0.03
IF
1.4
1.8
1.8 
ni
=
ai
ni
Pse
Fa
+
Fr
=
1Pse22
Fr
=
1Pse21
Pe
Fa
+
Fr
=
1Pe22
Fr
=
1Pe21
Ys2
Xs2
Ys1
Xs1
Yd2
Xd2
Yd1
Xd1
Fa
Fr
Table E11.2A Duty Cycle Deﬁnition
Variable
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
, lb
2000
1000
5000
, lb
500
900
0
IF
light shock
moderate shock
moderate shock
/duty cycle
1000
2000
100
, rpm
3600
7200
900
(rotational speed) 
Nop
ni
Fa
Fr
Example 11.2 
Continues

From (11-15), for a ball bearing (a  3),
or
From Table 11.5, the smallest acceptable bearing is number 6311. This bearing
has a bore of 55 mm (2.164 inches), an OD of 120 mm (4.7244 inches), and a width
of 29 mm (1.1417 inch). Checking the limiting speeds for bearing number 6311, it
would be acceptable if oil lubrication were used (limiting speed 6700 rpm), but grease
lubrication could not be used (limiting speed 5600 rpm). The basic static load rating
of 10,100 lb is acceptable (
). Also, the bore diameter of bearing num-
ber 6311, 2.1654 inches, is acceptable because it will go over the strength-based min-
imum shaft diameter of 1.63 inches.
The spectrum loading procedure therefore results in the selection of single-row
ball bearing candidate number 6311. The nominal shaft mounting diameter at this
bearing site should be increased to
and manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted to determine appropriate tolerances.
Shaft-abutment-shoulder dimensions from Table 11.5 are 2.520 inches for minimum
shoulder diameter and r  0.079 inch, maximum, for shaft-shoulder ﬁllet radius.
b.
Using the simpliﬁed method (largest steady load), and choosing segment 3 loading
data from Tables E11.2A and E11.2B, (11-4) gives
From Table 11.5 the smallest acceptable bearing is number 6316, based on basic
dynamic load rating. This bearing has a bore of 80 mm (3.1496 inches), an OD of 170
mm (6.6929 inches), and a width of 39 mm (1.5354 inches). Checking the limiting
speed, even with oil lubricaiton the bearing’s limiting speed (4500 rpm) does not meet
the segment 2 speed requirement of 6700 rpm, and segment 2 represents about 63 per-
cent of bearing operation.
Clearly, this (oversimpliﬁed) approach, for the case at hand, results in a much
larger, heavier bearing and it doesn’t meet limiting speed requirements. Consultation
with a bearing manufacturer would probably be necessary to resolve the lubrication/
speed issue.
The superiority of using the spectrum loading approach to bearing selection is 
evident for this particular case.
Lubrication
Until recently, metal-to-metal contact and boundary lubrication were assumed to characterize
all rolling element bearing applications. However, in the development of elastohydrodynamic
3Cd19724req = c
107
0.4411062
d
1>3
11.82150002 = 2.83190002 = 25,470 lb
d = 2.1654 inches
10,100 7 5000
= 2.83154622 = 15,460 lb
3Cd19724req = 32.8342
3 7.02 * 109 + 156.0 * 109 + 0.022 * 109
c
107
0.4411062
d
1>3
2
30.3231.412000243 + 0.6531.813450243 + 0.0331.815000243
3Cd19724req =
Bearing Selection 451

theory16 in the 1960s and 1970s, it was postulated that for operational rolling element bear-
ings, the squeeze ﬁlm thickness, h, often may be the same order of magnitude (microinches)
as surface roughness, making total separation of the surfaces by the ﬁlm a feasible goal. Early
investigators examined the inﬂuence on 
bearing life of a dimensionless ﬁlm parameter
, sometimes called the lambda ratio. It is deﬁned as
(11-16)
minimum elastohydrodynamic ﬁlm thickness
relative roughness (arithmetic average roughness height) of bearing
surface a (see Figure 6.11)
relative roughness (arithmetic average roughness height) of bearing
surface b (see Figure 6.11)
Experimental results for ball bearings17 and roller bearings18 are shown in Figure 11.6.
These results illustrate the improvement in ABMA 
life that may be achieved by main-
taining an appropriate minimum ﬁlm thickness, 
. The 
life degradation that may re-
sult for small values of 
is also shown. A magnitude of 
may be regarded as near
optimum when elastohydrodynamic conditions prevail. The minimum ﬁlm thickness is a
complicated function of the contact geometry, load, speed, and material properties. Its cal-
culation is beyond the scope of this text, but is available in the literature.19 Additional re-
search is being conducted in this area. Bearing manufacturers’ catalogs also provide useful
information about the lubrication of rolling element bearings.20
¶ L 3
¶
L10
hmin
L10
Rb =
Ra =
where  hmin =
¶ K
hmin
1R2
a + R2
b21>2
¶
L10
452
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
16See 10.5.
17See ref. 7.
18See ref. 8.
19See ref. 9.
20See refs. 5 and 6.
Percent of calculated ABMA L10 life
Dimensionless film parameter, 
0.6
0.8
1.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0 10.0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Roller bearings (ref. 8)
Mean of ball and
roller bearings
(recommended by
some for
general use)
Ball bearings (ref. 7)
Calculated ABMA L10 life
Figure 11.6
Inﬂuence of elastohydrodynamic ﬁlm pa-
rameter on the ABMA L10 bearing life of
ball and roller bearings.

11.6 Preloading and Bearing Stiffness
Although many design applications require no special attention to stiffness or deﬂection,
high-performance dynamic systems may require high stiffness, high natural frequency, low
deﬂection, and/or low noise levels. Bearings (which behave as springs; see 4.7) are usually
in series with other machine components, such as shafts and support structure. If bearings
are “soft” springs compared to the other components in series, they may dominate the
combined spring rate and signiﬁcantly lower the system stiffness, as evidenced by (4-91).
Further, because rolling element bearing deﬂection under load is predominantly governed
by Hertz contact behavior (see 4.6), the typical force-displacement curve for any such
bearing is nonlinear and stiffening with increasing loads, as shown in Figures 4.21(b) and
11.7. That is, under light loads a bearing behaves as a soft spring, but at higher loads it be-
haves as a stiff spring. For this reason it is common practice to preload certain types of
bearings to eliminate the “soft” lower branch of the force-displacement curve. As illus-
trated in Figure 11.7, the effect of preloading is to minimize the operational bearing de-
ﬂection and increase effective stiffness. When it is desired to utilize preloading to increase
effective bearing stiffness, it is ﬁrst necessary to select bearings that can accommodate
both axial and radial loads. Angular contact ball bearings, deep-groove ball bearings, and
tapered roller bearings are all good candidates for preloading. They would typically be
mounted in matched pairs, face-to-face or back-to-back, so they can be preloaded axially
against each other. Achieving the desired preload is usually accomplished by using a pair
of bearings with a controlled “stickout” between inner and outer race faces, by tightening
a nut on the shaft or in the housing to produce an axial displacement of one race relative
to the other, or by using thrust washers or springs. When the axial preload is induced in
such bearings, a radial preload also results (because of the opposing contact angles of the
paired bearings). For example, Figure 11.8 shows the axial force-deﬂection curve for se-
lected pairs of ball bearings installed without preload, as compared to paired ball bearings
with three different levels of initial preload. For a single bearing of this type, with no preload,
a 600-lb externally applied axial load produces an axial deﬂection of nearly 0.001 inch.
Preloading and Bearing Stiffness 453
Preload
displacement
Preload
Operating
load
Force
Soft
branch
Approx. kwith
preload
no
preload
Approx. kno
preload
> k
Stiff branch
Displacement
Operating displacement
if not preloaded
Operating displacement
if preloaded
Figure 11.7
Linearized approximation of typical
bearing force-displacement curve, show-
ing the stiffening effect of preloading.

Using a light (standard) preload reduces this deﬂection to about 0.0005 inch for the same
600-lb axial load, effectively doubling the bearing stiffness in this loading range. Medium
and heavy preloads reduce the deﬂection under a 600-lb external load to 0.0003 and 0.0002
inch, respectively. The radial force-deﬂection behavior of these same bearings, with and
without axial preload, is illustrated in Figure 11.9. It is clear that the radial stiffness is sig-
niﬁcantly increased when axial preloads are used.
Example 11.3 Inﬂuence of Bearing Stiffness and Preloading on System Behavior
A rotating steel disk, 35 inches in diameter and 2 inches thick, is to be mounted at midspan
on a 1020 hot-rolled solid steel shaft having 
psi, 
percent elongation
in 2 inches, and fatigue properties shown in Figure 5.31. A reliability of 99 percent is de-
sired for the shaft and the bearings. The shaft length between symmetrical bearing centers
[see (b) below for proposed bearings] is to be 6.0 inches. The operating speed of the ro-
tating system is 7200 revolutions per minute, and a design life of 108 cycles is desired.
When the system operates at steady-state full load, it has been estimated that about one
horsepower of input to the rotating shaft is required.
a.
Estimate the required shaft diameter and the critical speed for the rotating system,
assuming that the support bearings and the frame are rigid. The bending fatigue
stress concentration factor has been estimated as 
, and the composite
Kfb = 1.8
e = 36
Su = 65,000
454
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Axial force, lb
Axial deflection, in.
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Bearing pair—heavy preload
Bearing pair—medium preload
Bearing pair—light preload
Single bearing—no preload
Figure 11.8
Sample axial force-deﬂection curves for ball bear-
ings installed with various levels of axial preload.
(Data Source: New Departure Hyatt21 Catalog BC-7,
1977.)
Radial force, lb
Radial deflection, in.
0
0.0005
0.001
0.0015
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Bearing pair—heavy preload
Bearing pair—medium preload
Bearing pair—light preload
Single bearing—no preload
Figure 11.9
Sample radial force-deﬂection curves for ball bear-
ings installed with various levels of axial preload; see
Figure 11.8. (Data Source: New Departure Hyatt22
Catalog BC-7, 1977.)
21No longer in business.
22No longer in business.

strength-inﬂuencing factor, 
, deﬁned in (5-58), has been estimated as 0.25. A de-
sign safety factor of 
is desired. Is the estimated critical speed acceptable?
b.
Make a second estimate for the critical speed of the rotating system, this time includ-
ing the bearing stiffness (elasticity). A design task group working under your direc-
tion has tentatively selected a single-row deep-groove ball bearing, number 6309 (see
Table 11.5), with oil lubrication, for the application, using the procedure outlined in
Example 11.1. In addition, the group has experimentally veriﬁed that the force-
deﬂection data shown in Figures 11.8 and 11.9 are approximately correct for the ten-
tatively selected bearing.
c.
Compare results from (a) and (b), and judge the inﬂuence of bearing stiffness, as well
as the acceptability of the design from a vibrational viewpoint.
d.
Make a third estimate for critical speed of the rotating system if a standard (light) ax-
ial preload is induced by the way the bearings are mounted. Comment on the inﬂu-
ence of preloading in this particular case, and suggest alternatives if necessary.
Solution
a.
Based on information provided in the problem statement, the following preliminary
determinations and calculations may be made:
From Figure 5.31, the fatigue strength corresponding to N  106 cycles is
psi. Using 5-56 therefore gives
The disk weight WD is
From Table 4.1, case 1, the maximum moment at midspan is
The reaction (radial) at each bearing site is
From 4-39, the torque on the shaft is
The moment is an alternating moment (Ma) and the torque is a mean torque (Tm).
Using 8-11, the strength-based shaft diameter (ds)str is given by
= A
3 16
p e2(1.8)(2.1) 817
8250 + 1.732 8.75
65,000 f = 1.56 inch
(ds)str = a16
p e2Kfb(nd)Ma
SN
+ 23 Tm
Su
f b
1
2
T = 63,025(1)
7200
= 8.75 in-lb
RL = RR = WD
2
= 544.6
2
= 272 lb
Mmax = WDL
4
= 544.6(6.0)
4
= 817 in-lb
WD = 0.283cp(35)2
4
d(2.0) = 544.6 lb
SN = S¿106 = k10S¿106 = 0.25(33,000) = 8250 psi
S106 = 33,000
nd = 2.1
k108
Preloading and Bearing Stiffness 455

Comparing this strength-based minimum shaft diameter requirement with the bore
size of the selected bearing (number 6309; see Table 11.5), the bearing bore is seen to
be larger than the shaft. The shaft diameter must therefore be increased locally to
match the 1.7717-inch bore size at the mounting site, and, correspondingly, the abut-
ment shoulder diameter should be made 2.087 inches. For stiffness calculations, the
shaft diameter will be assumed to be 2.087 inches, uniform along the length.
From Table 4.1, case 1, the midspan (maximum) deﬂection is
The critical shaft frequency, assuming the bearings and housing to be inﬁnitely
stiff, then may be estimated from (8-18) as
and
According to the guidelines of 8.6, this is well within the acceptable range.
b.
Using Figure 11.9 as the basis, and using the radial bearing reaction of 272 lb, the radial
deﬂection for a single bearing with no preload may be read as
so the total midspan lateral displacement of the disk center from the unloaded
shaft centerline becomes
Again using (8-18)
and
c.
This ratio is far below the recommended guidelines of 8.6, and would be regarded as
a risky design, requiring improvement or experimental investigation.
d.
Again using Figures 11.8 and 11.9 as a basis, when a light preload is induced, the ra-
dial deﬂection of the bearing pair, each carrying a radial reaction force of 272 lb, may
be read as
1ybrg2light = 0.00008 inch
1ncr2no-pre
nop
= 10,179
7200
= 1.4
1ncr2no-pre = 187.7A
1
0.00034 = 10,179 rev
min
1ym2no-pre = 0.00009 + 0.00025 = 0.00034 inch
1ybrg2no-pre = 0.00025 inch
1ncr2shaft
only
nop
= 19,785
7200
= 2.8
1ncr2shaft
only  = 187.7A
1
0.00009 = 19,785 rev
min
ym = WL3
48EI =
1544.6216.023
48130 * 1062a
p12.08724
64
b
= 0.00009 inch
456
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
Example 11.3 
Continues

so the total midspan displacement of the disk center becomes
and from (8-18)
giving
This lies within the acceptable range.
In this particular case, ignoring the bearing elasticity [as in (a)] gives an erroneous
conclusion about the acceptability of the design. This becomes clear in (b) because
when the bearing elasticity (stiffness) is included, the design becomes risky from the
system vibration standpoint. A light axial preload on the ball bearings [as in (c)]
brings the system stiffness back into the accpetable range. In other circumstances it
might be necessary to consider heavier preloads or other types of bearings, such as
double-row ball bearings or tapered roller bearings, to improve system stiffness.
11.7 Bearing Mounting and Enclosure
Because so many different arrangements are possible for mounting and enclosing bearings,
a designer is well advised to consult bearing manufacturers’ catalogs and handbooks for
information relative to mounting options for the speciﬁc bearing selected and the speciﬁc
application of interest. The discussion of mounting practice included here is brief, and in-
tended only as broad guidance.
The operational clearances within mounted bearings that are running at steady-state
operating temperatures should be virtually zero to provide acceptable life, vibration be-
havior, and noise levels. It is important to understand that the internal clearance of a
mounted bearing is typically smaller than the internal clearance of the same bearing be-
fore it is mounted. Designers should follow bearing manufacturers’ guidelines for shaft
and housing ﬁts and tolerances to obtain optimum beneﬁts from the precision level of the
bearings selected. In general, the rotating ring of a bearing should have an interference ﬁt
with its mating member (shaft or housing) and the nonrotating ring should have a close
push ﬁt with its mating member. This practice typically assures that the rotating ring will
not slip or turn with respect to its mating shaft or housing, and that the nonrotating (un-
clamped) ring can accommodate axial sliding to avoid undesirable thermally induced
thrust loads.
The majority of applications involve rotating shafts and stationary housings. For such
a conﬁguration, an approved interference ﬁt should be speciﬁed between the shaft at the
mounting site and the inner race bore, and a close push ﬁt should be speciﬁed between the
bearing’s outer diameter and the housing bore. If housings are made of lower modulus-of-
elasticity, higher thermal-coefﬁcient-of-expansion materials, such as aluminum or magne-
sium, slightly tighter push ﬁts should be used. If shafts are hollow, slightly tighter
interference ﬁts should be used.
Interference ﬁts alone usually do not provide adequate precision for the axial loca-
tion of a bearing ring. Some positive means of axially locating and securing the ring is
1ncr2light
nop
= 14,396
7200
= 2.0
1ncr2light = 187.7A
1
0.00017 = 14,396 rev
min
1ym2light = 0.00009 + 0.00008 = 0.00017 inch
Bearing Mounting and Enclosure 457

458
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
usually required, such as an abutment shoulder, a spacer sleeve, a collar, or a snap ring,
in conjunction with retention devices such as shaft nuts and lock washers, housing end
caps, or threaded rings. Appropriate abutment dimensions must be speciﬁed for proper
bearing operation (see, for example, Tables 11.5, 11.6, and 11.7, or bearing manufactur-
ers’ catalogs).
The basic arrangement for typical applications is to support a rotating shaft on two
bearings, one near each end of the shaft. One (locating type) bearing is axially secured to
both shaft and housing to provide accurate axial location and the ability to support both ra-
dial and thrust loads. The other (nonlocating type) bearing provides radial support only, al-
lowing axial displacements to accommodate differential thermal expansion between shaft
and housing without developing undesired thrust overloads. Axial displacements may, in
some cases, take place within the bearing itself (e.g., cylindrical roller bearings) or by slip
between the outer ring and housing bore. A typical arrangement is shown in Figure 11.10.
Three or more bearings on a shaft are to be avoided unless absolutely necessary because
centerline mismatch from bearing to bearing may produce “built-in” bending moments and
unknown radial bearing loads that sometimes lead to premature failures.
It is a designer’s responsibility to assure that bearings can physically be installed and
that surrounding parts can be assembled without damaging the bearings. Proper access and
clearance must be provided for mechanical, hydraulic, or thermal mounting and dis-
mounting tools, so that no forces are ever transmitted across the rolling elements during
assembly or disassembly. Access ports for inspection and cleaning must be provided so
that these maintenance functions may be accomplished with a minimum of disassembly
and downtime.
To prevent solid contaminants and moisture from getting into the bearings, and to re-
tain lubricant, enclosures and/or seals are usually necessary. Seals may be an integral part
of the bearing or they may be separate from the bearing. Selection of a suitable sealing
arrangement may depend upon the type of lubricant (oil or grease), relative surface speed
at the sealing interface, potential misalignment, available space, potential environmental
inﬂuences, or other factors.
If integral seals are to be used, bearing manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted.
Typically, bearings can be supplied with seals or shields at one or both sides. If separate
seals are to be used, seal manufacturers’ catalogs should be consulted. Separate seals may
be either nonrubbing seals, such as gap-type seals or labyrinth seals, or rubbing seals, such
as radial lip seals, V-ring seals, or felt seals. It is common practice to place a nonrubbing
seal in front of the rubbing seal to protect it from damage by solid contaminants. 
Nonlocating bearing
Locating bearing
End cap
Rotating shaft
Fixed housing
End closure and seal
Shaft nut and lock washer
Shoulder cartridge
Figure 11.10
Typical mounting arrangement with locat-
ing bearing at left end and nonlocating
bearing at right end. The locating bearing
is ﬁxed axially. The nonlocating bearing is
free to slide axially so that neither temper-
ature changes nor tightening procedures
will overload the bearings in the axial 
direction.

Problems 459
11-1. For each of the following applications, select two possible
types of rolling element bearings that might make a good choice.
a. High-speed ﬂywheel (see Chapter 18) mounted on a
shaft rotating about a horizontal centerline.
b. High-speed ﬂywheel mounted on a shaft rotating about
a vertical centerline.
c. Low-speed ﬂywheel mounted on a shaft rotating about
a vertical centerline.
11-2. A single-row radial ball bearing has a basic dynamic load
rating of 11.4 kN for an 
life of 1 million revolutions.
Calculate its 
life if it operates with an applied radial load of
8.2 kN.
11-3. a. Determine the required basic dynamic load rating for
a bearing mounted on a shaft rotating at 1725 rpm if it
must carry a radial load of 1250 lb and the desired design
life is 10,000 hours.
b. Select a single-row radial ball bearing from Table 11.5
that will be satisfactory for this application if the outside
diameter of the bearing must not exceed 4.50 inches.
11-4. A single-row radial ball bearing must carry a radial load
of 2250 N and no thrust load. If the shaft that the bearing is
mounted to rotates at 1175 rpm, and the desired 
life of the
bearing is 20,000 hr, select the smallest bearing from Table 11.5
that will satisfy the design requirements.
11-5. In a preliminary design calculation, a proposed deep-
groove ball bearing has been tentatively selected to support one
end of a rotating shaft. A mistake has been discovered in the
load calculation, and the correct load turns out to be about 25
percent higher than the earlier incorrect load used to select the
ball bearing. To change to a larger bearing at this point means
that a substantial redesign of all the surrounding components
will probably be necessary. If no change is made in the original
bearing selection, estimate how much reduction in bearing life
would be expected.
11-6. A number 6005 single-row radial deep-groove ball bear-
ing is to rotate at a speed of 1750 rpm. Calculate the expected
bearing life in hours for radial loads of 400, 450, 500, 550, 600,
650, and 700 lb, and make a plot of life versus load. Comment
on the reuslt.
11-7. Repeat problem 11-6, except use a number 205 single-
row cylindrical roller bearing instead of the 6005 radial ball
bearing.
11-8. A number 207 single-row cylindrical roller bearing has
tentatively been selected for an application in which the design
life corresponding to 90 percent reliability (
life) is 7500 hr.
Estimate what the corresponding lives would be for reliabilities
of 50 percent, 95 percent, and 99 percent.
11-9. Repeat problem 11-8, except use a number 6007 single-
row radial ball bearing instead of the 207 roller bearing.
L10
L10
L10
L10
11-10. A solid steel spindle shaft of circular cross section is to
be used to support a ball bearing idler pulley as shown in Figure
P11.10. The shaft may be regarded as simply supported at the
ends and the shaft does not rotate. The pulley is to be mounted
at the center of the shaft on a single-row radial ball bearing. The
pulley must rotate at 1725 rpm and support a load of 800 lb, as
shown in the sketch. A design life of 1800 hours is required and
a reliability of 90 percent is desired. The pulley is subjected to
moderate shock loading conditions.
Problems
Nonrotating
shaft of circular
cross section
800 lb radial load
Bearing
RL
RR
8 in.
16 in.
Figure P11.10
Idler pulley supported by nonrotating shaft.
a. Pick the smallest acceptable bearing from Table 11.5 if
the shaft at the bearing site must be at least 1.63 inches in
diameter.
b. Again using Table 11.5, select the smallest bearing that
would give an inﬁnite operating life, if you can ﬁnd one. If
you ﬁnd one, compare its size with the 1800-hour bearing.
11-11. A helical idler gear (see Chapter 15) is to be supported
at the center of a short hollow circular shaft using a single-row
radial ball bearing. The inner race is presses on the ﬁxed non-
rotating shaft, and the rotating gear is attached to the outer race
of the bearing. The gear is to rotate at 900 rpm. The forces in
the gear produce a resultant radial force on the bearing of 1800 N
and a resultant thrust force on the bearing if 1460 N. The as-
sembly is subjected to light shock loading conditions. Based on
preliminary stress analysis of the shaft, it must have at least a
50-mm outside diameter. It is desired to use a bearing that will
have a life of 3000 hours with 99 percent reliability. Select the
smallest acceptable bearing (bore) from Table 11.5.
11-12. An industrial punching machine is being designed to
operate 8 hours per day, 5 days per week, at 1750 rpm. A 10-
year design life is desired. Select an appropriate Conrad type
single-row radial ball bearing to support the drive shaft if bear-
ing loads have been estimated as 1.2 kN radial and 1.5 kN ax-
ial, and light impact conditions prevail. Standard 
bearing
reliability is deemed to be acceptable for this application.
11-13. The shaft shown in Figure P11.13 is to be supported by
two bearings, one at location A and the other at location B. The
L10

460
Chapter 11 / Rolling Element Bearings
shaft is loaded by a commercial-quality driven helical gear (see
Chapter 15) mounted as shown. The gear imposes a radial load
of 7000 lb and a thrust load of 2500 lb applied at a pitch radius
of 3 inches. The thrust load is to be fully supported by bearing
A (bearing B takes no thrust load). It is being proposed to use a
single-row tapered roller bearing at location A, and another one
at location B. The device is to operate at 350 rpm, 8 hours per
day, 5 days per week, for 3 years before bearing replacement is
necessary. Standard 
strength-based analysis has shown that the minimum shaft 
diameter must be 1.375 inches at both bearing sites. Select suit-
able bearings for both location A and location B.
stant radial load (and corresponding axial load) is applied to
the bearing throughout all segments of its operation.
11-15. A preliminary stress analysis of the shaft for a rapid-re-
turn mechanism has established that the shaft diameter at a par-
ticular bearing site must be at least 0.70 inch. From a force
analysis and other design speciﬁcations, one duty cycle for this
device lasts 10 seconds, and is well approximated by two seg-
ments, each segment having the characteristics deﬁned in Table
P11.15.
The total design life for the bearing is to be 3000 hours. A
single-row tapered roller bearing is preferred, and a standard
reliability is acceptable.
a. Select an appropriate bearing for this application, using
the spectrum loading procedure.
b. Compare the result of (a) with a bearing selection for
this site using the steady load procedure, assuming that a
constant radial load equal to the largest spectrum load 
(and corresponding axial load) is applied to the bearing
throughout the full duty cycle.
11-16. A preliminary analysis of the metric equivalent of bear-
ing A in Figure P11.13 has indicated that a 30209 tapered roller
bearing will provide a satisfactory 
bearing life of 3 years
(operating at 350 rpm for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week) be-
fore bearing replacement is necessary. A lubrication consultant
has suggested that if an ISO/ASTM viscosity-grade 46 petro-
leum oil is sprayed into the smaller end of the bearing (tapered
roller bearings provide a geometry-based natural pumping ac-
tion, including oil ﬂow from their smaller ends toward their
larger ends), a minimum elastohydrodynamic ﬁlm thickness
(
) of 250 nanometers can be maintained. If the bearing
races and the tapered rollers are all lapped into a surface rough-
ness height of 100 nanometers (see Figure 6.11), estimate the
bearing life for the 30209 tapered roller bearing under these
elastohydrodynamic conditions.
11-17. A rotating steel disk, 40 inches in diameter and 4 inches
thick, is to be mounted at midspan on a 1020 hot-rolled solid
steel shaft, having 
psi, 
percent elongation
in 2 inches, and fatigue properties as shown in Figure 2.19. A
reliability of 90 percent is desired for the shaft and the bearings,
and a design life of 
cycles has been speciﬁed. The
shaft length between symmetrical bearing centers [see (b) be-
low for proposed bearings] is to be 5 inches. The operating
speed of the rotating system is 4200 revolutions per minute.
5 * 108
e = 36
Su = 65,000
hmin
L10
L10
Table P11.14 Duty Cycle Deﬁnition
Variable
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3
, kN
7
3
5
, kN
3
0
0
IF
light impact
heavy impact
moderate impact
per duty
100
500
300
cycle
, rpm
500
1000
1000
Nop
ni
Fa
Fr
Table P11.15 Duty Cycle Deﬁnition
Variable
Segment 1
Segment 2
, lb
800
600
, lb
400
0
IF
light impact
steady load
Operating time per cycle, sec
2
8
, rpm
900
1200 
Nop
Fa
Fr
rp = 3.00 in.
A
B
6 in.
10 in.
Power in
Power out
Fr = 7000 lb
FA = 2500 lb
(RB)r

(RA)a
(RA)r
Figure P11.13
Support bearing arrangement for gear-driven shaft.
11-14. From a stress analysis of a rotating shaft, it has been de-
termined that the shaft diameter at one particular bearing site
must be at least 80 mm. Also, from a force analysis and other
design speciﬁcations, a duty cycle is well approximated by
three segments, each segment having the characteristics deﬁned
in Table P11.14.
The total design life for the bearing is to be 40,000 hours
and the desired reliability is 95 percent. A single-row deep-
groove ball bearing is preferred.
a. Select an appropriate bearing for this application, using
the spectrum loading procedure.
b. Compare the result of (a) with a bearing selection for this
site using the steady load procedure, assuming that a con-

Problems 461
When the system operates at steady-state full load, it has been
estimated that about three horsepower of input to the rotating
shaft is required.
a. Estimate the required shaft diameter and the critical
speed for the rotating system, assuming that the support
bearings and the frame are rigid in the radial direction. The
bending fatigue stress concentration factor has been esti-
mated as 
, and the composite strength-inﬂuencing
factor, 
, used in (2-28), has been estimated as 0.55. A
design safety factor of 1.9 has been chosen. Is the estimated
critical speed acceptable?
b.
Make a second estimate for the critical speed of the
rotating system, this time including the bearing stiffness
k5*108
Kfb = 1.8
(elasticity). Based on the procedure outlined in Example 11.1,
a separate study has suggested that a single-row deep-groove
ball bearing number 6209 (see Table 11.5), with oil lubrica-
tion, may be used for this application. In addition, an exper-
imental program has indicated that the force-deﬂection data
shown in Figures 11.8 and 11.9 are approximately correct
for the tentatively selected bearing. Is your second estimate
of critical speed acceptable? Comment on your second esti-
mate, and if not acceptable, suggest some design changes
that might make it acceptable.
c. Make a third estimate for critical speed of the rotating
system if a medium preload is induced by the way the
bearings are mounted. Comment on your third estimate.

Power Screw Assemblies
Chapter 12
12.1 Uses and Characteristics of Power Screws
Power screws, sometimes called jack screws, lead screws, or linear actuators, are machine
elements that transform rotary motion into translational motion, or amplify a small tan-
gential force moving (rotationally) through a large distance into a large axial force mov-
ing through a small distance. Geometrically, a power screw is a threaded shaft with an
attached thrust collar at one end, engaged into a mating nut. With suitable constraint,
either the nut may be rotated to cause axial translation of the threaded shaft (screw), or the
screw may be rotated to cause axial translation of the nut. Common examples include
screw jacks for load lifting, C-clamps, vises, lead screws for precision lathes or other
machine tools, positive positioners for control rod drives in nuclear power reactors, and
compaction drives for home garbage compactors.
The basic conﬁguration for a load-lifting application is illustrated in Figure 12.1.
Because large mechanical advantages are possible (the threads are essentially inclined
462
Root radius rr
Major radius ro
Lead angle 
Helix
  angle 
2
Thread
angle 
Pitch p
Mean collar radius rc
Thrust collar
Thrust washer
Input torque to raise load
Support frame
Lateral
support
Rotational
constraint
Translating
nut
Pitch
radius rp
Load W
Figure 12.1
Basic conﬁguration of load-raising power
screw.

planes, wrapped helically around the shaft), thread forms are chosen to maximize axial
load-carrying capacity and to minimize frictional drag. The most useful thread forms that
may be used for power screws are the square thread, the modiﬁed square thread, the Acme
thread, and (for unidirectional loads) the buttress thread, all sketched in Figure 12.2. The
square thread provides the best strength and efﬁciency but is difﬁcult to manufacture. The
thread angle, , (
included angle) of the modiﬁed square thread improves its manu-
facturability. The Acme thread illustrated in Figure 12.1, with its 
included angle
(
) is easy to manufacture and allows the use of a split nut that can be squeezed
radially to adjust for wear. The buttress thread provides greater strength for unidirectional
loads. Stress analysis of power screw threads is discussed in 12.6. Power screw thread
u = 1412°
29°
10°
u
5°
Uses and Characteristics of Power Screws 463
p
4
p
2
p
4
p
4
p
2
p
2
p
p
2
p
2
p
p
2
p
2
p
p
2
2
1
p
2
p p
2
p
2
rp
rr
rp
rp
ro
ro
ro
(a) Square thread.
(b) Modified square thread.
(c) Acme thread.
14
°
Note: rf = 0.06p (max).
rf
0.6p
0.3p
7°
5°
45°
(d) Buttress thread (unidirectional loads only).
Figure 12.2
Common thread forms used
for power screw applications.
Some examples of power screws.

standards have been developed1 for most practical thread forms, as illustrated by the se-
lected data shown in Table 12.1. Metric power screw threads are rarely used in the United
States, but are often used elsewhere.2
As shown in Figure 12.1 the pitch is deﬁned as the axial distance along an element of
the pitch cylinder measured from a reference point on one thread to a corresponding point on
the next adjacent thread. The pitch is the reciprocal of the number of threads per inch. The
major (outer) diameter is 
. The lead angle (complement of the helix angle), , is the
angle between a plane drawn tangent to the pitch helix of a square thread and a plane drawn
normal to the screw axis.3 The lead l is the axial displacement of the nut relative to the screw
for one rotation of the screw. If a single-threaded conﬁguration is used, the lead is equal to
the pitch. Single threads are used in most applications. If a double- or triple-threaded con-
ﬁguration is used, the lead is equal to twice the pitch or three times the pitch, respectively.
Therefore, the increased lead of a multiple thread provides the advantage of rapid axial ad-
vancement. For double- or triple-threaded conﬁgurations, either two or three parallel helical
threads are machined side by side around the screw. If n is the number of parallel threads,
(12-1)
l = np
a
do = 2ro
464
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Table 12.1 Selected Data for Standardized Power Screw Thread
Forms1
Threads per Inch
Nominal Major
Outside Diameter,
Square and
, in
Modiﬁed Square
Acme
Buttress
10
16
—
—
14
—
—
12
—
8
10
—
—
12
—
—
10
—
10
16
8
16
5
6
16
6
12
1
4
5
12
3
4
10
2
4
8
2
3
8
3
2
6
4
2
6
5
—
2
5
1See refs. 1, 2, 3 for more complete data.
112
134
212
214
112
412
78
34
512
58
612
12
716
716
38
38
516
14
do
1See, for example, refs. 1, 2, and 3.
2See, for example, ref. 4.
3Ambiguities in terminology exist in the literature; some authors call 
the lead angle while others call 
the
helix angle. In this text, the lead angle is consistently measured from a plane normal to the screw axis while
helix angle is measured from the screw axis itself, as shown in Figure 12.1. Hence, 
.
a + c = 90°
a
a

Uses and Characteristics of Power Screws 465
By “developing” one full turn of a thread onto a plane, it may be deduced that
(12-2)
Single, double, and triple threads are illustrated in Figure 12.3. Usual practice is to utilize
right-hand threads, but for special applications left-hand threads may be used.
In some special applications, where it is very important to minimize thread-friction
drag, the sliding friction between screw and nut threads may be replaced by rolling fric-
tion through use of a ball screw. In ball screws a continuous stream of balls ﬂows along
between threadlike nominally semicircular grooves in the screw and nut. Each ball, after
rolling to the end of the nut groove, enters a return tube on the outside of the nut to be fed
back into the circuit at the entry point. A sketch of a ball screw is shown in Figure 12.4.
Such devices are commonly used in automotive steering assemblies, aircraft ﬂap actuators,
thrust reversers, landing gear retractors, door closers, and other special applications.
 tana =
l
2prp
=
np
2prp
Lead l
Lead l
Lead l
p
p
p

2
(a) Single (single-
start) thread.
(b) Double (double-
start) thread.
(c) Triple (triple-
start) thread.
Figure 12.3
Multiple thread conﬁgurations.
Input torque to raise load, TR
Support frame
Low friction
rotational constraint
Translating ball nut
Ball-return tube
Rotating ball screw
Low friction
thrust bearing
Low friction
lateral support
Load W
Load W
Figure 12.4
Sketch of a ball screw version of the load-
raising power screw shown in Figure 12.1.
Because of inherently low friction in a ball
screw, a brake is usually required to prevent
the load from driving the screw in reverse
when not under power, a condition called
“overhauling.”

12.2 Potential Failure Modes
Examination of the typical conﬁguration of a power screw assembly, as illustrated for ex-
ample in Figure 12.1, suggests that power screws embody certain characteristics of plain
bearings (Chapter 10), power transmission shafting (Chapter 8), axially loaded columns
(2.5), and (for ball screw versions) rolling element bearings (Chapter 11). The potential
failure modes for a power screw assembly therefore include candidates from each of these
applications, including failure by yielding, brinnelling, fatigue, corrosion, surface fatigue
wear, adhesive wear, abrasive wear, corrosive wear, fretting wear, galling, seizure, and pos-
sibly, for screws with long unsupported spans, failure by buckling or elastic instability.
(See 2.3 for failure mode descriptions.)
Design to prevent failure by certain ones of these failure modes is further compli-
cated by the indeterminate nature of the thread contact region between the screw and
the nut. Theoretically, all threads in engagement should share the load, but inaccuracies
in thread profile and spacing cause virtually all of the load to be carried by the first few
threads. This uncertainty has relevance to the determination of proper thread-bearing
contact area, to selection of acceptable lubricants, and to minimization of wear, galling,
or seizure (see 10.6). It also impacts thread stress analyses required to prevent failure
by fatigue, yielding, or brinnelling (see 12.6). As always, the designer is responsible for
assessing which of the potential failure modes must be considered in each particular
case, then for making the necessary judgments and simplifying assumptions needed to
design the assembly and avoid failure. In the final analysis, experimental testing and
development are virtually always required to achieve the desired performance with
acceptable failure rates. If the application is critical, periodic inspection of the power
screw assembly, at specified intervals, is essential to the avoidance of catastrophic
failure.4
12.3 Materials
From the potential failure modes listed in 12.2 and the material selection guidelines of
Chapter 3, candidate material pairs for power screws and mating nuts should have good
compressive strength, good fatigue strength, good ductility, good thermal conductivity, and
good material compatibility between mating surfaces of the screw and nut. For the case of
ball screws, material surfaces should have high surface hardness, usually a hard fatigue-re-
sistant case over a tough ductile core.
In most circumstances, a threaded power screw would be manufactured from low-car-
bon carburizing-grade alloy steel, case carburized and heat treated. AISI 1010, 3310, 4620,
or 8620 might be used, depending upon the speciﬁc application. The mating nut would
typically be made of a soft ductile material such as bronze, leaded bronze, or aluminum
bronze, or sintered porous versions of these materials, impregnated with lubricant. Thrust
collar material selection would follow the guidelines for plain bearings in Chapter 10, or
rolling element bearings in Chapter 11. Ball screw applications usually involve selection
of an appropriate stock assembly from a manufacture’s catalog, so “material” issues usu-
ally will have already been resolved by the ball screw manufacturer.
466
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
4Even when periodic inspections are performed, catastrophic failures may sometimes occur. A recent case in
point is the crash of Alaskan Airlines Flight 261 on January 31, 2000. It has been hypothesized that the crash
may have been caused by the failure of a jack-screw-and-nut assembly used to operate the horizontal stabilizer
of the aircraft (see ref. 5).

Power Screw Torque and Efﬁciency 467
W
W
Ttf
Tcf
TR
rp
rc
Rv = W
Wc
Figure 12.5
Screw and nut of Figure 12.1
taken together as a free body.
The load is being raised.
TR
rp
rc
Rv = W (total)
Wc
Total W distributed
over “n” threads;
also thread friction
force is produced
P
x
y
z
Figure 12.6
Screw of Figure 12.5 taken alone as
a free body when the load is being
raised.
12.4 Power Screw Torque and Efﬁciency
The input torque 
required to operate a power screw when raising the load, as illustrated
in Figure 12.1, may be estimated as the sum of the torque 
required to lift the load, the
torque 
required to overcome friction between the contacting threads of the screw and the
nut, and the torque 
required to overcome friction between the thrust collar and the sup-
porting frame. Thus
(12-3)
To evaluate these terms, the equilibrium conditions of (4-1) are applied to the screw
taken as a free body, illustrated in Figures 12.5, 12.6, and 12.7. From Figure 12.6 it may
be noted that 
and 
are satisﬁed by symmetry, and 
and 
are identically satisﬁed.
From the remaining two conditions of (4-1), utilizing Figures 12.6 and 12.7,
(12-4)
and
(12-5)
From (12-4)
(12-6)
Fn =
W
cosuncosa - mtsina
©Mz = TR - Wmcrc - rpFncosunsina - rpFn mtcosa = 0
©Fz = W + Fn mtsina - Fncosuncosa = 0
©My = 0
©Mx = 0
©Fy = 0
©Fx = 0
TR = TW + Ttf + Tcf
Tcf
Ttf
TW
TR

Combining 12.6 with 12.5,
(12-7)
The ﬁrst term of this input torque expression is the torque required to raise the load 
and overcome thread friction. The second term is the torque required to overcome collar
friction. The expression for input torque required to operate the power screw when lower-
ing the load, , may be found by rewriting (12-4) and (12-5), noting that the sense of the
input torque is reversed when lowering the load. The directions of the thread friction force
vectors and collar friction force vectors are reversed as well, giving
(12-8)
The expressions for 
and 
may be written in a more convenient form by noting,
from the geometry of Figure 12.7, that
(12-9)
and for small lead angles (the usual case) cos 
, giving from (12-9)
(12-10)
Dividing the bracketed expressions of (12-7) and (12-8) by cos 
in both numerator
and denominator, and evaluating tan 
from (12-2), expressions (12-7) and (12-8) may be
rewritten in terms of lead and thread angle as
(12-11)
TR = Wrp c
lcosu + 2prpmt
2prpcosu - lmt
d + Wrcmc
u
l
a
a
un = u
a L 1
tanun = tanucosa
TL
TR
TL = Wrp c - cosunsina + mtcosa
cosuncosa + mtsina d + Wrcmc
TL
W
TR = Wrp c cosunsina + mtcosa
cosuncosa - mtsina d + Wrcmc
468
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
A
B
C
D
R
S
P
Q
J
Fn
Fnt
TR
rp
B
A
C
Q
R
S
P
D
Fnt
Fn
Fnt
n



cos 
Fnt
Fn cos n cos 
Fn sin n
Fn cos n sin 
Fn cos n
sin 
(a) Forces at points P along
pitch helix of Figure 12.6.
(b) Details of force resolution.
Figure 12.7
Force resolution at a typical
point in the thread contact
zone when the load is being
raised.

and
(12-12)
For the case of square threads, cos 
. For the case of a thrust collar that embod-
ies a rolling element bearing, the collar friction coefﬁcient, 
, is very low, and the second
term (collar friction term) may usually be neglected. For the case of a ball screw, the thread
friction coefﬁcient is usually very small, and for the limiting case of zero thread friction
(never actually achievable),
(12-13)
Depending upon friction coefﬁcients and thread geometry, the load being raised may
or may not back-drive the screw if the applied torque 
is removed. That is, axial load 
may or may not be able lower itself by causing the screw to rotate in reverse. If the screw
cannot be rotated in reverse by any magnitude of axial load 
, the assembly is said to be
self-locking. If applying an axial load on the nut can cause the screw to rotate, the assem-
bly is said to be overhauling. If collar friction is negligibly small, the condition that rep-
resents the boundary between self-locking and overhauling is that 
in (12-12). Since
the denominator of the bracketed expression in (12-12) cannot be zero, for the screw to be
self-locking
(12-14)
and for the screw to be overhauling
(12-15)
Design applications exist for each category. For example, it is essential that screw jacks
and threaded fasteners be self-locking. It is equally essential that linear actuators to be de-
signed so that an axial force on the nut will cause rotation of the screw be overhauling.
Efﬁciency of a power screw assembly, , may be deﬁned as the ratio of driving torque
(theoretical torque to raise the load if there were no friction in either collar or thread
contact zone) to 
(with collar and thread friction). Utilizing (12-7) to obtain an expres-
sion for the theoretical torque assuming zero friction,
(12-16)
whence
(12-17)
This may be rewritten as
(12-18)
e =
1
c cosun + mtcota
cosun - mttana d + mc
rc
rp
cota
e =
Tm=0
TR
=
Wrptana
Wrp c cosunsina + mtcosa
cosuncosa - mtsina d + Wrcmc
Tm=0 = Wrptana
TR
Tm=0
e
mt 6 lcosu
2prp
mt 7 lcosu
2prp
TL = 0
W
W
TR
TR = -TL = Wl
2p
mc
u = 1
TL = Wrp c
-lcosu + 2prpmt
2prpcosu + lmt
d + Wrcmc
Power Screw Torque and Efﬁciency 469

If collar friction is negligibly small, and (12-10) is utilized, (12-18) simpliﬁes to
(12-19)
Efﬁciency as a function of lead angle 
has been plotted in Figure 12.8 for Acme
threads, using several values of thread friction coefﬁcient and assuming collar friction to
be negligibly small. It may be noted that efﬁciencies are very low for lead angles ap-
proaching 
or 
. Near-maximum efﬁciencies are achieved using lead angles in the
range of 
to 
and low thread friction coefﬁcients. The lead angle for standard Acme
power screws ranges from about 
to 
, and practical values of 
are around 0.1 for dry
surfaces or 0.03 for lubricated surfaces (see Appendix Table A.1). Therefore, for Acme
threads, operating efﬁciencies tend to be rather low, ranging around 20 percent for larger
sizes and dry surfaces to around 70 percent for smaller sizes and lubricated surfaces. A
similar plot for ball screws with lead angles in the range 
to 
would typically exhibit
efﬁciencies of 90 percent or higher.
Example 12.1 Power Screw Torque and Efﬁciency
A power screw assembly, of the type illustrated in Figure 12.1, is to be used to cyclically
raise and lower a load of 2500 lb at an axial displacement rate of 3 in/sec. It is being pro-
posed that a single-start modiﬁed square thread form, with outside diameter of 1.50 inches,
be used for the application. Tentatively, a steel screw and bronze nut are being proposed,
and a bronze thrust washer is to be secured to the frame at the thrust collar contact site.
The proposed mean collar radius is 0.88 inch. It is anticipated that both the screw threads
and the thrust collar will be oil lubricated.
a.
If these proposals are adopted, ﬁnd the pitch, lead, pitch radius, and lead angle for this
conﬁguration.
b.
Find the starting torque and running torque required to raise and lower the load.
c.
Would you expect the screw assembly to be self-locking or overhauling?
d.
Calculate the power screw efﬁciency of the proposed assembly. Does collar friction
contribute signiﬁcantly to loss of efﬁciency?
5°
2°
mt
5°
2°
a
60°
30°
90°
0°
a
emc=0 = cosu - mttana
cosu + mtcota
470
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Effeciency, e, percent
Lead angle , degrees
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
t = 0.02
t = 0.01
t = 0.05
t = 0.10
t = 0.15
t = 0.20
c = 0
Figure 12.8
Efﬁciencies for Acme screws as a function of
lead angle and thread friction coefﬁcient.
Collar friction is not included.

e.
If a special gear motor is to be used to drive this power screw assembly, what would
be the minimum power and torque requirements for the drive motor?
f.
Using Figure 12.8 as the basis, compare the thread efﬁciency of the proposed modi-
ﬁed square thread with the thread efﬁciency if a standard Acme thread form were
used.
Solution
a.
From Table 12.1, a standard modiﬁed square thread with 
inches has 3
threads per inch; hence the pitch is
and from (12-1), for this single-start thread, the lead is
From Figure 12.2 the pitch radius is
and using (12-2), the lead angle is
b.
The torque to raise the load is given by (12-11), and to lower the load given by 
(12-12). From Figure 12.2 the thread angle is 
. The only difference between start-
ing and running torque is the difference between static and sliding friction coefﬁ-
cients, which are, from Table A.1, for lubricated steel on bronze,
Thus to raise the load, using (12-11),
and
To lower the load, using (12-12),
= -30.3 + 132.0 = 101.7 in-lb
1TL2start = 250010.672 c
-0.33cos5 + 2p10.67210.062
2p10.672cos5 + 0.3310.062 d + 132.0
= 182.2 + 66.0 = 248.2 in-lb
1TR2run = 250010.672 c
0.33cos5 + 2p10.67210.032
2p10.672cos5 - 0.3310.032 d + 250010.88210.032
= 233.3 + 132.0 = 365.3 in-lb
1TR2start = 250010.672 c
0.33cos5 + 2p10.67210.062
2p10.672cos5 - 0.3310.062 d + 250010.88210.062
mt-sld = mc-sld = 0.03
mt-stc = mc-stc = 0.06
5°
u
a = tan -1
l
2prp
= tan -1
0.33
2p10.672 = 4.5°
rp = ro - p
4 = 1.50
2
- 0.33
4
= 0.67 inch
l = p = 0.33 inch
p = 1
3 = 0.33 inch
do = 1.50
Power Screw Torque and Efﬁciency 471

and
(hence it overhauls when lowered)
c.
Using (12-14), the thread will be self-locking if
or if
The static and sliding values of 
given above are both less than 0.08, so the screw
would be classiﬁed as overhauling, not self-locking. From (b), however, positive
torques must be applied both to start and run the screw, even when the load is being
lowered, implying that the assembly behaves as if it were self-locking. The reason is
that the collar friction acts as a brake to prevent overhauling of the screw.
d.
From (12-18) the efﬁciency of the power screw assembly is
Without collar friction, from (12-19),
Collar friction reduces efﬁciency from about 72 percent to about 53 percent, a signif-
icant reduction. The use of a rolling element thrust bearing rather than the bronze
thrust washer should be considered.
e.
The minimum torque requirement is the starting torque needed to raise the load, as
previously calculated. Thus
The minimum power requirement may be calculated from (4-39), using the running
torque to raise the load, as previously calculated. The rotational speed of the screw
may be calculated as
whence
1hp2min =
Tn
63,025 =
1248.2215402
63,025
= 2.13 horsepower
n =
3 in
seca60 sec
min b
0.33 in
rev
= 540 rev
min
Tmin = 365.3 in-lb
emc=0 = cos5 - 0.03tan4.5
cos5 + 0.03cot4.5 = 0.72
e =
1
c cos5 + 0.03cot4.5
cos5 - 0.03tan4.5 d + 0.03a0.88
0.67 b cot4.5
= 0.53
mt
mt 7 0.08
mt 7 lcosu
2prp
= 0.33cos5
2p10.672
= -80.7 + 66.0 = -14.7 in-lb
1TL2run = 250010.672 c
-0.33cos5 + 2p10.67210.032
2p10.672cos5 + 0.3310.032 d + 132.0
472
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Example 12.1
Continues

An appropriate safety factor on minimum torque and power requirements would
need to be applied when selecting the drive motor.
f.
If an Acme thread form of the same outside diameter 
inches were used,
Table 12.1 indicates that the standard speciﬁcation would be 4 threads per inch, giv-
ing a pitch of 0.25 and lead angle of, from (4),
From Figure 12-8, using 
and 
as compared with 72 percent for the modiﬁed square thread form.
12.5 Suggested Power Screw Design Procedure
As for any other machine component, the primary objectives for design of a power screw
are to select the best material and conceive the best geometry to satisfy the design spec-
ifications. Following the guidelines of 6.2, the screw should be designed so as to place
it in tension, if possible. If it must support compression due to the axial load, buckling
must be considered when determining its diameter. Determination of thread bending,
bearing, and shearing stresses within the thread engagement zone is important in pre-
venting potential failures due to wear or fatigue. Stress concentration at the roots of the
more heavily loaded threads may be an important factor, since cyclic loading of the
threads is usual in power screw operation. Typically, power screw thread standards limit
the length of engagement to twice the major diameter of the screw.5 However, due to
manufacturing tolerances and load-induced pitch changes, the first one, two, or three
threads in the engagement zone carry most of the load, a fact important when estimat-
ing thread stresses and bearing pressures. At certain critical points the nominal screw
stresses may combine with local thread stresses, so an appropriate combined stress de-
sign theory (see 6.4) may be required. With these observations in mind, the following
procedure is suggested.
1.
Tentatively select the materials for screw and nut, including heat treatment, and select
the desired thread form, consulting pertinent thread standards or Figure 12.2. The type
of thrust collar bearing should also be tentatively selected.
2.
If the selected design conﬁguration places the screw in compression, or if off-center
loading or spurious external bending moments are induced, estimate a tentative screw
diameter based on buckling (see 2.5). If buckling is not a potential failure mode, esti-
mate the tentative screw diameter based on direct stress. Use of the resulting diameter
from these estimates as the root diameter usually provides a slightly conservative result.
3.
Using the tentative root diameter from step 2, and the selected thread form, exam-
ine Figure 12.2 and Table 12.1 to determine tentative thread pitch, lead, and other
dimensions.
4.
Utilizing (12-11) and/or (12-12), together with design speciﬁcations, calculate the
required driving torque for the power screw assembly.
1e2Acme = 66%
a = 3.4
mt = 0.03
a = tan -1
0.25
2p10.672 = 3.4°
do = 1.50
Suggested Power Screw Design Procedure 473
5See, for example, ref. 1.

5.
Identify applicable critical sections and critical points, calculate nominal direct stresses
and torsional shear stresses in the screw, and calculate thread bending stresses, thread
shearing (stripping) stresses, and thread bearing pressures in the engagement zone.
Where pertinent, calculate principal stresses so that combined stress design theories or
failure theories may be used to assess the acceptability of the design at each critical point.
6.
Using an appropriate design factor of safety, for each potential failure mode, calculate
the design stress for each candidate material (see 2.12).
7.
Using the principal stresses determined in step 5, pertinent design stresses from step 6,
and pertinent combined stress design theories (see 6.4), adjust dimensions as necessary
to provide an acceptable design. Acceptability of the bearing pressure between screw
and nut threads in the engagement zone may be based on the plain bearing criteria of
Table 10.1.
12.6 Critical Points and Thread Stresses
Three critical points in the thread engagement zone of a power screw are of importance.
These critical points are illustrated in Figure 12.9, where an elemental volume showing the
state of stress at each of the critical points is also shown.
At critical point A, the probable governing failure mode is wear. The allowable bearing
pressure between engaged threads may be selected from Table 10.1. The bearing pressure 
on the thread surface may be estimated using the effective projected thread contact area. Thus
(12-20)
sB = pB = W
Ap
=
W
p1r 2
o - r 2
r2ne
p
474
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Kddir = Kdz
Kbb = Kbx
Kss = Ksyz
dir = z
B = – z
B
s = yz
rmax = zx
z
y
x
z
z
z (axial)
x (radial)
y
y
x
(tang’l)
A
B
C
rp
ro
rr
Figure 12.9
Critical points and stress components in
power screws.

At critical point 
the probable governing failure modes are yielding and fatigue. The
stress components at the critical point include torsional shear stress in the body of the
screw, direct stress in the body of the screw, and transverse shear stress due to thread bend-
ing, as shown on the sketch of elemental volume B in Figure 12.9. Torsional shear stress
in the root cross section of the screw may be calculated using (4-33) and (12-3), to give
(12-21)
Direct stress in the root cross section is given by
(12-22)
Considering the thread as a cantilever beam with a rectangular root cross section, the
maximum transverse shearing stress is (see Table 4.4)
(12-23)
where is thread pitch in inches.
At critical point , the probable governing failure modes are yielding or fatigue, with
brittle fracture possible but less likely. The stress components at this critical point include
torsional shear in the body of the screw [see (12-21)], direct stress in the body of the screw
[see (12-22)], and thread bending stress, as shown on the sketch of elemental volume  in
Figure 12.9.
The nominal thread bending stress may again be estimated by considering the thread
as a cantilever beam with an “end” load distributed along the pitch line. Using (4-5) gives
(12-24)
An appropriate stress concentration factor should be applied to each stress component at
this critical point, as shown in Figure 12.9.
where p = thread pitch, in
sb = Mc
I
= 6M
bd 2 =
63W1rp - rr24
12prrne2a p
2 b
2 =
12W1rp - rr2
prrnep2
C
p
tr-max = 3
2
W
Atr
= a3
2b
W
2prrap
2 bne
=
3W
2prrpne
sdir = W
Ar
=
W
pr 2
r
rr = root radius of screw, in
Tcf = torque to overcome collar friction, in-lb
where  TR = torque to raise load, in-lb
ts =
1TR - Tcf2rr
Jr
=
1TR - Tcf2rr
apr 4
r
2 b
=
21TR - Tcf2
pr 3
r
B
ne = effective number of threads in the engagement zone that carry the load
rr = root radius, in
ro = major 1outer2 thread radius, in
where  W = load, lb
Critical Points and Thread Stresses 475

Example 12.2 Preliminary Design and Stress Analysis for a Power Screw
Consideration is being given to the use of a power screw assembly as the driving mecha-
nism for a mechanical compactor to be used in a sheet-metal fabrication plant. The device
is to be used for compacting sheet-metal scrap into small cylindrical “slugs” for shipment
to a recycling facility. The proposed conﬁguration is sketched in Figure E12.2. The esti-
mated unsupported length of the screw when fully extended (corresponds to maximum ax-
ial load) is 72 inches, and the end supports of the nut and platen may be considered to be
pinned at each location. The rotating drive nut is powered by a V-belt, engaged with the
drive pulley shown. The rotating nut, supported on a low-friction rolling element thrust
bearing, causes the screw (and attached platen) to translate up and down. The screw is con-
strained against rotation by a low-friction rolling element follower running in a vertical
groove in the support frame. When the metal scraps in the compaction chamber are com-
pressed enough to generate a resisting force on the compaction platen of 10,000 lb, a force
sensor activates a reversing switch on the drive, retracting the screw to its fully up position.
Make a preliminary determination of a satisfactory thread form and screw size for the
power screw to be used in this device. A design safety factor of 1.5 has been speciﬁed by
engineering management, and it is anticipated that the threads will be lubricated.
Solution
Using the suggested step-by-step procedure in 12.5, a preliminary design conﬁguration for
the screw may be found as follows:
1.
A steel screw and bronze nut will tentatively be selected. For preliminary design pur-
poses, material properties will be taken as those for 1020 steel for the screw and C-
2200 bronze for the nut (see Table 3.3). This combination provides a good wear
resistance (harder steel on softer bronze; see Table 3.13), good buckling resistance
476
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Figure E12.2
Sketch of proposed arrangement for scrap sheet-
metal compactor.
Compaction
platen
Compaction
chamber
Low friction
thrust bearing
Nonrotating
power screw
Rotating
drive nut
Low friction
rotational
constraint
Drive pulley
for rotating nut

(high modulus of elasticity for steel screw), and relatively low coefﬁcient of thread
friction (see Appendix Table 2.1). The Acme thread form will tentatively be selected.
As shown in Figure E12.2, the thrust collar embodies a rolling element bearing, so
collar friction may be neglected at the preliminary stage. “Follower” friction may be
neglected as well.
2.
Since the screw is in compression, a tentative root diameter for the screw may be es-
timated on the basis of buckling resistance. Using Euler’s equation (2-36), with
since the column has been judged to be pinned-pinned (see problem state-
ment), gives
Also, since the safety factor is prescribed to be 
,
The maximum compressive force (design value) on the plate is given as 10,000 lb, so
Thus, for a steel screw of length 72 inches
So the tentative root diameter 
is
3.
From Table 12.1, the nearest standard-size Acme thread appears to be the 2-in nomi-
nal major diameter thread. For this selection
4.
Utilizing (12-11), the driving torque for this device may be calculated for maximum
loading. It should be noted that the rolling element thrust collar bearing permits the
collar friction to be neglected, and from Appendix Table A.1 the coefﬁcient of fric-
tion between the steel screw and bronze nut may be read as
or
For the selected 2.0-in Acme thread, (12-11) may be written, for lubricated threads,
as
This is the peak driving torque required at the end of the compaction cycle (screw
fully extended).
TR = 10,000a1.0 + 0.88
2
b c 0.25 cos 14.5 + 2p(0.94)(0.03)
2p(0.94) cos 14.5 - 0.25(0.03) d = 690 in-lb
(mt)lubricated = 0.03 (sliding)
(mt)dry = 0.08    (sliding)
l = p = 0.25 inch (single start)
dr = do - 2(p>2) = 1.750 inches
p = 0.25 inch (4 threads/in)
do = 2.0 inches
dr = c(0.263)(64)
p
d
1>4
= 1.52 in
dr
Ireq’d = pd4
r
64
= PcrL2
p2E
=
15,000(72)2
p2(30 * 106)
= 0.263 in4
(Pcr)req’d = 1.5(10,000) = 15,000 lb
Pd = Pcr
1.5
nd = 1.5
Pcr = p2EI
L2
Le = L
Critical Points and Thread Stresses 477

5.
Critical points to be investigated are those shown in Figure 12.9 as A, B, and C.
For critical point A, in the contact zone between screw threads and nut threads, it
will be assumed that 3 threads carry the full load. Using (12-20),
From Table 10.1, for steel (screw) on bronze (nut), the maximum allowable pres-
sure is only 2000 psi, so a larger projected thread contact area is required. Trying the
next largest Acme thread size in Table 12.1 results in 
, 
,
, and 
. Using (12-20) produces a bearing pressure
of 
, which also exceeds the 2000 psi allowable. Therefore we try a 3.0-in
Acme thread, for which, from Table 12.1, we obtain 
, 
,
, and 
. Again using (12-20), reducing 
to 2.5
threads carrying the load (larger and stiffer threads)
This conﬁguration makes critical point A acceptable.
The torque calculation must be modiﬁed for the new screw size to
For critical point B at the thread bending neutral axis, using (12-21), (12-22), and
(12-23), the nominal stress components are torsional shear in the screw ( ), direct
stress in the screw (
), and maximum transverse shear stress due to thread bending
(
). These are
For critical point C
at the thread root, use 
,
, and (12-24) for the bending stress (
), which is
6.
At critical point A, where the probable governing failure mode is wear, the safety fac-
tor is already included in the allowable pressure data of Table 10.2. Hence the design
stress (design allowable pressure) of 2000 psi requires no further modiﬁcation.
At critical points B and C, where the probable governing failure mode is fatigue,
the design stress may be determined as follows: In step 1 of this solution the material
sb = sx = 12(10,000)(1.38 - 1.25)
p(1.25)(2.5)(0.5)2
= 6356 psi = 6.36 ksi
sb
ts = tyz = 0.80 ksi
sdir = sz = -2.04 ksi
tr-max = txz = 3
2 c
10,000
2p(1.25)(0.25)(2.5) d = 3056 psi = 3.06 ksi
sdir = sz = - 10,000
p(1.25)2 = -2037 psi = -2.04 ksi
ts = tyz = 4(1226)
p(1.25)3 = 799 psi = 0.80 ksi
tr-max
sdir
ts
TR = 10,000a1.5 + 1.25
2
b c0.5 cos 14.5 + 2p(1.38)(0.03)
2p(1.38) cos 14.5 - 0.5(0.03) d = 1226 in-lb
pB =
10,000
p(1.52 - 1.252)(2.5)
= 1852 psi
ne
l = p = 0.5 inch
dr = 2.5 inches
p = 0.5 inch
do = 3.0 inches
pB = 2679 psi
l = p = 0.33 inch
dr = 2.17 inches
p = 0.33 inch
do = 2.0 inches
pB =
10,000
p(1.02 - 0.882)(3)
= 4703 psi
478
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Example 12.2
Continues

properties chosen were those of 1020 steel, as speciﬁed in Chapter 3. These are
, 
, and 
. Taking the fatigue endurance limit
of the material to be 
,
Using Table 5.3 as a guideline, for this application (inﬁnite life assumed) the value
of 
may be estimated as6
Hence, for inﬁnite life, the fatigue endurance limit of the lead screw may be estimated
using (5-57) as
and, using the speciﬁed design safety factor, the design stress becomes
7.
As the compactor is actuated, the force increases to 10,000 lb, then reverses and re-
tracts, the load dropping to approximately zero. The stresses at critical points B and
C consequently are released cyclic stresses. The principal stresses for critical points
B and C are peak cyclic stress values; each returns to zero stress when the load is re-
leased. Following the concepts of 5.7, the equivalent mean and alternating stress am-
plitude for critical point B may be estimated from (5-93) and (5-94) as
sd = SN= q
nd
= 14.45
1.5
= 9.63 ksi
SN= q = 0.47(30.5) = 14.45 ksi
k q = (1.0)(1.0)(1.0)(0.65)(0.9)(1.0)(1.0)(0.9)(1.0)(0.9) = 0.47
k q
SN= q = 0.5(61) = 30.5 ksi
0.5Su
e (2 inches) = 15%
Syp = 51 ksi
Su = 61 ksi
Critical Points and Thread Stresses 479
6Stress concentration factors are included in stress calculations.
seq-m = A
1
2c Asx-m - sy-mB2 + Asy-m - sz-mB2 + Asz-m - sx-mB2 d + 3At2
xy-m + t2
yz-m + t2
xz-mB
seq-a = A
1
2c Asx-a - sy-aB2 + Asy-a - sz-aB2 + Asz-a - sx-aB2 d + 3At2
xy-a + t2
yz-a + t2
xz-aB
Since 
at point B, these reduce to
sx = sy = txy = 0
and   seq-m = 21sz-m22 + 31t2
yz-m + t2
xz-m2
seq-a = 21sz-a22 + 31t2
yz-a + t2
xz-a2
where
txz-a = txz-m = 0 < (3.06)
2
= <1.53 ksi;
tyz-a = tyz-m = 0.80 < 0
2
= 0.40 ksi
sz-a = sz-m = -2.04 < 0
2
= -1.02 ksi

hence
At critical point C, we use 
, 
, 
, and
. It is noted that at this critical point, appropriate stress concentration
factors should be applied to each of the alternating stress components, since fatigue is
a potential failure mode. Speciﬁc stress concentration factor date could not be found.
The shouldered shaft data of Figure 5.4 may be utilized for approximation purposes.
For the 3.0-in Acme thread under investigation, we have 
,
, 
, and 
[see Figure 12.2(c)].
From Figure 4.17, then, with 
and 
, we approximate the
stress concentration factors as
, 
, and 
Based on the stress ﬂow concepts discussed in 5.6, and the thread geometry illus-
trated in Figure 12.9, these stress concentrations are probably conservative. 
From Figure 5.46 it may be found that for 1020 steel (
) the notch sen-
sitivity index for 
is in the range 0.60–0.65 for tension and 0.65–0.70
for torsion. Hence it may be assumed that
and
Using (5-92) then
And combining these with 
, 
, and 
from above gives for the alternating stresses
and for the mean stresses
sx-m = asx < 0
2
b = a6.36 < 0
2
b = 3.18 ksi
tyz-a = Kfsa
tyz < 0
2
b = 1.9a0.80 < 0
2
b = 0.76 ksi
sz-a = Kfda
sz < 0
2
b = 2.2a -2.04 < 0
2
b = -2.244 ksi
sx-a = Kfbasx < 0
2
b = 2.0a6.36 < 0
2
b = 6.36 ksi
tyz
sz
sx
Kfs = 0.70(2.3 - 1) + 1 = 1.9
Kfd = 0.65(2.9 - 1) + 1 = 2.2
Kfb = 0.65(2.6 - 1) + 1 = 2.0
qs = 0.70
qb = qd = 0.65
rf = 0.03 inch
Su = 61 ksi
Ks = 2.3
Kd = 2.9 (extrapolated)
Kb = 2.6
ro>rr = 1.20
rf>dr = 0.012
rf = 0.05(0.5) = 0.03 inch
dr = 2.5 inches
p = 0.5 inch
do = 3.0 inches
tyz = 0.80 ksi
sz = -2.04 ksi
sx = 6.36 ksi
sy = txy = txz = 0
(seq-a)B = (seq-m)B = 2(-1.02)2 + 31(0.40)2 + (-1.53)22 = 2.92 ksi
480
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Example 12.2
Continues

The equivalent alternating and mean stresses are therefore represented as
hence
Since the material is ductile (
), the maximum stress at B and C is determined
from (5-99)
Hence, using (5-97)
and
We note that critical point C governs. Comparing this with the design stress
or
Since the inequality is satisﬁed, the design stress exceeds the actual stress and the de-
sign conﬁguration is acceptable.
It may be observed from these design calculations that the overall governing fail-
ure mode is wear.
To summarize, the preliminary recommendation is to use a standard 3.0-in Acme
single-start thread for this application. The choice appears to satisfy all design crite-
ria and avoid potential failure by buckling, wear, and fatigue. A hollow screw should
probably be considered to save material and reduce weight. The nut should be sepa-
rately examined.
9630 Ú
?
8320
sd Ú
?
(seq-CR)C
(seq-CR)C =
7.79
1 - a3.90
61.0 b
= 8.32 ksi
(seq-CR)B =
2.92
1 - a2.92
61.0b
= 3.07 ksi
(smax)C = 7.79 + 3.90 = 11.70 6 Syp = 51 ksi
(smax)B = 2.92 + 2.92 = 5.84 6 Syp = 51 ksi
e = 15%
(seq-m)C = A
1
2c(3.18)2 + (-1.122)2 + (-1.122 - 3.18)2 d + 3(0.40)2 = 3.90 ksi
(seq-a)C = A
1
2c(6.36)2 + (-2.244)2 + (-2.244 - 6.36)2 d + 3(0.76)2 = 7.79 ksi
seq-m = A
1
2c1sx-m22 + 1-sz-m22 + 1sz-m - sx-m22 d + 3At2
yz-mB
seq-a = A
1
2c1sx-a22 + 1-sz-a22 + 1sz-a - sx-a22d + 3At2
yz-aB
tyz-m = a
tyz < 0
2
b = a0.80 < 0
2
b = 0.40 ksi
sz-m = a
sz < 0
2
b = a -2.04 < 0
2
b = -1.122 ksi
Critical Points and Thread Stresses 481

482
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
12-1. Figures 12.5, 12.6, and 12.7 depict a power screw as-
sembly in which the rotating screw and nonrotating nut will
raise the load 
when the torque 
is applied in the direction
shown (CCW rotation of screw if viewed from bottom end).
Based on a force analysis of the power screw system shown in
the three ﬁgures cited, the torque required to raise the load is
given by (12-7).
a. List the changes that must be made in the free-body di-
agrams shown in Figures 12.6 and 12.7 if the load is to be
lowered by reversing the sense of the applied torque.
b. Derive the torque equation for lowering the load in this
power screw assembly. Compare your result with (12-8).
12-2. The power lift shown in Figure P12.2 utilizes a motor-
driven Acme power screw to raise the platform, which weighs
a maximum of 3000 lb when loaded. Note that the nut, which is
ﬁxed to the platform, does not rotate. The thrust collar of the
power screw presses against the support structure, as shown,
and the motor drive torque is supplied to the drive shaft below
the thrust collar, as indicated. The thread is a 1
-inch Acme
with 4 threads per inch. The thread coefﬁcient of friction is
0.40. The mean collar radius is 2.0 inches, and the collar coef-
ﬁcient of friction is 0.30. If the rated power output of the motor
drive unit is 7.5 hp, what maximum platform lift speed (ft/min)
could be speciﬁed without exceeding the rated output power of
the motor drive unit? (Note any approximations used in your
calculations.)
12
TR
W
6 mm. The mean radius of the thrust collar is 40 mm. The static
thread coefﬁcient of friction is estimated as 0.15 and the static
collar coefﬁcient of friction as 0.12.
a. Calculate the thread depth.
b. Calculate the lead angle.
c. Calculate the helix angle.
d. Estimate the starting torque required to raise the load.
12-4. In a design review of the power lift assembly shown in
Figure P12.2, a consultant has suggested that buckling of the
screw might become a problem if the lift height (screw length)
becomes “excessive.” He also suggests that for buckling consid-
erations, the lower end of the steel screw, where the collar con-
tacts the support structure, may be regarded as ﬁxed, and at the
upper end where the screw enters the nut, the screw may be re-
garded as pinned but guided vertically. If a safety factor of 2.2 is
desired, what would be the maximum acceptable lift height 
?
12-5. Replot the family of efﬁciency curves shown in Figure
12.8, except do the plot for square threads instead of Acme
threads. Use the same array of friction coefﬁcients, and again
assume the collar friction to be negligibly small.
12.6. A 50-mm single-start power screw with a pitch of 10 mm
is driven by a 0.75-kw drive unit at a speed of 20 rpm. The
thrust is taken by a rolling element bearing, so collar friction
may be neglected. The thread coefficient of friction is
. Determine the maximum load that can be lifted
without stalling the drive, the efﬁciency of the screw, and de-
termine if the power screw will “overhaul” under maximum
load if the power is disconnected.
12-7. A standard 1
-inch rotating power screw with triple
square threads is to be used to lift a 4800-lb load at a lift speed
of 10 ft/min. Friction coefﬁcients for both the threads and the
collar have been experimentally determined to be 0.12. The
mean thrust collar friction diameter is 2.75 inches.
a. What horsepower would you estimate to be required to
drive this power screw assembly?
b. What motor horsepower would you recommend for this
installation?
12-8. Repeat problem 12-7 if everything remains the same ex-
cept that the power screw has double square threads.
12-9. A 40-mm rotating power screw with triple square threads
has a pitch of 
. The screw is to be used to lift a 22 kN
load at a speed of 4 m/min. Friction coefﬁcients for both the
collar and threads have been determined to be 
.
The mean thrust collar friction diameter is 70 mm. Determine
the power required to drive the assembly.
12-10. Find the torque required to drive a 16-mm single-start
square thread power screw with a 2 mm pitch. The load to be
lifter is 3.6 kN. The collar has a mean friction diameter of
25 mm, and the coefﬁcients of collar and thread friction are
and 
.
mt = 0.15
mc = 0.12
mt = mc = 0.15
p = 8 mm
12
mt = 0.20
Ls
Problems
Nut
 = 0.40
 = 0.30
Ls
1 1
2 in. Acme, 4 threads/in.
rc = 2.0 in.
Support structure
Tdrive from 7.5 hp
motor drive unit
Platform
3000 lb max total
platform and load
Frictionless
guides to
prevent
rotation of
platform
Figure P12.2
Power lift driven by an Acme power screw.
12-3. A power lift similar to the one shown in Figure P12.2
uses a single-start square-thread power screw to raise a load of
50 kN. The screw has a major diameter of 36 mm and a pitch of

Problems 483
12-11. A mild-steel C-clamp has a standard single-start 
-
inch Acme thread and mean collar radius of 
inch. Estimate
the force required at the end of a 6-inch handle to develop a
300-lb clamping force. (Hint: See Appendix Table A.1 for fric-
tion coefﬁcients.)
12.12. Design speciﬁcations for a power screw lifting device
require a single-start square thread having a major diameter of
20 mm and a pitch of 4 mm. The load to be lifted is 18 kN, and
it is to be lifter at a rate of 12 mm/s. The coefﬁcients thread and
collar friction are estimated to be 
, and the
mean collar diameter is 25 mm. Calculate the required rota-
tional speed of the screw and the power required to drive it.
12-13. A 20-mm power screw for a hand-cranked arbor press is
to have a single-start square thread with a pitch of 4 mm. The
screw is to be subjected to an axial load of 5 kN. The coefﬁcient
of friction for both threads and collar is estimated to be about
0.09. The mean friction diameter for the collar is to be 30 mm.
a. Find the nominal thread width, thread height, mean
thread diameter, and the lead.
b. Estimate the torque required to “raise” the load.
c. Estimate the torque required to “lower” the load.
d. Estimate the efﬁciency of this power screw system.
12-14. Based on design speciﬁcations and loads, a standard
single-start 2-inch Acme power screw with 4 threads per inch
has tentatively been chosen. Collar friction is negligible. The
screw is in tension and the torque required to raise a load of
12,000 lb at the speciﬁed lift speed has been calculated to be
2200 in-lb. Concentrating your attention on critical point B
shown in Figure 12.9, calculate the following:
a. Nominal torsional shearing stress in the screw.
b. Nominal direct stress in the screw.
c. Maximum transverse shearing stress due to thread
bending. Assume that three threads carry the full load.
d. Principal stresses at critical point 
.
e. If the screw is to be made of 1020 cold-drawn steel (see
Table 3.3), the governing failure mode is speciﬁed to be
yielding, stress concentration may be ignored, and a de-
sign safety factor of 2.3 has been chosen, would the state
of stress at critical point 
be acceptable?
12-15. Based on design speciﬁcations and loads, a single-start
48-mm diameter Acme power screw with an 8-mm pitch has
been tentatively selected. Collar friction is negligible. The screw
is in tension and the torque required to raise a load of 54 kN at
the speciﬁed lift speed has been calculated to be 250 N-m.
Concentrate on point C shown in Figure 13.9 and calculate:
a. The torsional shear stress in the screw.
b. The direct stress in the screw.
c. The bending stress in the thread assuming 3 threads
carry the full load.
d. The principal stresses at critical point C assuming
stress concentration factors of 
, 
,
and 
.
Ks L 2.2
Kd L 2.8
Kb L 2.5
B
B
mt = mc = 0.15
516
12
12-16. A special square-thread single-start power screw is to be
used to raise a 10-ton load. The screw is to have a mean thread
diameter of 1.0 inch, and four threads per inch. The mean col-
lar radius is to be 0.75 inch. The screw, the nut, and the collar
are all to be made of mild steel, and all sliding surfaces are lu-
bricated. (See Appendix Table A.1 for typical coefﬁcients of
friction.) It is estimated that three threads carry the full load.
The screw is in tension.
a. Calculate the outside diameter of this power screw.
b. Estimate the torque required to raise the load.
c. Estimate the torque required to lower the load.
d. If a rolling element bearing were installed at the thrust
collar (gives negligible collar friction), what would be the
minimum coefﬁcient of thread friction needed to prevent
overhauling of the fully loaded screw?
e. Calculate, for the conditions of (d), the nominal values
of torsional shearing stress in the screw, direct axial stress
in the screw, thread bearing pressure, maximum transverse
shearing stress in the thread, and thread bending stress.
12-17. A power screw lift assembly is to be designed to lift and
lower a heavy cast-iron lid for a 10-foot-diameter pressure cooker
used to process canned tomatoes in a commercial canning fac-
tory. The proposed lift assembly is sketched in Figure P12.17.
The weight of the cast-iron lid is estimated to be 4000 lb, to be
equally distributed between two support lugs as shown in Figure
P12.17. It may be noted that the screw is in tension, and it has
been decided that a standard Acme thread form should be used.
W = 4000 pounds
Rotational
constraint
Fixed frame
Fixed frame
Nonrotating
nut
Acme power
screw
Rolling element
bearing
Td
Figure P12.17
Power screw lift assembly for canning factory pressure-
cooker lid.

484
Chapter 12 / Power Screw Assemblies
Preliminary calculations indicate that the nominal tensile stress in
the screw should not exceed a design stress of 8000 psi, based on
yielding. Stress concentration and safety factor have both been
included in the speciﬁcation of the 8000 psi design stress. Fatigue
may be neglected as a potential failure mode because of the in-
frequent use of the lift assembly. The rotating steel screw is sup-
ported on a rolling element bearing (negligible friction), as
shown, and the nonrotating nut is to be made of porous bronze
(see Table 10.1). The coefﬁcient of friction between the screw
and the nut has been estimated to be 0.08.
a. Estimate the tentative minimum root diameter for the
screw, based on yielding due to direct tensile load alone as
the governing failure mode.
b. From the result of (a), what Acme thread speciﬁcation
would you suggest as a ﬁrst-iteration estimate for this ap-
plication?
c. What would be the maximum driving torque, , for the
Acme thread speciﬁed in (b)?
d. What torsional shearing stress would be induced in the
root cross-section of the suggested power screw by driving
torque 
.
e. Identify the critical points that should be investigated in
the Acme thread power screw.
f. Investigate the contact zone between screw threads and
nut threads, and resize the screw if necessary. Assume that
the full load is carried by three threads. If resizing is nec-
essary, recalculate the driving torque for the revised screw
size.
g. What horsepower input would be required to drive the
screw, as sized in (f), if it is desired to raise the lid 18
inches in no more than 15 seconds?
TR
Td

485
Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Chapter 13
13.1 Uses and Characteristics of Joints in Machine Assemblies
Virtually all machines and structures, both large and small, comprise an assemblage of in-
dividual parts, separately manufactured, and joined together to produce the complete arti-
cle. The joints and connections between parts must be given special attention by the
designer because they always represent geometrical discontinuities that tend to disrupt uni-
form force ﬂow. Consequently, either the stresses at a joint are high (because of stress con-
centration), or a “bulbous” geometry must be used to prevent the high local stresses. Also,
joints may involve adverse interactions between two different materials in contact, may
sometimes contribute to damaging misalignments, nearly always constitute potential fail-
ure sites, and often represent more than half of the cost of the machine (if joint analysis,
design, and assembly costs are included). The conﬁgurational guidelines for determining
size and shape, given in 6.2, should be followed as closely as possible when designing
joints, but are sometimes difﬁcult to implement. The basic challenge is to design the joint
so that the components may be assembled and secured economically, with maximum joint
integrity.
Where possible, joints and fasteners should be eliminated. However, to facilitate man-
ufacture, to accommodate machine delivery through standard door openings, to provide
for repair or replacement of parts, to accommodate shipping and handling, and to permit
disassembly for maintenance procedures, joints become a necessity. No standards have
been developed for uniform joint conﬁgurations. The more usual structural joint conﬁgu-
rations include butt joints, lap joints, ﬂange joints, sandwich joints, face joints or connec-
tions, movable joints, or combinations of these. Most joint types permit choices among a
variety of different permanent and removable fastening techniques. Factory assembly of
joined components is usually preferable, especially for permanent joints, but ﬁeld assem-
bly may be required or desired in some circumstances. The potenial hazard of in-service
joint loosening must also be addressed by the designer. Figure 13.1 illustrates several ba-
sic types of joints.
13.2 Selection of Joint Type and Fastening Method
Selection of the type of joint to be used and the method of fastening depends upon many fac-
tors, including the loading direction, magnitude, and spectrum characteristics, whether the
load is symmetric or eccentric, whether materials to be joined are the same or different, the
sizes, thicknesses, geometries, and weights of the parts to be joined, the precision of alignment
and dimensional tolerances required, whether the joint is to be permanent or detachable,

486
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
whether the joint must be pressure sealed, and the cost of assembly. As usual, designer
experience is a valuable asset in making the best choice. Evaluation of each proposed joint
interface in terms of the factors just listed and the various basic joint types available (illus-
trated in Figure 13.1) usually narrows the choice to one or two satisfactory joint options.
Potential fastening methods include interference ﬁts, threaded fasteners, welding,
bonding (brazing, soldering, adhesive bonding), crimping, staking, clamping, or the use of
pins, retaining rings, clips, or other specialty fasteners.1 Which method is selected by the
designer depends largely upon the choice of basic joint type, the forces to be transmitted,
whether a detachable fastener is required or desired, and the cost of assembly. Threaded
(a) Butt joint (edge).
(c) Butt joint (cylindrical).
(e) Lap joint (single).
(k) Sandwich joint
 (cylindrical).
(l) Sandwich joint
     (straight).
(n) Moveable joints.
      (See Example 12.2).
(i) Flange joint
      (cylindrical).
(j) Combination
       flange and lap
              joint (cylindrical).
(m) Face joint
           (connection).
(f ) Lap joint (double).
(g) Lap joint (cylindrical).
(h) Flange joint (straight).
(d) Combination butt and
lap joint (cylindrical).
(b) Butt joint (tee).
Rolling joints
Sliding joints
Figure 13.1
Variations on basic joint
types.
1See, for example, ref. 1.

fasteners, including bolts, machine screws (cap screws), and studs, are the most widely se-
lected fastener types, both for detachable and permanent joints. Special threaded connec-
tions are also used in some applications. Various threaded fastening arrangements are
illustrated in Figure 13.2.
For permanent joints, welding is widely used, but rivets are also frequently chosen.
Various bonding techniques are used in suitable applications. Pins, retaining rings, and set
screws are chosen for special applications, such as retaining shaft-mounted components (see
8.8), and interference ﬁts are widely used for mounting rolling element bearings (see 11.7),
gears, ﬂywheels, and other similar components. Design considerations related to threaded
fasteners, rivets, welding, and bonding are discussed in later sections of this chapter.
13.3 Potential Failure Modes
Because joints, by deﬁnition, involve at least two components, an interface between them,
and fasteners or fastening media to hold them together (except for movable joints), the iden-
tiﬁcation of potential failure modes is more complicated than usual. This is because failure
may occur in either of the components near the contact surface, in the fasteners or the fas-
tening medium, or failure may be initiated primarily because of interfacial contacts.
Examination of potential failure modes from this perspective, utilizing 2.2 and 2.3 as guide-
lines, suggests that potential governing failure modes may be elastic deformation failure
(leading to unacceptable loss of fastener preload or joint separation under load), plastic de-
formation failure (leading to permanent distortion or displacement that interferes with ma-
chine function, ductile rupture or brittle fracture in components, fasteners, or fastening
media, corrosion (especially galvanic corrosion due to dissimilar metals in contact), fatigue
in components, fasteners, or fastening media, fretting fatigue generated by small-amplitude
cyclic relative motions at the interface, stress corrosion, corrosion fatigue, and, for elevated
temperature environments, creep, thermal relaxation, or stress rupture. For the case of a
moveable joint, the failure modes discussed in 10.3 and 11.3 should also be considered.
Some joints involve multiple bolts, rivets, or weld-runs, often in a repeating pattern,
within or along the joint. This complicates the designer’s task of failure prevention because
the analysis of redundant load paths in multiply fastened joints requires either the use of
indeterminate structural analysis techniques (see 4.7) or realistic simplifying assumptions
Potential Failure Modes 487
(a) Standard bolt.
(d) Stud.
(e) One example of a special
     threaded connection.
(b) Reduced body bolt.
(c) Standard machine
       screw (cap screw).
Figure 13.2
Various threaded fastening arrange-
ments.

488
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
by the designer to determine how the loads are shared among the bolts, rivets, or weld-
runs. Ultimately, experimental testing and development are usually necessary to achieve
required joint integrity with acceptable failure rates.
13.4 Threaded Fasteners
Because threaded fasteners offer so many distinct advantages, they are more widely used
than any other means for joining components and assembling machines or structures.
Threaded fasteners are commercially available in a wide range of standardized styles, sizes,
and materials, throughout the industrialized world. They may be used to join components of
the same or different materials, for simple or complex joint conﬁgurations, in factories, or in
the ﬁeld. They may be readily and safely installed with standard hand tools or power tools,
and if maintenance or repair is required they may be removed or replaced just as easily.
As illustrated in Figure 13.2, the basic threaded fastening system consists of an exter-
nal (male) threaded element such as a bolt, machine screw, or stud, assembled to a mating
internal (female) threaded element, such as a nut, threaded insert, or tapped hole. Nearly
all of the basic joint types shown in Figure 13.1 may be secured by using appropriate
threaded fastening techniques. Because threaded fasteners are so widely standardized, in-
terchangeability and low unit cost are virtually guaranteed, irrespective of manufacturer.
Many different threaded fastener styles are commercially available off the shelf, and
some manufacturers also supply special-order designs for nonstandard applications.
Various standard head styles (see Figure 13.3) and thread conﬁgurations (see “Screw
Thread Standards and Terminology,” below) are readily available. A wide variety of mate-
rials and grades (standardized strength levels) are also available (see “Threaded Fastener
Materials,” below). In addition, many different types of nuts, locknuts, washers, and lock
washers may be obtained (see Figure 13.4).
Threads are manufactured either by cutting or forming.2 Smaller sizes may be pro-
duced by utilizing cutting tools called taps for internal threads or dies for external threads.
Larger sizes are usually lathe-turned. Thread forming is accomplished by rolling a
“blank” between hardened dies that cause the metal to ﬂow radially into the desired
thread shape. This cold-rolling process produces favorable residual stresses (see 4.9) that
enhance fatigue strength, and results in a smoother, harder, more wear-resistant surface.
High-production-rate automatic screw machines utilize the thread-forming process.
Heads are typically formed by a cold-forming process called “upsetting” in which the
fastener blank is forced to ﬂow plastically into a head die of the desired shape. Slots or ﬂats
may be machined in a subsequent operation.
Reduced body bolts [see Figure 13.2(b)] are sometimes used to enhance fatigue per-
formance by reducing stress levels within the thread zone, especially at the critical ﬁrst
(a) Hex-head cap screw.
(d) Slotted oval-head screw.
(b) Hexagonal socket-head screw.
(e) Slotted round-head screw.
(c) Slotted flat-head screw.
(f) Phillips round-head screw.
Figure 13.3
A sample of readily avail-
able standard head styles
for bolts and screws.
Many other styles are
available.
2See, for example, ref. 2.

thread. Since for reduced body bolts the minor (root) thread diameter is larger than the bolt
body diameter, the nominal stress is lower at the thread root for a given load. Also, gener-
ous ﬁllets between the reduced body and the threads lead to lower stress concentration fac-
tors. The combination of lower nominal stress and lower stress concentration factor often
provides a remarkable improvement in resistance to fatigue failure. Strain matching be-
tween threads of the bolt and nut, as illustrated in Figure 6.9, is also utilized in some cases
to improve the fatigue resistance of a threaded fastener system.
Screw Thread Standards and Terminology
The terminology used in discussing threaded fasteners parallels the power screw terminol-
ogy deﬁned in 12.1. Thus, as illustrated in Figure 13.5, the pitch, , is the axial distance be-
tween corresponding points on adjacent threads. In Uniﬁed Inch standard threads (see ref.
3), the pitch is the reciprocal of the number of threads per inch. The major diameter, , is
the largest diameter of the (male) thread and the minor diameter, 
, is the smallest (root)
diameter of the thread. The lead, , is the axial displacement of the mating nut for one nut
l
dr
d
p
Threaded Fasteners 489
(a) Plain flat washer.
(g) Hex nut
(washer face).
(e) Square nut.
(h) Hex jam nut
(locknut).
(i) Slotted nut.
(j) Castle nut.
( f ) Hex nut
(chamfered).
(b) Belleville (conical)
lock washer.
(c) Split helical
lock washer.
(d) External toothed
lock washer.
Figure 13.4
A sample of readily available
standard washers and nuts.
Many other styles are avail-
able.
Body
Pitch,
p
Flank
End chamfer
Crest: may be partially
or fully rounded
Root: For UNR threads (external
only) the root is a tangentially
blended continuous rounded
contour; for UN threads the
root may be flat.
Thread
angle
Thread
height
60°
Minor
diam., dr
Pitch
diam., dp
Major
diam., d
Figure 13.5
Screw thread proﬁle and terminol-
ogy (see ref. 3, 4, or 5 for standard
details).

rotation. For a single thread the lead is equal to the pitch. For double threads (two adjacent
parallel threads) or triple threads (three adjacent parallel threads), the lead is equal to twice
the pitch or three times the pitch, respectively (see Figure 12.3). Although multiple threads
provide the advantage of more rapid nut advancement, they are rarely used in threaded fas-
tener applications because they tend to loosen more easily due to the steeper lead angle.
The size of a screw thread refers to the nominal major diameter, or, for a male thread,
the nominal diameter of the stock on which the helical thread is cut. In the Uniﬁed Inch
system, screw thread sizes smaller than 
-inch diameter are numbered from No. 12 (0.216
inch) down to No. 0 (0.060 inch), and even smaller for special applications. Selected di-
mensional information is shown in Table 13.1 for Uniﬁed Inch standard screw threads, and
Table 13.2 for Metric standard threads.
14
490
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Table 13.1 Dimensions of Uniﬁed Inch Standard Screw Threads1
Coarse Thread Series—
Fine Thread Series—
UNC/UNRC
UNF/UNRF
Minor
Tensile
Minor
Tensile
Major
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Diam. d,
Threads
Diam. dr,
Area Ar,
Area2,
Threads
Diam. dr,
Area Ar,
Area2,
Size
in
per Inch
in
in2
in2
per Inch
in
in2
in2
0
0.0600
—
—
—
—
80
0.0465
0.0015
0.0018
1
0.0730
64
0.0561
0.0022
0.0026
72
0.0580
0.0024
0.0028
2
0.0860
56
0.0667
0.0031
0.0037
64
0.0691
0.0034
0.0039
3
0.0990
48
0.0764
0.0041
0.0049
56
0.0797
0.0045
0.0052
4
0.1120
40
0.0849
0.0050
0.0060
48
0.0894
0.0057
0.0066
5
0.1250
40
0.0979
0.0067
0.0080
44
0.1004
0.0072
0.0083
6
0.1380
32
0.1042
0.0075
0.0091
40
0.1109
0.0087
0.0101
8
0.1640
32
0.1302
0.0120
0.0140
36
0.1339
0.0129
0.0147
10
0.1900
24
0.1449
0.0145
0.0175
32
0.1562
0.0175
0.0200
12
0.2160
24
0.1709
0.0206
0.0242
28
0.1773
0.0226
0.0258
0.2500
20
0.1959
0.0269
0.0318
28
0.2113
0.0326
0.0364
0.3125
18
0.2524
0.0454
0.0524
24
0.2674
0.0524
0.0581
0.3750
16
0.3073
0.0678
0.0775
24
0.3299
0.0809
0.0878
0.4375
14
0.3602
0.0933
0.1063
20
0.3834
0.1090
0.1187
0.5000
13
0.4167
0.1257
0.1419
20
0.4459
0.1486
0.1600
0.5625
12
0.4723
0.1620
0.1819
18
0.5024
0.1888
0.2030
0.6250
11
0.5266
0.2018
0.2260
18
0.5649
0.2400
0.2560
0.7500
10
0.6417
0.3020
0.3345
16
0.6823
0.3513
0.3730
0.8750
9
0.7547
0.4193
0.4617
14
0.7977
0.4805
0.5095
1
1.000
8
0.8647
0.5510
0.6057
12
0.9098
0.6245
0.6630
1
1.1250
7
0.9704
0.6931
0.7633
12
1.0348
0.8118
0.8557
1
1.2500
7
1.0954
0.8898
0.9691
12
1.1598
1.0237
1.0729
1
1.3750
6
1.1946
1.0541
1.1549
12
1.2848
1.2602
1.3147
1
1.5000
6
1.3196
1.2938
1.4053
12
1.4098
1.5212
1.5810
1
1.7500
5
1.5335
1.7441
1.8995
2
2.0000
4.5
1.7594
2.3001
2.4982
2
2.2500
4.5
2.0094
3.0212
3.2477
2
2.5000
4
2.2294
3.7161
3.9988
2
2.7500
4
2.4794
4.6194
4.9340
34
12
14
34
12
38
14
18
78
34
58
916
12
716
38
516
14

Threaded Fasteners 491
Table 13.1 (Continued)
Coarse Thread Series—
Fine Thread Series—
UNC/UNRC
UNF/UNRF
Minor
Tensile
Minor
Tensile
Major
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Diam. d,
Threads
Diam. dr,
Area Ar,
Area2,
Threads
Diam. dr,
Area Ar,
Area2,
Size
in
per Inch
in
in2
in2
per Inch
in
in2
in2
3
3.0000
4
2.7294
5.6209
5.9674
3
3.2500
4
2.9794
6.720
7.0989
3
3.5000
4
3.2294
7.918
8.3286
3
3.7500
4
3.4794
9.214
9.6565
4
4.0000
4
3.7294
10.608
11.0826
1Reprinted from ref. 3 by permission of The American Society of Mechanical Engineers. All rights reserved.
2Tensile stress area is based on using the average of the root diameter dr and pitch diameter dp.
34
12
14
Table 13.2 Dimensions of Selected Metric Standard Screw Threads1 (preferred combinations of diameter
and pitch; other standard options are available)
Coarse Thread Series
Fine Thread Series
Minor
Tensile
Minor
Tensile
Major
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Minor
Diam.
Stress
Diam.
Pitch
Diam.
Area 
,
Area2,
Pitch
Diam.
Area 
,
Area2,
, mm
, mm
, mm
mm2
mm2
, mm
, mm
mm2
mm2
3.0
0.50
2.459
4.75
5.18
3.5
0.60
2.850
6.38
6.98
4.0
0.70
3.242
8.25
9.05
5.0
0.80
4.134
13.4
14.6
6.0
1.00
4.917
19.0
20.7
8.0
1.25
6.647
34.7
37.6
1.00
6.917
38.0
40.0
10.0
1.50
8.376
55.1
59.5
1.25
8.647
58.7
62.5
12.0
1.75
10.106
80.2
86.3
1.25
10.647
89.0
93.6
14.0
2.00
11.835
110
118
1.50
12.376
120
127
16.0
2.00
13.835
150
160
1.50
14.376
162
170
18.0
2.50
15.294
184
197
1.50
16.376
211
219
20.0
2.50
17.294
235
250
1.50
18.376
265
275
22.0
2.50
19.294
292
309
1.50
20.376
326
337
24.0
3.00
20.752
338
360
2.00
21.835
374
389
27.0
3.00
23.752
443
468
2.00
24.835
484
501
30.0
3.50
26.211
540
571
2.00
27.835
609
628
33.0
3.50
29.211
670
705
2.00
30.835
747
768
36.0
4.00
31.670
788
831
3.00
32.752
842
876
39.0
4.00
34.670
944
992
3.00
35.752
1004
1041
42.0
4.50
37.129
1083
1140
2.00
39.835
1246
1274
48.0
5.00
42.587
1424
1498
2.00
45.835
1650
1681
56.0
5.50
50.046
1967
2062
2.00
53.835
2276
2313
64.0
6.00
57.505
2591
2716
2.00
61.835
3003
3045
72.0
6.00
65.505
3370
3505
2.00
69.835
3830
3878
80.0
6.00
73.505
4243
4395
2.00
77.835
4758
4811
90.0
6.00
83.505
5477
5648
2.00
87.835
6059
6119
100.0
6.00
93.505
6867
7059
2.00
97.835
7518
7584
1Reprinted from ref. 4 by permission of The American Society of Mechanical Engineers. All rights reserved.
2Tensile stress area is based on using the average of the root diameter 
and pitch diameter 
.
dp
dr
dr
p
dr
p
d
Ar
Ar

Basic thread form proﬁles (see, for example, Figure 13.5) are given the standard des-
ignations UN and UNR for Uniﬁed Inch screw threads, and M and MS for Metric threads.3
The Inch-series UNR and Metric-series MS threads have ﬂank-blended continuous
rounded root contours (external threads only), which reduce stress concentration and en-
hance resistance to fatigue failure.
Screw thread standards have identiﬁed useful groups of diameter-pitch combinations
called thread series. Coarse-series threads are advantageous where rapid assembly or dis-
assembly is required, or to reduce the likelihood of “cross-threading” where screws are in-
serted into softer materials such as cast iron, aluminum, or plastics. Fine-series threads are
used where higher bolt strength is important, since smaller thread depth and larger root di-
ameter provides higher basic tensile strength. Fine threads have less tendency to loosen un-
der vibration than coarse threads because the lead angle is smaller. An extra-ﬁne series
may be used in special cases where more precise adjustments must be made (e.g., bearing
retaining nuts) or for thin-wall tubing applications. Constant pitch series (4, 6, 8, 12, 16,
20, 28, and 32 threads per inch) have also been standardized.4
Thread classes distinguish standard speciﬁed ranges of dimensional tolerance and al-
lowance. Classes 1A, 2A, and 3A apply to external threads only, and classes 1B, 2B, and
3B apply to internal threads only. Tolerances decrease (higher precision) as class number
increases. Classes 2A and 2B are the most commonly used.
Screw threads are speciﬁed by designating in sequence the nominal size, pitch, series,
class, and hand. For example,
deﬁnes a 0.250-inch-diameter thread with 28 threads per inch, uniﬁed ﬁne thread series, class
2 ﬁt, external right-hand thread. For a left-hand thread the designation LH would be appended.
An example of a metric thread speciﬁcation would be
which deﬁnes a 10-mm-diameter thread with thread pitch of 1.5 mm, rounded root (MS
proﬁle), external thread (since rounded root proﬁles are used only on external threads).
Threaded Fastener Materials
As for any other machine element, the important task of selecting an appropriate fastener
material may be accomplished by applying the materials selection methodology described
in Chapter 3. Because of the many advantages of selecting a steel material (see 3.4), car-
bon steels and steel alloys are by far the most widely used materials for threaded fastener
applications. Common steels used for threaded fasteners include 1010 (no critical strength
requirements), 1020 (bright cap screws, other special items), 1038 (high-strength fasten-
ers), 1045 (special high-strength requirements), and 1100 resulfurized (usually for nuts).
To improve both economy and reliability, several standards-making organizations
have established well-deﬁned speciﬁcations for threaded fastener materials and strength
levels. A system of head markings that identify material class or grade and minimum
strength level for each individual fastener has also been standardized. (Imported fasteners
may not have head markings.) Figure 13.6 illustrates head-marking speciﬁcations estab-
lished by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) and American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM). Tables 13.3, 13.4, and 13.5 provide corresponding material and
property information. In these tables the proof of strength is deﬁned as the minimum
MS 10 * 1.5
14-28 UNF-2A
492
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
3See refs. 3, 4, and 5.
4See ref. 3.

Threaded Fasteners 493
4.6
4.8
A325
5.8
A325
8.8
A325
9.8
BC
10.9
12.9
A490
A490
Class
A307
Class
A490
type 3
Class
A490
type 1
Class
A449
Class
A354
Grade BD
Class
A354
Grade BC
Class
A325
type 3
Class
A325
type 2
Class
A325
type 1
Grades
1, 2 & 4
Grade
8.2
Grade
8
Grade
7
Grade
5.2
Grade
5
Class 4.6
Class 12.9
Class 10.9
Class 9.8
Class 8.8
Class 5.8
(c) Metric head markings. (See Table 13.5 for properties.)
(b) ASTM head markings. (See Table 13.4 for properties.)
(a) SAE head markings. (See Table 13.3 for properties.)
Class 4.8
Figure 13.6
Standard head markings for
Uniﬁed Inch and Metric
bolts and cap screws.
Table 13.3 SAE Grade Speciﬁcations for Steel Bolts
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum
Size
Tensile
Yield
Proof
SAE
Range,
Strength,
Strength,
Strength,
Grade
Material
in
ksi
ksi
ksi
1
Low or medium carbon
–1
60
36
33
2
Low or medium carbon
–
74
57
55
–1
60
36
33
4
Medium carbon, cold drawn
–1
115
100
65
5
Meidum carbon, Q&T
–1
120
92
85
1
–1
105
81
74
5.2
Low-carbon martensite, Q&T
–1
120
92
85
7
Medium-carbon alloy, Q&T
–1
133
115
105
8
Medium-carbon alloy, Q&T
–1
150
130
120
8.2
Low-carbon martensite, Q&T
–1
150
130
120
14
12
14
12
14
14
12
18
14
12
14
12
78
34
14
12
14
Table 13.4 ASTM Class Speciﬁcations for Steel Bolts
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum
Size
Tensile
Yield
Proof
Range,
Strength,
Strength,
Strength,
ASTM Class
Material
in
ksi
ksi
ksi
A307
Low carbon
–1
60
36
33
A325, type 1
Medium carbon,
–1
120
92
85
Q&T
1
–1
105
81
74
A325, type 2
Low-carbon  
–1
120
92
85
martensite, Q&T
1
–1
105
81
74
12
18
12
12
18
12
12
14
(Continued)

494
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Table 13.5 Metric Class Speciﬁcations for Steel Bolts
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum
Tensile
Yield
Proof 
Property
Strength,
Strength,
Strength, 
Class1
Material
Size Range
MPa
MPa
MPa
4.6
Low or medium carbon
M5–M36
400
240
225
4.8
Low or medium carbon
M1.6–M16
420
340
310
5.8
Low or medium carbon
M5–M24
520
420
380
8.8
Medium carbon, Q&T
M16–M36
830
660
600
9.8
Medium carbon, Q&T
M1.6–M16
900
720
650
10.9
Low-carbon martensite, Q&T
M5–M36
1040
940
830
12.9
Alloy, Q&T
M1.6–M36
1220
1100
970
1Number to left of decimal point designates approximate minimum tensile strength, Su, in hundreds of megapas-
cals; approximate yield strength, Syp, in each case, is obtained by multiplying Su times decimal fraction to the
right of (and including) the decimal point [e.g., for class 4.6, Su  400 MPa and Syp  0.6(400)  240 MPa].
Table 13.4 (Continued)
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum
Size
Tensile
Yield
Proof
Range,
Strength,
Strength,
Strength,
ASTM Class
Material
in
ksi
ksi
ksi
A325, type 3
Weathering steel,
–1
120
92
85
Q&T
1
–1
105
81
74
A354, grade BC
Alloy steel, Q&T
–2
125
109
105
A354, grade BD
Alloy steel, Q&T
–4
150
130
120
A449
Medium carbon, 
–1
120
92
85
Q&T
1
–1
105
81
74
1
–3
90
58
55
A490, type 1
Alloy steel, Q&T
–1
150
130
120
A490, type 3
Weathering steel, 
Q&T
12
12
34
12
18
14
14
12
14
12
18
12
tensile stress that must be sustained by the fastener without signiﬁcant deformation or fail-
ure, and generally corresponds to about 85 percent of the yield strength.
In addition to the standard steel materials, fasteners may be made of alloys of alu-
minum, brass, copper, nickel, stainless steel, or beryllium, from plastics, and, for high-
temperature applications. Hastelloy, Inconel, or Monel may be used as well. Coatings or
special ﬁnishes are sometimes used to improve appearance, improve corrosion resistance,
or provide lubricity.
Critical Points and Thread Stresses
As for power screw threads (see 12.6), there are three potential critical points in the thread
engagement zone, illustrated in Figure 13.7 as A, B, and C. In addition, a fourth critical

Threaded Fasteners 495
P
P
D
tb = z
b = yz
z
y
x
z
(axial)
y
(radial)
x
(tang'l)
t = z
s = yz
rmax = zx
z
y
x
Fb
Fb
Fs
A
Nut
Member 2
Member 1
B
C
Ksb = Ksyz
Kbb = Kbx
Ktt = Ktz
L
C?
Figure 13.7
Critical points and stress components in threaded fasteners.
point in the bolt at the joint parting line, shown as D in Figure 13.7, must be considered if
the joint is subjected to shear loading.
Unlike the case of power screw threads, critical point A is usually ignored when ana-
lyzing fastener threads because there is no relative motion between the threads of the bolt or
screw and the nut after assembly; hence wear is not an applicable failure mode. Potential fas-
tener loosening, however, may involve an analysis of thread friction at this critical point.
At critical point B the analysis closely parallels the power screw thread analysis ex-
cept that much of the torsion is released after completion of the initial tightening process.
Thus the potential failure modes are yielding (stripping) and fatigue, and the pertinent
stress components are torsional shear, , due to tightening, direct tensile stress, 
, due to
tensile force 
on the bolt (including preload), and transverse shearing stress, 
, due
to thread bending. To avoid stripping, the minimum nut length is typically made long
enough so that the axial force on the bolt will produce a tensile failure before the threads
are stripped. Stripping of external threads occurs when male threads fail in shear at the mi-
nor diameter, and stripping of internal threads occurs when female threads fail in shear at
the major diameter. For standard threads, if bolt and nut materials are the same, a nut
length of at least one-half the nominal thread diameter produces tensile failure before strip-
ping. Standard nuts have a length of approximately 
of the nominal thread diameter.
Adapting (12-21) to the threaded fastener case
(13-1)
tightening torque to produce desired preload, in-lb
torque to overcome friction at contact face of nut (if turned) or head (if
turned), in-lb
root diameter of screw thread, in
Adapting (12-22) to the threaded fastener case
(13-2)
tensile force on bolt (including preload), lb.
where  Fb =
st = 4Fb
pd2
r
dr =
Tnf =
where  Tt =
ts =
161Tt - Tnf2
pd3
r
78
ttr-max
Fb
st
ts

Adapting (12-23) to the threaded fastener case,
(13-3)
thread pitch, in
effective number of threads in the engagement zone that carry the bolt
load
At critical point , the analysis again parallels the power screw thread analysis. Thus
the potential failure modes are yielding or fatigue (brittle fracture is possible, but less
likely). The pertinent stress components are torsional shearing stress, 
(see 13-1), direct
tensile stress, 
(see 13-2), and thread bending stress, 
. Adapting (12-24) to the threaded
fastener case,
(13-4)
pitch diameter (mean diameter) of screw thread, inches.
As in the case of power screw analysis, an appropriate stress concentration factor
should be properly applied to each stress component at this critical point if fatigue is a po-
tential failure mode. As noted in 4.8, thread root theoretical stress concentration factors, 
range from about 2.7 to about 6.7. Typical values of notch sensitivity index range around
0.7 for mild steel (Grade 1), so fatigue stress concentration factors typically range from
about 2.2 to about 5. A value of 
is often chosen for preliminary calculations. If
loading is static, and the bolt or screw is made of a ductile material (usual case), a stress
concentration factor of unity is usually appropriate (see Table 5.1).
At critical point 
the potential failure modes are yielding (shearing) and fatigue, and
the pertinent stress components are direct tensile stress in the body, 
, and shearing stress
in the body, 
. The direct tensile stress is given by
(13-5)
body diameter of bolt, inches.
The shearing stress 
is usually calculated as direct (pure) shear, although, as a prac-
tical matter, there is virtually always some bolt bending, and therefore transverse shearing
stress is a more accurate characterization than pure shear. In high-performance design sit-
uations, these bolt-bending and transverse-shearing stresses should be carefully investi-
gated. Assuming that the bolted joint is tightly clamped and symmetrically loaded, as
shown in Figure 13.7, the shearing stress 
may be estimated as
(13-6)
shear force on bolt, lb.
This estimate assumes that the bolt body is snug in the holes and the joint is tightly clamped,
but the entire shear load, 
, is transferred by the bolt alone, none of it by friction at the joint
interface (an overconservative assumption in some cases). If more than one fastener is used
to secure the joint, and the joint loading is in any way asymmetric, additional torsion-like or
Fs
where  Fs =
tb = 4Fs
pd2
b
tb
tb
where  db =
stb = 4Fb
pd2
b
tb
stb
D
Kf = 3.5
Kt,
where  dp =
sb =
12Fb1dp - dr2
pdr ne p2
sb
st
ts
C
Fb
ne =
where  p =
ttr-max =
3Fb
pdrpne
496
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods

bending-like stress components may require assessment, as described below in “Multiply
Bolted Joints; Symmetric and Eccentric Loading.”
Preloading Effects; Joint Stiffness and Gasketed Joints
When a bolted joint, such as the one shown in Figure 13.7, is tightened to clamp members 1
and 2 together, the tightening process induces tension in the bolt and compression in the
clamped ﬂanges of members 1 and 2. The consequence of the tightening process is that the
bolt is preloaded (in tension) against the clamped ﬂanges (in compression), producing inter-
nal stresses without any externally applied load. As discussed in 4.7, such a joint behaves as
a system of springs; the bolt is in parallel with the ﬂanges, which are in series with each other
(see Figures 4.19 and 4.20). Properly preloaded bolted joints of this type may be used to
eliminate the development of clearance gaps under operational loads, to enhance resistance
to potential shear failure, to enhance resistance to fastener loosening, and to enhance resist-
ance to fatigue failure by reducing the cyclic stress amplitude carried by the bolt (see 4.8).
As discussed in 4.7, a preloaded bolted joint constitutes a statically indeterminate
elastic system; hence the axial tensile force in the bolt is a function both of the initial pre-
load force, 
, due to tightening, and the subsequently applied operating force, , which
tends to separate the clamped members. Considering the bolt and the clamped members to
be linear springs (usually a valid assumption), a bolted joint such as the one shown in
Figure 13.7 may be modeled as the parallel-series spring system shown in Figure 13.8.
Such a system requires both force-equilibrium and force-displacement relationships to
explicitly calculate forces in the bolt and in the clamped members.
From Figure 13.8,
(13-7)
and
(13-8)
By force equilibrium,
(13-9)
force on the bolt, lb
force on the clamped members, lb
Fm =
where  Fb =
P = Pb + Pm
km = Pm
ym
kb = Pb
yb
P
Fi
Threaded Fasteners 497
P
Bolt
Member 1
yb
kb = Pb
yb
ym
Pm
Pb
km =
km1
Member 2
km2
Pm
ym
Figure 13.8
Parallel–series model of preloaded bolted joint
of type shown in Figure 13.7.

By geometric compatibility,
(13-10)
Combining (13-10) with (13-7) and (13-8),
(13-11)
so (13-9) may be rewritten as
(13-12)
From this,
(13-13)
and
(13-14)
Assuming that an initial bolt preload force 
(
in the clamped members) has
been induced by tightening the fastener enough so that joint separation never occurs un-
der operating load , the initial preload force and the operating forces add to give re-
sultant forces 
and 
on the bolt and on the clamped members, respectively. These
forces are
(13-15)
and
(13-16)
To reiterate, the initial preload force induced by bolt tightening must be large enough
so the clamped members do not separate under operating loads; otherwise the bolt is
forced to carry the entire applied load . It is common practice to specify an initial preload
(or tightening torque) that brings the fastener to approximately 75 percent of yield
strength, or, equivalently, 85 percent of proof stress (see Tables 13.3, 13.4 and 15.5).
Example 13.1 Bolt Preloading
A bolted joint of the type shown in Figure 13.7 has been tightened by applying torque to
the nut to induce an initial axial preload force of 
lb in the 
-16 UNC Grade 1
steel bolt. The external (separating) force on the bolted assembly is to be 
lb. The
clamped ﬂanges of the steel housing, each 0.75 inch thick, have been estimated to have an
axial stiffness of three times the bolt stiffness in the axial direction.
P = 1200
38
Fi = 1000
P
Fm = Pm - Fi = a
km
kb + km
bP - Fi
Fb = Pb + Fi = a
kb
kb + km
bP + Fi
Fm
Fb
P
-Fi
Fi
Pm = a
km
kb + km
bP
Pb = a
kb
kb + km
bP
P = Pb + km
kb
Pb = a1 + km
kb
bPb
Pb
kb
= Pm
km
yb = ym
498
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods

a.
Find the resultant tension in the bolt and compression in the clamped members when
the external load of 1200 lb is fully applied to the preloaded joint.
b.
Will the members separate or remain in contact under full load?
Solution
a.
Utilizing (13-15),
and, from (13-16),
b.
Since there remains a compressive force in the clamped members, they do not sepa-
rate under the fully applied operating load of 1200 pounds.
The bolted joint shown in Figure 13.7, modeled as the spring system shown in Figure
13.8, may be broken down into a separate free body for the bolt and another for the
clamped members, as shown in Figure 13.9. The axial spring rate for the bolt, 
, is rela-
tively easy to obtain from Figure 13.9(b) using (4-82) to give
(13-17)
effective (unthreaded) cross-sectional area of bolt, in2
effective load-carrying length, in
modulus of elasticity for bolt material, psi
nominal bolt diameter, in
db =
Eb =
Leff =
where  Aub =
kb = AubEb
Leff
= pd 2
bEb
4Leff
kb
= -100 lb
1compression in clamped members2
Fm = a3kb
4kb
b1200 - 1000 = 0.75112002 - 1000
= 1300 lb
1tension in bolt2
Fb = a
kb
kb + 3kb
b1200 + 1000 = 0.25112002 + 1000
Threaded Fasteners 499
P
P
Lub
Fb
Fb
Leff
Lth
(a)
(c)
Bolted joint free body.
Clamped member
free body.
(b) Bolt free body.
Member 2
Member 1
P
Constant diameter
cylinder approx.
Conical frustra
approx.
Force flow
lines
P
Lm1
Lm2
Fm
Fm
Figure 13.9
Free bodies of bolt, and 
of clamped members, 
deﬁned to augment the 
estimation of spring rates
kb and km.

If more precision is desired, the bolt body and bolt threads may be separately mod-
eled [see Figure 13.9(b)] and combined in series to obtain the spring rate 
. That is,
utilizing (4-91),
(13-18)
and
These spring rates may be calculated as
(13-19)
and
(13-20)
To estimate the axial spring rate for the clamped members, lines of force ﬂow
(see 4.3 and 5.3) may be visualized as shown, for example, in Figure 13.9(c).
Although it is not possible to sketch precise lines of force ﬂow, it is clear that they
ﬂow from the area of bolt head contact, diverge as they spread into the ﬂange mate-
rial, then converge back to the area of nut and washer contact. Various methods of
deﬁning the boundaries of the force-ﬂow region have been suggested. The two more
practical approaches5 are (1) to deﬁne a hollow constant-diameter cylindrical approx-
imation to the force-ﬂow region, or (2) to deﬁne two hollow conical frustra, back-to-
back, to approximate the force-ﬂow region, as shown in Figure 13.9(c). All such
approximations require judgment, and accuracy of the estimate is enhanced by de-
signer experience. If the design is critical, a more accurate modeling approach, such
as ﬁnite element analysis, or an experimental setup to determine 
may be advisable.
If the hollow conical frustrum approximation is utilized, the ﬁxed cone angle between
an element of the surface of the cone and the bolt centerline, starting at the edge of
the bolt head or nut and washer, is usually taken to be approximately 30 degrees.6 For
less critical cases, it may be enough to know that the effective outside diameter, 
,
of a constant-diameter hollow-cylinder model usually lies in the range from 1.5 to 2.5
times the nominal bolt diameter. A “typical” value of 2 times the bolt diameter is of-
ten chosen for preliminary calculations. If the constant-diameter hollow-cylinder
model is chosen, the spring rate 
for the clamped member may be calculated from
a series spring combination of member 1 and member 2 (see Figure 13.8), giving
(13-21)
km =
1
1
km1
+
1
km2
km
dm
km
kth = At Eb
Lth
=
pa
dr + dp
2
b
2
Eb
4Lth
kub = AubEb
Lub
= pd2
bEb
4Lub
kth =  spring rate of threaded length
where  kub =  spring rate of unthreaded body
kb =
1
1
kub
+ 1
kth
kb
500
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
5See also refs. 6 and 7.
6See ref. 12.

where
(13-22)
and
(13-23)
with
assumed diameter of hollow constant-diameter cylinder approximation
to the force-ﬂow region
Example 13.2 Joint Separation and Bolt Selection
The bolted joint shown in Figure E13.2 is required to support an external force of
. For a preliminary design, class 4.6 bolts are speciﬁed and initial estimates in-
dicate that 
can be expected. The maximum root stress is required to be less
than 65 percent of the minimum yield strength of the bolt and the joint cannot sepa-
rate. Determine the minimum required bolt preload to assure that the joint does not
separate and the type of bolt to be used.
Solution
We begin by assuming that each bolt supports the same load. The external force supported
by each bolt is therefore 
. The load sharing between the bolt and the
joint is given by (13-15) and (13-16) as
Since joint separation occurs when 
, we use the second equation to determine
that the minimum required bolt preload is
Fm = 0 = 4000 - Fi :  Fi = 4000 N
Fm = 0
Fm = a
km
km + kb
bP - Fi = a
4kb
4kb + kb
b(5000) - Fi = 4000 - Fi
Fb = a
kb
km + kb
bP + Fi = a
kb
4kb + kb
b(5000) + Fi = 1000 + Fi
P = F>2 = 5 kN
km = 4kb
F = 10 kN
dm =
km2 = Am2Em2
Lm2
=
p1d 2
m - d 2
ub2Em2
4Lm2
km1 = Am1Em1
Lm1
=
p1d 2
m - d 2
ub2Em1
4Lm1
Threaded Fasteners 501
Figure E13.2
Bolted joint supporting a 10 kN external load.
F
F
F
F

This results in a bolt load of 
From Table 13.5, the minimum yield strength for a class 4.6 bolt is 240 MPa. Since the
root stress must be less than 65 percent of the minimum yield strength, we determine the
required root area from
From Table 13.2 we note that the bolt with a root area closest to 
is an
, which has a root area of 
. Therefore, in this preliminary
design we select an 
with a preload of 
.
If design conditions require a pressure-sealed bolted joint, a gasket must usually be in-
stalled at the interface between the bolted members. If the gasket is clamped between the
ﬂanges, as illustrated in Figure 13.10(a), the spring rate of the gasket material, 
, must be
included in the spring rate of the clamped members, given in (13-21), by adding 
in
series with 
and 
. This gives
(13-24)
In many cases the modulus of elasticity of the gasket material is several orders of mag-
nitude softer than for the ﬂanges of the clamped members. When this is true it may be seen
from (13-24) that the soft gasket “spring” dominates and:
(13-25)
The moduli of elasticity for a few gasket materials are shown in Table 13.6. If the soft gasket
spring rate does dominate the clamped members’ stiffness, the advantages of bolt preloading
are largely lost. To avoid this potential problem, captured gaskets or O-rings are often used,
as illustrated in Figure 13.10(b). For this arrangement the soft gasket material does not par-
ticipate as a series spring sandwiched between the ﬂanges of the clamped members.
km L kg
km =
1
1
km1
+ 1
kg
+
1
km2
km2
km1
kg
kg
Fi = 4 kN
MS 8 * 1.25
Ar = 34.7 mm2
MS 8 * 1.25
Ar = 20.83 mm2
= 20.83 mm3
0.65A240 * 106B = Fb
Ar :  240 * 106 = 5000
Ar  :  Ar = 20.83 * 10-6 m2
Fb = 1000 + Fi = 5000 N
502
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Example 13.2 
Continues
Lm1
Lg
km
p
p
Lm2
Gasket
Lm1
km
Lm2
O-ring
(a) Gasket sandwiched between flanges.
(b) O-ring constrained in groove;
      flanges in solid contact.
Figure 13.10
Pressure-sealed joints.

As a general rule, gaskets should be made as thin as possible, but thick enough to pro-
vide an effective seal. Thin gaskets are not only stiffer springs [see (4-82)] but also result
in reduced thermal relaxation and the associated loss of preload, provide higher resistance
to “blowout,” and promote better heat transfer.
Example 13.3 Cyclic Loading of Preloaded and Gasketed Joints
It is desired to further investigate the bolted joint discussed in Example 13.1, where it was
found that a preload force of 1000 lb in the 
-16 UNC Grade 1 bolt was sufﬁcient to keep
the joint from separating under the peak operating load of 1200 lb. It has now been learned
that the external load is actually not static, but a released cyclic force ranging from a min-
imum of 0 to a maximum of 1200 lb at 3000 cycles per minute.
a.
Plot the cyclic force-time pattern in the bolt if no preload is used.
b.
Estimate bolt life for the case of no preload.
c.
Plot the cyclic force-time pattern in the bolt if the initial bolt preload force is 1000 lb,
as for the case of Example 13.1.
d.
Estimate bolt life for the case of 
lb.
e.
If a 
-inch thick gasket made of compressed asbestos were sandwiched between
member 1 and member 2, in the manner shown in Figure 13.10(a), plot the resulting
cyclic force-time pattern in the bolt for the preloaded case of 
lb.
f.
Estimate bolt life for the gasketed joint with 
lb.
Solution
a.
With no preload the bolt is subjected to the full operational cyclic force, ranging from
to 
lb. This force-time pattern is shown in Figure E13.3A.
Fmax = 1200
Fmin = 0
Fi = 1000
Fi = 1000
332
Fi = 1000
38
Threaded Fasteners 503
Table 13.6 Modulus of Elasticity and Temperature Limits for
Selected Gasket Materials
Temperature Limit,
Modulus of Elasticity,
Material
(
)
psi (Mpa)
Stainless steel
1000–2100 (538–1149)
(
)
Copper
900 (482)
(
)
Aluminum
800 (427)
(
)
Asbestos (compressed)
800 (427)
(480)
Spiral wound
800 (427)
(300)
Teﬂon
250 (121)
(300)
Rubber
250 (121)
(69)
Cork
250 (121)
(86)
12 * 103
10 * 103
40 * 103
40 * 103
70 * 103 6.9 * 104
10 * 106
12.9 * 104
18.7 * 10620 * 104
29 * 106
°C
°F
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Time
Force, lb
Figure E13.3A
Cyclic force-time pattern for the case of no ini-
tial preload.

b.
To estimate bolt life, the fatigue strength properties must be obtained or estimated for
the Grade 1 bolt material in its operating environment, and the stress-time pattern at
the thread root must be deﬁned. From Table 13.3, Grade 1 bolts in this size range have
the properties
As suggested in “Critical Points and Thread Stresses” above, the fatigue stress con-
centration factor 
will be taken as 3.5. Using the techniques outlined in 5.6 for es-
timating S-N curves, the polished specimen mean S-N curve for the material may be
plotted as shown by the dashed line in Figure E13.3B. Utilizing (5-55), (5-57), and
Table 5.3, and choosing a 90 percent reliability level for material properties,
with
Hence
Utilizing this value, the solid S-N curve for the bolt, as used in this application and
corresponding to 90 percent reliability, may be plotted as shown in Figure E13.3B.
From Table 13.1, the root area of 
-16 UNC bolt is 
in2. Hence the
nominal stresses at the thread root are
and
smin = 0
smax = Fmax
Ar
= 1200
0.068 = 17,650 psi
Ar = 0.068
38
Sf = 0.21130,0002 = 6170 psi
k q = 11.0211.02a 1
3.5 b10.8211.0211.0211.0211.0211.0210.92 = 0.21
Sf = k qS¿f
Kf
Syp = 36,000 psi
Su = 60,000 psi
504
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Stress, S, · ksi
Cycles to failure, N
0.1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Estimated curve for bolt application
Estimated polished specimen curve
Figure E13.3B
Estimated uniaxial S-N
curves for Grade 1 material,
(a) for polished specimens,
and (b) for bolts as used in
this application with a relia-
bility R  90 percent.
Example 13.3 
Continues

Accordingly,
Using (5-72), since 
,
Reading into the bolt S-N curve (solid curve in Figure E13.3B) with
psi, the estimated bolt life may be read out as approximately
300,000 cycles, or about 100 minutes of operating time.
c.
With an initial preload of 
lb, the maximum and minimum cyclic tensile
forces in the bolt, as calculated in Example 13.1, are 
lb and 
lb. This force-time pattern is plotted in Figure E13.3C.
d.
Using the same approach as in (b),
and
Accordingly,
Again using (5-72),
Reading into the bolt S-N curve of Figure E13.3B again, with 
psi,
the bolt life is found to be inﬁnite.
The result of preloading in this case is to improve bolt life from about 100 min-
utes to inﬁnite life.
seq-CR = 3080
seq-CR = smax - sm
1 - asm
Su
b
= 19,120 - 16,910
1 - a16,910
60,000 b
= 3080 psi
sm = 19,120 + 14,705
2
= 16,910 psi
smin = Fmin
Ar
= 1000
0.068 = 14,705 psi
smax = Fmax
Ar
= 1300
0.068 = 19,120 psi
Fmin = 1000
Fmax = 1300
Fi = 1000
seq-CR = 10,350
seq-CR = smax - sm
1 - asm
Su
b
= 17,650 - 8825
1 - a 8825
60,000 b
= 10,350 psi
smax 6 syp
sm = 17,650 + 0
2
= 8825 psi
Threaded Fasteners 505
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Time
Force, lb
Figure E13.3C
Cyclic force-time pattern for the case of initial
preload of Fi  1000 lb.

e.
If a gasket is sandwiched between members 1 and 2, the spring rate 
is changed,
and forces in the bolt and in the housing, when the initial preload force is applied,
must be recomputed.
Assuming the effective outer diameter of the gasket to be 
, just as for the
clamped members, the gasket spring rate may be calculated in the manner of (13-22)
as
From Table 13.6, the value of 
for compressed asbestos is 
psi, and from
the problem statement 
inch. Hence, assuming 
,
For the 0.75-inch-thick steel ﬂanges
Using (13-26)
It is worth noting that in this case the gasket dominates the spring rate 
. The bolt
spring rate 
may be calculated from (13-17) as
Now, using (13-15) and (13-16) to calculate the force in the bolt and in the
clamped members, respectively,
and
For the gasketed joint with an initial preload of 
lb therefore, the max-
imum and minimum cyclic tensile forces in the bolt are 
lb and
lb. This force-time pattern is plotted in Figure E13.3D.
f.
Using the same approach as for (b) and (d),
smax = Fmax
Ar
= 2080
0.068 = 30,590 psi
Fmin = 1000
Fmax = 2080
Fi = 1000
Fm = a2.38 * 105
2.45 * 106b1200 - 1000 = 0.10112002 - 1000 = -880 lb
Fb = a
2.21 * 106
2.21 * 106 + 2.38 * 105 b1200 + 1000 = 0.90112002 = 2080 lb
kb =
p10.37522130 *  1062
411.52
= 2.21 * 106lb
in
kb
km
km =
1
1
1.33 * 107 +
1
2.47 * 105 +
1
1.33 * 107
=
1
4.20 * 10-6 = 2.38 * 105lb
in
km1 = km2 =
p3310.375224130 *  1062
4(0.75)
= 1.33 *  107lb
in
kg =
p312db22 - d 2
b4170 * 1032
413>322
=
p3310.375224170 *  1032
4(0.094)
= 2.47 *  105lb
in
dm = 2db
Lg = 332
70 * 103
Eg
kg =
p1d 2
m - d 2
b2Eg
4 Lg
dm
km
506
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Example 13.3 
Continues

and
Accordingly,
Again using (5-72),
Reading into the bolt -
curve of Figure E13.3B again with 
psi,
the estimated bolt life is approximately 300,000 cycles (about the same as for the case
of no preload). This life, about 100 minutes, is likely unacceptable, and a different
gasketing arrangement or an upgraded bolt fatigue strength should be considered.
Tightening Torque; Fastener Loosening
To obtain the maximum beneﬁts of preloading, it is essential that the designer-speciﬁed
initial preload actually be induced in the bolt by the tightening process. The most accurate
method of inducing the desired axial preload involves direct measurement of the axial
force-induced elastic deformation, , in the bolt, by using a micrometer or an electronic
device for precisely measuring bolt elongation. From (2-3), the required value of bolt elon-
gation, 
, corresponding to the speciﬁed preload force, may need to be calculated,
then the bolt tightened until the measured value 
is equal to 
. This method pro-
duces accurate preloads but is impractical in most applications because it is slow and ex-
pensive. A more convenient (but less accurate) method of inducing the desired preload is
to apply a measured torque to the nut or screw head, using a torque wrench. The torque
needed to develop a desired axial preload may be calculated by adapting the power screw
equation (12-11) to the bolt-tightening scenario, giving
(13-26)
Ti = Fi 
dp
2  c
lcosu + pdpmt
pdpcosu - lmt
d + Fi dc
2 mc
1df2req’d
df
1df2req’d
df
seq-CR = 12,755
N
S
seq-CR = 30,590 - 22,650
1 - a22,650
60,000b
= 12,755 psi
sm = 30,590 + 14,705
2
= 22,650 psi
smin = Fmin
Ar
= 1000
0.068 = 14,705 psi
Threaded Fasteners 507
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Time
Force, lb
Figure E13.3D
Cyclic force-time pattern for the case of gasketed
joint with initial preload of Fi  1000 lb.

where 
is the tightening torque required to produce initial preload force 
in the bolt.
Often, the pitch diameter, 
, is approximated by the nominal bolt diameter, 
, and the
mean collar (contacting washer-face) diameter, 
, approximated as 
. Using
these estimates, (13-26) may be approximated as
(13-27)
or
(13-28)
The bracketed coefﬁcient is usually deﬁned as the torque coefﬁcient, 
. It is often as-
sumed that the thread friction coefﬁcient, 
, and the collar friction coefﬁcient, 
, for an
average application, are both nominally equal to 0.15. For this assumption, it turns out that
the nominal value of torque coefﬁcient is
(13-29)
for all bolt sizes and for both coarse and ﬁne thread pitches. It is cautioned, however, that
values of 
ranging from 0.07 to 0.3 have been reported, depending upon ﬁnishes and lu-
bricants.7 Thus, for an average application, (13-28) may be approximated as
(13-30)
A more modern method is to use a “smart” torque wrench which continuously moni-
tors wrench torque and nut rotation, sending these data to a controlling computer program.
When the onset of yielding is detected by the computer, the wrench is disengaged, leaving
a tensile preload approaching the proof load8 for the fastener being tightened.
Under less demanding conditions, for lower performance designs, or when torque
wrenches are not available, an alternative technique called the turn-of-the-nut method is
sometimes used. The nut is “seated” to a ﬁnger-tight condition, then subjected to a speci-
ﬁed additional rotation to induce the preload. More accurate methods should be used when
practical.
Initial preload is often relaxed over time by virtue of creep, corrosion, wear, or other
processes that slowly reduce the axial elastic deformation induced by the initial preload-
ing (tightening torque). Elevated temperature or cyclic temperature ﬂuctuations may ac-
celerate the loss of preload.
Loss of preload not only has the potential for diminishing fatigue resistance of the
joint (see Example 13.3), but also may contribute to loosening of the threaded fastener,
possibly allowing the joint to separate. Ease of disassembly has often been cited as an ad-
vantage of threaded fasteners, allowing maintenance or replacement of parts, but this very
characteristic represents a disadvantage in terms of allowing threaded assemblies to loosen
and separate during operation. It is common practice to specify a retightening schedule for
threaded fasteners, to prevent excessive loosening and to periodically reestablish the
proper preload.
Ti L 0.2Fi db
KT
KT L 0.2
mc
mt
KT
Ti L c1
2 alcosu + pdbmt
pdbcosu - lmt
b + 0.625mcdFi db
Ti L Fi 
dp
2  clcosu + pdbmt
pdbcosu - lmt
d + Fi 
11.25db2
2
mc
1db + 1.5db2>2
dc
db
dp
Fi
Ti
508
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
7See ref. 1.
8See Tables 13.3, 13.4, and 13.5 for proof strength values.

Multiply Bolted Joints; Symmetric and Eccentric Loading
In the section “Critical Points and Thread Stresses,” the analyses were based on the pre-
sumption that shear and tensile loads on the bolt were known. More often than not, bolted
joints involve many bolts placed in a speciﬁed pattern to improve the strength and stabil-
ity of the joint. In multiply bolted joints, it becomes important to deﬁne the distribution of
applied forces among the bolts and the stresses that result in each bolt. Several different
conﬁgurations of multiply bolted joints, some subjected to symmetric loads and others to
eccentric loads, some under shear loads and others under tension loads, are illustrated in
Figures 13.11 and 13.12.
If shear loading is symmetrically applied to a multiply bolted joint, as illustrated in
Figure 13.11(a), it is usually acceptable to assume that the total shear is uniformly distrib-
uted over all bolts. (It should be noted, however, that if there are more than two bolts in the
pattern, a more accurate assessment of the loading distribution may be required for criti-
cal design applications.) If the shear is assumed to be equally distributed over all bolts, and
if it is assumed that clamping friction provides no shear resistance, equation (13-6) may be
adapted as
(13-31)
where
 area of the th bolt, 
 number of bolts, and shearing stress 
has the sense
of .
If shear loading is eccentrically applied to a multiply bolted joint, as illustrated in
Figure 13.11 (b), there will be an additional “torsion-like” shearing stress developed
P
tb
nb
i
Ai
tb =
P
a
nb
i=1
Ai
Threaded Fasteners 509
e
P
P
P
P
Centroid
(b) Eccentric loading on bolt.
(a) Symmetric loading on bolt.
x
O
y
Figure 13.11
Multiply bolted joints in
shear, with symmetric and
eccentric loading illus-
trated.
P
P
yi = y3 = y4 = ymax
yi = y2
yi = y1
a
P
P
1
2
3
4
(a) Symmetric loading on bolts.
(b) Eccentric loading on bolts.
Figure 13.12
Multiply bolted joints in tension, with symmetric and eccentric loading illustrated.

because of the couple Pe. This shearing stress component is estimated by transferring the
eccentric shear force P to the centroid of the bolt pattern as a direct shear force P and a
couple Pe. The total shear stress supported by a bolt is the vector sum of the components
resulting from direct shear and the torsion-like shear, as shown in Figure 13.13. The di-
rect shear stress is deﬁned by (13-31) and is shown in Figure 13.13 (a). Again, neglect-
ing any shear resistance due to clamping friction, the torsion-like shear stress at the ith
bolt may be calculated from
(13-32)
where
“joint” polar moment of inertia
The torsion-like shear stress is perpendicular to the radius 
and in the direction of the
torque (Pe) as illustrated in Figure 13.13 (b). Since the torsion-like and direct shear
stress components must be added as vectors, it is convenient to write 
in terms of its
components. The location of each bolt with respect to the centroid of the bolt pattern can
be expressed in terms of x and y coordinates. The x and y components of the 
shear
stress is shown in Figure 13.12 (b) for bolt number 6, and in general is deﬁned as
and      
(13-33)
(tti)y = Txi
Jj
(tti)x = Tyi
Jj
tti
tti
ri
Jj =
a
nb
i=1
Air 2
i =
ri =  radius from the centroid to the ith bolt
tti =  shear stress on the ith bolt due to torsion
tti = Tri
Jj
= (Pe)ri
Jj
510
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
τb
3
(a) Shear stresses due to
 
direct shear.
(b) Shear stresses due to
 
torsion.
(c) Total shear stress (vector sum
 
of direct and torsion produced
 
components).
3
2
5
6
4
1
y
y
y
Pe
P
x
τb
2
τb
1
τb
τt2
τt3
τt1
τt5
τt6
τ1
τ2
τ5
τ6
τ4
τ3
(τt6)x
(Pe)y6
Jj
=
τt4
r1
r4
r2
r5
r3
r6
x6
x
y6
6
τb
5
τb
4
2
4
5
6
3
1
(τt6)y
(Pe)x6
Pe
P
x
Jj
=
Figure 13.13
Illustration of resultant shearing stress 
caused by an eccentric shear force on a multiply
bolted joint, such as shown in Figure 13.11 (b).
ti

Using the shear stress components deﬁned in (13-33), it is noted that the shear stress 
deﬁned in (13-32) can be written in terms of its components as
Since the radius from the centroid of the bolt pattern to the ith bolt can be written as
, it is obvious that (13-32) and (13-33) yield the same results.
The location of the centroid may be found with respect to any convenient x-y coor-
dinate origin from
and    
(13-34)
where
The resultant shearing stress (assuming no frictional shear resistance) on the ith bolt may
be found by superposition of the direct shear from (13-31) and the 
shear components
from (13-33), and taking the vector sum. Figure 13.13 (c) illustrates the result. It should
be noted that if (13-32) is used to deﬁne the 
shearing stress, one must also determine
the angle each 
makes with the coordinate axes so that the components can accurately
be deﬁned prior to the determination of the vector sum of the components.
When bolts are preloaded, combined stress failure theories or design theories must be
appropriately applied.
If tension loading is symmetrically applied to a multiply bolted joint, as illustrated in
Figure 13.12(a), it is usually acceptable to assume that the external load is uniformly dis-
tributed among all bolts, so, for preloaded bolts, (13-15) may be adapted as
(13-35)
If tensile loading is eccentrically applied to a multiply bolted joint, as illustrated in
Figure 13.12(b), an additional “bending-like” load distribution may be produced in the
bolts. To ﬁnd the load-sharing distribution for such a case, as illustrated in Figure 13.12(b),
the load in any given bolt may be written as
(13-36)
from which the external force on the most highly loaded bolt in the group may be written as
(13-37)
area of most heavily loaded bolt
total applied load
P =
where  Ab =
1Fb2max = Ab c
1Pa21yk2max
Ij
d
Fk = Akstk = Ai c
M1yk2
Ij
d
Fb = a
kb
kb + km
b P
nb
+ Fi
P
tti
tti
tti
nb = number of bolts
xi, yi = coordinates of the ith bolt with respect to the selected coordinate origin
x, y = coordinates of the centroid with respect to the selected coordinate origin
y =
a
nb
i=1
Aiyi
a
nb
i=1
Ai
x =
a
nb
i=1
Aixi
a
nb
i=1
Ai
ri = 2x2
i + y2
i
tti = 2(tti)2
x + (tti)2
y = A aTyi
Jj
b
2
+ aTxi
Jj
b
2
= T
Jj
2x2
i + y2
i
tti
Threaded Fasteners 511

perpendicular distance from hinge point H to applied load line of action
(see Figure 13.12)
distance from reference plane through H and perpendicular to line of
action of P, for the most heavily loaded bolt
and
“joint” moment of inertia
(13-38)
For eccentrically loaded joints having preloaded bolts then, (13-37) and (13-38) may
be combined with (13-15) to give the tensile force in the most heavily loaded bolt as
(13-39)
Again, if the resulting state of stress is multiaxial, combined stress failure theories or
design equations should be used. As usual, however, appropriate simplifying assumptions
may be made for preliminary design calculations.
Example 13.4 Multiply Bolted Joints and Tightening Torques
An L-shaped 1020 steel support bracket must support a static load of 
, as
shown in Figure E13.4A. A bolt pattern using three bolts, with locations as shown in
Figure E13.4A, has been suggested. If the bolts are to be SAE Grade 1 (see Table 13.3)
with uniﬁed standard coarse threads, and if a design factor of safety of 2 is desired, rec-
ommend an appropriate bolt size and tightening torque for this application. As a practical
matter, all three bolts are the same size. Make enough simplifying assumptions to expedite
the calculations, since this is a ﬁrst-cut preliminary design estimate.
Solution
From the sketch of Figure E13.4A, it may be deduced that the bolts are subjected to direct
shear, torsion-like shear, and bending-like tension, due to the eccentrically applied external
load P. By speciﬁcation, an initial preload tension (tightening torque) is also to be applied.
P = 3000 lb
1Fb2max = a
kb
kb + km
bAb 
J
1Pa21yk2max
a
nb
k=1
Aky2
k
K
+ Fi
Ij = a
nb
k=1
Aky2
k =
1yk2max =
a =
512
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
2.5"
1.5"
2"
15"
10"
P = 3000 lb
3"
1"
5"
0.75"
B
A
C
Figure E13.4A
Sketch of L-shaped support bracket, showing
proposed bolt pattern.

We conservatively assume that all the shear loading is supported by the bolts; none of it by
clamping friction. In more reﬁned calculations, this assumption should probably be re-
leased. The distortional energy design equation (6-14) will be used to evaluate failure and
estimate the size of the bolts.
We begin by determining the location of the centroid of the bolt pattern assuming an
unknown bolt area 
. Once the centroid is located, we replace the applied load with an
equivalent force-couple system acting at the centroid and proceed with the analysis using
the unknown bolt area. Assuming the origin of the coordinate system is at the center of
bolt A, we use (13-34) to determine and to be
and        
The centroid and the equivalent force-couple system acing there are shown in Figure E13.4B.
The direct shear stress, 
,  acting at each bolt is given by (13-31) as
The shear stress due to the torque is deﬁned in terms of its components using (13-33) af-
ter the joint inertia, Jj, is deﬁned. In order to deﬁned. From Figure E13.4B (a) we observe
that 
and that 
Therefore,
The x and y components of shear stress due to torsion at each bolt is determined using (13-
33). Knowing that 
and using the x and y coordinates de-
ﬁned in Figure E13.4B (a), we determine
(ttC)y = 36,375(1)
8Ab
L 4547
Ab
(ttC)x = 36,375(1)
8Ab
L 4547
Ab
(ttB)y = 36,375(1)
8Ab
L 4547
Ab
(ttB)x = 36,375(1)
8Ab
L 4547
Ab
(ttA)y = 36,375(0)
8Ab
= 0
(ttA)x = 36,375(2)
8Ab
L 9094
Ab
T = 12.125(3000) = 36,375 in.-lb
Jj =
a
nb
i=1
Air 2
i = Ab(4 + 2 + 2) = 8Ab
rB = rc = 2(1)2 + (1)2 = 1.414 in.
rA = 2.0 in.
tb =
P
3Ab
= 3000
3Ab
= 1000
Ab
tb
y = Ab(0 + 3 + 3)
3Ab
= 2.0
x = Ab(0 + 1 - 1)
3Ab
= 0
y
x
Ab
Threaded Fasteners 513
10 P
12.125 P
1.0 in
1.0 in
2.0 in
(a) Location of centroid
(b) Equivalent force-couple acting at centroid
y
x
B
C
A
y
x
z
B
P
C
A
Figure E13.4B
Centroid of bolt patters and equivalent force-couple
system acting at centroid.

Superimposing these components on the direct shear stresses at each bolt as shown in
Figure E13.4C (a), we can determine the components of shear stress at each bolt as shown
in Figure E13.4C (b). The total shear stress at each bolt is then determined by taking the
vector sum of the components, which is shown in Figure E13.4C (c). Referring to Figure
E13.4C (b), the total shearing stress at each bolt is 
Although the largest shearing stress occurs at bolt A, the state of stress in the bolt also in-
cludes a normal stress from bending as well as the preload. The effects of the normal stress
will be developed before application of the failure theory.
The bending-like bolt tension may be evaluated for the bolt pattern of Figure E13.4A
by adapting (13-39) to this case. Taking the fulcrum axis to be the lower edge of the
clamped face, assuming the clamped members have an effective stiffness 
(see
Figure 13.9 and related discussion), the force in the bolts is
For the purpose of establishing a minimum preload to prevent joint separation, (13-16)
may be used to assure that the clamping force 
on the members always remains com-
pressive (minus sign). Thus for the three bolts
FmB = FmC = 0.7533636.44 - Fi = 2727.3 - Fi
FmA = 0.753909.14 - Fi = 681.8 - Fi
Fm
= 909.1 + Fi
FbB = FbC = a
kb
3kb + kb
bAbc (3000)(10)(4.0)
Ab112 + 42 + 422
d + Fi = 0.2533636.44 + Fi
FbA = a
kb
3kb + kb
bAbc (3000)(10)(1.0)
Ab112 + 42 + 422
d + Fi = 0.253909.14 + Fi = 227.3 + Fi
km = 3kb
tC = A a3547
Ab
b
2
+ a4547
Ab
b
2
= 5767
Ab
tB = A a5547
Ab
b
2
+ a4547
Ab
b
2
= 7172
Ab
tA = A a9094
Ab
b
2
+ a1000
Ab
b
2
= 9149
Ab
514
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
A
(a) Individual components
(b) Superimposed components
(c) Total shear stress
y
x
C
3547 / Ab
9094 / Ab
1000 / Ab
5547 / Ab
4547 / Ab
4547 / Ab
B
A
y
x
C
B
A
y
x
C
B
Figure E13.4C
Shearing stress at each
bolt location.
Example 13.4 
Continues

Hence, if all three bolts are to be tightened to the same preload, 
, 
must be no
smaller than approximately 2727 lb in order to prevent separation of the joint. At the other
extreme, the preload should not produce a stress greater that 
when the bolt is tightened.
This condition will be explored once a bolt is selected.
In order to determine 
we begin by arbitrarily assuming a bolt preload of
, which exceeds the minimum requirement for joint separation. The normal
stresses at each bolt are therefore
Critical point D in Figure 13.7(b) illustrates the state of stress being investigated in
this example. For such a state of stress, the results from above may be summarized as
,
,
,
The normal stress at bolts B and C are identical. Since the shear stress at bolt C is less than
that at B, we conclude that of these two bolts, B is more critical. 
The principal stresses at bolt A are
With these principal stresses, the distortional energy design equation (6-14) is used.
For the grade of bolts speciﬁed and the required factor of safety, the design stress is
. Applying (6-14) results in
The principal stresses at bolt B are
s3 = sB
2 - A a
sB
2 b
2
+ t2
B = 5909
2Ab
- A a
5909
2Ab b
2
+ a
7172
Ab b
2
= -4802
Ab
s2 = 0
s1 = sB
2 + A a
sB
2 b
2
+ t2
B = 5909
2Ab
+ A a
5909
2Ab b
2
+ a
7172
Ab b
2
= 10,711
Ab
Ab = 0.927 in2
16,686
Ab
= 18,000
A
1
2e c12,128
Ab
- 0d
2
+ c0 - a -6901
Ab b d
2
+ c -6901
Ab
- 12,128
Ab
d
2
f = 18,000
sd = 36,000/2 = 18,000 psi
s3 = sA
2 - A a
sA
2 b
2
+ t2
A = 5227
2Ab
- A a
5227
2Ab b
2
+ a
9149
Ab b
2
= -6901
Ab
s2 = 0
s1 = sA
2 + A a
sA
2 b
2
+ t2
A = 5227
2Ab
+ A a
5227
2Ab b
2
+ a
9149
Ab b
2
= 12,128
Ab
tC = 5767>Ab
sC = 5909>Ab
tB = 7172>Ab
sB = 5909>Ab
tA = 9149>Ab
sA = 5227>Ab
sB = sC = 909.1 + 5000
Ab
= 5909
Ab
sA = 227.3 + 5000
Ab
= 5227
Ab
Fi = 5000 lb
Ab
sd
Fi
Fi
Threaded Fasteners 515

Applying (1-4) results in
Comparing these two areas we see that bolt A is critical and a bolt area of 
is required. Assuming this corresponds to the tensile stress area, we see from Table 13.1 that
a 1 
-6 UNC bolt is required. From Table 13.1 we use 
for the normal stress
and 
for shear stress and determine the actual stresses for bolt A to be
Using these stresses, we determine the principal stress at bolt A to be
Using (6-14) results in
This is close, but slightly under the speciﬁed design factor of safety of 2. Due to the pre-
liminary nature of these calculations, we would probably accept this result as satisfactory.
Since bolt A was shown to be critical, we will not compute the stresses for bolts B and C.
For a 1 
-6 UNC grade 1 bolt the proof load would be
Since the preload should not exceed 85 percent of the proof load9
Since the proof load we assumed was 
, we are well below the limit. Increasing
the preload at this point would increase the principal stresses. Since bolt A currently has a
factor of safety slightly less that the recommended value, we will keep the preload at 5000
lb for now.
The preliminary recommendations then are to use 
1 
-6 UNC grade 1 bolts
and, based on (13-30), a tightening torque of 
Ti = 0.2Fi db = 0.2(5000)(1.25) = 1250 in-lb (104 ft-lb)
14
Fi = 5000 lb
(Fi)limit = 0.85Fp = 0.85(31,980) = 27,183 lb
Fp = sp At = 33,000(0.9691) = 31,980 lb
14
18,604 =
?
18,000
A
1
2E313,322 - 042 + 30 - (-7933)42 + 3-7933 - 13,32242F =
?
18,000
s1 = 13,322 psi, s2 = 0, s3 = -7933 psi
tA =
9149
0.8898 = 10,282 psi
sA =
5227
0.9691 = 5394 psi
Ar = 0.8898 in2
At = 0.9691 in2
14
Ab = 0.927 in2
Ab = 0.764 in2
13,756
Ab
= 18,000
A
1
2e c
10,711
Ab
- 0 d
2
+ 30 - a -4802
Ab b d
2
+ c -4802
Ab
- 10,711
Ab
d
2
f = 18,000
516
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Example 13.4 
Continues
9A rule of thumb is to limit tightening preload to 85 percent of the proof stress.

13.5 Rivets
For permanent joints, rivets have been widely used to secure both structural joints, for
which strength is an important design consideration, and lower-performance industrial
joints, for which strength requirements are modest but production costs and assembly time
are key factors. Rivet use is virtually always restricted to lap joints (see Figure 13.1) be-
cause rivets are efﬁcient in shear but inefﬁcient in tension. Traditionally, structural rivets
have been used in civil engineering structures such as buildings, bridges, and ships, as well
as many mechanical engineering applications including pressure vessels, automotive ap-
plications, and aircraft structures. Although the development of modern welding equip-
ment and techniques has reduced the importance of riveting for many of these uses, it
remains important in high-performance applications such as stressed-skin aircraft struc-
tures. Rivets are cost-effective, do not change the material properties of the members fas-
tened, do not warp the joined parts, and serve as fatigue crack stoppers.
For lower-performance industrial joints, such as used in the assembly of appliances,
electronic devices, business machines, furniture, and other similar applications, the poten-
tially lower costs and higher assembly speeds often make riveting a wise choice.
Additional advantages of riveting are that rivets do not tend to shake loose, can be assem-
bled blind (fully installed from one side), can be used to join dissimilar materials in vari-
ous thicknesses, and are simple and safe to install.
Four common rivet types are illustrated in Figure 13.14. Many other variations are
commercially available,10 including self-piercing rivets, compression rivets, and other spe-
cial cold-headed conﬁgurations.
Rivet Materials
Rivets may be made of virtually any ductile material with acceptable shear strength for the
application. The selection of an appropriate material for a given high-performance struc-
tural application should follow the guidelines given in Chapter 3.
Low- and medium-carbon steel rivets are most widely used because of low cost, high
strength, and good ductility (formability). Low-carbon grades (1006 to 1015) are preferred
because of better formability (if strength requirements are adequate). Aluminum rivets are
also widely used, notably in aircraft applications, but also are used in consumer products
Rivets 517
10See, for example, ref. 1.
(a) Solid rivet.
(b) Semitubular rivet.
(c) Countersunk flush rivet.
(d) Closed end break-mandrel blind rivet.
Blind side upset
Figure 13.14
Various types of rivets.

such as tubular furniture, storm windows and doors, and automotive parts. For consumer
products, almost any soft grade of aluminum may be used. For aircraft applications, 2024,
5052, or other ductile high-strength aluminum alloys may be utilized for rivets. Other duc-
tile materials, including brass or copper alloys, stainless steel, and even precious metals,
may be used in special environments if warranted by the application.
Critical Points and Stress Analysis
In the elementary analysis of riveted joints and connections, it is usually assumed that
bending and tension in the rivets may be neglected, that friction between parts does not
contribute to force transfer across the joint, and that residual stresses are negligible.
Further, shear in the rivets is assumed to be uniform and equally shared among rivets.
Potential critical sections, therefore, may be identiﬁed as
1.
Tensile failure of net plate cross section between rivets
2.
Shearing of rivet cross section
3.
Compressive bearing failure between rivet and plate
4.
Edge shear-out at rivet hole
5.
Edge tearing at rivet hole
These various critical sections are sketched in Figure 13.15. For elementary riveted-
joint analysis, the stresses associated with each critical section may be estimated as de-
scribed next.
For tensile failure of the plate between rivets [see Figure 13.15(a)], the plate tensile
stress, 
, is
(13-40)
total shear load, lb
gross plate width, in
b =
where  Fs =
st =
Fs
1b - NrDh2t
st
518
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
de
xe
xe
Dh
Dr
Fs
Fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
fs
b
p
p
t
t
(d) Edge shear-out stress e in plate.
(c) Compressive bearing stress c between plate and rivet.
(b) Shear stress s on rivet cross section.
(a) Tensile stress t on net plate cross section.
de
p
de
fs
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
(e) Edge tearing stress σe in plate.
Figure 13.15
Potential critical sec-
tions in a riveted lap
joint.

Rivets 519
plate thickness, in
hole diameter, in (slightly larger than rivet diameter)
number of load-carrying rivets
For rivet shearing [see Figure 13.15(b)], the shearing stress, , is
(13-41)
For compressive bearing failure [see Figure 13.15(c)], the compressive bearing stress,
, is
(13-42)
For edge shear-out of the rivet to the plate edge [see Figure 13.15(d)], the shear-out
stress, , is
(13-43)
distance from rivet hole center to edge of plate (recommended mini-
mum values for 
are 
for protruding head rivets and 
for
countersunk ﬂush rivets)
For edge tearing failure [modeled as a center-loaded ﬁxed-ﬁxed beam in bending; see
Figure 13.15(e)], the edge-tearing tensile stress is
(13-44)
where p  pitch (recommended minimum values are shown in Table 13.7; if two rows
are used, the row spacing should be such that any two rivets in the two rows
are spaced at least p apart)
(distance from edge of rivet hole to edge of plate)
It should be emphasized that selecting rivet materials and sizes to keep these elemen-
tary stress estimates below the design stress provides only a preliminary conﬁguration. For
critical applications, experimental veriﬁcations should be conducted to qualify the joint for
actual operating conditions.
If eccentric loading is applied to multiply riveted joints, the concepts of eccentrically
loaded multiply bolted joints may be directly applied, as discussed in detail in 13.4.
de = xe - Dr
2
se = Mc
I
= 6M
td 2
e
=
6afs p
8 b
td 2
e
=
3Fsp
4td 2
eNr
2.5Dr
2Dr
xe
where  xe =
te =
fs
2xet =
Fs
2xetNr
te
sc =
fs
tDr
=
Fs
tDrNr
sc
Dr = rivet diameter, in
fs = shear force per rivet, lb
where  As = shear area of rivet, in2
ts = fs
As
=
a Fs
Nr
b
apD2
r
4
b
=
4Fs
pD2
rNr
ts
Nr =
Dh =
t =

Example 13.5 Determining Allowable Tensile Stress in a Riveted Joint
Two 24-mm thick, 300-mm wide main plates are fastened to two 16-mm thick cover
plates with 20 rivets as shown in Figure E13.5A. All rivets are nominally 24 mm in
diameter and each rivet hole has a diameter of 26 mm. The design stresses for 
both the rivets and the plates are 
, 
, and
. Determine the maximum allowable axial force P that can be ap-
plied to the main plates of the multi-riveted joint by considering failure due to:
a.
Rivet shear
b.
Bearing failure (in main and cover plates)
c.
Tension failure (in main and cover plates)
Solution
a.
River shear is determined from 
, where 
is the shear force in each rivet
(
) and 
is the cross-sectional area of each rivet.  
The force acting at each rivet hole of the main plates is assumed to be equally dis-
tributed, as shown in Figure E13.6B. Each rivet is acting in double shear. Therefore,
the shear force on each rivet is 
. Since the allowable shear stress for each
rivet is 
, we establish the allowable applied force from 
The applied force required to fail the rivets in shear is 
.
P = 995 kN
P = 110 * 106(452.4 * 10-6)(20) = 995.28 kN
110 * 106 = fs
Ar
=
P
20(452.4 * 10-6)
(tall)shear = 110 MPa
fs = P>20
Ar = p
4 D2
r = p
4 (0.024)2 = 452.4 * 10-6 m2
Ar
fs = Fs/Nr
fs
ts = fs/Ar
(sall)bearing = 350 MPa
(tall)shear = 110 MPa
(sall)tension = 160 MPa
520
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Table 13.7 Recommended Minimum Rivet Pitch
(Spacing)1
Rivet diameter 
, in
Minimum pitch p for
protruding head rivets, in
Minimum pitch p for
countersunk ﬂush rivets, in
1
1
1See ref. 8.
14
132
2732
1116
78
1116
916
12
14
316
532
18
Dr
Figure E13.5A
Multi-riveted joint sup-
porting an axial load P.
P
P
300 mm
24 mm main plate
16 mm cover plates
P
P

b.
Bearing failure can occur in either the main or cover plate. The compressive bearing
stress is determined from 
, where 
is the force at each rivet bearing on
either the main or cover plate and t is the thickness of the plate. For the main plate
there are 10 bearing surfaces, each supporting a force of 
. The main plate
thickness is 24 mm and the rivet diameter is 24 mm, so the allowable force P is de-
termined from
For the cover plate there are 20 bearing surfaces (10 for each plate). The bearing force
on each rivet is 
and the thickness of each cover plate is 16 mm, so
c.
Tension failure in either the main plate or the cover plates is determined based on the
net load acting on the plate. The load changes for each row of rivets. Figure E13.5C
illustrates the force acting through the second row of rivets in the mail plate. In the
section of the main plate where there are no rivet holes, the cross-sectional area of the
plate is 
A = tw = (0.024)(0.30) = 7.2 * 10-3 m2
(sall)bearing = 350 MPa =
FB
(0.016)(0.024) =
P
20(0.016)(0.024) :  P = 2688
FB = P>20
P = 10(350 * 106)(0.024)2 = 2016 kN
(sall)bearing = 350 MPa =
FB
(0.024)(0.024) =
P
10(0.024)2
FB = P>10
FB
sc = FB>tDr
Rivets 521
P/10
Row 3
Row 2 Row 1
P/10
P/10
P/10
P/10
P/10
P
P/10
P/10
P/10
P/10
Figure E13.5B
Forces acting on the main
plate at each rivet hole
P/10
P
P/10
F2–2
Figure E13.5C
Forces acting through the
second row of rivets in the
main plate.

The allowable load is therefore
In the sections of the plate where there are holes, the area that can support load can
be given as
where t  plate thickness (24 mm), w  plate width (300 mm), Nr  number of holes,
and Dh  hole diameter (26 mm). We consider each row of rivets separately.
Row 1: 
Row 2: 
Row 3: 
The same procedure is followed for the cover plates. The area is 
. For each row we obtain
Row 1: 
Row 2: 
Row 3: 
Therefore, the maximum load that can be applied to the joint is the smallest force we have
determined, which is for row 2 of the main plate
13.6 Welds
When permanent joints are an appropriate design choice, welding is often an economically at-
tractive alternative to threaded fasteners or rivets. Most industrial welding processes involve
local fusion of the parts to be joined, at their common interfaces, to produce a weldment. Heat
P = 941 kN
P = 1004 kN
P = 1673 kN
P = 5018 kN
30.300 - Nr(0.026)4
A = 0.016
P = 1881 kN
F3-3 = 2
5P = 160 * 106(4.704 * 10-3) = 752.6 kN
F3-3 + 6(P/10) = P Q  F3-3 = 2
5P
A = 0.02430.300 - 4(0.026)4 = 4.704 * 10-3 m2
P = 941 kN
F2-2 = 4
5P = 160 * 106(4.704 * 10-3) = 752.6  kN
F2-2 + 2(P>10) = P Q  F2-2 = 4
5P
A = 0.02430.300 - 4(0.026)4 = 4.704 * 10-3 m2
P = F1-1 = 160 * 106(5.952 * 10-3) = 952.3 kN
A = 0.02430.300 - 2(0.026)4 = 5.952 * 10-3 m2
A = t(w - NrDh)
P = A(sall)tension = (7.2 * 10-3)(160 * 106) = 1152 kN
522
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Example 13.5 
Continues

is supplied by a controlled electric arc passing from an electrode to the workpiece, or by use
of an oxyfuel gas ﬂame. Typically, an inert gas or a ﬂux is used to shield the weld zone from
the atmosphere during the welding process, and a ﬁller metal is introduced so that sound, un-
contaminated welds result. Table 13.8 lists the more frequently used industrial welding
processes and their abbreviated letter designations.
Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), sometimes called stick welding, is the common
manual process used for repair work, and for welding large steel structures, where a con-
sumable ﬂux-coated electrode (welding rod) is fed into the molten zone as the welder trav-
erses the joint. Gas metal arc welding (GMAW), sometimes called metal–inert gas (MIG)
welding, is a common automated process for producing high-quality welds at high weld-
ing speeds. The GMAW process may be used for most metals. For production welding, the
goal is to select a process that provides the desired quality and strength at the lowest avail-
able cost. A designer is well advised to consult with a welding specialist when selecting
the welding process to be used in a production environment.
Speciﬁcation of welds has been standardized by the American Welding Society (AWS)
through the use of a basic welding symbol,11 shown in Figure 13.16. The basic welding sym-
bol consists of a reference line, which carries precise information about type, size, edge
preparation, contour, ﬁnish, and any other pertinent welding data, and an arrow which points
to one side of the joint to be welded, designated as the arrow side (as opposed to the other
side). As indicated in Figure 13.16, all welding speciﬁcations for the arrow side are placed
below the reference line, and welding speciﬁcations for the other side are placed above the
reference line. Standard symbols for edge preparation, weld type, and joint ﬁnishing, shown
in Figure 13.17, are placed as needed on or near the reference line of Figure 13.16.
Sketches of various types of weld joints are shown in Figure 13.18. It is estimated that
about 85 percent of all industrial welds are ﬁllet welds, about 10 percent are butt welds,
and special welds account for the remaining 5 percent. Figure 13.19 provides preliminary
guidance for appropriate weld selection for various basic joint types. Final selection of the
best type of weld for a given application should be made in consultation with a welding
specialist.
No matter what welding technique is used, the weld joint must be regarded as a met-
allurgically nonhomogeneous zone ranging from unheated parent metal through the heat-
affected zone (HAZ) to the weld metal zone, a region of cast material. The gradient in
Welds 523
Table 13.8 Frequently Used Welding Processes1
Letter Designation
Welding Process
SMAW
shielded metal arc welding
SAW
submerged arc welding
GMAW
gas metal arc welding
FCAW
ﬂux cored arc welding
GTAW
gas tungsten arc welding
PAW
plasma arc welding
OFW
oxyfuel gas welding
EBW
electron beam welding
LBW
laser beam welding
RSW
resistance spot welding
RSEW
resistance seam welding
1For a detailed description of these processes, see ref. 9.
11See ref. 9, Ch. 6.

524
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
T
S(E)
F
A
R
(N)
L–P
Number of spot, seam, stud,
plug, slot or projection welds
Elements in this area
remain as shown when tail
and arrow are reversed
Weld symbols shall be
contained within the length
of the reference line
(Both sides)
Arrow
side
Other
side
Reference line
Weld-all-around symbol
Arrow connecting ref-
erence line to arrow-
side member of joint
or arrow side of joint
Field weld symbol
Pitch (center-to-center
spacing) of welds
Length of weld
Groove angle; included
angle of coluntersink
for plug welds
Finish symbol
Contour symbol
Root opening; depth of filling
for plug and spot welds
Groove weld size
Depth of  bevel; size or
strength for certain welds
Specification, process,
or other reference
Tail (may be omitted
when reference
is not used)
Weld symbol
Figure 13.16
Standard location of the ele-
ments of the welding symbol.
(Reprinted from ref. 13 with per-
mission from American Welding
Society.)
Groove
Square
Scarf
V
Bevel
U
J
Flare-V
Flare-
bevel
Fillet
Plug
or
slot
Stud
Spot
or
projection
Seam
Back
or
backing
Surfacing
Edge
Weld all
around
Field weld
Note: The reference line is depicted as a dashed line fir illustrative purposes.
Melt
through
Con-
sumable
insert
(square)
Backing or
spacer
(rectangle)
Backing
Spacer
Contour
Flush
or flat
Convex
Concave
Figure 13.17
Standard symbols for edge
preparation, weld type, and
joint ﬁnishing, deﬁned for use
with AWS basic welding sym-
bol shown in Figure 13.16.
Resulting welds are sketched
in Figure 13.18. (Adapted
from ref. 13 with permission
from American Welding
Society.)

Welds 525
(a) Single square-groove weld.
(c) Single V-groove weld.
(e) Single bevel-groove weld.
(b) Double square-groove weld.
(d) Double V-groove weld.
( f ) Double bevel-groove weld.
(g) Single U-groove weld.
(h) Double U-groove weld.
(i) Single J-groove weld.
(j) Double J-groove weld.
(k) Single flare-V-groove weld.
(l) Double flare-V-groove
weld.
(m) Single flare-bevel-
groove weld
(n) Double flare-bevel-
groove weld.
(o) Single fillet weld.
(p) Double fillet weld.
Figure 13.18
Sketches of various types of welds and their edge preparation. (Excerpted from ref. 9, with permission from American
Welding Society.)
homogeneity, together with any geometrical discontinuities, gives rise to stress concentra-
tion that must be considered by the designer, especially if ﬂuctuating loads are applied to
the weldment. Fatigue stress concentration factors commonly used for various weld-zone
critical points are given in Table 13.9.
A signiﬁcant design consideration in specifying welded construction is that unfavorable
residual stresses (see 4.9) of high magnitude may result from postcooling shrinkage stresses,
Table 13.9 Fatigue Stress Concentration Factors Kf for
Various Weld-Zone Critical Points
Location
HAZ1 of reinforced butt weld (even if ground ﬂush)
1.2
Toe of transverse ﬁllet weld
1.5
End of parallel ﬁllet weld
2.7
Toe of tee-butt weld joint
2.0
1Heat-affected zone.
Kf

usually greatest in the transverse direction. These residual stresses not only have the potential
for adversely inﬂuencing fatigue resistance, but may also result in unacceptable distortion of
the weldment. Preheating and/or postweld thermal treatments are often used to reduce the
residual stresses and the distortions to acceptable levels. Mechanical cold-working treatments
of the completed welds, such as shot-peening, cold-rolling, or cold-stretching, are also used
to produce favorable residual stresses at the weld-zone critical points (see 5.6).
Base Metals, Filler Materials, and Weldability
Most metals can be welded by selecting appropriate processes, electrodes, and shielding
media. The term weldability refers to a qualitative description of the weld quality that can
be achieved by using speciﬁed materials and processes. Table 13.10 provides weldability
characteristics for several metals and alloys, using approved welding practices.12
Electrode materials usually have compositions similar to the base metals being
welded, but often have slightly higher tensile strengths. Speciﬁcations for electrodes have
been developed and published as ANSI/AWS standards. For example, references covering
electrode speciﬁcations for the SMAW and GMAW welding processes, brieﬂy discussed
above, are shown for various materials in Tables 13.11 and 13.12, respectively. (For other
processes, see ref. 9.)
In ANSI/AWS A5.1, Speciﬁcation for Covered Carbon Steel Arc Welding Electrodes
(see Table 13.11), a simple numbering system is speciﬁed for electrode classiﬁcation. The
system uses a preﬁx E (for electrode), followed by four (or ﬁve) digits. The ﬁrst two (or
three) digits give the minimum tensile strength (ksi) of undiluted weld metal in as-welded
condition. The next digit indicates welding position suitability (1: all positions, 2: ﬂat and
horizontal ﬁllets, 3: ﬂat only). The last digit refers to electrode covering and current type.
Carbon steel electrodes are available in strength level series 60 and 70. Low-alloy steel
electrodes are available in strength levels from 70 to 120 ksi in 10-ksi increments. Nominal
weld metal properties for some of these electrodes are given in Table 13.13.
Design calculations for welded structures may be based on either electrode material
strength or base metal strength, depending upon conﬁguration, and design safety factors
526
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
(a) Edge butt joint.
(b) Tee butt joint.
(c) Lap joint.
Applicable Welds
Square-groove
V-groove
Bevel-groove
U-groove
J-groove
Flare-V-groove
Flare-bevel-groove
Applicable Welds
Fillet
Plug
Slot
Square-groove
Bevel-groove
J-groove
Flare-bevel-groove
Spot
Projection
Seam
Applicable Welds
Fillet
Plug
Slot
Bevel-groove
Seam
J-groove
Flare-bevel-groove
Spot
Projection
Figure 13.19
Applicable weld selections for various ba-
sic joint types (see Figure 13.1). Some of
these welds are sketched in Figure 13.8.
(Excerpted from ref. 9, with permission
from American Welding Society.)
12See ref. 9.

are chosen using the methods of Chapter 2. In certain applications, however, where public
safety is at issue, safety factors (allowable design stresses), as well as other speciﬁcations,
are prescribed by law. Designers are constrained to follow the applicable construction
codes in these cases.13
Welds 527
Table 13.10 Weldability of Various Metals (G  good, F  fair, U  unacceptable)
Metal
Arc
Gas
Metal
Arc
Gas
Carbon steel
Magnesium alloys
U
G
Low and medium carbon
G
G
High carbon
G
F
Copper and copper alloys
Tool steel
F
F
Deoxidized copper
F
G
Pitch, electrolytic, and lake
G
F
Cast steel, plain carbon
G
G
Commercial bronze, red
brass, and low brass
F
G
Spring, admiralty, yellow,
and commercial brass
F
G
Gray and alloy cast iron
F
G
Muntz metal, naval brass,
and magnesium bronze
F
G
Phosphor bronze, bearing
bronze, and bell metal
G
G
Malleable iron
F
F
Aluminum bronze
G
F
Beryllium copper
G
—
Low-alloy high-strength steels
Ni-Cr-Mo and Ni-Mo
F
F
Nickel and nickel alloys
G
G
Most others
G
G
Lead
U
G
Stainless steel
Chromium
G
F
Chromium-nickel
G
G
Aluminum and Al alloys
Commercially pure
G
G
Al-Mn alloys
G
G
Al-Mg-Mn and Al-Si-Mg alloys
G
F
Al-Cu-Mg-Mn alloys
F
U
Table 13.11 AWS Speciﬁcations for Covered
Electrodes Used in the SMAW
Process
Base Material Type
AWS Speciﬁcation
Carbon steel
A5.1
Low-alloy steel
A5.5
Corrosion-resistant steel
A5.4
Cast iron
A5.15
Aluminum and Al alloys
A5.3
Copper and copper alloys
A5.6
Nickel and nickel alloys
A5.11
Surfacing
A5.13 and A5.21
Table 13.12 AWS Speciﬁcations for Electrode
Wire Used in the GMAW Process
Base Material Type
AWS Speciﬁcation
Carbon steel
A5.18
Low-alloy steel
A5.28
Aluminum alloys
A5.10
Copper alloys
A5.7
Magnesium
A5.19
Nickel alloys
A5.14
300 series stainless steel
A5.9
400 series stainless steel
A5.9
Titanium
A5.16
13For example, see American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) Manual of Steel Construction, and
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.

528
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Table 13.13 Minimum Properties for Carbon Steel and Low-Alloy Steel Welding
Electrodes
ANSI/AWS
Tensile Strength,
Yield Strength,
Elongation in 2 in,
Electrode
ksi (MPa)
ksi (MPa)
percent
E 60
62 (427)
50 (345)
17–25
E 70
70 (482)
57 (393)
22
E 80
80 (551)
67 (462)
19
E 90
90 (620)
77 (531)
14–17
E 100
100 (689)
87 (600)
13–16
E 120
120 (827)
107 (737)
14
Reinforcement
Heat affected
zone (HAZ)
w
h
P
P
Lw
Throat; t ≈h
Figure 13.20
Butt-welded strap subjected to tensile load P.
[Critical section is usually the heat affected
zone (HAZ) at the edge of the weld.]
Butt Welds
If approved welding techniques are used, and a sound full-penetration weld is achieved,
the stress analysis of a butt-welded critical section may be conducted using the methods
of Chapter 4 for analyzing stress patterns in monolithic machine elements. To use this ap-
proach, the weld zone is assumed to have the properties and characteristics of the parent
metal in the welded plates. An appropriate stress concentration factor should be used if
ﬂuctuating loads are imposed on the weld zone. If loads are static, and materials are duc-
tile, a stress concentration factor is not usually necessary (see Table 4.7). If a simple butt-
welded strap, such as the one shown in Figure 13.20, is subjected to a direct tensile load
P, for example, the weld-zone tensile stress may be calculated as
(13-45)
fatigue stress concentration factor (see Table 13.9)
tensile load, lb
weld throat (plate thickness), in
effective weld length (usually taken as plate width, w, but a deduction
may be made for imperfections at weld-run ends caused by starting and
stopping the weld seam)
Typically, no load-carrying credit is given to the reinforcement, since failure usually
initiates in the heat-affected zone. If the potential for fatigue failure exists, the reinforce-
ment is often ground ﬂat, but a fatigue stress concentration factor should still be applied
because of weld-zone imperfections.
Lw =
t =
P =
where  Kf =
s = Kf  snom = Kfa P
tLw
b

Fillet Welds
Actual stress distributions in loaded ﬁllet welds are nonlinear and difﬁcult to estimate ac-
curately.14 It has become common practice to base the required size of ﬁllet welds upon
the average shearing stress across the throat. As shown in Figure 13.21, the ﬁllet weld
throat is the height t of an equilateral triangle whose legs s are equal to the ﬁllet weld size.
Thus
(13-46)
and the shear area of a ﬁllet weld is
(13-47)
Thus for symmetrically loaded welds subjected either to cross shear or longitudinal
shear, the average shearing stress on the weld throat may be calculated as
(13-48)
For ﬂuctuating loads, an appropriate fatigue stress concentraiton factor should also be
used (see Table 13.9).
Just as for the case of multiply bolted joints, or multiply riveted joints, if multiply
welded joints are subjected to eccentric loading, as illustrated in Figure 13.22, an addi-
tional torsion-like shearing stress, 
, will be developed in the welds. This torsion-like
shearing stress must be vectorially added to the direct shear, 
, at the weld critical points.
To estimate the torsion-like shearing stress, it may be assumed that the base metal parts are
rigid, with only the welds behaving as linear elastic (spring) elements.
First, the centroid of the weld group may be found using equations of the form of 
(13-34), except that the 
’s are the weld throat areas for the various welds in the group,
and ,
are individual weld centroid coordinates for each of the welds.
i
yi
xi
Ai
tw
tt
tw = P
As
=
P
0.707sLw
where  Lw =  effective weld length.
As = 0.707sLw
t = 0.707s
Welds 529
(a) Parallel fillet welds subjected to longitudinal shear.
(Load is parallel to weld run.)
(b) Transverse fillet weld
subjected to cross shear.
(Load is transverse to
weld run.)
(c) Fillet weld of
size“s” with
throat “t”.
P
P
P
P
t
Heel
Toe
Toe
s
s
Lw
Lw
Figure 13.21
Fillet welds subjected to loads parallel and transverse to the weld run.
14See, for example, ref. 10.

The shear stress due to torsion at any point i can be deﬁned as
(13-49)
where
The weld-joint polar moment of inertia may be calculated by ﬁnding the polar mo-
ment of inertia of each weld in the group about its own centroid, adding the transfer term
(parallel axis theorem) to ﬁnd its moment of inertia about the joint centroid, and summing
for all n welds in the group. Thus,
(13-50)
where 
polar momrnt of inertia of the ith weld about its own centroid 
radius from the joint centroid to the weld centroid for the ith weld
Just as for bolted joints, illustrated in Figure13.13, the torsion-like shearing stresses,
, must be added vectorially to the direct shearing stress,
, at each potential critical
point. As with a bolted attachment, the angle 
makes with a convenient reference axis
must be known in order to establish its components. Knowing the coordinates 
of the
critical point with respect to the centroid of the weld, the components of the shearing stress
due to torsion can be determined as they were for bolted attachments by using
and
(13-51)
(tti)y = Txi
Jj
(tti)x = Tyi
Jj
(xi,yi)
tti
tw
tti
riN =
L AiL2
wi>12
Joi =
Jj = a
n
i=j
[Joi + Ai Nr 2
i ] L a
n
i=j
cAiaL2
wi
12 + Nr 2
i b d
Jj = weld joint polar moment of inertia
ri = radius from the centroid to the ith critical point of interest
T = Pe = torsion-like couple on the weld joint
tti = Tri
Jj
530
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
P
Weld 3
Weld 1
Weld 4
Weld 2

e
Lw1, Lw3
Lw2, Lw4
Centroid
r
q
Figure 13.22
Multiply ﬁllet-welded joint subjected to eccen-
tric loading.

In a similar manner, a welded joint may be subjected to a bending moment about either of
its two orthogonal centroidal axes. Under the application of a bending moment, the shear
stress due to bending at an arbitrary point in the weld can be deﬁned by
(13-52)
where  
bending moment on the weld joint
distance from the centroid to the ith critical point of interest
weld joint area moment of inertia
Both the polar moment of inertia ( ) and area moment of inertia ( ) in equations (13-49)
and (13-51), respectively, can be deﬁned in terms of a unit moment of inertia (
or ),
which are related to the unit inertia through the weld thickness, t, which is related to the
weld size, s as deﬁned in (13-46). Consider the welded joint in shown in Figure 13.23; it
is subjected to two bending moments and a torque.
The shear stresses caused by the bending moments are 
and
. The shear stress is related to the torque by (13-49). The joint inertias about
the x and y axes are related to unit inertias with respect to these axes through
(13-53)
(13-54)
Recalling the basic deﬁnition of polar moment of inertia from strength of materials
(
), we can deﬁne the polar moment of inertia as
(13-55)
The area, centroid location, unit area moments of inertia and unit polar moment of in-
ertia for a variety of common ﬁllet weld conﬁgurations is shown in Table 13.14. The unit
inertia is generally simpler to use for common weld shapes than application of (13-15). In
situations where a complex weld geometry exists, the unit inertia table does not help and
(13-15) should be used.
With these expressions at hand, a suggested ﬁllet weld design procedure may be
established as follows:
1.
Try to conﬁgure the proposed weldment so that welds can be placed where they will
be most effective. For example, symmetric placement of weld runs with respect to the
weld group centroid will tend to maximize the value of 
[see (13-50)], and therefore
minimize the torsion-like shearing stress.
Jj
Jj = tJu = 0.707sJu = 0.707s(Iu-x + Iu-y)
J = Ix + Iy
Ij-y = tIu-y = 0.707sIu-y
Ij-x = tIu-x = 0.707sIu-x
tbi = Mzci>Ij-x
tbi = Myci>Ij-y
Iu
Ju
Ij
Jj
Ij =
ci =
M =
tbi = Mci
Ij
Welds 531
My
Mx
x
Mz = T
z
y
Figure 13.23
Welded joint subjected to two bending
moments and a torque.

532
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Weld
Throat Area
Centroid
Conﬁguration
A = 1.414s(b + d)
A = 0.707s(2b + d)
A = 0.707s(b + d)
A = 1.414sd
A = 0.707sd
Ju = Iu-x + Iu-y
Iu
y
G
x
d
y
G
x
b
y
y
d
x
G
x
b
y
y
d
x
b
G
y
x
d
y
x
y = d>2
x = 0
Iu = d3
12
Ju = d3
12
y = d>2
x = b>2
y =
d2
2(b + d)
x =
b2
2(b + d)
y = d>2
x =
b2
2b + d
y = d>2
x = b>2
Iu-y = db2
2
Iu-x = d3
6
Iu-y = b3(b + 4d)
12(b + d)
Iu-x = d3(d + 4b)
12(b + d)
Iu-y = b3a b + 2d
3(2b + d)b
Iu-x = d2
12(d + 6b)
Ju = d(3b2 + d2)
6
Ju = b4 + d4 + 4bd(b2 + d2)
12(b + d)
+ b3a b + 2d
3(2b + d)b
Ju = d2(d + 6b)
12
Iu-y = b2
6 (b + 3d)
Iu-x = d2
6 (d + 3b)
Ju = (b + d)3
6
b
y
x
d
y
x
Unit Moment of Inertia
TABLE 13.14 Unit Moments of Inertia for Selected Weld Conﬁgurations

2.
Sketch the proposed weld joint, showing the proposed location and the length of
each weld run. Also, show external loads and supports. (This may require three
views if three-dimensional weld-run geometry or three-dimensional loading is
involved.)
3.
Find the joint centroid and the joint polar moment of inertia, , about the centroid of
the weld group.
4.
Select potential critical points. Usually these occur at the ends of edges of welds that
are farthest from the joint centroid (maximum value of ).
5.
Using (13-48) and (13-49) or (13-51), calculate tentative values for 
and 
(or 
and 
), and add them vectorially to obtain a tentative resultant shearing stress, 
,
at each potential critical point. If the loads are ﬂuctuating, appropriate fatigue stress
concentration factors should be employed.
6.
Compare the largest resultant shearing stress 
(which is expressed in terms of the
weld size s) with the design-allowable shearing stress, 
. Solve for the weld size s.
Example 13.6 Determining Fillet Weld Sizes
It is desired to weld a 1020 steel side plate to a12020 steel column in accordance with the
speciﬁcations of Figure E13.6A. The side plate is to support a 6000-lb vertical load applied
at a horizontal distance of 5 inches away from the edge of the column. Determine the size
of the ﬁllet weld that should be used if all welds are to be the same size and a design fac-
tor of safety of 2 has been selected.
td
ts- max
tsi
tti-y
tti-x
tti
tw
ri
Jj
Welds 533
y =
d2
b + 2d
x = b>2
Iu-y = b3
12 + da2
2
Iu-x = d3
3
(2b + d)
(b + 2d)
Ju = d3
3
(2b + d)
(b + 2d) + b3
12 + da2
2
y = d>2
x = b>2
Iu-y = b3
6 + da2
2
Iu-x = 2d3
3
Ju = 2d3
3
+ b3
6 + da2
2
Ju = 2pr 3
Iu-x = Iu-y = pr 3
A = 1.414psr
A = 1.414s(b + d)
A = 0.707s(b + 2d)
G
c
b
x
d
y
x
y
c
b
x
G
d
y
x
y
x
r G
y

534
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Solution
From the sketch of Figure E13.6A, it may be deduced that the eccentric load P produces
both direct and torsion-like shear in the two ﬁllet welds. From Table 13.13, the yield
strength of an E6016 electrode is 
. Using the speciﬁed factor of safety of
2 and the distortional energy theory,
Using point A as the origin of the coordinate axes, we can determine the centroid as shown
in Figure E13.6B (a) from 
and
y = (6s)(0) + (6s)(-3)
12s
= -1.5 in (1.5 in below line AB)
x = (6s)(3) + (6s)(6)
12s
= 4.5 in (right)
td =
typ
2
=
0.577Syp
2
= 14,500 psi
Syp = 50,000 psi
N
N
A
C
B
6 in.
5 in.
Note N: Use E6012 electrode.
 
Weld length is to be 6 inches
6 in.
P = 6000 1b
Figure E13.6B
Weld conﬁguration with centroid
and shear stress components
shown.
Figure E13.6A
Sketch of pro-
posed side plate
installation.
C
B
B
A
P
T
C
P = 6000 1b
r1
r2
A
3 in.
3 in.
(a)
(b)
5 in.
4.5 in.
1.5 in.
1.5 in.
4.5 in.
3 in.
4.5 in.
1.5 in.
Example 13.6 
Continues

The total length of the weld is 
, with each segment being 6 in long. Determining
the polar moment of inertia using (13-50) requires deﬁning the location of the centroid of
each weld segment with respect to the centroid of the weld. In addition, the area of each weld
section is required. For the given weld we note that 
, and
. Thus, using (13-50)
The loads reacted at the centroid of the weld consist of a vertical shear force 
and a torque 
. Points A and C on the weld are furthest away
from the centroid and will have the largest shear stress. The direct shear stress is deter-
mined using (13-48) and the components of the shear stress due to the torque about the
centroid is determined from (13-51). Figure E13.6B (b) shows the loads acting at the cen-
troid of the weld and the components of each shear stress.
Knowing that 
, we determine the direct shear stress form (13-48) to be 
Similarly, using (13-51), the components of the shear stress at A and C are
From Figure E13.6B, we note that the y components of shear stress add at point C and sub-
tract at point A. As a result, we have 
The total shearing stress at points A and C is thus
Since point C experiences the greatest shearing stress, we compare 
with 
, which
results in
For a static loading, a 
-inch ﬁllet weld is recommended for this application. (It is worth
noting that if the loading were cyclic, a fatigue stress concentration factor would be required
and a larger weld size would likely be necessary.)
1>4
3626
s
= 14,500  Q   s = 0.25 inch
td
tC
tC = 2(tC-x)2 + (tC-y)2 = A a3168
s
b
2
+ a1763
s
b
2
= 3626
s
tA = 2(tA-x)2 + (tA-y)2 = A a1056
s
b
2
+ a2461
s
b
2
= 2678
s
tC-y = 1056
s
+ 707
s
= 1763
s
tA-y = 3168
s
- 707
s
= 2461
s
(ttC)y = TxC
Jj
= 39,000(1.5)
55.398s
= 1056
s
(ttC)x = TyC
Jj
= 39,000(4.5)
55.398s
= 3168
s
(ttA)y = TxA
Jj
= 39,000(4.5)
55.398s
= 3168
s
(ttA)x = TyA
Jj
= 39,000(1.5)
55.398s
= 1056
s
tw = P
As
=
6000
0.707s(12) = 707
s
As = 0.707s(12)
T = 6.5(6000) = 39,000 in-lb
P = 6000 lb
Jj = 2c4.242sa 62
12 + (2.12)2b d = 55.398s
r1 = r2 = 2(1.5)2 + (1.5)2 = 2.12 in
A1 = A2 = 0.707s(6) = 4.242s
Lw = 12 in
Welds 535

Example 13.7 Welded Joint Analysis Using Unit Inertia
Two welds, indicated as AB and CD in Figure 13.7A are required to attach a plate to a ma-
chine component, as shown. The plate is subjected to a 45 kN load directed as shown. The
allowable shear stress in the weld material is 
. Using unit inertia, deter-
mine the required size s of the weld. 
Solution
Due to symmetry, the centroid of the weld section is easy to determine and is marked on
the original sketch. The applied 45 kN load can be broken into components
and 
. Creating an equivalent force-couple
system at the centroid of the weld results in two direct shear forces (
and 
) as well as
a torsional moment in the direction shown in Figure E13.7B, and a magnitude of 
From Table 13.14, the unit polar moment of inertia for this weld conﬁguration is 
The total length of weld is 
. Using a weld thickness 
, we
determine the area over which the direct shear forces are applied and the unit inertia to be
The shear stress due to direct shear at all points along welds AB and CD is the same. The
shear stress due to the torsional moment varies with distance from the centroid. It reaches
a maximum at points A, B, C, and D, which are the farthest points from the centroid (0.125
m). The magnitude is identical at these points, but the direction of 
is different at each
point. The direct shear in the x and y directions along welds AB and CD is
tdy =
Py
A = 36 * 103
0.21s
= 171 * 103
s
tdx = Px
A = 27 * 103
0.21s
= 129 * 103
s
tT
Jj = tJu = (0.707s)(2.6875 * 10-3) L 1.9 * 10-3s
A = tLw = 0.707s(0.3) = 0.21s
t = 0.707s
Lw = 2(0.15) = 0.3 m
Ju =
dA3b2 + d2B
6
=
0.15C3(0.15)2 + (0.2)2D
6
= 2.6875 * 16-3 m3
T = 0.175Py - 0.1Px = 0.175(36) - 0.1(27) = 3.6 kN-m (cw)
Py
Px
Py = (4>5)P = 36 kN
Px = (3>5)P = 27 kN
tallow = 145 MPa
536
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
A
D
C
B
P = 45 kN
4
3
200 mm
100 mm
100 mm
75 mm
150 mm
A
Py
Px
D
T
C
B
Figure E13.7A
Welded joint assembly.
Figure E13.7B
Equivalent force-couple
system acting at the cen-
troid of weld pattern.

Welds 537
Figure E13.7C
Shear stress components at
points A, B, C, and D.
C
r
r
r
r
The shear stress due to torsion can be determined using 
, which produces the
magnitude of the shear stress at each point. This shear stress is directed perpendicular to
the radius vector from the centroid to the point. In order to determine the actual magnitude
of the shear stress at each point, 
must be broken into components, which are added to
and 
. The shear stress due to torsion can also been determined in terms of its com-
ponents. Noting that the x and y distances from the centroid to points A, B, C, and D are
the same, we could have written the shear stress due to torsion as
The direction of these components at each point being evaluated is as shown in Figure
E13.7C. The largest shear stress will occur at the point where the two components (from
direct shear and torsion) are in the same direction, which is point C. Combining these we
get
The shear stress at point C is therefore
Knowing 
You would probably specify 
.
s = 3 mm
145 * 106 = 446 * 103
s
 :  s = 3.075 * 10-3 m
tallow = 145 MPa
= 446 * 103
s
tC = 2(tCx)2 + (tCy)2 = A a318 * 103
s
b
2
+ a313 * 103
s
b
2
tCy = tdy + tty = 171 * 103
s
+ 142 * 103
s
= 313 * 103
s
tCx = tdx + ttx = 129 * 103
s
+ 189 * 103
s
= 318 * 103
s
tti-y = tty = Txi
Jj
= 3.6 * 103(0.075)
1.9 * 10-3s
= 142 * 103
s
tti-x = ttx = Tyi
Jj
= 3.6 * 103(0.10)
1.9 * 10-3s
= 189 * 103
s
tdy
tdx
tti
tti = Tri>Jj

538
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
15See, for example, ref. 11.
16Similar to a stress concentration factor but with smaller stress gradient.
13.7 Adhesive Bonding
Adhesive bonding of structural parts has become more attractive as a design option with
the development of improved adhesive formulations. Designers have found that, in some
cases, structural adhesives produce reliable joints at lower total cost than other fastening
methods. An adhesively bonded joint is actually a composite structure in which the two el-
ements being joined (the adherends) are held together by surface attachment provided by
the adhesive. Thin adhesive layers (ideally 0.005 inch or less) and intimate adherend sur-
face contact are essential for strong bonds, and joint conﬁgurations that load the adhesive
bonding material in shear have the highest probability of success.
Advantages of adhesive bonding over other joining techniques, such as bolting, rivet-
ing, or welding, include:
1.
Loads transferred across the joint are distributed over the entire area of the joint’s fay-
ing surfaces (rather than the smaller discrete shear areas of bolts, rivets or welds), al-
lowing the successful use of lower speciﬁc strength adhesive agents.
2.
Stress concentrations are minimized because there are no holes, as with bolts or riv-
ets, and no warping, residual stresses, or local discontinuities, as with welding. In
some cases, this may result in thinner sections and lighter weight.
3.
Smoother unbroken surfaces (no protruding fasteners) may provide better appearance,
easier ﬁnishing, and/or more streamlined ﬂuid ﬂow characteristics.
4.
Adhesive bonding is well suited to joining dissimilar materials, and may be used to
electrically insulate them from each other (to avoid galvanic corrosion), or seal them
against air or liquid leakage.
5.
The viscoelastic properties and ﬂexibility of the adhesive layer may accommodate dif-
ferential thermal expansion between the adherends, provide hysteretic damping to at-
tenuate vibration and sound transmission, reduce impact loading, or contribute to
improved fatigue resistance of the joint.
Joint Design
Joint type (see Figure 13.1) must be carefully considered if adhesive bonding is an-
ticipated, since bonded joints are most effective when the adhesive layer is loaded in shear.
Tensile loading of the adhesive layer should generally be avoided in structural applications,
especially if nonuniform loading distributions tend to produce cleavage or peeling [see
Figure 13.24(c)]. Typically, lap joints are preferred; butt joints are not usually practical. It
is important to note, however, that single lap joints, as shown in Figure 13.25(a), develop
bending moments because applied loads are not colinear. Double lap joints may be re-
quired in some cases to avoid potential cleavage or peeling. A hybrid version, called a
scarf joint, is sometimes used, but is expensive to machine and is impractical for thin sec-
tions. A scarf joint is illustrated in Figure 13.25.
It has been shown15 that the shearing stress distribution in the adhesive layer of a lap
joint loaded as shown in Figure 13.25(a) is highly nonlinear, reaching maximum values at
the adhesive boundaries that may be more than twice the average shearing stress across the
joint. For preliminary design purposes, the average shearing stress in the adhesive layer
may be calculated, then multiplied by a stress distribution factor,16
. Likewise, a stress
distribution factor may be used for scarf joints [see Figure 13.25(b)]. Speciﬁc values for
are not readily available.
Ks
Ks

The maximum shearing stress, 
, in the adhesive layer of a lap joint, such as the one
shown in Figure 13.25(a), may be calculated as
(13-56)
The maximum shearing stress, 
, in the adhesive layer of a scarf joint, such as the
one shown in Figure 13.25(b), may be calculated as
(13-57)
u = scarf angle = tan-1 t
Ls
where  t = thickness of adherend members
tmax = Kstave = Ks 
J
Pcosu
a bt
sinub K
= Ksa P
bt sinucosub
tmax
LL = length of adhesive layer
b = width of adhesive layer
P = applied load
where  Ks = stress distribution factor 1use Ks = 2 in the absence of specific data2
tmax = Kstave = Ksa P
bLL
b
tmax
Adhesive Bonding 539
High-tensile (cleavage)
stress in adhesive
P
P
P
P
High-tensile (direct)
stress in adhesive
Flexible member
High-tensile (peeling)
stress in adhesive
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 13.24
Illustration of potential failures of the adhesive layer due to (a) direct tension, (b) cleavage, and (c) peel-
ing. Such designs are to be avoided.
LS
LL
(a) Single lap joint (bonded).
(b) Scarf joint (bonded).
b
b
cp 1
cp 1
cp 2
cp 2
t
t
t
P
P
P
P
Adhesive
layer
Adhesive
layer

Figure 13.25
Adhesively bonded (a) lap
joint and (b) scarf joint.

540
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
Typically, the design objective for adhesively bonded joints is to select an adhesive
material and joint dimensions so that the load-carrying capability of the adhesive layer is
equal to the load-carrying ability of the members being joined.
Structural Adhesive Materials
Selection of an appropriate structural adhesive material depends upon many factors,
including strength requirements, type of joint, operational environment (temperature, hu-
midity, solvents), substrates to be bonded (porosity, coatings, contaminants), available
manufacturing facilities, and cost factors. Table 13.15 gives a brief summary of properties
and characteristics of several commonly used structural adhesive materials.
Example 13.8 Adhesive Bonding
It is desired to investigate adhesive bonding as a means of joining Ti-6Al-4V titanium
plates having a thickness of 1.5 mm and widths of 100 mm.
a.
If a lap joint of the type shown in Figure 13.25 (a) were used, and an epoxy adhesive
selected, what would be the required length of the joint overlap?
b.
If a scarf joint of the type shown in Figure 13.25 (b) were used, and an epoxy adhe-
sive selected, what would be the required length L, of the scarf joint?
c.
Which type of joint would you recommend?
Solution
a.
The basic design criterion is to achieve a joint strength equal to the plate strength.
That is, the tensile load-carrying capability of the titanium plates should equal the
ability of the adhesive to carry the load in shear. Thus, 
. Using (13-56)
for the adhesive layers in shear, at incipient failure,
For the plates in tension, at incipient failure by yielding, 
. Equating 
to 
and solving for 
,
From Table 3.3, 
for Ti-6Al-4V, and from Table 13.15, 
for a typical adhesive. Using 
and a plate thickness of 
gives
b.
Using the same design criterion for the scarf joint and utilizing (13-60)
Ps-adh =
bttmax-f
Ks sin u cos u
LL = 2(1.5)a883
15 b = 177 mm
t = 1.5 mm
Ks = 2
tmax-f = 15 MPa
Syp = 883 MPa
LL = Ksta
Syp
tmax -f
b
LL
Ps-adh
Pt-pl
Pt-pl = Sypbt
Ps-adh =
bLLt max -f
Ks
Pt-pl = Ps-adh

Table 13.15 Properties and Characteristics of Selected Structural Adhesive Materials
Epoxies
Urethanes
Cyanoacrylates
Acrylics
Anaerobics
Hot Melts
Silicones
Typical RT1 shear 
2.2(15)
2.2(15)
2.7(19)
3.7(26)
2.5(17)
0.5(3.4)
0.2–0.25
strength, ksi (MPa)
(1.4–1.7)
Max. continuous
390 (200)
210 (100)
175 (80)
210 (100)
390 (200)
390 (200)
500 (260)
operating
temperature, 
(
)
Impact resistance
Poor
Excellent
Poor
Good
Fair
Fair
Excellent
Surfaces bonded
Metals, glass, 
Metals, glass, 
Metals, plastics,
Metals, glass,
Metals, glass,
All
All
plastics, 
plastics,
ceramics, 
plastics,
some plastics,
ceramics
ceramics,
rubber, 
creamics,
creamics
rubber
wood
wood
Gal limitations, in
None
None
0.010 (0.254)
0.030(0.762)
0.025(0.635)
None
0.25(6.35)
(mm)
Substrate 
Yes; careful 
Varies with 
Yes
Some can
Yes
Yes
Yes; careful 
preparation 
cleaning 
substrate
bond oily
cleaning
required
required
surfaces
required
Oily substrate 
Fair–good
Fair
Poor–fair
Good
Fair
Poor
Poor
bonding
Moisture resistance
Excellent
Fair
Poor
Good
Good
Fair–good
Good
Solvent resistance
Excellent
Good
Good
Good
Excellent
Fair–good
Fair
Typical cure, 
2–4 @ 70(21)
4–12 @ 70 (21)
0.5–5 @ 70
0.5–1 @ 70
1–12 @ 70 (21)
seconds
24 @ 77 (25)
hr at 
(
)
0.1–4 @ 300
0.2–0.5 @ 150
(21)
(21)
0.05–2 @ 250
(150)
(66)
(for handling)
(121)
Fastest RT1 cure to 
5 min
5 min
10 sec
2 min
5 min
seconds
2 hr
handleable state
Fastest RT1 full cure
24 hr
24 hr
2 hr
12 hr
12 hr
—
2–5 days
Odor/toxicity
Mild/moderate
Mild/moderate
Irritating/low
Strong/low–
Mild/low
Mild/low
Mild–irritating/low
moderate
Shelf life
6 mo–1 yr
6 mo–1 yr
1 yr
6 mo–1 yr
1 yr
1 yr
6 mo–1 yr
Remarks
Brittle; good
Excellent for 
Brittle; low 
Good for 
Thin glue
Flexible;  
Excellent for
for dissimilar 
low temps and
shrinkage;  thin
dissimilar
lines best
softens at 
extreme temps and
materials; low 
dissimilar
ﬁlms best
materials
high temps
dissimilar materials;
shrinkage
materials
provides sealing
1Room temperature.
7
7
6
6
6
6
6
6
°C
°F
°C
°F
541

542
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
13-1. You have been assigned the task of examining a number
of large flood gates installed in 1931 for irrigation control at a
remote site on the Indus River in Pakistan. Several large steel
bolts appear to have developed cracks, and you have decided
that they should be replaced to avert a potentially serious fail-
ure of one or more of the flood gates. Your Pakistani assistant
has examined flood gate specifications, and has found that the
original bolts may be well characterized as 32-mm medium-
carbon quenched and tempered steel bolts, of property class
8.8. You have brought with you only a limited number of re-
placement bolts in this size range, some of which are SAE
Grade 7, and others that are ASTM Class A325, type 3.
Which, if either, of these replacement bolts would you recom-
mend as a substitute for the cracked originals? Justify your
recommendation.
13-2. A high-speed “closing machine” is used in a tomato
canning factory to install lids and seal the cans. It is in the
middle of the “pack” season and a special bracket has sepa-
rated from the main frame of the closing machine because the
-24 UNF-2A hex-head cap screws used to hold the bracket
in place have failed. The head markings on the failed cap
screws consist of the letters BC in the center of the head. No
cap screws with this head marking can be found in the store-
room. The 
-24 UNF-2A cap screws that can be found in the
“high-strength” bin have five equally spaced radial lines on
the heads. Because it is so important to get up-and-running
immediately to avoid spoilage, you are being asked, as an en-
gineering consultant, whether the available cap screws with
head markings of five radial lines can be safely substituted for
the broken originals. How do you respond? Justify your rec-
ommendation.
13-3. A cylindrical ﬂange joint requires a total clamping force
between two mating ﬂanges of 45 kN. It is desired to use six
38
38
equally spaced cap screws around the ﬂange. The cap screws
pass through clearance holes in the top ﬂange and thread into
tapped holes in the bottom ﬂange.
a. Select a set of suitable cap screws for this application.
b. Recommend a suitable tightening torque for the cap
screws.
13-4. It is desired to use a set of four bolts to attach the
bracket shown in Figure P13.4 to a stiff steel column. For
purposes of economy, all bolts are to be the same size. It is
desired to use ASTM Class A307 low-carbon steel material
and standard UNC threads. A design safety factor of 2.5 has
been selected, based on yielding as the governing failure
mode.
a. What bolt-hole pattern would you suggest and what
bolt speciﬁcation would you recommend?
b. What tightening torque would you recommend if it is
desired to produce a preload force in each bolt equal to 85
percent of the minimum proof strength?
Problems
where 
. Equating 
for the scarf joint to 
and solv-
ing for 
The length of the scarf joint 
, may be found form
c.
The require length of the scarf joint and the lap joint are both approximately the same
(177 mm). Machining a 177 mm scarf in a 1.5 mm thick plate of titanium is not very
practical. Therefore, a lap joint is recommended for this application.
Ls =
t
tan u =
1.5
tan 0.487o = 177 mm
Ls
u = 1
2 sin -1c 2
Ks
a
t max -f
Syp
b d = 1
2 sin -1c2
2 a 15
883 b d = 0.487o
u
Pt-pl = Sypbt
Ps-adh
u = tan -1(t>Ls)
Example 13.8 
Continues
7 in.
3 in.
5 in.
6000 lb
1 in.
1 1
2 in.
Figure P13.4
Steel support bracket to be bolted to a stiff steel column.

Problems 543
13-5. Estimate the nominal size of the smallest SAE Grade 1
standard UNC bolt that will not yield under a tightening torque
of 1000 in-lb. Neglect stress concentration.
13-6. A standard ﬁne-thread metric machine screw made of
steel has a major diameter of 8.0 mm and a head marking of 9.8.
Determine the tensile proof force (kN) for this screw. It may be
assumed that the coefﬁcient of friction is about 0.15 for both the
threads and the collar.
13-7. A standard coarse-thread metric cap screw made of steel
has a major diameter of 10.0 mm. If a torque wrench is used to
tighten the cap screw to a torque of 35 N-m, estimate the axial
preload force induced in the cap screw. It may be assumed that the
coefﬁcient of friction is about 0.15 for both threads and collar.
13-8. Engineering speciﬁcations for a machine tool bracket ap-
plication call for a nonlubricated M30 
2 threaded fastener of
property class 8.8 to be tightened to 100 percent of proof load.
Calculate the torque required to accomplish this. It may be as-
sumed that the coefﬁcient of friction is about 0.15 for both the
threads and the collar.
13-9. A 
-16 SAE Grade 2 steel bolt is to be used to clamp
two 1.00-inch-thick steel ﬂanges together with a 
-inch-thick
special lead-alloy gasket between the ﬂanges, as shown in
Figure P13.9. The effective load-carrying area of the steel
ﬂanges and of the gasket may be taken as 0.75. sq. in. Young’s
modulus for the gasket is 5.3
106 psi. If the bolt is initially
tightened to induce an axial preload force in the bolt of 6000 lb,
and if an external force of 8000 lb is then applied as shown,
a. What is the force on the bolt?
b. What is the force on each of the steel ﬂanges?
c. What is the force on the gasket?
d. If the stress concentration factor for the bolt thread root
is 3.0, would local yielding at the thread root be expected?
*
116
34
*
in diameter and generously ﬁlleted, so stress concentration may
be neglected. The bolt material is AISI 4620 cold-drawn steel.
a. Sketch the joint, showing the reduced-body bolt, and
the loading.
b. If the bolt is tightened to produce a preload in the joint
of 5000 lb, what external force 
could be applied to the
assembly before the joint would start to separate?
c. If the external load 
ﬂuctuates from 0 to 5555 lb at
3600 cycles per minute, and the desired design life is 7
years of continuous operation, would you predict failure of
the bolt by fatigue?
13-11. A typical bolted joint of the type shown in Figure 13.9
uses a 
-13 UNC bolt, and the length of the bolt and length of
the housing is the same. The threads stop immediately above
the nut. The bolt is steel with 
101,000 psi, 
85,000
psi, and 
50,000 psi. The thread stress concentration factor
is 3. The effective area of the steel housing is 0.88 in2. The load
ﬂuctuates cyclically from 0 to 2500 lb at 2000 cpm.
a. Find the existing factor of safety for the bolt if no pre-
load is present.
b. Find the minimum required value of preload to prevent
loss of compression in the housing.
c. Find the existing factor of safety for the bolt if the pre-
load in the bolt is 3000 lb.
13-12. A 
-20 UNF-2A SAE Grade 2 steel cap screw is being
considered for use in attaching a cylinder head to an engine block
made of 356.0 cast aluminum (see Table 3.3). It is being proposed
to engage the cap screw into an internally threaded hole tapped di-
rectly into the aluminum block. Estimate the required length of
thread engagement that will ensure tensile failure of the cap screw
before the threads are stripped in the aluminum block. Assume
that all engaged threads participate equally in carrying the load.
Base your estimate on direct shear of the aluminum threads at the
major thread diameter, and use the distortion energy theory of fail-
ure to estimate the shear yield strength for the aluminum block.
13-13. A support arm is to be attached to a rigid column using
two bolts located, as shown in Figure P13.13. The bolt at A is
12
Sf =
Syp =
Su =
12
P
Psep
External force
External force
Lead gasket
Steel flanges
Figure P13.9
Bolted ﬂange joint with interposed gasket.
13-10. A special reduced-body bolt is to be used to clamp two
-inch-thick steel ﬂanges together with a 
-inch-thick copper-
asbestos gasket between the ﬂanges in an arrangement similar to
the one shown in Figure P13.9. The effective area for both the
steel ﬂanges and the copper-asbestos gasket may be taken as
0.75 square inch. Young’s modulus of elasticity for the copper-
asbestos gasket is 13.5
106 psi. The special bolt has 
-16
UNF threads but the body of the bolt is reduced to 0.4375 inch
34
*
18
34
150 mm
375 mm
50 mm
50 mm
Column
Support arm
18 KN
25 mm
Figure P13.13
Support arm bolted to a rigid column.

544
Chapter 13 / Machine Joints and Fastening Methods
to have an 
thread speciﬁcation and the bolt at B
is to have an 
speciﬁcation. It is desired to use the
same material for both bolts, and the probable governing failure
mode is yielding. No signiﬁcant preload is induced in the bolts
as a result of the tightening process, and it may be assumed that
friction between the arm and the column does not contribute to
supporting the 18 kN load. If a design safety factor of 1.8 has
been selected, what minimum tensile yield strength is required
for the bolt material?
13-14. A steel side plate is to be bolted to a vertical steel col-
umn as shown in Figure P13.14, using 
-10 UNC SAE Grade
8 steel bolts.
a. Determine and clearly indicate the magnitude and di-
rection of the direct shearing stress for the most critically
loaded bolt.
b. Determine and clearly indicate the magnitude and di-
rection of the torsion-like shearing stress for the most crit-
ically loaded bolt.
c. Determine the existing safety factor on yielding for the
most critically loaded bolt, assuming that no signiﬁcant
preload has been induced in the bolt due to tightening.
34
MS 10 * 1.5
MS 20 * 2.5
e. Determine whether yielding would be expected at any
point within the installed support plate under the 16-kN
applied load.
13-16. For the eccentrically loaded riveted joint shown in
Figure P13.16, do the following:
a. Vertify the location of the centroid for the joint.
b. Find the location and magnitude of the force carried by
the most heavily loaded rivet. Assume that the force taken
by each rivet depends linearly on its distance from the joint
centroid.
c. Find the maximum rivet shearing stress if 
-inch rivets
are used.
d. Find the location and magnitude of the maximum bear-
ing stress if 
-inch thick plate is used.
516
34
200 mm
300 mm
60 mm
60 mm
M16 × 2; 4 req’d
A
B
D
C
1020 steel plate
F = 16 kN
t = 15 mm
50 mm
75 mm
50 mm
Figure P13.15
Cantilevered support plate bolted to a steel column.
5 in.
P = 10,000 lb
5 in.
1 in.
1 in.
Side plate
10 in.
A
B
C
3
4
Column
– 10 UNC
grade 8 bolts
(3 req’d)
Figure P13.14
Steel side plate bolted to a steel column.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 in.
X = 2 in.
Y =
5 in.
3 in.
6 in.
2 in. 2 in.
3 in.
r1
r2
r3
10,000 lb
c.g.
5
16 in.-thick
steel plate
Stiff steel column
Figure P13.16
Eccentrically loaded riveted joint.
13-15. A 1020 hot-rolled steel cantilevered support plate is to
be bolted to a stiff steel column using four M16
2 bolts of
Property Class 4.6, positioned as shown in Figure P13.15. For
the 16-kN static load and the dimensions given, and assuming
that none of the load is supported by friction, do the following:
a. Find the resultant shear force on each bolt.
b. Find the magnitude of the maximum bolt shearing
stress, and its location.
c. Find the maximum bearing stress and its location.
d. Find the maximum bending stress in the cantilevered
support plate, and identify where it occurs. Neglect stress
concentration.
*
13-17. For a bracket riveted to a large steel girder, as sketched
in Figure P13.17, perform a complete stress analysis of the

Problems 545
Column
50 mm
60 mm
F = ±18 kN
(cyclic)
t = 10 mm
Side plate
Note N: E 6012 electrode
N
N
Figure P13.19
Steel side plate welded to a stiff steel column.
125 mm
75 mm
75 mm
200 mm
75 mm
Stiff steel girder
Steel bracket
40 KN
20 mm rivets (5 req’d)
1
2
3
4 5
5000 lb
5 in.
5 in.
Side
plate
4 in.
A
E
B
C
D
Column
N
N
3
8 in.
3
8 in.
riveted joint. The yield stresses are 
for the
plate and 
for the rivets. Assume the rivet cen-
terline is 1.5 times the rivet diameter away from the edge of the
plate and protruding head rivets are used. The plate is 6 mm
thick and the girder is much thicker. Determine the existing fac-
tors of safety on yielding for each of the potential types of fail-
ure for the riveted joint, except edge shear-out and edge tearing.
13-18. A simple butt-welded strap, similar to the one shown in
Figure 13.20, is limited by surrounding structure to a width of 4
inches. The material of the strap is annealed AISI 1020 steel (see
Table 3.3), and an E 6012 welding electrode has been recom-
mended for this application. The applied load P ﬂuctuates from a
minimum of 0 to a maximum of 25,000 lb and back, continuously.
a. If a safety factor of 2.25 has been selected, 
is ap-
proximately 0.8 [see (2-27)], and inﬁnite life is desired, what
thickness should be speciﬁed for the butt-welded strap?
b. If any fatigue failures do occur when these welded
straps are placed in service, at what location would you ex-
pect to see the fatigue cracks initiating?
13-19. A horizontal side plate made of 1020 steel (see Figure
2.19) is to be welded to a stiff steel column using an E 6012
electrode, as speciﬁed in Figure P13.19. If the horizontally ap-
plied load F ﬂuctuates cyclically from 18 kN (tension) to
kN (compression) each cycle,  
is approximately 0.75
[see (2-27)], and a design safety factor of 2.5 is desired, what
ﬁllet weld size would your recommend if all ﬁllet welds are to
be the same size? Inﬁnite life is desired.
k q
-18
k q
Syp = 345 MPa
Syp = 276 MPa
13-20. A steel side plate is to be welded to a vertical steel col-
umn according to the specifications in Figure P13.20.
Neglecting stress concentration effects, calculate the magni-
tude and clearly indicate the direction of the resultant shear-
ing stress at the critical point. In selecting the critical point be
sure to consider effects of both torsion-like shear and direct
shear.
13-21. A proposed double lap-joint [see Figure 13.1(f)] is to be
symmetrically loaded in tension, parallel to the plane of the
straps to be joined. Adhesive bonding is being considered as a
means of joining the straps. The single center strap is titanium
and the double outer straps are medium-carbon steel. This aero-
space application involves continuous operation at a tempera-
ture of about 350
, moderate impact loading, and occasional
exposure to moisture. What types of structural adhesives would
you recommend as good candidates for bonding this double lap
joint?
13-22. In an adhesively bonded lap joint (see Figure 13.24)
made of two sheets of metal, each having thickness t, it has
been found from an experimental testing program that the max-
imum shearing stress in the adhesive may be estimated as
total in-plane tensile force on the joint (perpen-
dicular to b)
sheet width
overlap dimension of joint.
If the adhesive material has a shear failure strength of 
, and
the metal sheets have a yield strength of 
, derive an equation
for overlap dimension 
for which adhesive shear failure and
metal sheet yielding failure are equally likely.
13-23. It is being proposed to use a lap joint conﬁguration to
adhesively bond two 0.9-mm thick strips of 2024-T3 aluminum
using an epoxy adhesive. Assuming a stress distribution factor
of 
, what bond overlap length would you recommend?
Ks = 2
LL
Syp
tsf
LL =
b =
where  P =
1tmax2adh = 2P
bLL
°F
Figure P13.17
Steel bracket riveted to stiff steel girder.
Figure P13.20
Side-plate welded to a vertical steel column.

546
Springs
Chapter 14
14.1 Uses and Characteristics of Springs
Springs may be broadly deﬁned as structures or devices that exhibit elastic deformation
when loaded, and recover their initial conﬁguration when the load is removed. In most ap-
plications linear spring rates are desired (see 2.4). Because every real material has a ﬁnite
modulus of elasticity, machine elements of all types necessarily behave as “springs.” When
analyzing load sharing in redundant structures or in preloaded systems,1 or when investi-
gating vibrational response to operating loads and frequencies,2 the spring properties of
machine elements must be considered.
Usually the term spring denotes a resilient device specially conﬁgured to exert desired
forces or torques, to provide ﬂexibility, or to store potential energy of strain for release at
a later time. Conﬁgurations that provide desirable spring behavior include helically coiled
wire (usually round or square) loaded by a force along the axis of the helix or by torsional
moments about the axis of the helix, thin ﬂat beams (simply supported or cantilevered)
loaded in bending, and round bars or tubes loaded in torsion. These conﬁgurations, and a
few additional specialty springs, are discussed further in 14.2. A wide variety of spring
conﬁgruations are commercially available as stock items, and custom springs are readily
available from many manufacturers.
14.2 Types of Springs
Helical-coil springs are probably more widely used than any other type. As illustrated in
Figure 14.1, helical-coil springs may be used to support compressive loads (pushing), ten-
sile loads (pulling), or torsional moments (twisting). In addition to the standard helical-coil
compression spring shown in Figure 14.1(a), several nonlinear conﬁgurations designed to
solve special problems are shown in Figure 14.1(b) through (e). A typical helical-coil 
extension spring is illustrated in Figure 14.1(f), and a helical torsion spring is shown in 
Figure 14.1(h).
Beam springs (leaf springs) of various types are illustrated in Figure 14.2. Leaf
springs may be either single or multileaf cantilever beams subjected to transverse end-
loads, as shown in Figures 14.2(a) and (b), or single or multileaf simply supported beams
subjected to center loads, as shown in Figures 14.2(c) and (d). Multileaf springs are usu-
ally proportioned to approximate constant-strength beams (see 14.7).
1See 4.7 and 4.8.
2See 8.6 and 11.6.
Some examples of springs.

Types of Springs 547
Torsion bar springs, as illustrated in Figure 14.3, may be solid or hollow bars with cir-
cular cross sections subjected to torsional moments that induce angular displacements.
End attachments for torsion bar springs require special design attention to minimize stress
concentration problems. Occasionally, torsion bar springs may be made with noncircular
cross sections for special applications, but circular cross sections are more efﬁcient.
Many other specialty springs have been devised. A few of these are shown in Figures
14.3(c) through (h). The volute spring, shown in 14.3(c), may be used when high friction
damping is desired. Rubber springs, such as the one shown in 14.3(d), provide high damping
as well, and have been successfully used as “shock insulators” for mounting heavy equipment
such as automotive engines. Pneumatic springs, such as the two-convolution bellows arrange-
ment shown in Figure 14.3(e), are basically columns of conﬁned gas, properly contained so
that the compressibility of the gas provides the desired displacement behavior. Belleville
(a) Standard compression;
fixed pitch; linear;
constant rate; pushes.
(f) Standard closed-coil
extension; linear after
coils open; pulls.
(g) Drawbar; linear until
extended to solid stop;
pulls.
(h) Helical torsion; linear;
constant rate; twists.
(b) Variable pitch;
nonlinear; pushes;
resists resonance.
(c) Conical; linear or
hardening; pushes;
minimum solid height.
(d) Hourglass; nonlinear;
pushes; resists
resonance.
(e) Barrel; nonlinear;
pushes; resists
resonance.
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
y
y
y
y
y
y
y

Figure 14.1
Various helical-coil spring conﬁgurations.
(a) Flat cantilever; constant cross section;
linear; pulls or pushes.
(b) Multileaf cantilever; approximates
uniform strength cantilever; linear;
pulls or pushes (if properly oriented).
(c) Flat simply supported constant cross section;
linear; pulls or pushes.
(d) Multileaf simply supported; positive arc height
(camber); approximates uniform strength beam;
linear; pushes or pulls (if properly oriented).
P
P
P
P
y
y
y
y
Figure 14.2
Various beam spring (leaf
spring) conﬁgurations.

548
Chapter 14 / Springs
washers (coned-disk springs), such as the one shown in 14.3(f), may be used where space is
limited and high loads with small deﬂections are required. By varying the dimensions of the
coned disks, or by stacking them in series or parallel, as shown in Figures 14.3(g) and (h), the
spring rate may be made approximately linear, nonlinear hardening, or nonlinear softening
(see Figure 4.21). Many other types of special-purpose springs are commercially available.
14.3 Potential Failure Modes
Springs of all types are expected to operate over long periods of time without signiﬁcant
changes in dimensions, displacements, or spring rates, often under ﬂuctuating loads. Based
on these requirements and the various spring conﬁgurations discussed in 14.2, the poten-
tial failure modes (see 2.3) include yielding, fatigue, corrosion fatigue, fretting fatigue,
creep, thermal relaxation, buckling, and/or force-induced elastic deformation (in the guise
of resonant response or “surging”). To clarify, when springs are deﬂected under full load,
the stresses induced must not exceed the yield strength of the material. If they do, the
resulting permanent dimensional changes may interfere with the spring’s ability to provide
required forces or deliver stored strain energy essential to subsequent operation. Similarly,
creep may lead to unacceptable long-term dimensional changes, even under static loading,
a condition sometimes referred to as “set.” If operating conditions include elevated
temperatures, thermal relaxation must not produce unacceptable changes in dimensions or
reduction of load-supporting capability. Fluctuating loads, often applied to springs, may
lead to fatigue failure. Corrosive environments may make matters even worse, giving rise
to accelerated failures due to corrosion fatigue. Fretting conditions between leaves of
(a) Torsion bar; linear; twists.
(c) Volute spring;
embodies friction
damping; pushes.
(f) Bellville washer;
high loads;
nonlinear; pushes.
(g) Belleville washers
stacked in series.
(h) Belleville washers
stacked in parallel.
(d) Rubber spring;
high damping;
may push, pull
or twists.
(e) Two-convolution
bellows pneumatic
spring; controlable
spring rate; adjustable
load capacity; pushes.
F
T
F
y
F
F
F
y
F
y
F
y
y

T

(b) Torsion tube; linear; twists.
Figure 14.3
Torsion bar springs and a few other
speciality springs.

Spring Materials 549
multileaf springs, between torsion bars and attached lever-arms, between washers of
stacked Belleville springs, and any other conﬁgurations where cyclic strains induce small-
amplitude sliding between contacting surfaces of spring elements may lead to fretting fa-
tigue failures. Like columns, axially loaded open-coil compression springs may buckle if
they are too slender or exceed critical deﬂections. When cyclic operating frequencies are
close to the resonant frequency3 of a spring, erratic force-displacement behavior may be
induced because of wave propagation phenomena, sometimes called “surging.” The pre-
vention of surging is especially important for helical-coil spring applications.
As always, it is an important design responsibility to identify probable failure modes
at the design stage, for the particular application at hand, and select an appropriate mate-
rial and geometry to minimize the likelihood of potential failures.
14.4 Spring Materials
Material selection guidelines established in Chapter 3, together with failure mode discus-
sions of 14.3, suggest that candidate materials for springs should have high strength (ulti-
mate, yield, and fatigue), high resilience, good creep resistance, and, in some applications,
good corrosion resistance and/or resistance to elevated temperatures. Materials meeting
these criteria include carbon steel, alloy steel, stainless steel, spring brass, phosphor
bronze, beryllium copper, and nickel alloys. Any of these spring materials may be formed
into bars, wire, or strip by various hot-forming or cold-forming processes.
Cold-formed spring wire is produced by cold drawing the material through carbide dies
to produce the desired size, surface ﬁnish, dimensional accuracy, and mechanical properties.
Spring wire may be obtained in annealed, hard-drawn, or pretempered conditions. Strength
properties of many materials are strongly size dependent, as illustrated in Figure 14.4.
Flat wire is produced by passing round wire through the rolls of a ﬂattening mill, then
quenching and tempering the ﬂat strand to obtain the desired properties. Spring steel strip
is produced by subjecting hot-rolled strip to a cleaning operation, followed by a combina-
tion of cold-rolling and thermal treatments to obtain the properties desired.
After the wire or strip material is coiled or formed, a shot-peening, strain-peening, or
presetting operation is sometimes used to enhance fatigue resistance.4 Corrosion resistance
may be enhanced by coating, plating, or painting the spring.
Spring wire materials that are widely used by the spring industry include 5:
1.
Music wire (highest quality; highest strength; widely used)
2.
Oil-tempered steel valve spring wire (high quality; high strength; limited sizes)
3.
Oil-tempered steel spring wire (good quality; good strength; often used)
4.
Hard-drawn steel wire (inexpensive; modest strength; used for static loads)
5.
Alloy steel wire (for elevated temperatures to 230
; high quality; high strength; e.g.,
chrome-vanadium, chrome-silicon)
6.
Stainless-steel wire (good corrosion resistance for elevated temperatures to 260
;
high quality; high strength)
7.
Beryllium copper wire (good conductivity; high strength; excellent fatigue resistance)
8.
Nickel alloy wire (good corrosion resistance for elevated temperatures to 600
; e.g.,
Inconel X-750; high cost)
Ultimate strength properties for many of these materials may be closely approximated
by the empirical expression
°C
°C
°C
3See 8.2 and 8.6.
4See 5.6 and 4.9.
5See ref. 1.

550
Chapter 14 / Springs
(14-1)
Using data from Figure 14.4, the exponent 
and coefﬁcient 
may be evaluated for
ﬁve of the materials, as shown in Table 14.1. For materials not included in Table 14.1, ul-
timate strengths may be read directly from Figure 14.4. Commonly available stock wire
sizes in the diameter ranges shown in Table 14.1 are listed in Table 14.2. Springs are usu-
ally cold-formed when wire diameters are less than 10 mm (
inch), and hot-wound when
wire diameters exceed 16 mm (
inch).
58
38
B
a
B = coefficient
a = exponent
d = wire diameter
where  Sut = ultimate strength in tension
Sut = Bd a
Minimum ultimate tensile strength (MPa)
0.10
1.0
2
3
4
5 6 7 8 9
10.0
2
3
4
5 6 7 8 9
2
3
4
5 6 7 8 9
0
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
0.004
0.008
0.020
0.040
0.080
0.200
0.400
0.800
ASTM A228 music wire (cold-drawn steel)
ASTM A313
(302)
ASTM A229
ASTM A227
Inconel alloy X-750 (spring temper)
ASTM B159 (phosphor bronze)
ASTM A401 (Cr-Si steel)
ASTM A232 (Cr-Va steel)
ASTM A229 (oil-tempered
carbon steel)
ASTM A227 (hard drawn
carbon steel)
ASTM A313 (302
stainless steel)
Wire diameter (in.)
Wire diameter (mm)
Minimum ultimate tensile strength (ksi)
ASTM A230 (oil-tempered carbon steel)
Figure 14.4
Minimum ultimate tensile strengths of several spring wire materials, as a function of wire diameter.
(From ref. 2 with permission of Associated Spring, Barnes Group, Inc., Bristol, CT.)
TABLE 14.1 Values of a and B for Five of the Materials Shown in Figure 14.4
Diametral Range of
Exponent
Coefﬁcient B,
Material
Validity, in (mm)
a
ksi (MPa)
Music wire
0.010–0.250 (0.25–6.5)
0.1625
184.6 (2153.5)
Oil-tempered steel
0.020–0.625 (0.5–16)
0.1833
146.8 (1831.2)
Hard-drawn steel
0.020–0.625 (0.5–16)
0.1822
141.0 (1753.3)
Cr-Va alloy steel
0.020–0.500 (0.5–13)
0.1453
173.1 (1909.9)
Cr-Si alloy steel
0.031–0.437 (0.8–11)
0.0934
220.8 (2059.2)
-
-
-
-
-

Spring Materials 551
Flat steel spring stock is usually made of cold-rolled AISI 1050, 1065, 1074, or
1095 steel, typically available in annealed, 
hard (pretempered), 
hard, 
hard, or
full hard condition. Automotive leaf springs have been made from various other fine-
grained alloy steels such as SAE 9260, SAE 6150, and SAE 5160. In all cases, hard-
enability must be adequate to ensure a fully martensitic microstructure throughout the
entire spring cross section. Properties for flat spring steel strip and other materials of
interest are shown in Table 14.3, and preferred widths and thicknesses are given in
Table 14.4.
34
12
14
TABLE 14.2 Commonly Available Spring Wire Stock Diameters1
in
mm
in
mm
0.010
0.25
0.092
0.012
0.30
0.098
2.50
0.014
0.35
0.105
0.016
0.40
0.112
2.80
0.018
0.45
0.125
0.020
0.50
0.135
3.50
0.022
0.55
0.148
0.024
0.60
0.162
4.00
0.026
0.65
0.177
4.50
0.028
0.70
0.192
5.00
0.030
0.80
0.207
5.50
0.035
0.90
0.225
6.00
0.038
1.00
0.250
6.50
0.042
1.10
0.281
7.00
0.045
0.312
8.00
0.048
1.20
0.343
9.00
0.051
0.362
0.055
1.40
0.375
0.059
0.406
10.0
0.063
1.60
0.437
11.0
0.067
0.469
12.0
0.072
1.80
0.500
13.0
0.076
0.531
14.0
0.081
2.00
0.562
15.0
0.085
2.20
0.625
16.0
1Custom wire sizes also available at extra cost.
TABLE 14.3 Typical Properties of Selected Spring Alloy Flat Strip1
,
Rockwell
Elongation (2 in),
Material
ksi (MPa)
Hardness
percent
Spring steel
246 (1700)
C50
2
Stainless 302
189 (1300)
C40
5
Monel 400
100 (690)
B95
2
Monel K500
174 (1200)
C34
40
Inconel 600
151 (1040)
C30
2
Inconel X-750
152 (1050)
C35
20
Beryllium Copper
189 (1300)
C40
2
Phosphor bronze
100 (690)
B90
3
1From ref. 2.
Sut

552
Chapter 14 / Springs
14.5 Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection,
and Spring Rate
The design of helical-coil springs involves selection of a material, and determination of the
wire diameter, d, mean coil radius, R, number of active coils, N, and other spring parame-
ters (see Figure 14.5) so that the desired force-deﬂection response is obtained, without ex-
ceeding the design stress under the most severe operating conditions.
TABLE 14.4 Preferred Widths and Thicknesses for Flat Strip Leaf Spring Stock
Cross Sections1
Width
Thickness
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
in
mm
1.57
40.0
0.28
7.10
0.52
13.20
0.98
25.00
1.77
45.0
0.30
7.50
0.55
14.00
1.04
26.50
1.97
50.0
0.31
8.00
0.59
15.00
1.10
28.00
2.20
56.0
0.33
8.50
0.63
16.00
1.18
30.00
2.48
63.0
0.35
9.00
0.67
17.00
1.24
31.50
2.95
75.0
0.37
9.50
0.71
18.00
1.32
33.50
3.54
90.0
0.39
10.00
0.75
19.00
1.40
35.50
3.94
100.0
0.42
10.60
0.79
20.00
1.48
37.50
4.92
125.0
0.44
11.20
0.83
21.20
—
—
5.91
150.0
0.46
11.80
0.88
22.40
—
—
0.49
12.50
0.93
23.60
—
—
1See American National Standard ANSI Z17.1; Custom sizes available at extra cost.
D = 2R
Di Do
Lf
Li
Fi
yop
yop–max
Fop–max
yclash
Lop–max
yi
ys
Fs
Ls
D0
F
F
(a) Closely wound helical-coil extension
spring with half hook at each end.
(b) Helical-coil
compression
spring at free
length, Lf;
no load.
Hook opening
d
Length over coils
Length inside hooks
p
d
(c) Same spring
with inital
preload, Fi.
(d) Same spring
at maximum
operating load.
(e) Same spring
at solid height, Ls
(to be avoided).
Figure 14.5
Illustration of nomenclature used for
helical-coil springs.

Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection, and Spring Rate 553
6Not including curvature effects.
For open-coil helical springs, loaded along the coil axis, whether the load produces
extension or compression, the primary stress developed in the wire is torsion. For tightly
coiled and preloaded extension springs, torsion is also the primary stress in the wire, but it
remains constant until the external extension force exceeds the built-in preload. Thus, a
helical-coil spring may be thought of as a coiled torsion bar. To illustrate this, a straight
bar (wire) of diameter d and length L may be loaded torsionally by attaching levers at each
end as shown in Figure 14.6(a). If the levers have length R, and are loaded by equal but
opposite force-couples as shown, the bar is subjected to the torsional moment
(14-2)
The same bar may be formed into a helix of N coils, each having a mean radius R, then
subjected to opposing columnar forces F, as shown in Figure 14.6(b). The free body that
results when a section is cut through the helically coiled bar, as shown in Figure 14.6(c),
indicates that the bar experiences a torsional moment 
, just as for the straight tor-
sion bar, and in addition, a transverse shear force F. Investigations have shown that the tor-
sional shearing stresses induced in the wire are the primary stresses, but transverse
shearing stresses in helical-coil springs are important enough to consider. From (4-30) and
(4-28), the maximum torsional shearing stress over the surface of the wire6 is
(14-3)
axial load on the spring
mean coil radius (radius from coil centerline to wire centerline)
wire diameter
d =
R =
where  F =
ttor-max = 16FR
pd 3
T = FR
T = FR
(a) Straight bar (wire) subjected to pure torsion.
(b) Helically coiled wire
subjected to axial forces.
(c) Free body obtained by
cutting through wire
at any cross section.
(d) State of stress at the critical point.
L
C
d
R
R
R
F
F
F
F
F
F
R
F
F
L = 2RN
D
T = FR
Coil
L
C
Coil
L
C
Coil
tor–max (outer surface)
ts–max (wire mid-height)
Critical point at inner
coil radius where tor–max
and ts–max add
Figure 14.6
Torsion and transverse shear in helical-coil springs.

554
Chapter 14 / Springs
The transverse shearing stress has been shown7 to reach a maximum value at the mid-
height of the wire cross section, and to have the magnitude
(14-4)
As shown in Figure 14.6(d), the torsional shear and transverse shear oppose at the
outer coil radius but add at the inner coil radius.
Further, because of coil curvature, a slightly larger shearing strain is produced (by the
torsion) at the inner (shorter) ﬁber of the coil than at the outer (longer) ﬁber, inducing a
slightly higher torsional shearing stress at the inner ﬁber. This stress-increasing curvature
factor,
, may be estimated as8
(14-5)
where the spring index, c, is deﬁned to be
(14-6)
The curvature factor is often neglected when springs are statically loaded.
The maximum shearing stress, therefore, occurs at the mid-height of the wire at the in-
ner coil radius, and may be estimated by combining (14-3), (14-4), and (14-5), as follows:
(14-7)
or
(14-8)
which may be rewritten as
(14-9)
or
(14-10)
Deﬁning
(14-11)
Kw K a4c - 1
4c - 4 + 0.615
c
b K Wahl factor
tmax = a4c - 1
4c - 4 + 0.615
c
b16FR
pd 3
tmax = a4c - 1
4c - 4 b a 16FR
pd 3 b + 1.23a
F
p1d 22>4
b aR
Rb a d
d b
tmax = a4c - 1
4c - 4 b a 16FR
pd 3 b + 1.23a F
Aw
b
tmax = Kc1ttor-max2 + tts-max
c K 2R
d
= D
d
Kc = 4c - 1
4c - 4
Kc
where  Aw = pd2
4
= area of wire cross section
tts-max = 1.23 F
Aw
7See ref. 3.
8See ref. 3.

Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection, and Spring Rate 555
the expression (14-10), for maximum shearing stress, becomes
(14-12)
Values of Wahl factor, 
, as a function of spring index, c, are shown in Table 14.5.
Experience has shown that springs proportioned to give values of c less than about 4
are difﬁcult to manufacture, and if values of c exceed about 12, springs tend to buckle in
compression, and tangle when stored in bulk. From Table 14.5, it may be noted that the
range of 
is from about 1.4 when c is 4 to about 1.1 when c is 12. A midrange value is
around 
. This midrange value is often used as an initial estimate for 
in (inher-
ently iterative) spring design calculations.
The end loops of helical-coil extension springs must be separately analyzed be-
cause of stress concentration at the point where the end loop is “bent up” [see Figure
14.7(b)], and at the inner radius of the hook [see Figure 14.7(a)]. At critical section B,
where torsion is the primary stress, the stress concentration factor is often approxi-
mated as
(14-13)
mean bend radius at section B
inner radius at section B
Combining this with (14-3) gives
(14-14)
tmax B = kiBttor-max = rmB
riB
a16FR
pd 3 b
riB =
where  rmB =
kiB = rmB
riB
Kw
Kw = 1.2
Kw
Kw
tmax = Kwa16FR
pd 3 b
TABLE 14.5 Values of Wahl Factor Kw as a Function of Spring Index c
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
2
2.058
1.975
1.905
1.844
1.792
1.746
1.705
1.669
1.636
1.607
3
1.580
1.556
1.533
1.512
1.493
1.476
1.459
1.444
1.430
1.416
4
1.404
1.392
1.381
1.370
1.360
1.351
1.342
1.334
1.325
1.318
5
1.311
1.304
1.297
1.290
1.284
1.278
1.273
1.267
1.262
1.257
6
1.253
1.248
1.243
1.239
1.235
1.231
1.227
1.223
1.220
1.216
7
1.213
1.210
1.206
1.203
1.200
1.197
1.195
1.192
1.189
1.187
8
1.184
1.182
1.179
1.177
1.175
1.172
1.170
1.168
1.166
1.164
9
1.162
1.160
1.158
1.156
1.155
1.153
1.151
1.150
1.148
1.146
10
1.145
1.143
1.142
1.140
1.139
1.138
1.136
1.135
1.133
1.132
11
1.131
1.130
1.128
1.127
1.126
1.125
1.124
1.123
1.122
1.120
12
1.119
1.118
1.117
1.116
1.115
1.114
1.113
1.113
1.112
1.111
13
1.110
1.109
1.108
1.107
1.106
1.106
1.105
1.104
1.103
1.102
14
1.102
1.101
1.100
1.099
1.099
1.098
1.097
1.097
1.096
1.095
15
1.095
1.094
1.093
1.093
1.092
1.091
1.091
1.090
1.090
1.089
16
1.088
1.088
1.087
1.087
1.086
1.086
1.085
1.085
1.084
1.084
17
1.083
1.083
1.082
1.082
1.081
1.081
1.080
1.080
1.079
1.079
18
1.078
1.078
1.077
1.077
1.077
1.076
1.076
1.075
1.075
1.074
T
c :

556
Chapter 14 / Springs
At critical section A, where bending stress and direct tension add, this critical point
occurs at the inner radius of the hook. It is common practice to approximate this stress con-
centration factor as
(14-15)
The stress at the inner wire radius of section A then may be written as
(14-16)
If desired, the hook may be more accurately analyzed as a curved beam using (4-118)
together with data from Table 4.8. It is usually recommended that k not be permitted to ex-
ceed about 1.25, corresponding to the requirement that 
. In some cases, the end-loop
maximum stress may be reduced by “coning” the end coils to shorten the bending moment
arm from R to 
, as illustrated in Figure 14.7(c).
Example 14.1 Helical-Coil Tension Spring Stresses
A helical-coil tension spring is being designed as a shutter return for a small camera.
Preliminary design speciﬁcations estimate a wire diameter of 
, a mean diam-
eter of 
, and a tensile force of 
are required. The spring is to be made
from hard-drawn steel (
). The end-loops are to have the geometry shown in
Figure 14.7 (a) and (b), with 
and 
. Determine the maximum
shear stress in the body and the end-loop, as well as the maximum normal stress in the
end-loop.
Solution
Knowing the men diameter, we determine the mean radius to be 
. Since
the spring index is known (
), we can determine the Wahl factor from
(14-11) to be
Kw = a4c - 1
4c - 4 + 0.615
c
b = a4(4) - 1
4(4) - 4 + 0.615
4
b = 1.25 + 0.15375 = 1.40375
c = D>d = 2>0.5 = 4
R = D>2 = 1 mm
rmB = 0.5 mm
rmA = 1 mm
G = 79 GPa
F = 5 N
D = 2 mm
d = 0.5 mm
rm
ri Ú d
smax A = kiaMc
I b + F
A = rmA
riA
a32FR
pd 3 b + 4F
pd 2
kiA = rmA
riA
rmA
rmB
rm
ri
rm
riA
riB
F
F
F
d
d
d
R
A
B
R
D = 2R
D = 2R
(a) Bending and tension
at critical section A
of end loop;
kiA ≈rmA
riA
.
(b) Torsion at critical
section B of end
loop; kiB ≈rmB
riB .
(c) Coned-end design
for reducing
stresses in end loops.
Figure 14.7
Extension spring end-loop
stresses. (See also Figure 14.10.)

Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection, and Spring Rate 557
The maximum shear stress in the body is determined from (14-12) to be
For the maximum shear stress in the end-loop, we use (14-14)
where 
. Thus,
The maximum normal stress in the end-loop is determined from (14-16)
where 
. Thus,
In order to assess if these stresses are going to cause failure, we should determine the
ultimate tensile stress of the material. For hard-drawn steel, the ultimate stress is found
using (14-1) to be
Estimating the yield stress to be on the order of 90 percent of the ultimate strength for
steel, we approximate the tensile yield strength to be 
.
Similarly, we can approximate the shear strength to be 
.
Although a more accurate analysis is required before the design is ﬁnalized, we can assume
that the spring is satisfactory at this stage.
Deﬂection and Spring Rate
Axial deﬂection of a helical-coil spring under axial load may be found by ﬁrst determin-
ing the magnitude of the relative angular rotation between two adjacent cross sections of
the wire, spaced a distance dL apart, produced by an applied torque 
.
Referring to Figure 14.8, consider for the moment that only a small segment ABCD of
the wire is ﬂexible, and the rest of the spring wire is inﬁnitely stiff. From (4-37), the angle
of twist, 
, of a circular bar of length dL, subjected to a torque FR, may be written as
(14-17)
Using this equation, the rotation of wire section CD may be calculated with respect to sec-
tion AB. As shown in Figure 14.8, this angular displacement permits calculation of the axial
dw = FRdL
JG
dw
T = FR
typ L 0.577(Syp) L 3635 MPa
Syp L 0.9(7003) L 6300 MPa
Sut = Bda = 1753.3(0.0005)-0.1822 = 7003 MPa
smax A =
1
0.75a32(5)(0.001)
p(0.0005)3 b +
4(4)
p(0.0005)2 = 543.2 + 25.5 = 568.7 MPa
riA = rmA - d>2 = 1 - 0.25 = 0.75
smax A = rmA
riA
a32FR
pd3 b + 4F
pd2
tmax B = 0.5
0.25 a16(5)(0.001)
p(0.0005)3 b = 407 MPa
riB = rmB - d>2 = 0.5 - 0.25 = 0.25
tmax B = rmB
riB
a16FR
pd3 b
tmax = Kwa16FR
pd3 b = 1.40375a16(5)(0.001)
p(0.0005)3 b = 286 MPa

558
Chapter 14 / Springs
displacement, dy, of a point E located 90 away. Because of the rigid body assumption for
everything but segment ABCD, the axial displacement of point F, at the center of the helix,
is the same as the axial displacement of E. The axial displacement of point F, therefore, is
(14-18)
Now, if the entire spring is permitted to be ﬂexible, the total axial deﬂection y may be
found by integrating (14-18) over the entire active wire length, L, to give
(14-19)
If the spring has N active coils, its active length may be expressed as
(14-20)
and (14-19) may be rewritten as
(14-21)
From this, an expression for spring rate k [see 2.4 and equation (2-1)] may be written as
(14-22)
When writing expressions for spring rate or deﬂection in terms of the number of ac-
tive coils, N, it is important to note that the end coil conﬁguration often locally inﬂuences
overall spring ﬂexibility. End coil conﬁguration should be accounted for in determining
the total number of coils, 
, used in winding the spring. The total number of coils, 
,
is the total number of turns from end of wire to end of wire; the number of active coils,
N, is the number or turns over which the wire twists under load, and therefore contributes
to axial spring deﬂection. For helical-coil compression springs, 
is determined by adding
the number of inactive coils, 
, to the number of active coils N, to obtain
(14-23)
Figure 14.9 gives the number of inactive coils associated with each of the more com-
mon end conditions used for helical-coil compression springs.
For the case of extension springs, the end loops contribute additional elasticity to the
springs, depending upon the end-loop conﬁguration. Referring to Figure 14.5(a), the
Nt = N + Ni    1compression springs2
Ni
Nt
Nt
Nt
k = F
y =
d 4G
64R3N
y =
FR212pRN2
apd 4
32 bG
= 64FR3N
d 4G
L = 2pRN
y = FR2L
JG
dy = Rdw = FR2dL
JG
°
dL
dL
d
E
F
R
D
D
A
A

d
2
C
C
B
B
Figure 14.8
Deﬂections in helical-coil springs under
axial load.

Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection, and Spring Rate 559
effective number of active coils, N, is obtained by adding the equivalent coils for both end
loops, 
, to the number of coils in the length over coils, 
, to obtain
(14-24)
The equivalent numbers of coils for a few common end loops used for extension springs
are given in Figure 14.10.
Buckling and Surging
Two other design issues that may be important in some cases are: (1) elastic instability, or
buckling of long, skinny helical-coil springs under compressive loads, and (2) resonant
frequency response, or surging, if axial operating frequencies approach the axial natural
frequency of the helical-coil spring (see 8.2).
Just as long thin columns subjected to axial compression become elastically unstable
and buckle when loads become too large (see 2.5), helical-coil springs loaded in com-
pression will buckle if axial deﬂections become too large. Equations for prediction of
critical buckling deﬂection, 
, developed in a manner similar to column-buckling equations9,
may be expressed in terms of free length 
, mean coil radius R, and the method of
Lf
ycr
N = Nc + Ne    1extension springs2
Nc
Ne
(a) Plain ends; no inactive coils unless
special end fitting used.
(b) Plain ends ground; one-half inactive
coil each end.
(d) Closed ends; one inactive coil each end;
left-hand helix.
(e) Closed and ground ends; one inactive
coil each end.
(c) Closed ends; one inactive coil each end;
right-hand helix.
Figure 14.9
Various helical-coil compression spring conﬁgurations, and the inﬂuence of end coils on spring rate.
(a) Half hook over center;
adds axial deflection
equivalent to about 0.1
coil each end.
(b) Half loop over center;
adds axial deflection
equivalent to about 0.1
coil each end.
(c) Single full loop over
center; adds axial deflection
equivalent to about 0.5
coil each end.
(d) Double full loop over
center.
(e) Long round-end hook
over center.
(f) Coned end with swivel hook;
coned-end design tends to
decrease stress concentration
in hook.
Figure 14.10
Various helical-coil extension
spring end conﬁgurations.
Many other variations are
possible.
9See ref. 3.

560
Chapter 14 / Springs
constraining the ends of the spring (see Table 14.6). Figure 14.11 shows critical deﬂec-
tion ratio plotted versus slenderness ratio for springs with both ends hinged (
) and
springs with both ends ﬁxed (
). Values of 
for other end constraints included in
Table 14.6 may be used to plot additional critical deﬂection curves if needed. After a
spring has been tentatively designed to achieve the desired spring rate within acceptable
stress levels, potential buckling failure should be checked using the curves of Figure
14.11. If the deﬂection ratio for the proposed spring exceeds the critical value read from
the curve, the spring should be redesigned.
An alternative buckling solution sometimes used is to contain the spring inside a
closely ﬁtting guide cylinder, or to insert an internal cylindrical guide mandrel to prevent
buckling, but friction and wear may produce failures of another type if this solution is cho-
sen. If guide cylinders or mandrels are used in this way, a diametral clearance of approximately
a
a = 0.5
a = 1
Slenderness ratio,
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Lf
2R
Critical deflection ratio,
ycr
Lf
Buckles
Buckles
Stable
Stable
Hinged ends
( = 1)
Fixed ends
( = 0.5)
Figure 14.11
Critical deﬂection curves deﬁning onset of
buckling of helical-coil springs loaded in axial
compression. (  end condition constant;
see Table 14.6.)
TABLE 14.6 End Constraint Constants for Compressively Loaded
Helical-Coil Springs
Type of End Constraint
End Constraint Constant1
Both ends pivoted (hinged)
1
One end supported by ﬂat surface
0.7
perpendicular to spring axis (ﬁxed);
other end pivoted (hinged)
One end clamped; other end free
2
Spring supported between ﬂat
0.5
parallel surfaces (ﬁxed ends)
1See column end constraint constants shown in Table 2.1, for comparison.
a

Axially Loaded Helical-Coil Springs; Stress, Deﬂection, and Spring Rate 561
10 percent of the cylinder or mandrel diameter is commonly used to avoid rubbing be-
tween the spring and its guide.
If springs are used in high-speed cyclic applications, the resonant response, called surg-
ing, should be investigated. If the material and geometry of the axially reciprocating spring
are such that its axial natural frequency is close to the operating frequency, a traveling dis-
placement wave front is propagated and reﬂected along the spring with about the same fre-
quency as the exciting force.10 This condition results in local condensations and
rarefactions11 propagating along the spring. These phenomena may produce high stresses
and/or erratic forces locally, with consequent loss of control of the spring-loaded object. The
often-cited example of an automotive valve spring illustrates the condition; surging of a valve
spring may allow the valve to open erratically when it should be closed, or vice versa.
The axial natural frequency, , of a helical-coil spring (using ﬁxed-ﬁxed end condi-
tions) has been developed12 from the basic equation
(14-25)
fundamental axial natural frequency, Hz
axial circular frequency, rad/sec
spring rate
weight of spring’s active coils
gravitational constant
For a helical-coil spring this may be rewritten as
(14-26)
shear modulus of elasticity of spring material
speciﬁc weight of spring wire
For the common case where steel wire is used to wind the spring, 
psi,
and 
lb/in3, so (14-22) becomes
(14-27)
It is important to note that these equations give the natural frequency of the spring it-
self, not the natural frequency of a spring-mass system where a mass 
is attached to a
spring of much smaller mass. In some applications higher harmonics13 may be excited,
giving potential resonant responses at frequencies much higher than the fundamental nat-
ural frequency of the spring. Harmonics up to about the thirteenth have been reported to
be signiﬁcant in some applications.14 Based on such evidence, it is usually recommended
that cyclically loaded springs should have a fundamental natural frequency at least ﬁfteen
times the operating frequency to avoid resonances at the higher harmonics.
W1
1fn2steel = 3525d
R2N
w = 0.283
G = 11.5 * 106
w =
where  G =
fn =
d
2pR2NA
Gg
32w
g =
W =
k =
vn =
where  fn =
fn = vn
2p =
pA
kg
W
2p
= 1
2A
kg
W
fn
10See for example, refs. 4 and 5.
11Local changes in pitch wherein a few coils may momentarily be very close (condensation) or signiﬁcantly
separated (rarefaction).
12See ref. 3.
13Harmonics are integral multiples of the fundamental natural frequency.
14See ref. 6.

562
Chapter 14 / Springs
14.6 Summary of Suggested Helical-Coil Spring Design
Procedure, and General Guidelines for Spring Design
Spring design is an inherently iterative process in which, at a minimum, the stress re-
quirements and force-deﬂection requirements must be independently satisifed. Other fac-
tors, such as envelope constraints and environment, may also play a role. The following
steps may be utilized to develop a successful spring design, but many other approaches
could also be used.
1.
Based on functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, generate a
ﬁrst conceptual sketch for the proposed spring, approximately to scale. Incorporate
any restrictions imposed by the spring space envelope, including maximum outer coil
diameter, minimum inner coil diameter, limits on free length or solid length, or limits
on operating displacements (see Figure 14.5).
2.
Identify potential failure modes (see 14.3).
3.
Select a tentative spring material (see 14.4).
4.
Select an appropriate design safety factor (see Chapter 2).
5.
Calculate the design stress 
using (2-84), repeated here for reference.
(2-84) (repeated)
or, by extension,
(14-28)
failure strength of the selected material corresponding to the governing
failure mode
design safety factor
design shearing stress
shear failure strength of the selected material corresponding to the 
governing failure mode
In spring design applications, three complicating factors are often encountered
when attempting to ﬁnd an appropriate value for failure strength 
or 
; they are
a. Spring wire strength is often a function of wire size, d, as shown in (14-1), but at
the outset d is unknown.
b. Yield strength data are sparse for spring wire materials, and relationships between
ultimate strength and yield strength, especially in torsion, can only be deﬁned em-
pirically and approximately. (Recall that torsion is the primary state of stress at the
critical points of helical-coil springs). Table 14.7 includes some data that may be
helpful in relating 
to 
.
c. Cyclically loaded springs are usually subjected to nonzero-mean loading cycles.
Since torsion is a multiaxial state of stress, the critical points in cyclically loaded
helical-coil springs must be analyzed as multiaxial states of nonzero-mean cyclic
stress, as discussed in 5.7. As noted in 5.6, however, if a designer is fortunate
enough to ﬁnd multiaxial nonzero-mean cyclic strength data that match the operat-
ing conditions of the application, these data should be used directly rather than us-
ing the approximations of 5.7. The spring industry has developed a small body of
Sut
typ
tfm
Sfm
tfm =
td =
nd =
where  Sfm =
td =
tfm
nd
sd =
Sfm
nd
sd

Summary of Suggested Helical-Coil Spring Design Procedure, and General Guidelines for Spring Design 563
data of this type for the special (but common) case of released loading (R  0), as
shown in Table 14.8.
6.
Determine wire diameter, d, mean coil radius, R, and number of active coils, N, so that
shearing stress 
from (14-12) and deﬂection y from (14-21) are independently sat-
isﬁed in such a way that strength, life, and spring rate all meet design speciﬁcations
(from step 1). If design performance speciﬁcations are not met, changes must be made
in d, R, and/or N, iteratively, until speciﬁcations are satisﬁed.
Usually, stress requirements are more easily satisﬁed ﬁrst in the iteration process,
since 
is a function of only two spring parameters, d and R. Then, deﬂection re-
quirements may be satisﬁed by determining N. Space envelope constraints, reasonable
values of spring index, and designer judgment are the basis for initial selections of d
and R to start the iteration process.
7.
Using the tentative values of d, R, and N from step 6, determine spring rate, k, and
check to assure that it also meets any other functional requirements for k.
8.
Select an appropriate end conﬁguration (see Figures 14.9 and 14.10) and determine the
number of inactive coils (for compression springs) or equivalent extra coils (for exten-
sion springs). Calculate total number of coils in the spring using (14-23) or (14-24).
9.
Determine solid height, free height, and operational deﬂection to make sure that no
design requirements are violated.
tmax
tmax
TABLE 14.7 Approximate Torsional Shear Yield
Strength yp as a Function of
Ultimate Tensile Strength Sut for
Helical-Coil Compression Springs
Under Static Loading1
Material
Carbon steel (cold drawn)
0.45
Music wire
0.40
Carbon and low-alloy steel
0.50
(hardened and tempered)
Stainless steel
0.35
Nonferrous alloys
0.35
1See ref. 2.
typ>Sut
TABLE 14.8 Approximate Fatigue Shearing Strength f for Round Wire Helical-Coil
Compression Springs Under Released Cyclic Loading Conditions1
(R  0) as a Function of Ultimate Tensile Strength Sut (see Figure 14.4)
Austenitic Stainless
Steel Alloys
and Nonferrous Alloys
ASTM A230 and A232
Fatigue Life N,
cycles
Unpeened
Peened
Unpeened
Peened
105
0.36
0.42
0.42
0.49
106
0.33
0.39
0.40
0.47
107
0.30
0.36
0.38
0.46
1Room temperature, benign environment, typical spring wire sizes and surfaces (see ref. 2).
tf>Sut

564
Chapter 14 / Springs
10. Check potential buckling of compression springs (see Figure 14.11).
11. Check potential surging of the proposed design [see (14-25)].
12. Continue to iterate until all design requirements are satisﬁed. Summarize the ﬁnal spec-
iﬁcations for material, heat treatment, and dimensions. As the spring design is devel-
oped using these steps, the following experience-based guidelines may be found useful:
a. If the spring is guided (to prevent buckling), allow a minimum diametral clearance
between the spring and the guiding hole or mandrel, or approximately 10 percent
of the coil diameter.
b. Use material strength data from Tables 14.7 and 14.8, with (14-1), if applicable.
Otherwise, use procedures of 5.7 for multiaxial states of nonzero-mean cyclic
stress to determine failure strength.
c. For initial selection of wire diameter, d, and mean coil radius, R, try to proportion
the spring so that spring index c will lie in the range between 4 and 12; an initial
assumption of 7 or 8 usually produces a well-proportioned spring. Any space en-
velope constraints should also be invoked at this ﬁrst iteration. Commonly avail-
able wire sizes, as shown in Table 14.2, should be selected unless there is an
important reason to select other sizes.
d. If designing a compression spring, closed and ground ends [see Figure 14.9(e)] are
usually a good choice, unless minimum cost is essential. If designing an extension
spring, the use of full end loops, over center (see Figure 14.7), is usually a good
choice, unless minimum cost is essential.
e. Allow a clearance between coils when the spring is at its maximum operating de-
ﬂection, 
(see Figure 14.5), to avoid coil-to-coil contact (clash). A clash al-
lowance, 
, of at least 10 percent of the maximum operating deﬂeciton, is
usually recommended.
f. For the usual case of highly stressed springs, the use of favorable residual stress
ﬁelds should be considered as a means of improving life and reliability, especially
under nonzero-mean cyclic loading. Shot-peening (see 5.6) and presetting (see 4.9)
are often used to induce favorable residual stresses. Presetting is accomplished for
a compression spring by manufacturing the spring to be longer than the actual
length desired, then overloading it in the direction it will be loaded during opera-
tion, causing it to yield. The objective is to achieve the desired free length upon re-
moval of the overload. An extension spring would be preset from a manufacturing
length shorter than the free length desired.
Example 14.2 Helical-Coil Spring Design for Static Loads
A helical-coil compression spring is to be designed to exert a static force of 100 lb when
the spring is compressed 2.0 inches from its free length, and it must ﬁt inside a cylindrical
hole 2.25 inches in diameter. The environment is laboratory air. Design a spring suitable
for this application. Only ﬁve such springs are to be manufactured. A design safety factor
of 2 is desired.
Solution
1.
Following the spring design procedure just discussed, a conceptual sketch may be
made, as shown in Figure E14.2. To provide the 10 percent diametral clearance sug-
gested in guideline 12.a above,
1.10Do = 1.1012R + d2 … Dh
yclash
yop-max

Summary of Suggested Helical-Coil Spring Design Procedure, and General Guidelines for Spring Design 565
or, for hole diameter Dh  2.25 inches, as speciﬁed,
2.
The most probable failure mode is yielding, since the load is static and buckling is
prevented by the guide hole.
3.
Since it is widely available, has excellent properties, and can be cold-formed, music
wire will be tentatively selected for the spring material.
4.
By speciﬁcation, the design safety factor (see Chapter 2) is to be
5.
From (14-28), the shear design stress is
From Table 14.7,
Using (14-1) and the data from Table 14.1, the ultimate tensile strength, 
, may
be written as a function of wire diameter, , as
Combining these yields
6.
Using guideline 12.c, the spring index may be tentatively selected as
and from (14-6), using c  8,
2R = 8d
c = 8
1td2static = 36.9d -0.1625 ksi
Sut = 184.6d -0.1625 ksi
d
Sut
typ = 0.40Sut
1td2static =
typ
nd
nd = 2
Do = 2R + d L 2.0 inches
Lf
yop
0
1
2
Do = 2R + d
Dh = 2.25 in.
Follower
F
Workpiece
Figure E14.2
Conceptual sketch of proposed spring.

566
Chapter 14 / Springs
but from D0 above
equating these gives
whence,
Using these values, gives
From (14-12) then, using 
 1.18 from Table 14.4,
Thus 
slightly exceeds the design stress 
, but they are close. Before making
any changes, other parameters should be examined, and before proceeding further, a
tentative “standard” wire size should be selected from Table 14.2.
Rewriting (14-21),
7.
No additional “functional” spring rate requirements are speciﬁed.
8.
Using guideline 12.d for stability, closed and ground ends will be selected. From
Figure 14.9(e), one inactive coil for each end should be allowed for this end coil con-
ﬁguration. Using (14-23), the total number of coils for the proposed spring is
9.
Approximate solid height (see Figure 14.5), 
, may be calculated as
From guideline 12.e, an appropriate clash allowance would be
The free height, therefore, should be
10. Although this spring is guided, its buckling tendency may be checked by using Figure
14.11. For this spring the slenderness ratio is
Thus from Figure 14.11, the critical deﬂection ratio is so large that the deﬂection
ratio for this spring
DR = 2.0
5.4 = 0.37
SR =
15.42
210.8892 = 3.04
Lf = yop-max + yclash + Ls = 2.0 + 0.20 + 3.20 = 5.4 inches
yclash = 0.1012.02 = 0.20 inch
Ls = Nt d = 14.4210.2222 = 3.20 inches
Ls
Nt = 12.42 + 2112 = 14.42 coils
N = d 4Gy
64FR3 =
10.22224111.5 * 106212.02
641100210.88923
= 12.42 active coils
td
tmax
tmax = 1.18a
161100210.8892
p10.22223
b = 48,830 psi
Kw
1td2static = 36.910.2222-0.1625 = 47.12 ksi = 47,120 psi
R = 2.0 - 0.222
2
= 0.889 inch
d = 0.222 inch
2R = 2.0 - d
Example 14.2
Continues

Summary of Suggested Helical-Coil Spring Design Procedure, and General Guidelines for Spring Design 567
will clearly not cause buckling. (Actually, this spring will not buckle at any physically
achievable deﬂection.)
To reﬁne these calculations, a “standard” wire size of d  0.225 inch will be se-
lected from Table 14.2. Then,
and using
From Table 14.4,
and (14-12) becomes
Thus, 
, and the safety factor requirement is met.
The number of active coils, revising the previous estimate slightly, is
This gives a revised number of total coils, 
, of
The revised solid height becomes
and the free height becomes
Summarizing the results, the design recommendations for this spring are:
1.
Use ASTM A228 music wire, cold forming the spring from standard stock diameter
d  0.225-inch wire.
2.
Use closed and ground ends.
3.
Wind the spring to a mean coil radius of R  0.889 inch (D  1.776 inches).
4.
Wind a total number of 15.1 coils, tip-of-wire to tip-of-wire.
5.
Wind the spring to a ﬁnished free height of 
 5.6 inches. If it is necessary to ad-
just the manufactured free height using plastic deformation to achieve the value 5.6
inches, do so by winding the spring slightly longer and then compressively overload-
ing to obtain the ﬁnished free height desired.
Lf
Lf = 2.0 + 0.2 + 3.4 = 5.6 inches
Ls = 15.110.2252 = 3.40 inches
Nt = 13.1 + 2 = 15.1 coils
Nt
N =
10.22524111.5 * 106212.02
641100210.88923
= 13.1 active coils
tmax L td
tmax = 1.19a
161100210.8892
p10.22523
b = 47,300 psi
Kw = 1.19
c = 2R
d
=
210.8892
0.225
= 7.9
1td2static = 36.910.2252-0.1625 = 47,000 psi

568
Chapter 14 / Springs
Example 14.3 Helical-Coil Spring Design for Fluctuating Loads
It is desired to investigate the spring design generated in Example 14.2 to ﬁnd out if it
could survive 107 cycles if the load cycled repeatedly from zero to a peak of 100 lb. If the
design of Example 14.2 is not satisfactory, explain how to redesign the spring to obtain a
life of 107 cycles.
Solution
To determine whether the spring design of Example 14.2 will survive 107 cycles of re-
leased load (
 0), one need only compare the shear design stress in fatigue, correspon-
ding to 107 cycles of released load, to the static yielding design stress calculated in the
equation for 
of Example 14.2. Thus the fatigue design stress is
The value 0.38 
is read from Table 14.8. Comparing this with 
of Example 14.2. gives
therefore the design is a little less than satisfactory for 107 cycles of released loading.
Several options are available to the designer in attempting to redesign the spring for a
longer life:
1.
The spring could be shot-peened. From Table 14.7, it may be seen that shot peening
would increase 
from 0.38
to 0.46
, more than enough to produce a sat-
isfactory design stress.
2.
The safety factor could be reviewed to see if the small decrease in 
(from 2.0 to
1.915) could be accepted.
3.
The spring could be redesigned, using the approach of Example 14.1, to modify d, R,
and/or N until an acceptable design revision is achieved.
14.7 Beam Springs (Leaf Springs)
As illustrated in Figure 14.2, thin ﬂat beams may be used as springs in some applications.
Thin simply supported beams subjected to transverse center loads, or thin cantilever beams
subjected to transverse end loads, are the more common conﬁgurations used. From (4-5),
together with Tables 4.1 and 4.2, the bending stresses and deﬂections may be written for
both types of beam springs. For the case of a cantilever spring of constant rectangular
cross section, loaded at the free end as illustrated in Figure 14.12(a), the bending stress at
the outer ﬁbers, 
, as a function of position x along the beam, is
(14-29)
b = beam width
where  P = transverse end load
sx = Mxc
I
=
1Px2a t
2 b
abt 3
12 b
= a 6P
bt 2 bx
sx
nd
Sut
Sut
t107@R=0
1td2107 = 35.1d-0.1625 6 1td2static = 36.9d-0.1625
(td)static
Sut
1td2107 = t107@R=0
nd
= 0.38Sut
2
= 35.1d-0.1625 ksi
(td)static
R
15Obtained from the coefﬁcient ratio (35.1/36.9) from (2), multiplied times nd  2.

Beam Springs (Leaf Springs) 569
By inspection, the maximum outer-ﬁber stress occurs at the ﬁxed end where 
, so
from (14-29)
(14-30)
At the free end, where 
, the maximum outer ﬁber stress is zero. To use material
more efﬁciently, it is common practice to employ the tailored-shape guideline16 to elimi-
nate the lightly stressed material near the free end. This may be accomplished by pre-
scribing that stress 
in (14-29) remain constant, and equal to design stress 
all along
the beam. To obtain constant outer-ﬁber stress all along the beam, either b or t may be var-
ied with x in such a way that
(14-31)
From (14-29), this requirement may be satisﬁed by prescribing either that
(14-32)
or that
(14-33)
The constant-width beam of parabolic thickness-proﬁle, resulting from (14-32), is illustrated
in Figure 14.12(b). The constant-thickness beam of linearly varying width (triangular planform),
resulting from (14-33), is illustrated in Figure 14.12(c). Of these two, the constant-thickness
b = a 6P
t 2sd
bx
t 2 = a 6P
bsd
bx
sx = sd
sd
sx
x = 0
smax = 6PL
bt 2
x = L
x = distance from free end of beam
t = beam thickness
L
L
L
b
b
b
b
Top
Top
Top
Side
Side
Side
End
End
End
t
t = f(x)
t
P
P
P
x
x
x
b = f(x)
b = f(x)
(a) End-loaded single-leaf cantilever with constant cross section.
(b) End-loaded uniform fiber strength cantilever with constant
width (parabolic thickness profile).
(c) End-loaded uniform fiber strength cantilever with constant
thickness (triangular planform).
Figure 14.12
Various shapes used as end-loaded cantilever springs.
16See 6.2.

570
Chapter 14 / Springs
beam of triangular planform is much more practical to manufacture. To make it more com-
pact, it is usually manufactured as an equivalent multiple leaf spring, as shown in Figure
14.13. In the multiple leaf arrangement, each leaf approximates two symmetric half-strips cut
from a constant-strength triangular planform, then welded together lengthwise. Shorter leaves
are then stacked on top of longer leaves to form a bundle of n leaves, each having width , as
shown in the side view of Figure 14.13. Similar reasoning holds for the more common case
of the center-loaded simply supported multiple leaf spring illustrated in Figure 14.14, in which
a diamond-shaped planform is used to eliminate lightly stressed material near the supports.
Noting that the beam width at any position x is , the area moment of inertia is
(14-34)
Ix = zxt 3
12
zx
b1
Triangular contour of
uniform strength beam
L
nb1
L
x
y
1
1
3
4
5
6
2
b1
b1
b1
2 (typ.)
t(typ.)
2
3
4
5
6
Leaf number:
Top
(n = 6 for this example)
P
Side
Figure 14.13
Uniform (outer-ﬁber) strength cantilever
spring approximated by a multileaf can-
tilever spring. This is sometimes called a
“quarter-elliptic” spring.
Diamond-shaped contour
of uniform strength beam
L
nb1
L
x
x
b1
b1
2 (typ.)
t(typ.)
2
P
P
zx
yc
yx
2
P
2
"n" leaves
Figure 14.14
Uniform (outer-ﬁber) strength sim-
ply supported spring approximated
by a simply supported multileaf
spring. This is sometimes called a
“semielliptic” spring.

Beam Springs (Leaf Springs) 571
By geometric similarity,
(14-35)
so (14-34) may be written as
(14-36)
Note also that
(14-37)
and
(14-38)
By adapting (14-29), and utilizing symmetry,
(14-39)
where 
(constant over the whole length of the spring) may be equated to the design
stress 
.
The deﬂection 
may be obtained by utilizing (4-46) to give
(14-40)
Integrating once
(14-41)
and again
(14-42)
The boundary conditions are
(14-43)
and
(14-44)
First, using (14-43), (14-41) gives
(14-45)
and using (14-44), (14-42) gives
(14-46)
C2 = 0
C1 =
3PL2
2Enb1t 3
yx = 0  @  x = 0
dyx
dx = 0  @  x = L>2
yx = -
3PL
2Enb1t 3 x 2 + C1x + C2
dyx
dx = - 3PL
Enb1t 3x + C1
d 2yx
dx2 = - M
EI = -
aPx
2 b
Eanb1t 3x
6L
b
= - 3PL
Enb1t 3
yx
sd
sx
sx =
aPx
2 b a t
2b
anb1t 3x
6L
b
=
3PL
2nb1t 2    0 … x … L
Mx = aP
2 b x    0 … x … L>2
c = t
2
Ix = anb1t 3
6L b x    0 … x … L>2
zx
nb1
=
x
1L>22    0 … x … L>2

572
Chapter 14 / Springs
From (14-42) and (14-45) then
(14-47)
The deﬂection under the center load P, , may be obtained by setting 
to give
(14-48)
and the spring rate may then be written as
(14-49)
In addition to selecting the spring material, and determining dimensional parameters
(thickness, width, and number of leaves) to satisfy stress, life, deﬂection, and spring rate
requirements, other design issues of importance must be resolved. The conﬁguration of
leaf edges and ends must be speciﬁed. Load transfer features such as eyes, supporting
shackles, and center clamping details must be determined. Alignment and retention fea-
tures, overall conﬁguration to meet space envelope constraints, and initial curvature of the
whole spring assembly (up or down), must be speciﬁed. A detailed consideration of these
issues is beyond the scope of this text, but a few pertinent examples are illustrated here.17
Figure 14.15 shows two of many such possible multileaf spring conﬁgurations.
k = P
yc
= 8Enb1t 3
3L3
yc =
3PL3
8Enb1t 3
x = L2
yc
yx = - 3PLx 2
2Enb1t 3 +
3PL2x
2Enb1t 3
L
b1
b1
P
P
P
2
P
t
2
P
2
P
2
Datum line
Alignment clip
Alignment clip
Center bolt
Spring eye
Del
Der
t
Center bolt
Datum line
(a) Simply supported multileaf spring with plain ends
and near-zero arc height (small initial curvature).
(b) Simply supported multileaf spring with upturned eye
at each end and negative arc height (negative camber).
Figure 14.15
Typical leaf spring arrangements.
17For more detailed discussions, see ref. 1.

Beam Springs (Leaf Springs) 573
Leaf edges are usually rounded to a convex arc with radius of curvature between
65 and 85 percent of the leaf thickness. Springs are often preset or shot-peened to im-
prove fatigue resistance. Protective finishes or coatings such as grease, oil, paint, or
plastic are sometimes used. Various leaf end configurations may be used, such as those
illustrated in Figures 14.16(a) and (b). Spring ends must be supported by hinged load
transfer devices, usually called shackles, that permit small longitudinal end displace-
ments as the spring center deflects laterally under load. Two spring shackle arrange-
ments are illustrated in Figure 14.17, and various types of main-leaf spring eyes are
illustrated in Figures 14.16(c) through (f). Center load transfer usually involves a
clamping arrangement of U-bolts and contoured pads arranged to firmly attach the
spring to its seat, as illustrated, for example, in Figure 14.18.18 Alignment clips, often
used to maintain the orientation and integrity of the leaf stack, are illustrated in Figures
14.17(c) and (d). Much more detailed descriptions of these features and others may be
found in the literature.19
Springeye
Supporting
structure
Supporting
structure
(a) One-piece C-shackle;
for supporting spring eye.
(b) Riveted bolted shackle
with rubber bushings;
for supporting spring eye.
(c) Bolted-type alignment clip; used for
most heavy-duty multileaf springs.
(d) Clinch-type alignment clip; used
when clearances are limited.
Spring eye
Figure 14.17
Selected examples of spring shackles
and leaf alignment clips. (After ref. 1.)
18The effects on spring behavior of the inactive clamped length must be taken into account.
19See, for example, ref. 1.
(a) Square end (blunt end);
cheapest to produce but
often unsatisfactory; poor
approximation to uniform
strength.
(c) Upturned eye;
most commonly used.
(e) Downturned eye.
(f) Berlin eye; reduces
“unwrap” moment if
longitudinal loads exists,
sometimes welded if
longitudinal forces are high.
(d) Plain end.
(b) Tapered end; closly
approximates uniform
strength; improved interleaf
pressure distribution.
Figure 14.16
Selected examples of leaf ends
and spring eyes and ends. 
(After ref. 1.)

574
Chapter 14 / Springs
14.8 Summary of Suggested Leaf Spring Design Procedure
The following steps for developing a successful leaf spring design closely parallel the steps
for design of a helical-coil spring outlined in 14.6.
1.
Based on functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, generate a
ﬁrst conceptual sketch for the proposed spring, approximately to scale. Incorporate
any restrictions imposed by the spring space envelope, including length, width, over-
all height, curvature, or limits on operating displacements.
2.
Identify potential failure modes (see 14.3).
3.
Select a tentative spring material (see 14.4).
4.
Select an appropriate design safety factor (see Chapter 2).
5.
Calculate the design stress 
using (2-84), repeated here for reference:
(2-84)(repeated)
failure strength of the selected material corresponding to the gov-
erning failure mode
design safety factor
6.
Determine thickness and width of each leaf, and the number of leaves to be used, so
that spring rate requirements from (14-49) and bending stress requirements from 
(14-39) are independently satisﬁed. If design performance speciﬁcations are not met,
changes must be made to t, 
, and/or n, iteratively, until speciﬁcations are satisﬁed.
Usually, spring rate requirements are satisﬁed ﬁrst in the iteration process by select-
ing initial values for n and 
, then calculating t from (14-39). Next, the stress re-
quirements are satisﬁed. Space envelope constraints and designer judgment are the
basis for initial selections for n and . Preferred leaf widths and thicknesses, as shown
in Table 14.4, should be selected unless there is an important reason to select other
sizes.
7.
Using the tentative values of t, 
, and n, from step 6, determine spring rate k and
check to assure that it meets all functional requirements. Check to make sure that there
are no space envelope violations for any anticipated operating condition.
8.
Select appropriate leaf edge and leaf end geometry, spring eye and spring shackle
configuration, and center bolt and center clamping arrangement. Determine and
b1
b1
b1
b1
nd =
where  Sfm =
sd =
Sfm
nd
sd
(a) Center clamping arrangement for overslung
spring (inactive clamped length must be
accounted for in design of spring).
(b) Center clamping arrangement for underslung
spring (inactive clamped length must be
accounted for in design of spring).
Figure 14.18
Selected examples of cen-
ter bolt and center clamp-
ing arrangements. (After
ref. 1.)

Summary of Suggested Leaf Spring Design Procedure 575
account for inactive spring length arising from the selected center clamping
arrangement.
9.
Continue to iterate until all design requirements are satisﬁed. Summarize the ﬁnal ma-
terial and dimensional speciﬁcations.
Example 14.4 Beam Spring (Leaf Spring) Design for Fluctuating Loads
A proposed small, new, hydrocarbon-fuel-cell-driven passenger car is estimated to weigh
2500 lb fully loaded, with each wheel supporting an equal share of the load. It is desired
to design a symmetrical semielliptic leaf spring for each of the rear wheel locations. Space
envelope estimates indicate that a center-loaded spring, of approximately 48 inches length
between shackles, can be accommodated. To avoid side interference, the leaf width should
not exceed about 2 inches. Supporting design studies suggest that the spring deﬂection un-
der static load will not exceed about 2.25 inches, and the peak deﬂection under dynamic
operating conditions will be no more than about twice the static deﬂection, but an addi-
tional 0.50-inch clearance is desired before metal-to-metal contact occurs.20 Estimates of
have also been made,21 leading to a speciﬁed value of 
 0.65. The material is to
be spring steel and a design safety factor of 1.3 has been selected. Propose a preliminary
conﬁguration for a semielliptic (simply supported multileaf) spring for this application that
will provide inﬁnite life.
Solution
1.
Following the spring design procedure of 14.8, a conceptual sketch may be con-
structed, as shown in Figure E14.4.
2.
Based on the application, and because a dynamic deﬂection speciﬁcation is given, the
most probable failure mode is fatigue.
3.
By speciﬁcation, spring steel is the selected material (see Table 14.3).
4.
By speciﬁcation, the design safety factor is to be
5.
From (2-84) the design stress is
sd =
Sfm
nd
nd = 1.3
k q
k q
20Actually, as a practical matter, elastomeric “snubbers” should probably be used to prevent metal-to-metal contact
in case occasional high load spikes are encountered.
21See 5.6.
2500
Ps
2
ymax
ys
yd
h
Metal to
metal
Datum
Static
Dynamic
= 313 lb
Ps
Ps =
2 = 313 lb
4
= 625 lb
L = 48 in.
n = 6 (as shown; subject to change)
b1 < 2 in. (to avoid side interference)
Figure E14.4
Conceptual sketch of proposed spring.

576
Chapter 14 / Springs
Since the governing failure mode is fatigue, inﬁnite life is speciﬁed, and the load-
ing cycle has a nonzero mean,22
Because fatigue properties for this material are not at hand, the methods of 5.6
will be used to estimate the fatigue properties. From Table 14.3, the ultimate tensile
strength for spring steel is given as
and, since
the estimated value of 
for carefully prepared specimens of this material, under com-
pletely reversed loading, is
Since
 0.65 has been speciﬁed, (5-55) gives
From the deﬂection speciﬁcations it may be deduced that this is a case of non
zero-mean cyclic loading. Since this is a linear spring, stress is proportional to load,
and deﬂection is proportional to load. From Figure E14.4 it may be further deduced
that static deﬂection and load correspond to the mean of a released loading cycle.
Maximum dynamic deﬂection and load correspond to the peak (maximum) of a re-
leased loading cycle. For the case at hand
and
as deﬁned in (5-70). Using (5-70) to modify the completely reversed fatigue strength
to account for the released loading conditions,
Because this material is brittle (2
elongation in 2 inches, as shown in Table 14.3),
, the validity criteria of (5-70) are met, and 
is valid.
Combining this with the information above
6.
From Table 14.4, a standard preferred width that will accommodate the speciﬁed side
clearances is
An initial selection for number of leaves will be taken as
1n20 = 6
1b120 = 1.97 inches
1sd2released
load
= 103,170
1.3
= 79,360 psi
Smax-N= q
Syp L Sut
%
Smax-N= q =
Sf
1 - mt Rt
=
65,000
1 - 10.74210.52 = 103,170 psi
mt =
Su - Sf
Su
= 246,000 - 65,000
246,000
= 0.74
Rt =
ym
ymax
=
Pm
Pmax
=
sm
smax
= 0.5
Sf = k qS¿f = 0.651100,0002 = 65,000 psi
k q
S¿f = 100,000 psi
S¿f
Sut 7 200,000 psi
Sut = 246,000 psi
Sfm = Smax-N= q
Example 14.4
Continues
22See 5.6.

Summary of Suggested Leaf Spring Design Procedure 577
Based on speciﬁcations related to static load, and these assumptions (14-49) may
be written as
whence
Since speciﬁcation require that
a standard preferred thickness, selected from Table 14.4, should be no less than 0.32
inch. Therefore the selection made is
From (14-48), using this thickness, the center deﬂection under the static load
would be
Since this is a signiﬁcant departure from the speciﬁcation value of 2.25 inches, the
next smaller preferred width will be tried. It is
From (yc)0
This is an acceptable value. For these dimensions, the spring rate, as calculated from
(k)0, becomes
Checking stresses, (14-39) may be solved for 
by ﬁrst setting
and noting
Thus
This is compatible with the selection of (t0), so the iteration is complete.
7.
No additional constraints are known, except that a clearance of 0.5 inch is desired be-
tween
 2(2.26)  4.52 inches and any supporting structure, to avoid metal-to-metal
yd
tmin = A
3Pmax L
2nb1sx
= A
31125021482
216211.772179,3602 = 0.33 inch
Pmax = ymax
ys  1Ps2 = 216252 = 1250 lb
sx = 1sd2released
load
= 79,360 psi
tmin
1k21 = 625
2.26 = 277lb
in
1yc21 = a1.97
1.77b1yc20 = 11.11212.032 = 2.26 inches
1b121 = 1.77 inches
1yc20 =
31625214823
8130 * 106216211.97210.3323 = 2.03 inches
t0 = 0.33 inch
ys … 2.25 inches
t = A
3
277.813214823
8130 * 106216211.972
= 0.32 inch
1k20 = Ps
ys
= 625
2.25 = 277.8 =
8130 * 106216211.972t 3
314823

578
Chapter 14 / Springs
contact. Initial curvature should be speciﬁed to provide a distance between the unloaded
datum line and metal-to-metal contact of
This value, , usually called opening or overall height (depending upon how the
spring is attached), is illustrated in Figure E14.4.
8.
Rounded leaf edges, tapered ends, and upturned eyes are suggested for this applica-
tion. Details of spring shackles, center bolt, and center clamping will be deferred to a
later review.
9.
Recommendations are summarized as follows:
a. Use spring steel leaves with rounded edges and standard preferred cross-sectional
dimensions, t  0.33 inch by b1  1.77 inches.
b. Use 6 leaves, with the main leaf 48 inches long between centers of the upturned
eyes. Use a center bolt and alignment clips, to be selected later.
c. Use an initially curved spring of overall height h  5.02 inches, generally conﬁg-
ured as shown in Figure E14.4.
14.9 Torsion Bars and Other Torsion Springs
Torsion springs may be used in a wide variety of applications, ranging from precision in-
struments, balance springs, and window shades to automotive and military-tank suspen-
sion springs. Any application in which it is desired to apply a torque, or to store rotational
energy, is a candidate for the use of a torsion spring.
Perhaps the simplest of all torsion springs is the torsion bar (or torsion tube) illus-
trated in Figure 14.19. The torsion bar shown in Figure 14.19(a) is typical of those used
in suspension systems. Such torsion bars are usually loaded in one direction only, and
are frequently shot-peened and/or preset to enhance fatigue resistance. End connections
must be carefully considered in torsion bar systems since they represent stress concen-
tration sites at which premature failures may initiate. Typically, serrated ends permit the
smallest end diameter; however, experience dictates that the diameter of the serrated end
should be at least 1.15 times the body diameter of the torsion bar. The length of serration
h
h = 4.52 + 0.5 = 5.02 inches
Example 14.4
Continues
L
L
Integral lever
End lever
(a)
Fixed bearing
Fixed bearing
do
do
y
di
a
a
a
P
P
P
Generous transition
radius well blended
(often shot peened)
Hexagonal
end connection
Fixed anchor or hub
Serrated
end
connection

Torsion tube (or bar) spring and lever assembly.
(b) Rod with bent ends used as single-piece
torsion bar spring.
Figure 14.19
Examples of torsion bar springs.

Torsion Bars and Other Torsion Springs 579
is usually made about 0.4 of the body diameter of the bar.23 Serration roots are often
shot-peened.
Hexagonal end connections are sometimes used, especially when high-volume pro-
duction justiﬁes the use of upsetting machines that can produce the larger hexagonal ends
with no further machining required. One-piece torsion bars, such as the one sketched in
Figure 14.19(b), may be used in such applications as counterbalancing car hoods, trunk
lids, or truck tilt cabs, or as stabilizer bars (antiroll bars) in automotive wheel suspension
systems. When the one-piece conﬁguration is used, it is often necessary to include the
bending ﬂexibility of the integral levers in the spring rate determination.
The basic torsion bar equations for stress, , angular deﬂection, , and torsional spring
rate, 
, as developed earlier in (4-33), (4-34), (4-44), and (4-83), are
(14-50)
(14-51)
(14-52)
When helical-coil springs are used as torsion springs, they are wound in the same
manner as for the compression and extension springs discussed in 14.5, except that the
wire ends are conﬁgured to transmit torque [see Figure 14.20(a)]. Helical-coil torsion
springs are usually mounted around a shaft or a mandrel for stability, and are typically
made of round wire, close-wound. As shown in Figure 14.20(a), when load P is applied to
produce the torsional moment Pa, the spring wire is subjected to a bending stress over its
ktor = T
u = JG
L
=
p1d 4
o - d 4
i 2G
32L
in-lb
rad
u = TL
JG =
32TL
p1d 4
o - d 4
i 2G
 rad
tmax =
T1do>22
J
=
16Tdo
p1d 4
o - d 4
i 2
 psi
ktor
u
t
a
a
b
D
(a) Helical-coil springs used as torsion springs.
(b) Spiral torsion spring.
Short hook ends
Single-bodied torsion spring
Double-bodied torsion spring
Hinge ends
Straight offset ends
d
P

R
Spiral spring
Center mandrel
t
P
P
Dm
Figure 14.20
Various torsion spring conﬁgurations.
23See ref. 2.

580
Chapter 14 / Springs
whole length. Due to coil curvature, this bending stress is maximum at the inner coil ra-
dius (see 4.4). The bending stress concentration factor at the inner coil radius, , has been
shown (by Wahl) to be well approximated by the torsional curvature factor,24
, given in
(14-5). The maximum bending stress, 
, that occurs at the inner coil radius of a helical-
coil torsion spring is given by
(14-53)
Using Table 4.1, case 10, the angular deﬂection, , may be written as
(14-54)
and the torsional spring rate, 
, is
(14-55)
For spiral torsion springs, such as the one shown in Figure 14.20(b), the same basic
equations apply, but must be modiﬁed slightly because of the rectangular cross section of
the spirally wound strip. For the spiral torsion spring
(14-56)
stress concentration factor at inner curved surface of the spring strip
(ref. curved beam data of Table 4.3, case 1)
For example, when the spring is tightly wound on a mandrel of diameter 
, typical
values of 
as a function of (1 
) are:
and
(14-57)
The overall torsional spring rate for the spiral spring strip is
(14-58)
Example 14.5 Torsion Spring
A torsion spring made from 2-mm diameter piano wire with 
and
has 4.25 turns and is conﬁgured, as shown in Figure E14.5. Determine
the spring stiffness and the maximum force F that can be applied if a design safety factor
of 
is required.
nd = 2
Syp = 1860 MPa
SU = 1980 MPa
ktor = T
u = bt 3E
12L
where  L = total active length of spiral spring strip.
u = ML
EI = 12PaL
bt 3E
ki L 1.1    for  11 + Dm>t2 7 6.0
ki L 1.2    for  11 + Dm>t2 = 4.0
ki L 1.5    for  11 + Dm>t2 = 2.0
Dm>t
ki
Dm
where  ki =
smax = ki
Mc
I
= kia6Pa
bt 2 b
ktor = T
u = pd 4E
64L
ktor
u = ML
EI = 64PaL
pd 4E
u
smax = ki
Mc
I
= a4c - 1
4c - 4 b32Pa
pd 3
smax
Kc
ki
24See ref. 3.

Belleville (Coned-Disk) Springs 581
Solution
For this spring we note that the mean diameter is 
. Since the elas-
tic modulus is 
, the stiffness is determined using (14-55)
where 
. Therefore,
Based on the design safety factor, the allowable normal stress is 
. From (14-53), we know that 
where  
and 
. Thus,
Solving for the force F, we get
Estimating the yield stress to be on the order of 90 percent of the ultimate strength for
steel, we approximate the tensile yield strength to be 
.
Similarly, we can approximate the shear strength to be 
.
Although more accurate analysis is required before the design is ﬁnalized, we can assume
that the spring is satisfactory at this stage.
14.10 Belleville (Coned-Disk) Springs
When space is limited and forces are high, Belleville spring washers, as sketched in
Figures 14.3(f), (g), and (h), may often be used to good advantage. By appropriate selec-
tion of basic dimensions and stacking sequence, spring rates may be made approximately
typ L 0.577(Syp) = 3635 MPa
Syp L 0.9(7003) = 6300 MPa
F = 22.3 N
smax = sallow = 930 * 106 = a4(9) - 1
4(9) - 4b 32F(0.03)
p(0.002)3 = 41.78 * 106 F
a = 30 mm
c = D>d = 18>2 = 9
smax = a4c - 1
4c - 4 b 32Fa
pd3
Syp>nd = 930 MPa
sallow =
ktor = 14.15 kN/m
ktor = p(0.018)4(210 * 109)
64(0.0765)
= 14.15 kN/m
L = nD = 4.25(0.018) = 0.0765 mm
ktor = pd4E
64L
E = 210 GPa
D = 20 - 2 = 18 mm
Figure E14.5
Torsion spring.
F
F
20 mm
50 mm
30 mm
30 mm
50 mm

582
Chapter 14 / Springs
linear, nonlinear hardening, or nonlinear softening.25 The cross section of a typical single-
disk Belleville spring is sketched in Figure 14.21, with loads applied uniformly around
inner and outer circumferential edges. Development of the nonlinear force-deﬂection
equations, and expressions for critical stresses for Belleville washers, are complicated and
beyond the scope of this text.26 However, it has been shown that radial stresses are negli-
gible and the potential circumferential stress critical points occur at A (compressive), B
(tensile), and C (tensile; usually highest), as indicated in Figure 14.21.
An expression for the force 
, the force required to deﬂect the spring to a ﬂat con-
ﬁguration, is27
(14-59)
Poisson’s ratio
inside height at no load
thickness
outside washer diameter
inside washer diameter
constant based on diameter ratio 
(see Table 14.9)
For any particular Belleville spring, calculation of the washer ﬂattening force, 
,
from (14-59), together with the nondimensional plot of Figure 14.22, permits determination
of the complete force-deﬂection curve for that spring. Force-deﬂection curves for stacked
Belleville washers may be deduced from basic concepts of series and parallel spring
arrangements.28
Further, the expression for circumferential tensile stress at critical point C (usually the
highest tensile stress) is29
(14-60)
spring deﬂection
constants based on diameter ratio 
(see Table 14.9)
14.11 Energy Storage in Springs
The capacity of a spring to store energy, especially if the spring must function within a
limited space envelope, is often an important factor in the spring selection process. In
accordance with the basic principles for creating shape and size, as discussed in 6.2,
Do>Di
K1, K2, K3 =
where  y =
sC =
4EtyDi
K1D3
o11 - n22 cK3 + 12K3 - K22ah
t - y
2tb d
Fflat
Do>Di
K1 =
Di =
Do =
t =
h =
where  n =
Fflat =
4E
1 - n2 a ht 3
K1D2
o
b
Fflat
25See Figure 4.21.
26See ref. 2 for more detail.
27Ibid.
28See 4.7.
29See ref. 1 for more detail.
y
h
y
c.p.A
c.p.B
c.p.C
Di
Do
F
F
F
F
t
H = h + t
Figure 14.21
Cross section of a Belleville spring.

Energy Storage in Springs 583
and the application of (4-50) to the case of a linear spring, the stored strain energy, ,
is equal to the work done during the loading process. Thus, for an initially unloaded
spring
(14-61)
U = Favey = a0 + F
2
by = Fy
2
U
Dimensionless force ratio, F/Fflat
Dimensionless deflection ratio, y/h
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
h
t = 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.4
1.2 1.0
0.8
0.4
0.6
Figure 14.22
Nondimensional force-deﬂection characteristics
of single-disk Belleville washers, as a function
of h/t (see Figure 14.21). (Adapted from ref. 1,
reprinted with permission from SAE
Publication AE-21 © 1996, Society of
Automotive Engineers, Inc.)
TABLE 14.9 Values of Constants1 Used for Estimating Washer
Flattening Force Fﬂat and Tensile Stress c at Critical
Point C (see Figure 14.22)
Diameter Ratio 
1.4
0.46
1.07
1.14
1.6
0.57
1.12
1.22
1.8
0.65
1.17
1.30
2.0
0.69
1.22
1.38
2.2
0.73
1.26
1.45
2.4
0.75
1.31
1.53
2.6
0.77
1.35
1.60
2.8
0.78
1.39
1.67
3.0
0.79
1.43
1.74
3.2
0.79
1.46
1.81
3.4
0.80
1.50
1.87
3.6
0.80
1.54
1.94
3.8
0.80
1.57
2.00
4.0
0.80
1.60
2.01
1Adapted from ref. 1, reprinted with permission from SAE Publication AE-21 © 1996,
Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc.
K3
K2
K1
Do>Di

584
Chapter 14 / Springs
For example, the stored strain energy in a helical-coil compression spring, when de-
ﬂected by axial load , may be written, using (14-61) and (14-21), as
(14-62)
For maximum energy storage efﬁciency, as much of the spring material as possible
should be stressed to the maximum allowable stress for the material. Thus the use of a di-
rect tension bar as a spring would provide maximum efﬁciency because all of the material
is equally stressed. Such a conﬁguration is usually not very useful, however, because of the
inherent high stiffness, large loads, and small deﬂections associated with energy storage in
direct tension members. Thin tubes in torsion have good energy storage efﬁciency because
the shearing stress is relatively uniform all across the wall. Solid members in bending or
torsion have much lower energy storage efﬁciency because the central material is stressed
to much lower levels (see Figures 4.3 and 4.9).
For comparison purposes, springs may be divided into E springs (loading produces
primarily normal stress) and G springs (loading produces primarily shearing stress.30) A
form coefﬁcient, 
, may be deﬁned to characterize the inﬂuence of geometry when writ-
ing expressions for stored strain energy per unit volume. Using this approach,
(14-63)
and
(14-64)
Form coefﬁcients for most of the springs discussed in this chapter are shown in Table
14.10. Typical amounts of strain energy that can be stored within the spring space enve-
lope are also shown in Table 14.10.31
uv = CFat2
max
2G b    1for G springs2
uv = CFas2
max
2E b    1for E springs2
CF
Uhelical
compr
=
Fa64FR3N
d 4G
b
2
= 32FR3N
d 4G
 in-lb
F
TABLE 14.10 Form Coefﬁcients and Energy Storage Capacity for Various Springs
Typical Amounts of
Energy Stored in
Spring Space
Envelope,1
Spring Type
Category
Tension bar
E
1.0
Torsion tube; circular; 
G
Approx. 0.90
thin wall
Torsion bar; circular; 
G
0.50
solid
Helical coil; round 
G
Approx. 0.36
1.8–18 (1.5–15
)
wire; compression 
or extension
* 10-4
ft-lb
in3 a
J
mm3 b
CF
30See ref. 7.
31See ref. 2.

Energy Storage in Springs 585
Figure E14.6
Split Hopkinson bar for high
strain rate torsion testing.
A
T
B
C
D
E
1.5 m
Clamp
Specimen
Output bar
Input bar
Example 14.6 Energy Storage in Torsion Bar Springs
A split Hopkinson bar used to perform high strain rate testing is schematically shown in
Figure E14.6. The bar consists of an input bar (ABC), a test specimen (CD), and an out-
put bar (DE). A clamp at B is used to react the applied torque T and assure that section
BCDE of the apparatus supports no load until the clamp is released. Section AB can be
treated as a cantilevered rod subjected to an end torque until the clamp is released. Once
the clamp is released a stress wave travels through the specimen and experimental results
are obtained. 
a.
Show how the form coefﬁcient 
is obtained for a torsion bar of circular cross
section.
b.
Assuming the bar diameter is 30 mm, and the allowable shear stress for the bar is
, determine the applied torque. 
Solution
a.
Based on an adaptation of (14-61) to torsional loading, and using (14-51), the total
stored strain energy, U, in a torsion bar is
U = Taveu = Tu
2 = 16T2L
pd4
oG
tmax = 100 MPa
CF = 0.5
TABLE 14.10 (Continued)
Typical Amounts of
Energy Stored in
Spring Space
Envelope,1
Spring Type
Category
Spiral torsion; 
E
Approx. 0.28
12–20 (10–17
)
ﬂat strip
Helical-coil torsion; 
E
Approx. 0.20
1.2–6 (1.0–5
)
round wire
Cantilever or simply sup-
E
0.11
ported beam spring; rec-
tangular cross section
Cantilever or simply sup-
E
Approx. 0.38
ported constant-strength
multileaf spring; ﬂat strip
Belleville spring
E
Approx. 0.05–0.20
0.6–6 (0.5–5
)
1See also ref. 1; for reference, the energy stored per unit volume of space envelope for a typical lead-acid bat-
tery is about 3000-4000 ft-lb/in3
.
12500-3300 * 10-4 J>mm32
* 10-4
* 10-4
* 10-4
ft-lb
in3 a
J
mm3 b
CF

586
Chapter 14 / Springs
The volume of material stored in a solid cylindrical torsion bar is 
. The strain
energy stored per unit volume, 
, is
From (14-50), 
. Equating 
above to (14-64), and inserting 
b.
Knowing 
, we use (14-64) to determine 
From part (a) we have
T = 299 N-m
uv = 92593 =
64T2
p2d6
oG
=
64T2
p2(0.03)6(27 * 109)
= 1.035T2
uv = CFat2
max
2G b = 0.5a(100 * 106)2
2(27 * 109)
b = 92593
uv
tmax = 100 MPa
CF = 2Guv
t2
max
=
2Ga 64T2
p2d6
oG
b
a 16T
pd3
o
b
2
= a128T2
p2d6
o
b a p2d6
o
256T2 b = 0.50
tmax
uv
tmax = 16T>pd3
o
uv = U
v =
16T2L(4)
pd4
oG(pd2
oL)
=
64T2
p2d6
oG
uv
v = pd2
oL>4
14-1. You are asked, as a consultant, to determine a procedure
for ﬁnding a “best estimate” for the design stress to be used in
designing the helical-coil springs for a new off-the-road vehi-
cle. The only known information is:
1. The spring material is a ductile high-strength ferrous
alloy with known ultimate strength, 
, and known yield
strength, 
.
2. Spring deﬂection during ﬁeld operation is estimated to
range from a maximum of 
to a minimum of 

.
3. Very long life is desired.
Based on the known information, write a concise step-by-step
procedure for determining a “best estimate” value for the design
stress.
14-2. An open-coil helical-coil compression spring has a
spring rate of 80 lb/in. When loaded by an axial compressive
force of 30 lb, its length was measured to be 0.75 inch. Its solid
height has been measured as 0.625 inch.
a. Calculate the axial force required to compress the
spring from its free length to its solid height.
b. Calculate the free length of the spring.
0.30ymax
ymin
ymax
Syp
Su
14-3. An open-coil helical-coil compression spring has a free
length of 76.2 mm. When loaded by an axial compressive force
of 100 N, its length is measured as 50.8 mm.
a. Calculate the spring rate of this spring.
b. If this spring, with a free length of 76.2 mm, were
loaded by an axial tensile force of 100 N, what would you
predict its corresponding length to be?
14-4. A helical-coil compression spring has an outside diame-
ter of 1.100 inches, a wire diameter of 0.085 inch, and has
closed and ground ends. The solid height of this spring has been
measured as 0.563 inch.
a. Calculate the inner coil radius.
b. Calculate the spring index.
c. Estimate the Wahl factor.
d. Calculate the approximate total number of coils, end-
of-wire to end-of-wire, in this spring.
14-5. An existing helical-coil compression spring has been
wound from 3.50-mm peened music wire into a spring having
an outside diameter of 22 mm and 8 active coils. What maxi-
mum stress and deﬂection would you predict if an axial static
load of 27.5 N were applied?
Problems
Example 14.6
Continues

Problems 587
0.75 in. Eccentricity
6.75 in. max. when cam
is at top of stroke
1.5 in. D
Figure P14.8
Cam-driven valve mechanism with preloaded return spring.
14-6. An existing helical-coil compression spring has been
wound from unpeened music wire of 0.105-inch diameter into
a spring with mean coil radius of 0.40 inch. The applied axial
load ﬂuctuates continuously from zero to 25 lb, and a design
life of 107 cycles is desired. Determine the existing safety fac-
tor for this spring as used in this application.
14-7. A round wire, helical-coil compression spring with
closed and ground ends must work inside a 60-mm diameter
hole. During operation the spring is subjected to a cyclic axial
load that ranges between a minimum of 650 N and a maximum
of 2400 N. The spring rate is to be approximately 26 kN/m. A
life of 
cycles is required. Initially, assume
. A design factor of safety of 
is de-
sired. Design the spring. 
14-8. A helical-coil spring with plain ends, ground, is to be
used as a return spring on the cam-driven valve mechanism
shown in Figure P14-8. The 1.50-inch-diameter rod must
pass freely through the spring. The cam eccentricity is 0.75
inch (i.e., the total stroke is 1.50 inches). The height of the
compressed spring when the cam is at the head-end-dead-
center (HEDC) position is 3.0 inches, as shown. The spring
must exert a force of 300 lb when at the HEDC position
shown in the sketch, and must exert a force of 150 lb when at
crank-end-dead-center (CEDC) at the bottom of the stroke.
That is, the spring is preloaded into the machine. The spring
is to be made of a patented spring steel wire that has a
200,000-psi ultimate tensile strength, 190,000-psi tensile
yield strength, and 90,000-psi fatigue endurance limit. A
safety factor of 1.25 is desired, based on infinite life design.
Determine the following:
a. Mean coil radius, R
b. Wire diameter, d
c. Number of active coils, N
d. Spring rate, k
e. Free length of the spring, Lf
nd = 1.2
kN=2*105 = 0.85
2 * 105
12
total turns from end-of-wire to end-of-wire. The ends are
to be closed. Do the following:
a. Estimate torsional yield strength of the music wire.
b. Determine the maximum applied axial load that could
be supported by the spring without initiating yielding in
the wire.
c. Determine the spring rate of this spring.
d. Determine the deﬂection that would be produced if the
incipient yielding load calculated in (b) above were ap-
plied to the spring.
e. Calculate the solid height of the spring.
f. If no permanent change in free height of the spring can
be tolerated, determine the free height that should be spec-
iﬁed so that when the spring is compressed to solid height
and then released, the free height remains unchanged.
g. Determine the maximum operating deflection that
should be recommended for this spring if no preload is
anticipated.
h. Determine whether buckling of this spring might be a
potential problem.
14-10. A helical-coil compression spring is to be designed for
a special application in which the spring is to be initially as-
sembled in the mechanism with a preload of 10 N, and exert a
force of 50 N when it is compressed an additional 140 mm.
Tentatively, it has been decided to use music wire, to use closed
ends, and to use the smallest standard wire diameter that will
give a satisfactory performance. Also, it is desired to provide a
clash allowance of approximately 10 percent of the maximum
operating deﬂection.
a. Find a standard wire diameter and corresponding mean
coil radius that will meet the desired speciﬁcations.
b. Find the solid height of the spring.
c. Find the free height of the spring.
14-11. Two steel, helical-coil compression springs are to be
nested around a common axial centerline. The outer spring is to
have an inside diameter of 38 mm, a standard wire diameter of
2.8 mm, and 10 active coils. The inner spring is to have an out-
side diameter of 32 mm, a standard wire diameter of 2.2 mm,
and 13 active coils. Both springs are to have the same free
length. Do the following:
a. Calculate the spring rate of each spring.
b. Calculate the axial force required to deﬂect the nested
spring assembly a distance of 25 mm.
c. Identify the most highly stressed spring when the
assembly is a deﬂected 25-mm spring.
14-12. A round wire helical-coil tension spring has end loops
of the type shown in Figures 14.7(a) and (b). The wire diam-
eter of the spring is 0.042 inch, and the mean coil radius is
0.28 inch. Pertinent end-loop dimensions are (ref. Figure 14.7)
12
14-9. A proposed helical-coil compression spring is to be
wound from standard unpeened music wire of 0.038-inch di-
ameter, into a spring with outer coil diameter of 
inch and
716

588
Chapter 14 / Springs
riA  0.25 inch and riB  0.094 inch. An applied axial static
tension force of F  5.0 lb is to be applied to the spring.
a. Estimate the maximum stress in the wire at critical
point A.
b. Estimate the maximum stress in the wire at critical point B.
c. If the spring wire is ASTM A227 material, and a safety
factor of 1.25 is desired, would the stresses at critical
points A and B be acceptable?
14.13. A battery-powered nail gun uses two helical-coil com-
pression springs to help propel the nail from the end of the gun.
When the springs are in the fully extended position, as shown
in Figure 14.13 (a), the 2 oz hammer and nail are traveling at
90 ft/s. In this position, both springs are in their free length
position (for the initial design, these are assumed to be 2.0 in
for the upper spring and 2.5 in for the lower spring). Due to
mechanical advantage, the force exerted on the hammer by the
trigger is 40 lb and the hammer displaces the spring 1.0 in
when completely compressed, as shown in Figure 14.13 (b).
Neither spring can have an outside diameter greater than
3/8 in. Assuming that each spring has a shear modulus
. Deﬁne an initial design for the two springs,
specifying for each the parameters: wire type, d, D, c, and N.
Also, note any potential problems and suggest modiﬁcations
that could be used.
14-14. A conical compression spring is made from 3-mm di-
ameter steel wire and has an active coil diameter that varies
from 25 mm at the top to 50 mm at the bottom. The pitch (distance
between coils) is 
throughout. There are four active
coils. A force is applied to compress the spring and the stress
always remains in the elastic range. 
a. Determine which coil (top or bottom, or one in the mid-
dle) deﬂects to zero pitch ﬁrst as the force is increased.
p = 8 mm
G = 12 * 106 psi
b. Determine the force corresponding to the deﬂection
identiﬁed in part (a). In other words, determine the force
causing displacement of 8 mm.
14.15. A helical-coil compression made from music wire has a
rectangular cross section with dimensions 
, as shown in
Figure P14.15. Assume the maximum shear stresses due to tor-
sion and transverse shear exist at the same point on the rectan-
gular cross section. Assume dimensions a and b are related by
the relationship 
, where 
. Similarly, de-
ﬁne a spring index for rectangular cross section springs as
.
c = D>a
0.25 … n … 2.5
b = na
a * b
Figure P14.13
Schematic of a battery powered nail gun.
Figure P14.15
Helical-coil compression spring with rectangular cross
section.
1.0"
Compression spring
Scooper plate
0.5"
2.0"
k1
k2
Gears
Cam
Tension
spring
Lever
Hammer
 (a)
(b) 
R
F
R
b/2 b/2
a
(a) Develop the expression for the maximum shear stress
as a function of the applied load F, and the parameters a,
n, and c. Reduce the equations to its simplest form.
(b) The parameter K in Table 4.4 represents the polar mo-
ment of inertia. Beginning with equation (14-19), develop
an expression for the stiffness of this spring in terms of the
dimension a and c.

Problems 589
Preloaded
tension spring
(schematic only)

Figure P14.17
Cam-driven lever with return spring.

Pneumatic
actuator
0.43 in. spring deflection
peak to peak
Stops
 p
Preloaded
tension spring
(schematic only)
Figure P14.18
Return spring for pneumatically actuated lever.
Stress (S), thousands of psi
Life (N), cycles
103
104
105
106
107
0
2 3456
2 3456
2 3456
2 3456
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Su = 140, 000 psi
Syp = 110,000 psi
e = 18% in 2.0 in.
(completely reversed
loading)
E = 30 × 106 psi
 = 0.3
Figure P14.19
Material properties for patented steel spring wire.
(c) Assuming a mid-range spring index (
), the Whal
factor for a circular wire spring is 
. Assuming
the cross-sectional area of a circular and rectangular spring
are identical, we can show that 
. Using this
information, plot 
vs n and 
vs n for
.
14-16. For the helical-coil tension spring of problem 14-12,
calculate the maximum stress in the main body of the spring,
away from the ends, and identify where the critical point oc-
curs. If the wire material is ASTM A227, would failure of the
spring wire be expected?
14-17. A round wire, helical-coil tension spring is to be used as
a return spring on a cam-driven lever, as shown in Figure
P14.17. The spring must be pretensioned to exert a 45 N force
at the “bottom” of the stroke, and should have a spring rate of
3500 N/m. The peak-to-peak operating deﬂection for this spring
is 25 mm. The spring is made form a patented steel alloy which
has 
, 
, and a fatigue en-
durance limit of 
. It is desired to have a spring in-
dex of 
, and a design factor of safety of 
. Design
a lightweight spring for this application. Speciﬁcally, determine
the wired diameter (d), the mean coil radius (R), and the num-
ber of active coils (N).
nd = 1.5
c = 8
Sf = 621 MPa
Syp = 1311 MPa
Sut = 1380 MPa
0.25 … n … 2.5
kcirc>krect
tcirc>trect
pd2 = 4na2
Kw = 1.184
c = 8
14-18. The round wire helical-coil tension spring shown in
Figure P14.18 is to be used to make a return spring for a pneu-
matically actuated lever that operates between ﬁxed stops, as
shown. The spring must be pretensioned to 25 lb at the bottom
stop (minimum load point), and operates through a total spring
deﬂection of 0.43 inch, where it is halted by the upper stop, then
returns to the lower stop and repeats the cycle. The spring is
made of No. 12 wire (0.105-inch diameter), has a mean coil ra-
dius of 0.375 inch, and has been wound with 15 full coils plus
a turned-up half loop on each end for attachment. Material
properties for the spring wire are 
 200,000 psi, 

185,000 psi, 
(2 inches)  9 percent, 
 80,000 psi, 
 30
106 psi,
 11.5 
106 psi, and 
 0.30. Compute the ex-
isting safety factor for this spring, based on an infinite-life
design criterion.
14-19. A round wire open-coil helical-coil spring is wound us-
ing No. 5 patented steel wire (
 0.207 inch), with a mean coil
radius of 0.65 inch. The spring has 15 active coils, and its free
height is 6.0 inches. The material properties for the spring wire
are given in Figure P14.16. The spring is to be used in an appli-
cation where it is axially deﬂected 1.0 inch from its free height
d
v
*
G
*
E
Sf
e
Syp
Su

590
Chapter 14 / Springs
into tension, then 1.0 inch from its free height into compression
during each cycle, at a frequency of 400 cycles per min.
a. Estimate the expected life in cycles before this spring
fails.
b. Would buckling of this open-coil spring be expected?
c. Would you expect surging of the spring to be a problem
in this application?
d. How much energy would be stored in the spring at
maximum deﬂection?
14-20. A helical-coil spring is to be wound using 
wire made from a proprietary ferrous alloy for which
, 
, 
,
, 
, and 
. It is desired to use
the spring in a cyclic loading situation where the axial load on
the spring during each cycle ranges from 450-N tension to
450-N compression. The spring deﬂection at maximum load must
be 50 mm. A spring with 18 active coils is being proposed for
the application.
a. Compute the existing safety factor for this spring based
on an inﬁnite-life design criterion. Comment on the results.
b. If the spring is wound so that when it is unloaded the
space between coils is the same as the wire diameter,
would you expect buckling to be a problem? (Support your
answer with appropriate calculations.)
c. Approximately what maximum operating frequency
should be speciﬁed for this mechanism?
14-21. For a simply supported ﬂat-beam spring of rectangular
cross section, loaded at midspan, answer the following questions:
a. What is the primary stress pattern in the beam spring?
b. Is it uniaxial or multiaxial?
c. If there are secondary stresses to be considered, what
are they?
14-22. Derive a general expression for the maximum stress in
an end-loaded multileaf cantilever spring with n leaves, each
n = 0.35
G = 79 GPa
E = 210 GPa
e(50 mm) = 7%
Syp = 1587 MPa
Sut = 1725 MPa
d = 3.5 mm
having a thickness t and width 
. Assume a spring with
, 
, 
, and an end-load
of 
. Plot the allowable length of the spring as a func-
tion of the number of leaves for 
14-23. Derive an equation for the spring rate of an end-loaded
multileaf cantilever spring with n leaves, each having a width of
and thickness t.
14-24. The horizontal cantilever-beam spring in Figure P14.24
has a constant rectangular cross section and is loaded vertically
across the free-end by a force that ﬂuctuates cyclically from 
4.5 kN down to 22.5 kN up. The beam is 125 mm wide and
250 mm long. The material is a ferrous alloy with 
,
, and 
. A design factor of safety
of 
is required, stress concentration factors can be neg-
lected, and an inﬁnite-life is required. Determine the required
beam thickness.
nd = 1.5
Sf = 425 MPa
Syp = 760 MPa
Sut = 970 MPa
b1
1 … n … 5
P = 400 N
t = 10 mm
b1 = 100 mm
Syp = 1862 MPa
b1
Stress (S), thousands of psi
Life (N), cycles
103
104
105
106
107
0
2 3456
2 3456
2 3456
2 3456
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Su = 140, 000 psi
Syp = 110,000 psi
e = 18% in 2.0 in.
(completely reversed
loading)
E = 30 × 106 psi
 = 0.3
Figure P14.25
Material properties for multileaf spring.
Figure P14.24
Cantilever-beam spring.
125 mm
250 mm
F
A
t
14-25. A horizontal simply supported multileaf spring is to be
subjected to a cyclic midspan load that ﬂuctuates from 2500 lb
down to 4500 lb down. The spring is to have 8 leaves, each 3.0
inches wide. The distance between shackles (simply supports)
is to be 22.0 inches. Properties of the selected spring material
are given in Figure P14.25.
a. Neglecting stress concentration effects, how thick
should the leaves be made to provide inﬁnite life, with a
design safety factor of 1.2?
b. What would be the spring rate of this spring?

Problems 591
Figure P14.27
Concept design for a new extreme sport mechanism.
required thickness of the rectangular spring and the correspon-
ding diameter for a solid cylindrical spring.
14-28. A single-piece torsion bar spring of the type sketched in
Figure P14.28(a) is being considered by a group of students as
a means of supporting the hood of an experimental hybrid ve-
hicle being developed for intercollegiate competition. The max-
imum length L that can be accommodated is 48 inches. Figure
P14.28(b) illustrates their concept. They plan to install the
counterbalancing torsion bar spring along the hood-hinge cen-
terline, with one of the 3-inch integral end-levers in contact
with the hood, as shown. The hood will then be raised until it
contacts the 45 hood stop; the 3-inch support lever on the op-
posite end will be rotated until the hood is just held in contact
with the hood stop without any other external lifting force on
the hood. The support lever will next be given an additional
rotation to lightly preload the hood against the stop, and then
clamped to the supporting structure.
a. Determine the diameter 
of a solid-steel torsion bar
that would counterbalance the hood weight and provide a
10 ft-lb torque to hold the hood against the stop shown,
if the design stress in shear for the material is 

60,000 psi.
b. At what angle, with respect to a horizontal datum,
should the clamp for the 3-inch support lever be placed to
provide the desired 10 ft-lb preload torque? Neglect bend-
ing of the integral levers.
c. Make a plot showing gravity-induced torque, spring
torque, and net torque, all plotted versus hood-opening 
angle.
d. Is the operating force, 
, required to open or close the
installed hood, reasonable for this design conﬁguration?
What other potential problems can you foresee with the
arrangement?
Fop
td
do
14-26. A multileaf simply supported truck spring is to be de-
signed for each rear wheel, using AISI 1095 steel
(
, 
, 
). The truck
weight is 16 kN, with 65 percent of the weight on the rear
wheels. The static midspan deﬂection is 100 mm and the max-
imum midspan deﬂection during operation is 200 mm. The
loading may be considered to be released cyclic loading. The
length of the spring between supports must be between 1.2 m
and 1.6 m. It has been decided that a design factor of safety of
should be used. Design a leaf spring to meet these re-
quirements if inﬁnite-life is desired.
14-27. A new revision of an “extreme sport” device that at-
taches to a person’s feet and legs allows them to enhance the
power of his legs for running, jumping, etc. Your company is
trying to improve on the design, as conceptually shown in
Figure P14.27 (a). For the initial phase of the design, you are to
explore various spring conﬁgurations. The spring (section AB in
the drawing) spans an arc of 
and the arc length AB is ini-
tially assumed to be 600 mm long. Your company intends to
make the spring out of a woven composite material with an
elastic modulus of 
and a yield strength of
. Preliminary investigation has shown that you
expect the force a “normal” user exerts at point A to be 1000 N
down [Figure 14.27 (b)], which was established by considering
normal walking and running gates, impact, trick maneuvers,
etc. For the most complex maneuver anticipated, you have ap-
proximated the required spring rate to be 
. Two
spring designs are being considered. One is a rectangular sec-
tion and the other is cylindrical [Figure 14.27 (c)]. Your pre-
liminary estimate for the width of the rectangular spring is
, which accounts for normal leg widths, possible
interference, etc. Spring attachment point A is offset from at-
tachment point B by amount , which is not considered in this
initial phase of design. Considering only ﬂexure, determine the
d
w = 30 mm
k = 3 kN/m
Syp = 1200 MPa
E = 28 GPa
60o
nd = 1.3
Sf = 690 MPa
Syp = 952 MPa
Sut = 1379 MPa
1000 N
(b)
(a)
(c)
60°
A
D
B
MB
t
w
d
Bx
By
C

592
Chapter 14 / Springs
Wire rope
rp (pulley radius to rope     ) = 2.5 in.
L.H. Helical-coil torsion spring
Spring end attached
to rotating shaft
Note: Both springs have N = 140 turns,
dW = 0.225 in., and R = 0.89 in.
d0 = 1.0 in.
Wire rope
Pulley
Bearing and spring
fixed to structuer
R.H. Helical-coil torsion spring
Bearing fixed to structure
Bearing and spring
fixed to structure
Pulley
Wdoor
2
Wdoor
2
L
C
Figure P14.30
Sketch of a pair of helical-coil torsion springs used to counterbal-
ance an overhead garage door.
L = 48 in.
3 in.
3 in.
Hood (open)
Integral lever "A"
Hood closed position
Hood latch
Integral lever "B"
Hood hinge L
C
Hood hinge L
C
	 = 45°
Whood = 25 lb
Fop
36 in.
18 in.
Hood stop
Clamp
c.g.
(b) Proposed hood arrangement.
(a) Proposed torsion spring.
Integral lever "A"
Fixed bearing
Fixed bearing
do
Psupport
Phood
"B"
(see (b) below)
Figure P14.28
Proposed torsion bar spring for supporting the hood of an experimental vehicle.
14-29. A single-bodied, helical-coil torsion spring (see Figure
14.20) has a wire diameter of 1 mm and an outside coil diame-
ter of 10 mm. The tightly coiled spring has 9.5 coil, with an
end-extension of 
from the coil center to the point
of load application at each end. The spring material is a steel
alloy with 
.
a. Calculate the torsional spring rate for this spring.
b. If torque 0.1 N-m were applied to this spring, what an-
gular deﬂection (in degrees) would be expected? Neglect
the contribution of end-extensions.
Sut = 2030 MPa
a = 12 mm
c. What maximum stress would be predicted in the spring
wire under the 0.10 N-m torque?
d. If a design safety factor of 1.5, based on minimum ul-
timate tensile strength, is desired, would the spring design
be acceptable?
14-30. A matched pair of torsional helical-coil springs, one left-
hand and the other right-hand, is scheduled for use to counter-
balance the weight of a residential overhead garage door. The
arrangement is sketched in Figure P14.30. The 1-inch-diameter
rotating shaft is supported on three bearings near the top of the

Problems 593
door, one bearing at each end, and one at midspan. A small wire
rope is wrapped around each of the pulleys to symmetrically
support the weight of the door. The 2.5-inch pulley radii are
measured to the wire rope centerlines. Each spring is wound
from standard oil-tempered steel wire having a wire diameter of
0.225 inch, a mean coil radius of 0.89 inch, and 140 turns,
closely coiled. The total length of wire-rope excursion from
spring-unloaded position to door-closed position is 85 inches.
a. Calculate the maximum bending stress in the springs
when the door is closed, and tell where it occurs.
b. What would be the heaviest garage door that could be
counterbalanced using the arrangement of Figure P14.26
and this matched pair of springs?
c. Estimate the free length and the weight of each spring.
14-31. As a diversion, a “machine design” professor has built a
new rough-sawn cedar screened porch as an attachment to the
back of his house. Instead of using a traditional “screen-door
spring” (closed-coiled helical-coil tension spring) to keep his
screen door closed, he has decided to use a helical-coil torsion
spring of the single-bodied type shown in Figure 14.20(a). He
plans to install the spring so its coil centerline coincides with
the door-hinge centerline. The distance from the hinge center-
line to the pull-handle is to be 32 inches, and his goal is to pro-
vide a handle-pull of 1 lb when the door is closed and a pull of
3 lb after the door has rotated open through an angle of 180
about its hinge centerline. Tentatively, a standard no. 6 music
wire has been chosen (d  0.192 inch) for the spring. A design
stress of 
 165,000 psi has been calculated, based on yield-
ing as the probable governing failure mode.
a. Calculate the required mean coil radius for the spring.
b. Find the initial angular preload displacement of the
spring that will produce a 1-lb pull at the handle to open
the door from its closed position.
c. What would be the required number of active coils for
the spring?
14-32. An unlabeled box of steel Belleville spring washers (all
washers in the box are the same) has been found in a company
storeroom. As a summer-hire, you have been asked to analyti-
cally evaluate and plot the force-deﬂection characteristics of the
spring washers. The dimensions of the washers in the unlabeled
box, with reference to the sketch of Figure 14.21, are as follows:
Do  115 mm
Di  63.9 mm
sd
°
t  2.0 mm
h  3.0 mm
Do the following:
a. Estimate the force required to just “ﬂatten” one of the
Belleville washers.
b. Plot a force-deﬂection curve for one of the washers us-
ing force magnitudes ranging from zero up to the full ﬂat-
tening force. Characterize the curve as linear, nonlinear
hardening, or nonlinear softening.
c. Plot a force-deﬂection curve for two of the washers
stacked together in parallel. Characterize the curve as lin-
ear, nonlinear hardening, or nonlinear softening.
d. Plot a force-deﬂection curve for two of the washers
stacked together in series. Characterize the curve as linear,
nonlinear hardening, or nonlinear softening.
e. Calculate the magnitude of the highest tensile stress
that would be expected in the single washer of (b) above at
the time that the applied load just “ﬂattens” the washer.
14-33. Considering a solid square bar of steel with side-dimen-
sion s and length-dimension L, would you predict that more
elastic strain energy could be stored in the bar (without yield-
ing) by using it as a direct tension spring axially loaded in the
L-direction, or by using it as a cantilever-bending spring loaded
perpendicular to the L-direction? Make appropriate calculations
to support your prediction.
14-34. a. Write the equations from which the form coefﬁcient
CF may be found for a simply supported center-loaded
multileaf spring.
b. Find the numerical value of CF for this type of spring
and compare it with the value given in Table 14.10.
14-35. Repeat problem 14-34, except for the case of a simply
supported beam spring of rectangular cross section.
14-36. Repeat problem 14-34, except for the case of an end-
loaded cantilever-beam spring of rectangular cross section.
14-37. Repeat problem 14-34, except for the case of a spiral
ﬂat-strip torsion spring.
14-38. Repeat problem 14-34, except for the case of a round
wire helical-coil torsion spring.
14-39. Repeat problem 14-34, except for the case of a round-
wire helical-coil compression spring.

594
Gears and Systems of Gears
15.1 Uses and Characteristics of Gears
When it is desired to transmit or transfer power or motion from one rotating shaft to an-
other, many alternatives are available to a designer, including ﬂat belts, V-belts, toothed
timing belts, chain drives, friction wheel drives, and gear drives.1 If smooth slip-free uni-
form motion, high speed, light weight, precise timing, high efﬁciency, or compact design
are important design criteria, the selection of an appropriate system of gears will, in nearly
all cases, fulﬁll these criteria better than any of the other alternatives. On the other hand,
belt drives and chain drives are often less costly, and may be used to advantage when input
and output shafts are widely spaced.
1See also Chapter 17.
C
2
O2
O1
r1
r2
1
C
(a) Simple external friction drive.
(b) Simple internal friction drive.
Face width
Circular
pitch
Dedendum
Addendum
Pitch radius
Whole
depth
Tooth
fillet
(c) Straight tooth spur gear drive
with same angular velocity ratio
as friction drive shown in (a).
(d) Basic shape and terminology for
straight tooth spur gear teeth, such
as those in (c).
2
O2
P
O1
r1
r2
1
C
2
O2
P
O1
r1
r2
1
Figure 15.1
Friction wheel drives and analo-
gous spur gear drive geometry.
Chapter 15

Types of Gears; Factors in Selection 595
2The pitch circles correspond to the peripheries of the friction cylinders of Figure 15.1(a).
3See, for example, refs. 1, 2, 3, or 4.
Simple friction wheel drives, such as the external and internal drives sketched in
Figures 15.1(a) and (b), may provide a smooth transmission of power from input cylinder 1
(driving) to output cylinder or annulus 2 (driven) if no slip occurs at contact site P. For the
case of no slip, the magnitudes of tangential velocity are equal for the two contacting
members; hence
(15-1)
radius of member 1, 2, respectively
angular velocity of member 1, 2, respectively
For the external drive shown in Figure 15.1(a) the direction of 
is opposite
; for
the internal drive shown in Figure 15.1(b) the direction of 
is the same as 
.
Conventional practice is to attach a minus sign when directions are opposite and a plus
sign when directions are the same. For an external drive, therefore, the velocity ratio is
taken as negative and for an internal drive it is taken as positive.
For light loads that do not cause slip, a friction drive may provide acceptable per-
formance. If operating conditions do tend to cause slip, or if precise phasing (constant an-
gular velocity ratio and absolutely no slip) is required between input and output shafts, a
series of precise intermeshing teeth may be incorporated on each of the mating friction sur-
faces to ensure no-slip operation. If, as shown for the external drive of Figure 15.1(c), the
teeth are arranged to extend both inside (dedendum) and outside (addendum) of the pitch
circles2 and are extended parallel to the cylinder axes (face width), the resulting toothed
wheels become straight-tooth spur gears with pitch radii r1 and r2. Likewise, teeth may be
incorporated on mating members of an internal drive. The smaller of two meshing gears
is usually called the pinion and the larger is called the gear. Typically, the pinion is the
driver (input) and the gear is the driven member (output).
The teeth must be carefully shaped so they do not interfere with each other as the gears
rotate, and so that the angular velocity ratio between the driving pinion and the driven gear
neither increases nor decreases at any instant as successive teeth pass through the mesh
(region of tooth contact). If these conditions are met, the gears are said to fulﬁll the funda-
mental law of gearing. The kinematic conditions for the fundamental law of gearing and the
process of determining proﬁles of meshing teeth that satisfy these conditions have been
widely published3, and are brieﬂy summarized in 15.6. The basic nomenclature associated
with spur gear teeth is shown in Figure 15.1(d) and discussed more fully in 15.6.
15.2 Types of Gears; Factors in Selection
Selection of the best type of gearing for a particular design scenario depends upon many
factors, including geometric arrangement proposed for the machine, reduction ratio re-
quired, power to be transmitted, speeds of rotation, efﬁciency goals, noise-level limita-
tions, and cost constraints.
In general, three shafting arrangements are encountered by the designer when contem-
plating the transmission of power or motion from one rotating shaft to another. They are (1)
applications in which the shaft axes are parallel, (2) applications in which shaft axes inter-
sect, and (3) applications in which shaft axes are neither parallel nor do they intersect.
Types of gears for use when the shaft axes are parallel are sketched in Figure 15.2.
Straight-tooth spur gears, as shown in Figures 15.2(a) and (b), are relatively simple to
v1
v2
v1
v2
v1, v2 =
where  r1, r2 =
ƒr1v1 ƒ = ƒr2v2ƒ

596
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
1
1
2
2
(a) External straight tooth spur gears.
(b) Internal straight tooth spur gears.
1
1
2
2
(c) External helical gears.
R.H.
L.H.
L.H.
L.H.
L.H.
L.H.
R.H.
R.H.
(d) Internal helical gears.
1
2
(e) Double helical gears
(herringbone gears).
(f) Straight tooth spur rack and pinion
(can also be helical).
2
V2
Figure 15.2
Types of gears for use in ap-
plications with parallel
shafts.
Some examples of gears.

Types of Gears; Factors in Selection 597
4See 15.6.
5Substantially higher pitch-line velocities may be allowed in certain specialized high-performance applications,
such as helicopter gearing.
6See 15.3.
7Cross section perpendicular to the gear axis of rotation.
8Zerol is a registered trademark of the Gleason Works, Rochester, NY.
design, manufacture, and check for precision, and are relatively inexpensive. They impose
only radial loads on supporting bearings. Tooth proﬁles are ordinarily involute4 in shape,
and small variations in center distance are therefore usually well tolerated. Although spur
gears can be used at speeds as high as other types of gears, they are usually limited to
pitch-line velocities around 20 m/s (4000 fpm) to avoid high-frequency vibration and un-
acceptable noise levels5. External spur gears are usually preferred when design constraints
permit; internal spur gears are sometimes used to achieve a short center distance, and are
a necessity in most epicyclic6 gearing arrangements.
Helical gears, as shown in Figures 15.2(c) and (d), are very similar to spur gears ex-
cept that their teeth are angled with respect to the axis of rotation to form parallel helical
spirals. The helixes for the two mating external gears must be manufactured to have the
same helix angle, but for parallel shaft applications the hand of the helix on the pinion
must be opposite to the hand of the gear. Because of the angled teeth, helical gears impose
both radial and thrust (axial) loads on supporting bearings. Tooth proﬁles are ordinarily in-
volute in the transverse section7 and small variations in center distance are not a serious
problem. Also, because of the angled teeth, as the gears rotate each tooth pair comes into
engagement ﬁrst at one end, with contact spreading gradually along a diagonal path across
the tooth face as rotation continues [See Figure 15.33(c)]. This gradual-engagement pattern
produces smoother and quieter operation than with straight-tooth spur gears. Pitch-line
velocities in helical gearing applications have been permitted to exceed 50 m/s (10,000 fpm)
in some cases without violating design criteria for vibration, noise, and design life. Internal
helical gears, as sketched in Figure 15.2(d), are sometimes used. To eliminate thrust load-
ing on support bearings when high horsepower must be transmitted, two sets of helical
teeth of opposite hand are integrally manufactured on a single pinion, then meshed with a
mating set of double-helical teeth on a single-gear wheel, as illustrated in Figure 15.2(e).
In such double-helical or herringbone gears, the thrust loads generated by corresponding
opposite-hand helical teeth (equal in magnitude and opposite in direction) are internally
supported, inducing internal axial direct stresses in the pinion and in the gear, but elimi-
nating thrust loads on supporting bearings.
A special case of gearing used for parallel shafts is the rack-and-pinion drive, illus-
trated in Figure 15.2(f). The straight rack may be considered as a segment of a gear hav-
ing inﬁnite pitch radius. The rotary motion of the pinion is converted into linear motion of
the straight rack in this arrangement. Rack-and-pinion drives may be manufactured with
either straight spur or helical teeth.
Types of gears for use when the shaft axes intersect are sketched in Figure 15.3.
Straight bevel gears, as shown in Figure 15.3(a), represent the simplest type of gearing
used for intersecting shafts. Usually the shaft axes intersect at an angle of 90 but almost
any angle can be accommodated. The pitch surfaces for straight bevel gears are tangent
conical frustra, as compared to tangent cylindrical surfaces for straight spur gears [see
Figure 15.1(a)]. Bevel gear teeth are tapered in both tooth thickness and height, from a
larger tooth proﬁle at one end to a smaller tooth proﬁle at the other end. Bevel gears impose
both radial and thrust loads on supporting bearings. Tooth proﬁles closely resemble an in-
volute curve in a section normal to the tooth axis. Bevel gears must be accurately mounted at
the proper axial distance from the pitch cone apex for proper meshing. To provide smoother
operation, Zerol8 bevel gears are sometimes used. As shown in Figure 15.3(b), Zerol bevel

gears are similar to straight bevel gears except that they have teeth curved in their length-
wise direction, which provides a slight engagement overlap to produce smoother operation
than straight bevel gears.
Spiral bevel gears, illustrated in Figure 15.3(c), are related to straight bevel gears in
much the same way that helical gears are related to straight-tooth spur gears, thus provid-
ing the advantages of gradual engagement along the tooth face. Because of the conical
geometry (as opposed to cylindrical), spiral bevel teeth do not have a true helical spiral,
but have an appearance similar to that of a helical gear. Tooth proﬁles somewhat resemble
an involute curve.
Face gears, which are functionally similar to bevel gears, have gear teeth cut on an an-
nular ring at the outer edge of a gear “face,” as sketched in Figure 15.3(d). A face gear is
matched with a spur pinion mounted on an intersecting shaft (usually at 90) as shown.
Face gear teeth change shape from one end to the other. Pinion teeth need no special at-
tributes to mesh with a face gear, and may be made either spur or helical. Pinion support
bearings carry primarily radial loads but face gear support bearings carry both radial and
thrust loads.
Finally, types of gears for use when shaft axes are neither parallel nor intersecting are
sketched in Figure 15.4.
Hypoid gears resemble spiral bevel gears, but there is a small to moderate offset
between their axes, as shown in Figure 15.4(a). The offset is measured along the perpendi-
cular common to the two axes. If hypoid gears had zero offset, they would be spiral
bevel gears.
Spiroid gears involve a face gear with teeth spirally curved along their length, mating
with a tapered pinion, as sketched in Figure 15.4(b). Offsets for spiroid gearing are larger
than for hypoid gearsets, and the pinion somewhat resembles a worm (see below). High re-
duction ratios are achievable in a compact space envelope and load-carrying capacity is
good.
598
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
(a) Straight bevel gears.
(c) Spiral bevel gears.
(d) Spur face gears
(can also be helical).
(b) Zero bevel gears.
Figure 15.3
Types of gears for use in applications
with intersecting shafts. (Zerol is a reg-
istered trademark of the Gleason
Works, Rochester, NY.)

Crossed-helical gears9 are illustrated in Figure 15.4(c). Both members of a crossed-
helical gearset have a cylindrical shape, as opposed to worm gearsets, in which one or both
members are throated [see Figure 15.4(d) and (e)]. The nonintersecting axes of crossed-
helical gears often are 90 to each other, but almost any angle can be accommodated. As
the gears rotate, their meshing teeth ﬁrst meet only in a point contact which travels across
the tooth face along a sloping line; hence basic load-carrying capacity is small. After a
wear-in period, the point contact evolves to a sloping line of contact, somewhat increasing
load-carrying capacity. Usually a crossed-helical gear of one hand is meshed with a gear
of the same hand, as illustrated in Figure 15.4(c), but it is possible to mesh gears of oppo-
site hand if the shaft angle is properly set.
Worm gearsets, as illustrated in Figures 15.4(d) and (e), are characterized by a worm
with “teeth” similar to the threads of a power screw (see Chapter 12), in mesh with a worm
gear (worm wheel) having teeth similar to those of a helical gear, except that they are
contoured to envelop the worm. Wormsets provide the easiest way to obtain large reduction
ratios, but friction losses can be high because the worm threads slide sideways along the
Types of Gears; Factors in Selection 599
1
2
(a) Hypoid gears.
(e) Double-enveloping worm gear.
(b) Spiroid gears.
(c) Crossed helical gears (nonenveloping worm gears).
2
2
1
1
Offset
Center
distance
R.H.
R.H.
2
1
(d) Single-enveloping (cylindrical) worm gear.
2
1
Figure 15.4
Types of gears for use in appli-
cations where shafts are neither
parallel nor intersecting.
9Sometimes called nonenveloping worm gears.

gear teeth. When only the worm wheel teeth are contoured (throated) to envelop a cylindrical
worm, the wormset is called single enveloping or cylindrical, as sketched in Figure 15.4(d).
When the worm proﬁle is also throated to envelop the gear, as shown in Figure 15.4(e),
the wormset is called double enveloping. Double-enveloping wormsets have more mesh
contact area than single-enveloping wormsets and, hence greater load-carrying capacity;
however, precision alignment is more critical. Worms may have single threads or multiple
threads.10 Worm shaft support bearings are typically subjected to radial loads and high
thrust loads. Worm wheel bearings must support both radial and thrust loads.
15.3 Gear Trains; Reduction Ratios
A pair of meshing gears, such as the ones shown in Figure 15.1(c), is usually called a
gearset, the simplest form of a gear train. A gear train is a sequence of several meshing
gears arranged in such a way that desired output speed, torque, and/or direction of rotation
are achieved using speciﬁed input conditions.
Various arrangements and sequences of gears may be used to achieve design goals. It
is important to be able to readily determine the magnitude and direction of angular veloc-
ity of the output gear, given the input pinion velocity, for any gear train arrangement. Gear
trains may be classiﬁed as simple, compound, or epicyclic.
A simple gear train such as the one shown in Figure 15.5(a) is an arrangement in
which each shaft carries only one simple gear. Gear 2 in the simple gear train shown in
Figure 15.5(a) serves the function of changing the direction of rotation of output gear 3 (as
compared with a direct mesh of 1 and 3) but does not change the magnitude of angular ve-
locity ratio between output gear 3 and input pinion 1. For this reason, gear 2 is called an
idler. There is usually little justiﬁcation for more than three gears in a simple train because
no matter what their size, angular velocity ratios of additional idlers merely cancel each
other and no contribution is made to the overall train reduction ratio.
When two concentric gears are rigidly mounted on a common shaft so that they are con-
strained to rotate together in the same direction with the same velocity, the resulting element
is called a compound gear. Any gear train embodying at least one compound gear is called
a compound gear train. Figures 15.5(b) and (c) illustrate compound gear trains in which the
compound gear is 2–3. The compound gear train in Figure 15.5(b) is further subcategorized as
nonreverted because the input shaft and output shaft are not colinear. Figure 15.5(c) illustrates
a reverted compound gear train since the input shaft and output shaft are colinear. Reverted
gear trains may be desirable or necessary in some applications (e.g., automotive transmissions)
but are a little more complicated to design because of equal-center-distance constraints.
Borrowing the results from (15-15), it can be shown11 that the train reduction ratio for
a gear train in which all gears have space-ﬁxed axes of rotation may be written as
(15-2)
where the algebraic sign is determined by inspection, in accordance with the convention
that external mesh ratios are () and internal mesh ratios are (). Appropriately applied
and interpreted, (15-2) is equally valid for simple, compound, internal, external, spur, hel-
ical, bevel, or worm gear trains.
The train ratio will usually be less than 1 because most gear trains are speed reducers.
In some cases, however, when the gear train is a speed increaser, the train ratio will be
greater than 1.
vout
vin
= nout
nin
; `
product of number of teeth on driver gears
product of number of teeth on driven gears `
600
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
10See Figure 12.3.
11See, for example, ref. 3 or 4.

For the simple and compound gear trains just discussed, the axes of all gears are ﬁxed
with respect to the frame, so these trains have one degree of freedom.12 In contrast, an
epicyclic (planetary) gear train is arranged so that one or more gears13 are carried on a ro-
tating arm (carrier), which itself rotates about a ﬁxed center, as illustrated in Figures 15.5(d)
and (e). Thus the planet gear not only rotates about its own center, but at the same time its
Gear Trains; Reduction Ratios 601
Moving
axis of gear 2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
Input
Output
Idler
Input
Output
(a) Simple gear train.
(c) Compound gear train; reverted.
(e) Epicyclic gear train; internal.
(d) Epicyclic gear train; external.
(f) Epicyclic gear train with ring gear.
(b) Compound gear train; nonreverted.
Compound gear
1
1
2
3
4
4
4
2–3
2–3
4
Compound
gear
Input
Output
Planet gear
External gear (sun gear);
fixed for case shown
Rotating
carrier arm
Rotating
arm
Fixed internal
gear
Planet
gear
Moving axis
of gear 2
1
2
3
1
2
4
3
Planet
Ring
gear
(1 and 4 are
typical inputs)
4
1
Sun
gear
Carrier
arm
(typical
output)
3
Figure 15.5
Various types of gear
trains.
12Degrees of freedom (dof) are the number of independent parameters required to fully specify the position of
every link (gear) relative to the ﬁxed frame.
13Most actual epicyclic gear trains incorporate two or more planets, equally spaced around the sun gear, to bal-
ance forces acting on the sun gear, ring gear, and carrier arm. However, for the purpose of analyzing planetary
train speed ratios, it is more convenient to use a single-planet format, and the result is the same.

center rotates about another center (that of the arm). Such a planetary gear train has two de-
grees of freedom, making determination of the train reduction ratio more complicated. In
spite of the complication, planetary gear trains often provide an attractive design option be-
cause higher train reduction ratios may be obtained in smaller space envelopes, high efﬁ-
ciency is possible, shifting to obtain larger or smaller speed reduction ratios is feasible by
programmed control of two inputs,14 and a reverted train is characteristic.
If inputs are imposed upon the sun gear and carrier arm of the simple planetary
arrangement of Figure 15.5(d), the only gear remaining to act as output is the planet gear,
an impractical arrangement since its axis orbits the sun gear. For this reason, a ring gear
is usually added to the train, in mesh with the planet and centered on the same axis as the
sun gear and carrier arm, as shown in Figure 15.5(f). By selectively providing inputs (in-
cluding ﬁxity) to various combinations of elements in the planetary train, many planetary
gear train variations are possible.15
In contrast to the relative ease with which power ﬂow and rotational direction may be
visualized for gear trains with all axes space ﬁxed, it is very difﬁcult to correctly visualize
the behavior of a planetary gear train. Several methods have been developed for determin-
ing planetary gear ratios.16 One method is to utilize the basic kinematic condition
(15-3)
angular velocity of gear relative to ﬁxed frame
angular velocity of arm relative to ﬁxed frame
angular velocity of gear relative to arm
Combining (15-3) with (15-2), it may be shown that
(15-4)
angular velocity of ﬁrst gear in the train (arbitrarily designated at either
end)
angular velocity of last gear in the train (at the other end)
angular velocity of arm
and the algebraic sign is determined in accordance with the convention that external mesh
ratios are () and the internal mesh ratios are (). Additional conditions on use of the
equation are that the gears designated as ﬁrst and last in the train must rotate about axes
ﬁxed to the frame (not orbiting) and there must be an uninterrupted sequence of meshes
connecting them. Under these conditions, speciﬁcation of any two angular velocities (known
or specified inputs) allows determination of the third. One common arrangement, for
example, is to ﬁx the sun gear, drive the carrier arm by a chosen power source, and take
the output from the ring gear, but other arrangements are also used.
Another approach to determine planetary gear ratios is to use a table which represents
(15-3) for each gear of the gear train. The procedure is as follows:
1.
Assume that all of the gears are locked to the carrier, and rotate the assembly a given
number of revolutions.
varm =
vL =
where  vF =
vL - varm
vF - varm
= ; `
product of number of teeth on driver gears
product of number of teeth on driven gears `
vgear>arm =
varm =
where  vgear =
vgear = varm + vgear>arm
602
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
14Because of two degrees of freedom.
15See, for example, ref. 3, pp. 464–465.
16See, for example, refs. 3, 4, and 5.

2.
Fix the carrier, and rotate the second input member, which has a known absolute
motion, the required number of revolutions so that the sum of the second input member
in steps 1 and 2 equals its known absolute motion.
3.
Add the motions of steps 1 and 2 for each member of the train.
Example 15.1 Compound and Planetary Gear Trains
Two preliminary gear train proposals have been submitted for evaluation. One is the four-
gear train shown in Figure E15.1A and the other is the planetary gear train shown in Figure
E15.1B. The primary design criteria are to achieve a train reduction ratio of 0.30, within 
3 percent, and have the rotational direction of the output the same as the direction of the
input.
a.
Does the four-gear train of Figure E15.1A meet the stated criteria?
b.
Can the criteria be met using the planetary train of Figure E15.1B by ﬁxing one ele-
ment, driving a second element as the input, and using a third element as the output?
If so, clearly specify an arrangement that satisﬁes the criteria.
Solution
a.
Examining ﬁrst the four-gear train, with 
as input and 
as output, (15-2) may be
applied to give
The direction of the output is the same as the direction of the input (), so one
criterion is satisﬁed. The percent deviation of the train reduction ratio from the spec-
iﬁed value of 0.30 is
Thus the proposed four-gear train meets the design criteria.
e = a0.30 - 0.298
0.30
b100 = 0.67%
vout
vin
= a -N1
N2
b a -N3
N4
b = + `
13021302
15521552 ` = +0.298
v4
v1
Gear Trains; Reduction Ratios 603
1
1
2
3
4
4
2–3
Compound
gear
Input
Output
N1 = 30 teeth
N2 = 55 teeth
N3 = 30 teeth
N4 = 55 teeth
1
2
4
3
Planet
Ring gear
4
1
3
Sun gear
Carrier arm
N2 = 20 teeth
N1 = 30 teeth
N3 = 70 teeth
Figure E15.1A
Proposed four-gear train.
Figure E15.1B
Proposed planetary train. It is worth noting that
the number of teeth cannot be arbitrarily speci-
ﬁed for all of the gears in this type of gear train
because of the physical space constraint that the
sun-and-planet gears must ﬁt properly inside
the ring gear.

b.
To examine the proposed planetary train, several cases must be investigated. Each el-
ement of the planetary train, except for the planet gear, may be ﬁxed in turn, and 
(15-4) used to evaluate the reduction ratio for each case. (Fixing the planet gear would
cause the whole device to rotate as a rigid body with reduction ratio of unity.)
If carrier arm 4 were ﬁxed, the proposed planetary train would degenerate to a
simple three-gear train with the planet gear acting as an idler that meshes externally
with the sun gear () and internally with the ring gear () to give a () train reduc-
tion ratio. The ring gear output would therefore rotate in the opposite direction to the
sun gear input, violating the stated criterion of same-direction rotation. (The reduc-
tion ratio would also be wrong.)
If sun gear 1 were ﬁxed
, ring gear 3 used as input 
, and car-
rier arm 4 used as output 
, and if ﬁrst and last gears in the train are taken
as sun gear 1 and ring gear 3, respectively, (15-4) becomes
whence
Thus the same-direction criterion is satisﬁed but the 0.70 ratio deviates far too much
from the speciﬁed values of 0.30.
If ring gear 3 were ﬁxed
, sun gear 1 used as input 
, and car-
rier arm 4 used as output 
, and if ﬁrst and last gears in the train are again
taken as sun gear 1 and ring gear 3, (15-4) becomes
whence
This satisﬁes both the same-direction criterion and the speciﬁed reduction ratio value
of 0.30. Thus the planetary train can meet the design criterion if
1.
Ring gear 3 is ﬁxed to the frame.
2.
Sun gear 1 is attached to the input shaft.
3.
Carrier arm 4 is attached to the output shaft.
The above example can also be analyzed using the tabular method. For this analysis,
a positive turn is deﬁned to be clockwise. With the sun gear 1 ﬁxed
Element
Sun (1)
Planet (2)
Ring (3)
Carrier Arm
Step 1: Train is locked, entire 
assembly is given one positive 
1
1
1
1
turn (CW)
Step 2: Rotations with carrier arm 
1
0
ﬁxed
Step 3: Add motions from steps 1 
0
1
and 2 to establish the total
1 + N1/N3
1 + N1/N2
(N1/N2)(N2/N3)
(N1/N2)
v4
v1
= vout
vin
= +0.30
v3 - v4
v1 - v4
= 0 - v4
v1 - v4
= -0.43
1v4 = vout2
1v1 = vin2
1v3 = 02
v4
v3
= vout
vin
= +0.70
v3 - v4
v1 - v4
= v3 - v4
0 - v4
= a -30
20 b a +20
70 b = -0.43
1v4 = vout2
1v3 = vin2
1v1 = 02
604
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.1
Continues

and
or
With ring gear 3 ﬁxed, the tabular method gives
Element
Sun (1)
Planet (2)
Ring (3)
Carrier Arm
Step 1: Train is locked, 
1
1
1
1
entire assembly is given 
one positive turn (CW)
Step 2: Rotations with 
1
0
carrier arm ﬁxed
Step 3: Add motions from 
0
1
steps 1 and 2 to establish 
the total
and
or
15.4 Potential Failure Modes
Depending upon speciﬁc loads, speeds, type of gearing selected, gear materials and pro-
cessing, manufacturing accuracy, mounting details, bearing and shaft characteristics, lu-
brication, and environmental factors, gears may be vulnerable to failure by any of several
potential failure modes.17 The basic design requirements imposed by the fundamental law
of gearing, combined with the complexities of variable loading, combined rolling and slid-
ing contact between curved tooth surfaces, and system interactions with other machine
components, make the assessment of potential failure modes for gears more complicated
than for any other machine element so far discussed.
Most gears rotate in one direction, subjecting each tooth on the gear to a one-way bend-
ing load each time it passes through the mesh (except for idler and planetary gears). This
gives rise to potential fatigue failure (typically high cycle fatigue but may be low cycle fa-
tigue in certain circumstances), due to nonzero mean (released) cyclic bending stresses at
the root ﬁllet of each tooth. The root ﬁllet is also a site of stress concentration. The result
of a root-ﬁllet fatigue failure is ultimately to dislodge the tooth from the gear wheel.
v4
v1
=
1
3.33333 = +0.30
v1 = 1 + N3
N1
= 1 + 70
30 = 3.3333
v4 = 1
1 - N3/N2
1 + N3/N1
-(N3/N2)
-(N3/N2)(-N2/N1)
v4
v3
=
1
1.428 = +0.70
v3 = 1 + N1
N3
= 1 + 30
70 = 1.428
v4 = 1
Potential Failure Modes 605
17See 2.3 for list of potential failure modes.

Likewise, cyclic Hertz contact stresses are generated between the curved tooth sur-
faces as they repeatedly pass through the mesh, making surface fatigue a signiﬁcant po-
tential failure mode. The cyclic subsurface Hertzian shear stresses produced by the curved
surfaces in repetitive contact may initiate and propagate minute cracks that ultimately dis-
lodge particles and generate surface pits. The smaller pinion usually pits ﬁrst because each
tooth passes through the mesh more often than teeth on the larger gear. The pitting fre-
quently is concentrated in a band along the pitch line (sometimes called pitch-line pitting)
because the Hertz contact stresses tend to be higher in that region. Occasionally, tooth frac-
ture may initiate from a surface pit.
Because of the kinematics of the contact between meshing gear teeth as they pass
through the contact zone, a component of sliding motion exists in virtually all cases.
Depending upon the tooth proﬁle and type of gearing, the sliding component ranges from
small (e.g., spur gear meshes) to large (e.g., worm gear meshes). As a result, both adhe-
sive wear and abrasive wear must be considered as potential failure modes. In addition,
especially if lubrication is not used or is not adequate, adhesive wear behavior may de-
generate to galling. If any of these wear phenomena signiﬁcantly change the tooth proﬁle,
failure may occur because the angular velocity of the output gear becomes erratic (due to
unacceptable clearances between mating teeth), resulting in unaccounted-for impact
forces, or because intolerable levels of vibration or noise are generated.
Force-induced elastic deformation should also be considered as a potential failure
mode because gear trains are nearly always an integral part of a dynamic system of springs
and masses that may be excited to vibrate at resonant frequencies (see 8.2). Experience has
shown that spring rates associated with the elastic deformation of typical gear-tooth con-
tact geometry are low (soft) compared to many other machine elements, and therefore gear
mesh stiffness in some cases may dominate, or at least signiﬁcantly contribute to, the vi-
brational behavior of a machine (see 4.7). It is an important design responsibility to assure
that installed gear mesh stiffness is great enough and constant enough to keep the funda-
mental natural frequency of the system well above the forcing frequency18 so that exces-
sive deﬂection (force-induced elastic deformation failure) does not result.
Vibrational behavior may also be the source of noise generation in the mesh, or the
source of transmitted vibrations that excite other components, especially housing panels,
that may behave as “speakers.” By deﬁnition, if noise levels become unacceptable, failure
has occurred (by force-induced elastic deformation). Several excitation sources for noise
generation in gearing systems have been identiﬁed,19 including cyclic changes in stiffness
as teeth rotate through the mesh, and transmission error.20 In high-precision gearing, un-
loaded proﬁles are sometimes modiﬁed during manufacture to provide more nearly perfect
output under operating loads and speeds, thus reducing transmission error and consequen-
tial noise generation.
Other less frequently observed failure modes in gearing include root-ﬁllet yielding,
brittle fracture or ductile rupture by an unanticipated external “overload,” brinnelling of
gear teeth due to impact overloading at mesh contact sites, and “subcase fatigue” cracking
and spallation in case-hardened gears. The subcase fatigue nuclei are initiated in the
strength-gradient transition zone between low-strength core material and high-strength
case material. Finally, in occasional circumstances, a gear set may be “parked” in ﬁxed po-
sition over a period of time. If operational vibrations are transmitted to the parked tooth
contact sites, the small-amplitude cyclic relative motions may lead to failure by fretting
wear or fretting fatigue.
606
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
18See 8.2 for deﬁnitions.
19See ref. 7.
20Transmission error is deﬁned as the deviation of the actual position of the output gear from the position it
would occupy if the gear drive were perfect.

The complexity of potential failure in gearing systems has led to an organized effort
by the American Gear Manufacturers Association (AGMA) to categorize the various kinds
of observed gear failures and establish a standardized nomenclature to describe them. Most
of the failure modes just described are included in the AGMA failure “classes” speciﬁcally
deﬁned21 by the terms wear, scufﬁng, plastic deformation, contact fatigue, cracking, frac-
ture, and bending fatigue. Figure 15.6 illustrates, qualitatively, the operating regions in
which each of the more likely failure modes may be expected to occur.22
15.5 Gear Materials
Based on the material selection guidelines of Chapter 3, and the failure mode discussion
of 15.4, candidate materials for gears should have good strength (especially fatigue
strength), high stiffness, good wear resistance, high resistance to surface fatigue, high re-
silience, good damping ability, good machinability, and, in some applications, good cor-
rosion resistance, as well as reasonable cost. Using the evaluation indexes of Table 3.2,
materials meeting these criteria include steels and steel alloys, gray and alloy cast irons,
brass, bronze, and certain polymeric materials, although other materials may be used for
special applications. Steel gears are widely used because of high strength, good resilience,
and moderate cost, but because of wear-resistance requirements steel gears are usually heat
treated to produce a hard surface on the teeth. Thus a through-hardenable alloy such as
4140 or 4340 may be chosen, or a carburizing steel such as 4620 or 4320 may be used with
an appropriate carburizing and case-hardening procedure, followed by heat treatment to
produce a hard wear-resistant tooth surface. The nitriding process is also utilized to de-
velop tooth surfaces with high hardness, using alloys such as 4140 or 4340 for the core ma-
terial. Local surface heating by an induction coil or oxyacetylene ﬂame, followed by rapid
quenching (induction hardening or ﬂame hardening), are also used with alloys such as
4140 or 4340 to produce hard tooth surfaces.
Cast-iron gears are inexpensive and have high hysteretic damping capacity, which
tends to produce relatively quiet operation. ASTM Grade 20 is widely used, but higher-
strength grades are used in more demanding applications. Steel pinions are often paired
with cast-iron gears to obtain reasonable strength with quiet operation.
When nonferrous alloys are used to avoid corrosion problems, or in applications such
as worm gear meshes where high sliding velocities must be accommodated and wear-in
Gear Materials 607
Load
Speed
No failure
Adhesive
and
abrasive
wear
Bending fatigue and fracture
Scuffing
and galling
Contact fatigue
and pitting
Figure 15.6
Failure mode likelihood as a function of
load and speed.
21See ref. 8, Table 1.
22See ref. 9.

enhanced mesh conformability is advantageous, bronze alloys are often chosen. In the
wormset application, a bronze gear is usually paired with a hardened steel worm.
Polymeric gears may be used in lightly loaded applications to provide quiet operation,
effective load sharing due to low stiffness, and reasonable cost. Polymers may themselves
be lubricative, or may be ﬁlled with solid lubricants in some cases to allow the mesh to run
“dry.” Extruded nylon gears and molded cloth-reinforced phenolic gears have been meshed
with cast-iron or steel pinions in many cases.
Although the methods of 5.6 for deﬁning a fatigue strength value appropriate to the
application are as valid for gears as for any other machine element, the extensive special-
ized gearing database, developed within the gearing industry over many decades, makes it
prudent to ﬁrst search this database. Data for gear strength as a function of material, heat
treatment, governing failure mode, reliability requirements, surface conditions, environ-
ment, speed, or other factors may be matched to the proposed gearing application. Any
factors not included in the database strength values must, as usual, be accounted for by the
designer. Examples of available specialized gear strength data are shown in Tables 15.10
and 15.12, based on gear tooth failure by bending fatigue, and in Table 15.15 and 15.16
for surface fatigue failure. Correction factors for other design lives, other temperatures,
other hardnesses, or other reliability requirements23 need to be applied to the data of Tables
15.10, 15.12, 15.15, and 15.16.
15.6 Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry
If the fundamental law of gearing is to be satisﬁed (see 15.1), the gear-tooth proﬁle geom-
etry must produce an exactly constant angular velocity ratio between the driver and driven
gears at every position as successive teeth rotate through the mesh. If a meshing pair of
gear teeth have proﬁles that satisfy this requirement, they are said to be conjugate proﬁles.
Theoretically, it is possible to arbitrarily select any proﬁle for one tooth, then ﬁnd a pro-
ﬁle for the meshing tooth that will produce conjugate action. As a practical matter, how-
ever, because of relative ease of manufacture and insensitivity of angular velocity ratio to
minor variations in center distance, the only proﬁle of importance in current gearing prac-
tice is the involute of a circle. (Figure 15.7).24
The kinematic requirement for conjugate action is that as the gears rotate, the common
normal to the curved tooth surfaces at their point of contact must, for all gear positions,
608
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
rb
Base
circle
String
Involute
curve
Stylus
A4
A3
A2
B2
B3
B4
A1B1
Figure 15.7
Generation of involute curve. The stylus at-
tached to the string traces the curve A1 – A2 –
A3 – A4 as a taut string unwraps.
Corresponding tangents to the base circle
(A1B1, A2B2, A3B3, A4B4) represent instanta-
neous radii of curvature of the involute.
(Adapted from ref. 3, reprinted by permission
of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle
River, N. J.)
23See ref.10.
24The involute of a circle may be generated by unwrapping from a cylinder a taut string with
an end stylus (see Figure 15.7). The planar trace of the end stylus as the string unwraps is an involute curve
and the circular section of the cylinder is called the base circle.

intersect the line of centers at a ﬁxed point P called the pitch point.25 This kinematic re-
quirement is satisﬁed by meshing gear teeth that have conjugate involute proﬁles.
Involute Proﬁles and Conjugate Action
When any curved surface pushes on another, as shown in Figure 15.8, at contact point C
the two surfaces are tangent and the force transmitted from one to the other acts along the
common normal, ab. Line ab is called, therefore, the line of action or the pressure line. As
illustrated in Figure 15.8, the line of action ab intersects the line of centers, 
, at the
pitch point P. The angle 
between the pressure line and a reference line through the pitch
point, perpendicular to the line of centers, and tangent to the base circle, is called the pres-
sure angle. At the instantaneous position shown in Figure 15.8, circles may be drawn
through pitch point P about each center 
and 
. These circles are called pitch circles
(see also Figure 15.1 and related discussion) and their radii, 
and 
, are called pitch
radii. The angular velocity ratio of driven member B to driving member A is inversely pro-
portional to their pitch radius ratio [see also (15-1)], giving
(15-5)
Reiterating, a constant angular velocity ratio requires a constant pitch radius ratio.
Therefore, lines of action for every instantaneous contact point between mating teeth as
they rotate through the mesh must pass through the same (ﬁxed) pitch point P.
Using the involute properties illustrated in Figure 15.7, a common involute generator
string may be conceptually wrapped tightly in opposite directions about two adjacent base
circles of different radii, centered at 
and 
, as illustrated in Figure 15.9. If the base cir-
cles are rotated in opposite directions, keeping the string tight, a stylus point g on the com-
mon string will simultaneously trace an involute proﬁle cd attached to member 1 and ef
attached to member 2. Point g represents the point of contact. Line ab, the generating line,
is always normal to both involutes (see Figure 15.7), and therefore represents the line of
action. Thus the contact point moves along the line of action, but the line of action does
not change position because it is always tangent to both base circles. Accordingly, the two
conjugate involute proﬁles satisfy the fundamental law of gearing.
Figure 15.10 provides a basis for understanding the relationship between pitch circles
and base circles. From (15-5) it is clear that the ratio of radii of the pitch circles is determined
by the required angular velocity ratio for the design application. (Actual magnitudes for
O2
O1
vB
vA
= -rA
rB
rB
rA
O2
O1
w
O1O2
Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry 609
25See, for example, ref. 3 or 4.
rA
rB
Pitch circle A
Pitch circle B
Reference
line
Driven
Driver
a
b
P
C
B
A
A
B

O1
O2
Common
tangent
Figure 15.8
Transmission of force and motion from one
rotating member to another across contacting
curved surfaces.

the radii depend upon other design factors, as discussed later.) If, as shown in Figure 15.10,
the pitch circles are laid out to scale on centers 
and 
using the required radius ratio,
and in contact at the pitch point P, and the line of action ab is constructed through the pitch
point using the selected pressure angle , the circles centered on 
and 
and tangent to
the line of action at a and b are the base circles. Using these base circles, involute proﬁles
may be generated to form the basic tooth proﬁle for both sides of the involute gear teeth.
Gearing Nomenclature; Tooth Shape and Size
The distance from any selected reference point on one tooth to a corresponding point on
the next adjacent tooth, measured along the pitch circle, is called the circular pitch
[see
Figure 15.1(d)]. The circular pitch may be calculated as an arc length equal to the circum-
ference of the pitch circle divided by the number of teeth N, or
(15-6)
Similarly, the base pitch, 
, is deﬁned as an arc length equal to the circumference of
the base circle divided by the number of teeth N. Since 
(see Figure 15.10), it
follows from (15-6) that
(15-7)
pb = 2prb
N
= pccosw
rb = rcosw
pb
pc = pd
N = 2pr
N
pc
O2
O1
w
O2
O1
610
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Pitch circle 1
Pitch circle 2
Base circle 1
Base circle 2

O1
O2
r2
rb2
r1
rb1
Center
distance
C
Common
tangent
a
P
b
2
1
Figure 15.10
Relationship between pitch circles and base 
circles.
Center distance
C
Base circle 1
Base circle 2

O1
O2
Common
generator
string
P
g
a
c
f
d
e
b
Figure 15.9
Simultaneous generation of involutes on two adja-
cent base circles using a common counterwrapped
generator string.

The circular tooth thickness and tooth space are also measured along the pitch circle,
each being nominally equal to 
. As a practical matter, the tooth space is usually made
slightly larger than the tooth thickness, to provide a small amount of backlash26 for smooth
nonbinding operation, as discussed later.
To deﬁne the remaining boundaries of the gear teeth, addendum circles and dedendum
circles may be constructed centered on 
and 
, as illustrated in Figure 15.11. The ad-
dendum circle is established by adding the addendum a (tooth height outside the pitch cir-
cle) to the pitch radius r, and the dedendum circle by subtracting the dedendum (tooth
dimension inside the pitch circle) from the pitch radius. It is important to recognize that
the involute tooth proﬁle can extend inside the pitch circle only as far as the base circle; the
portion of the tooth inside the base circle cannot participate in conjugate action and there-
fore must be shaped to provide tip clearance for the teeth of the mating gear. The true shape
of this noninvolute portion of the tooth proﬁle, often visualized as a straight radial line, is
actually determined by the gear manufacturing process (see 15.7). From Figure 15.10 it
may be deduced that larger pressure angles result in smaller base circles, consequently ex-
tending conjugate action deeper into the dedundum ﬂank of the gear tooth. The dedendum
is typically made slightly larger than the addendum to provide positive clearance between
the tooth tip of one gear and the bottom land of the tooth space of the mating gear. A root
ﬁllet is used to blend the tooth ﬂank into the bottom land of the adjacent tooth space.
Although the circular pitch is a measure of tooth size, more common indices of tooth size
are diametrical pitch, Pd (used only with U.S. speciﬁcation gears), or module, m (used only
with SI or metric speciﬁcations). The diametrical pitch, deﬁned as the number of teeth
divided by pitch diameter in inches, is given by
(15-8)
and module, deﬁned as pitch diameter in millimeters divided by number of teeth, is
(15-9)
Equations for center distance C may be written using (15-8) and (15-9), respectively, as
(15-10)
C = r1 + r2 = N1
2Pd
+ N2
2Pd
=
1N1 + N22
2Pd
m = d
N
Pd = N
d
O2
O1
pc>2
Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry 611
26Nominally, backlash is the difference between tooth space and tooth thickness.
Dedendum circle 2
O1
O2

r2
a2
a1
r1
a
b
P
2
1
Addendum circles
Involute 1
Base circle 1
Pitch circle 1
Dedendum circle 1
Pitch circle 2
Base circle 2
Involute 2
Figure 15.11
Deﬁning boundaries for gear teeth.

and
(15-11)
Also, from (15-8) and (15-9) other useful relationships may be developed, including
(15-12)
(15-13)
and
(15-14)
Gear teeth on mating gears can mesh properly only if their diametral pitches or their
modules are the same. Hence (15-1) may be combined with either (15-8) or (15-9) to give
(15-15)
where the algebraic sign is determined by inspection, and in accordance with the conven-
tion that external mesh ratios are () and internal mesh ratios are ().
Although there are theoretically no restrictions on tooth size, as a practical matter
sizes are limited by available gear-cutting facilities. For standard involute spur gears to be
fully interchangeable, they must have the same diametral pitch (or module), the same pres-
sure angle, and the same addendum,27 and the circular tooth thickness must be nominally
equal to one-half the circular pitch.
The magnitude of the pressure angle signiﬁcantly affects the shape of a gear tooth, as
illustrated in Figure 15.12. As may be noted, the 25 teeth have thicker bases and larger
radii of curvature at the pitch line, giving them higher bending-load-carrying capacity as
compared to 20 teeth. The 25 teeth tend to generate more operating noise, however, due
to their lower contact ratio (see below). As discussed next, standard tooth systems typically
incorporate pressure angles of 20 or 25, but if conditions warrant, a compromise pressure
angle of 22
is sometimes used.
Gear-Tooth Systems28
Standardized tooth systems have been widely adopted to facilitate interchangeability and
availability by specifying selected pressure angles, then deﬁning addendum, dedendum,
working depth, whole depth, minimum tip clearance, and circular tooth thickness as func-
tions of diametral pitch (or module). The most commonly used pressure angle is 20, both
for U.S. and SI gears, but a 25 pressure angle is also common in U.S. coarse-pitch gears
. Other pressure angles may be used for special applications. Tooth proportions
for AGMA standard full-depth spur gear teeth are speciﬁed in Table 15.1, and the approx-
imate actual sizes of standard involute spur gear teeth are shown in Figure 15.13 for a
range of commonly used diametral pitches. Table 15.2 gives the range of tooth sizes (in
terms of diametral pitch or module) generally available from gear manufacturers.
1Pd 6 202
12°
v2
v1
= n2
n1
= ; r1
r2
= ; d1
d2
= ; N1
N2
m = 25.4
Pd
pc
m = p    1 pc = mm;  m = mm>tooth2
pcPd = p    1 pc = inches;  Pd = teeth>inch2
C = r1 + r2 = mN1
2
+ mN2
2
= m
2 1N1 + N22
612
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
27For nonstandard systems, such as the extended center distance system and long and short addendum system,
pinion and gear addenda may differ, as discussed in “Mesh Interactions” below.
28See, for example, refs. 11 and 12.

In addition to the standard tooth proportions deﬁned by Table 15.1, the minimum root-
ﬁllet radius 
typically is about 0.35/Pd or m/3, depending upon the manufacturing method
and edge radius of the cutter. The face width b speciﬁed for U.S. and SI gears, respectively,
is usually in the range
(15-16)
or
(15-17)
Wider face widths typically result in nonuniform contact pressure across the face width,
and narrower face widths may result in excessively high contact pressures.
9m … b … 14m
9
Pd
… b … 14
Pd
rf
Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry 613
12
20°
1.25
16
20°
1.00
16
20°
1.25
12
22.5°
1.20
16 teeth
22.5° Press-angle
1.00 Addendum
16
22.5°
1.20
12
25°
1.15
16
25°
1.00
16
25°
1.15
Pitch
circle
Base
circle
Figure 15.12
Comparison of gear tooth shape as a function
of pressure angle. (Extracted from ref. 1.
Source: Dudley Engineering Company, San
Diego, CA.)
TABLE 15.1 Standard Proportions for AGMA Full-Depth Gear Teeth1 (inch
system)
Coarse Pitch
Fine Pitch
Pressure angle
Addendum
Dedendum
Whole depth
Working depth
Clearance (basic)
Clearance (shaved or ground teeth)
Circular tooth thickness 
1See refs. 11 and 12.
1.571>Pd
1.571>Pd
10.350>Pd2 + 0.002 1min2
0.350>Pd
10.200>Pd2 + 0.002 1min2
0.250>Pd
2.000>Pd
2.000>Pd
12.200>Pd2 + 0.002 1min2
2.250>Pd
11.200>Pd2 + 0.002 1min2
1.250>Pd
1.000>Pd
1.000>Pd
20°
20°or 25°
1Pd Ú 202
1Pd 6 202

When a designer speciﬁes the use of gears manufactured to standard system speciﬁ-
cations, the gears are usually available as stock items. On the other hand, the availability
of modern computer-controlled gear manufacturing facilities allows the speciﬁcation of
special nonstandard optimized gears, if warranted by a speciﬁc application.
Mesh Interactions
From the time a pair of gear teeth enter contact, until they leave contact after rotating
through the mesh, force is transmitted from the driving gear to the driven gear along the
614
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
18
36
32
30
28
80
64
40
48
16
14
20
22
24
26
6
5
4
12
11
10
7
8
9
Figure 15.13
Approximate actual sizes of gear teeth
with various standard diametral
pitches. Generally, if Pd
20, the 
gears are called ﬁne-pitch gears; if Pd
20 the gears are called coarse-pitch
gears.
6
Ú
TABLE 15.2 Commonly Used Tooth Sizes
Diametral Pitch
Module
Coarse
Fine
Preferred
Second Choice
2
20
1
12
1.125
14
24
1.25
16
1.375
18
32
1.5
20
1.75
22
3
40
2
25
2.25
28
4
48
2.5
32
2.75
36
6
64
3
40
3.5
45
8
80
4
50
4.5
10
96
5
5.5
12
120
6
7
16
150
8
9
200
10
11
212
214

line of action. Figure 15.14 shows the angle of action
for both driver and driven gears,
corresponding to their rotation from ﬁrst contact at point a to ﬁnal separation at point b.
The distance Z along the line of action from a to b is called the length of action and
may be calculated from pinion-and-gear geometry as29
(15-18)
where symbols are deﬁned in Figure 15.15. The angle of action is usually subdivided into
an angle of approach 
and an angle of recess
as shown in Figure 15.14. Three impor-
tant design tasks associated with designing teeth that will rotate smoothly through the an-
gle of action are to avoid interference, to assure uninterrupted contact of at least one tooth
pair (preferable more) at all times, and to provide an optimum amount of backlash in the
mesh.
Since an involute exists only outside the base circle, if the dedendum circle is smaller
than the base circle, the tooth proﬁle between circles is not involute, tooth interaction is
not conjugate, and interference may occur between contacting teeth. Figure 15.15 illus-
trates conditions for which interference would occur. Points c and d, the points of tangency
between the line of action and the base circles, are called interference points. If an adden-
dum circle, which deﬁnes tooth tip path, intersects the line of action outside the interfer-
ence points, as illustrated, for example, by points a and b, interference will occur. One way
to relieve the interference would be to remove the crosshatched tooth tip, as shown in
Figure 15.15, creating a stub-tooth gear (seldom used in current practice). Undercutting
the tooth ﬂank of the mating gear also relieves interference but weakens the undercut teeth
in the region of the already-critical root ﬁllets.
Nonstandard spur gear systems are sometimes used to eliminate interference and un-
dercutting. Two nonstandard systems that have been successful, and allow the generation
of gear teeth using standard cutters, are the extended center distance system and the long
b
a
Z = 21rp + ap22 - 1rpcosw22 + 21rg + ag22 - 1rgcosw22 - Csinw
u
Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry 615
29For derivation see, for example, ref. 3.
P
O1
O2
a
b
Addendum circle
Addendum circle
Pitch circle
Pitch circle
Base circle
Base circle
Dedendum circle
Dedendum circle
Pinion
(driver)
Gear
(driven)
Line of
action
Pitch
angle, 2
Angle of
approach,
1
Angle of
recess, 2
Angle of
recess,
1
Angle of
action, 2
Angle of
approach,
2
Figure 15.14
Interaction between contacting
teeth as they rotate through the
mesh.

and short addendum system. In the ﬁrst system, when the pinion is being cut, the cutter is
withdrawn from the blank a chosen amount so the tip of the basic rack cutter30 passes
through the interference point on the pinion. This eliminates undercutting, increases tooth
thickness, and decreases tooth space. When the resulting nonstandard pinion is mated
with its gear, its operating center distance will have increased because of the smaller tooth
space, and the pressure angle will also be larger. The process may be applied to both pin-
ion and gear if conditions call for this.
In the long and short addendum system, the cutter is advanced into the gear blank by
the same amount it is withdrawn from the pinion blank during manufacture. This results
in a longer-than-standard addendum for the pinion and shorter-than-standard addendum
for the gear. The dedenda for both pinion and gear also change correspondingly to give a
standard working depth, standard center distance, and standard pressure angle in the oper-
ating gear set. Since the longer addenda of the driving pinion teeth also shift the arc of ac-
tion toward a longer arc of recess and a shorter arc of approach31, such gearing is
sometimes called recess action gearing.
In addition to eliminating interference and undercutting, recess action gearing tends
to beneﬁt from the fact that there is a lower coefﬁcient of friction during recess than dur-
ing approach. This results from the fact that the friction force component aids the driving
616
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
30See Figure 15.17.
31See Figure 15.14 for deﬁnition of arc of approach and arc of recess. Approach action takes place from the
time of ﬁrst contact of an involute driving pinion tooth ﬂank with a driven conjugate gear tooth proﬁle, contin-
uing as the point of contact moves deeper and deeper into the tooth space, until it reaches the pitch point. From
here it withdraws (recess action) until the pinion tooth tip disengages from the gear.
O1
O2


rg
ag
ap

rp
2
1
Base circle 1
Base circle 2
Pinion
(driver)
Gear
(driven)
(This portion of profile
is not an involute)
(This portion of profile
is not an involute)
Interference is
on flank of driver
during approach
Addendum
circle
Addendum
circle
Pitch
point P
c
b
a
d
Line of
action
C
Figure 15.15
Interference between mating
spur gear teeth.

force during recess32, and surface smoothing and polishing occur during recess as com-
pared with roughening and distress during approach.33 Because of these beneﬁcial factors,
recess action gearing tends to exhibit less wear and quieter operation. Typically, it is rec-
ommended that the pinion tooth addendum be increased no more than 25 percent over the
standard addendum. In some applications, however, longer addenda are used, sometimes
extending to the extreme case where a 200 percent addendum is used for the driving pin-
ion and 0 percent addendum for the gear to give full recess action and no approach 
action.34
Other steps useful for avoiding interference in standard gearing are to make sure that
the pressure angle is not too small, that the number of pinion teeth is not too small, and
that the number of gear teeth is not too large. Table 15.3 lists the minimum number of stan-
dard 20 full-depth involute pinion teeth that should be speciﬁed to avoid interference and
undercutting for various mating gear sizes.
To maintain smooth operation and constant angular velocity ratio, it is necessary that
at least one pair of teeth remain in contact at all times. This will be assured if the proﬁle
contact ratio 
, deﬁned as the angle of action
divided by the pitch angle
, or, alterna-
tively, the length of action Z divided by the base pitch
, exceeds a value of unity. Referring
to Figure 15.14, then, the proﬁle contact ratio 
may be written as (see Figures 15.14 and
15.15 for deﬁnitions)
(15-19)
or, using the alternative deﬁnition and (15-7), (15-12), and (15-18),
(15-20)
The proﬁle contact ratio may be thought of as the average number of teeth in contact,
and in practice typically ranges from about 1.4 to 1.8. As spur gears roll through the mesh,
however, there are either two pairs of teeth in contact, or one pair. A gear set with a proﬁle
contact ratio of 1.5 never really has 1.5 teeth in contact. It has one pair of teeth in contact
at all times and two pairs of teeth in contact 50 percent of the time. Larger proﬁle contact
mp = Z
pb
=
Pd c 21rp + ap22 - 1rpcosw22 + 21rg + ag22 - 1rgcosw22 - Csinw d
pcosw
mp = u
g = a + b
g
mp
pb
g
u
mp
Spur Gears; Tooth Proﬁle and Mesh Geometry 617
TABLE 15.3 Minimum Number of Pinion Teeth to
Avoid Interference Between 20 Full-
Depth Pinion and Mating Full-Depth
Gears of Various Sizes
Minimum Number
Number of
of Pinion Teeth
Gear Teeth
13
16
14
26
15
45
16
101
17
q
32It opposes the driving force during approach.
33See ref. 30, p. 2.
34More usual for worm gearing. See 15.20.

ratios usually imply some load sharing among the teeth as well as smoother operation.
Smaller teeth (larger ) and larger pressure angles tend to result in larger contact ratios.
An additional implication of load sharing when the proﬁle contact ratio is greater than
1.0 is that the total transmitted bending force is supported by a single tooth pair until a sec-
ond tooth pair comes into contact. The second tooth pair picks up its share of the load be-
fore the force vector reaches the tip of the single tooth pair. The bending moment on the
single tooth therefore builds with rotation until the second tooth comes into contact, then
drops off due to load sharing. This point is called the highest point of single tooth contact
(HPSTC) and is used as the moment arm in certain bending stress calculations.35
Backlash is the amount by which the sum of the circular thicknesses of two meshing
gear teeth is less than the circular pitch, or the gap distance between the noncontacting sur-
faces of adjacent teeth as they roll through the mesh. Backlash is often thought of as the
freedom of one gear to move while the mating gear is held ﬁxed. Some backlash is usually
desirable because it tends to eliminate binding and to promote proper lubrication, but if the
gear set is subjected to reversing torques, potential problems of impact, vibration, and
noise may be encountered. In such cases, it may be necessary to preload36 the mesh to
eliminate the backlash, or increase the mesh stiffness in the torsional mode. Since conju-
gate action for involute proﬁles is insensitive to small changes in center distance, the back-
lash in a gear set is sometimes adjusted to a desirable amount by adjusting the center
distance between the two gear shafts.
15.7 Gear Manufacturing; Methods, Quality, and Cost
To meet functional design requirements, maintain speciﬁed reliability, and achieve rea-
sonable cost, a designer should have a general understanding of the various gear manu-
facturing methods and their limitations. This brief discussion provides only a summary of
the methods used to make gear teeth; much more detailed accounts are available in the lit-
erature.37 Designers responsible for gearing used in high-performance applications are
well advised to consult with gearing specialists or precision-gearing manufacturers.
Methods commonly used for producing gears include casting, forming, sintering,
and machining processes (see Tables 7.1 and 7.2). Cast gears are limited to low-speed,
low-precision applications. Formed gears such as die cast (e.g., zinc, aluminum, or brass
alloys), extruded (e.g. aluminum or copper alloys), or injection-molded gears (e.g., ther-
moplastics such as nylon, acetal, or polycarbonate) may be used in applications where
moderate accuracy is acceptable and high production quantities are required. Sintered
powered-metal gears (e.g., iron, mild steel, or stainless steel) may be a good option if
small gears of higher precision are required in larger production quantities. For power
transmission, high-speed applications, high-load applications, and/or high-precision
applications, gears made by machining teeth on a cast, forged, or wrought metal blank
is by far the most usual manufacturing method.
Machining methods commonly used to cut gear teeth on a blank include hobbing,
shaping, milling, and broaching. When there is a need for high-precision gear teeth, ﬁn-
ishing operations, such as shaving, rolling, grinding, or honing, may follow the initial
gear-cutting process to obtain more accurate teeth and better surface ﬁnish.
Gear Cutting
Gear teeth may be cut with either form cutters or generating cutters. When form cutting,
the tooth space takes the exact shape of the cutter. When generating, a tool having a shape
Pd
618
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
35See discussion in 15.9.
36See 4.12.
37See, for example, ref. 1.

different from the tooth proﬁle is moved relative to the gear blank in such a way that the
proper tooth proﬁle is cut.
Hobbing is a generating method in which the cutting tool (called a hob), shaped like
a straight-sided worm thread with periodic relief grooves, and sharpened to provide cut-
ting edges, is fed across the gear blank as both the gear blank and the hob are synchro-
nously rotated. Spur, helical, and crossed-helical gears can be produced by feeding the hob
across the face width of the gear, as shown in Figure 15.16(a). Worm gears can be pro-
duced by feeding the hob tangentially across the gear blank or radially into the gear blank,
as illustrated in Figures 15.16(b) and (c). A high degree of proﬁle accuracy is attainable by
the hobbing process, excellent surface ﬁnish can be achieved, and the same cutter can be
used for gears of like pitch but different numbers of teeth. High production rates can be
achieved using the hobbing process.
Gear shaping, using either a rack cutter or a pinion cutter, is also a generating method.
Since a rack is a gear with inﬁnite pitch radius, involute rack teeth have a straight-sided pro-
ﬁle with side slopes equal to the pressure angle. To cut gear teeth with a rack cutter, the
pitch line of the rack is ﬁrst aligned to be tangent to the pitch circle of the gear to be cut,
as shown in Figure 15.17. Then the rack cutter, with sharpened tooth edges, is given a re-
ciprocating motion across the face of the gear blank. As the gear blank is slowly rotated,
the rack is synchronously fed parallel to its pitch line, as illustrated in Figure 15.17. Rack
cutters cut only a few teeth during one generating cycle, then must be  indexed back to pick
up the next tooth to be cut. Rack cutters may be used to cut either spur or helical gears.
The shaping operation using a pinion cutter is basically the same as that using a rack
cutter; the pinion-shaped cutting tool is reciprocated back-and-forth across the face of the
gear blank as both pinion cutter and gear blank are synchronously rotated. Spur, helical,
and face gears can be cut using a pinion cutter, as well as worms, and either internal or
Gear Manufacturing; Methods, Quality, and Cost 619
Hob feed
Hob feed
Hob
feed
Hob
taper
Depth
of finished
teeth
Depth
of finished
teeth
(a) Cross feed.
(b) Tangential feed.
(c) Radial feed.
Figure 15.16
Formation of gear teeth by the hob-
bing method. (Extracted from ref. 1.
Source: Dudley Engineering
Company, San Diego, CA.)
Gear blank
Pitch circle (gear)
Pressure angle
Rack cutter
Pitch line (rack)
Figure 15.17
Rack generation of involute gear teeth. 
(Adapted from ref. 3, reprinted by permission
of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle
River, N. J.)

external gears can be cut. Like hobbing, either rack or pinion generation may be used to
produce highly accurate proﬁles, and either tool can be used to cut gears with any number
of teeth of the same pitch.
When cutting gear teeth by the milling method, a milling cutter having the exact shape
of the tooth space is moved across the face of the gear blank, cutting out one complete
tooth space. The gear is then rotated one circular pitch and the next tooth space milled; the
process is repeated until all spaces have been cut, forming the gear. Worms, spur gears, and
helical gears may be produced by the milling process. Theoretically, a different milling
cutter must be used not only for different pitches but also for different numbers of teeth.
As a practical matter, milling cutters are usually manufactured to provide the theoretically
correct tooth shape for the gear with the smallest number of teeth in each of eight assigned
ranges, for each standard pitch. Proﬁle errors result for larger gears in the ranges but are
acceptable for many applications. The milling method would not be used for high-speed
or highly loaded gearsets.
Small internal gears (under 3 inches) can be cut with one pass of a broach38 as long
as the internal teeth are not in a blind hole. Larger internal gears are sometimes made by
using a broach to make only a few teeth at a time, then indexing for repeated passes to
complete the gear. Either spur or helical gears can be formed by broaching.
Gear Finishing
In high-performance applications, where gears operate at high speeds or under heavy
loads, it is often necessary to enhance tooth surface quality by following the gear-cutting
operation with a ﬁnishing operation. Finishing operations use highly accurate gear-like
tools, dies, or grinders (usually computer controlled) to remove minute amounts of mate-
rial to improve dimensional accuracy, surface ﬁnish, or surface hardness. Gear shaving is
a corrective process of scraping away tiny shavings of material to improve proﬁle accuracy
and surface ﬁnish prior to heat treatment. Shaving is accomplished by either the rotary
shaving method or the rack shaving method. In the rotary shaving method a hardened pin-
ion-like cutter, with serrated teeth ground to a conjugate proﬁle, is run against the gear to
be ﬁnished. In the rack shaving method a hardened rack with serrated teeth is run against
the gear.
The rolling process ﬁnishes the teeth by pressing a hardened tool with precisely
ground teeth (called a die) against the gear to be ﬁnished using a high force, then rolling
the die and the gear together. Gear rolling, generally applied prior to heat treatment, pro-
duces local small-scale yielding, compressive residual surface stresses, and a smooth bur-
nished surface ﬁnish.
The grinding process of gear finishing usually is performed after carburizing and
heat treating the already-cut gear teeth to a high surface hardness. Medium-hardness
gears are also ground in some cases. Several grinding methods are used, generally par-
alleling the cutting methods just discussed. Form grinders utilize an abrasive disk, with
an involute shape dressed into its sides, to grind both sides of the space between two
teeth. Generating grinders either use a single abrasive wheel dressed to the shape of a
basic rack tooth and reciprocated along the face width as the gear to be ground is rolled
through the mesh, or use two saucer-shaped wheels concave toward the tooth flank with
their narrow rims generating the involute as the gear to be finished is rolled through the
620
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
38A broach is a straight tool with accurately shaped cutting teeth, increasing in size along its axis, to make a
progressive series of cuts to the ﬁnished size and shape with a single pass of the tool, when pushed or pulled
through the workpiece.

grinding area.39 Threaded grinding wheels are also used in some applications, in a process
similar to hobbing.
In the honing process a ﬁne-grit abrasive gear-shaped tool, called a hone, is rolled
against the gear to be honed using a very light force to hold them in contact. Honing tends
to “average” the surface irregularities, removing local bumps and scale. High-speed gears
are often honed after ﬁnish grinding to produce a very smooth surface ﬁnish. This en-
hances load sharing among meshing teeth and reduces vibration and noise.
Cutter Path Simulation, Mesh Deﬂection, 
and Proﬁle Modiﬁcation
With the advent of electronic computers, not only has it become possible to produce gears
of improved precision and quality; it has become possible to model the changes in proﬁle
geometry induced by operating loads and speeds, then specify proﬁle modiﬁcations that
may be manufactured into unloaded gear teeth to produce an optimum running proﬁle.
Although these methods are still under development, good progress has been made in link-
ing interactive graphics, ﬁnite element and boundary element analysis, solid modeling, and
experimental databases developed for gear cutters and gearset performance,40 allowing the
production of higher-performance gearing in a more condensed time frame.
For example, the computer generation of a theoretical involute proﬁle,41 as illustrated in
Figure 15.18, provides an accurate basis of comparison for internal and external spur and
helical gear-tooth proﬁles. Composite cutter path simulations, such as the one shown in
Figure 15.19 for a particular hobbing cutter, allow comparisons of the cut proﬁle with the
theoretical involute proﬁle to expedite decisions about important details such as tip relief, tran-
sition from involute ﬂank to root radius, and material allowances for ﬁnishing processes.
Gear Manufacturing; Methods, Quality, and Cost 621
39This type of grinder is made only by the Maag Gear Wheel Company of Zurich, Switzerland; hence the
process is known as Maag grinding.
40See, for example, ref. 13.
41See Figure 15.7 and related discussion.
Figure 15.18
Computer-generated theoretical in-
volute proﬁle. (From ref. 13,
reprinted with permission from SAE
Publication AE-15 © 1990, Society
of Automotive Engineers, Inc.)
Hob cut involute
Theotetical involute
Figure 15.19
Comparison of composite cutter path
simulation with theoretical involute
proﬁle. (From ref. 13, reprinted with
permission from SAE Publication AE-
15 © 1990, Society of Automotive
Engineers, Inc.)

Tooth deﬂections caused by bending and Hertz contact deformations may cause in-
terference with mating teeth rolling through the mesh, as shown in Figure 15.20(b).
Interference may occur both in the zone of ﬁrst contact at a and in the zone of last contact
at b. Proﬁle modiﬁcations are often used to avoid interference and provide better load
distribution in these zones, as illustrated, for example, in Figure 15.20(c). Such proﬁle
modiﬁcations result in smoother, quieter operation, and reduce the risk of failure by sur-
face fatigue (pitting), adhesive wear, galling, and tooth fracture. Computer simulations can
be used to obtain three-dimensional tooth deﬂection data, and then generate plots of devi-
ation from an involute proﬁle as the loaded teeth roll through the mesh. Such plots form
the initial basis for proﬁle modiﬁcations. For high-precision gearing, a trial-and-error ex-
perimental program usually follows the initial proﬁle modiﬁcation proposal. The manu-
facture of proﬁle-modiﬁed gears is usually accomplished using generating-type grinding
machines that are computer controlled to move the grinding wheels shallower or deeper
along the proﬁle.
Accuracy Requirements, Measurement Factors, and
Manufacturing Cost Trends
Casting the concepts of Chapter 1 into gear design strategy, the gear designer is respon-
sible for achieving required load-carrying capacity and specified reliability while meet-
ing gear speed, life, and noise requirements at a reasonable cost. High loads, high
speeds, long lives, and quiet operation require high-quality gears manufactured to close
tolerances; costs for such high-precision gears are high. When loads and speeds are less
622
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Driven gear
Path of contact
Driving pinion
p
g
a
b
p, Tp
p, Tp
g
a
b
g
a
b
Gear addendum
circle
Pinion addendum
circle
(a) Theoretical engagement geometry for involute teeth with no load.
(b) Approximate engagement geometry under operating load,
showing deflection-induced interference zone.
(c) Gear-tooth profile modification (tip relief) to remove
interference material shown in (b).
Interference
zone
Interference
material removed
Figure 15.20
Depiction of unloaded (theoretical) mesh geometry, tooth deformation under load, and a sample proﬁle modiﬁ-
cation (tip relief), designed to provide smoother operation. (Courtesy of Gear Dynamics and Gear Noise
Research Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Ohio State University.)

demanding, and more moderate application constraints with wider tolerances are per-
missible, accuracy requirements may be relaxed to give costs that are more moderate.
Table 15.4 provides an experience-based guide to accuracy-level requirements for vari-
ous applications.42
To assess the quality of a manufactured gear it is necessary to measure the ﬁnished
product with an appropriate level of accuracy. Generally, it is necessary to have available
measuring devices to accurately check the prime variables of involute proﬁle: helix across
the face width, tooth spacing, tooth ﬁnish, and tooth action when meshed with a master
gear43 to obtain a composite check of individual tooth action and total gear runout. A plot
of the cost trends of manufacturing gear teeth by different methods, as a function of re-
quired accuracy, is shown in Figure 15.21.
Gear Manufacturing; Methods, Quality, and Cost 623
42Adapted from ref. 1. Source: Dudley Engineering Company, San Diego, CA.
43Carefully maintained, high-precision gear.
TABLE 15.4 Accuracy Levels Typical of Various Gearing Applications
Approximate Standard
Quality Ranges
Dudley
AGMA2
DIN3
Accuracy Level
Designation1
Value
Value
Highest possible accuracy. Achieved by special
AA
14
2
toolroom methods. Used for master gears, unusually
Ultra-high
or
or
critical high-speed gears, or when both highest load
accuracy
15
3
capacity and highest reliability are needed.
High accuracy. Achieved by grinding or shaving with
A
12
4
ﬁrst-rate machine tools, and utilizing skilled operators.
High
or
or
Widely used for turbine gearing and aerospace gearing.
accuracy
13
5
Sometimes used for critical industrial gears.
Relatively high accuracy. Achieved by grinding or shaving
B
10
6
with emphasis on production rate rather than highest quality.
Medium-high
or
or
May be achieved by hobbing or shaping with best equipment
accuracy
11
7
under favorable conditions. Used for medium-speed industrial
gears and critical vehicle gears.
Good accuracy. Achieved by hobbing or shaping with ﬁrst-rate
C
8
8
machine tools and skilled operators. May be obtained in high-
Medium
or
or
production grinding or shaving. Typically used for vehicle gears
accuracy
9
9
and electric motor industrial gears running at slower speeds.
Nominal accuracy. Can be achieved by hobbing or shaping
D
6
10
using older machine tools and less-skilled operators. Typically
Low
or
or
used for low-speed gears that wear in to yield a reasonable ﬁt.
accuracy
7
11
(Lower hardness promotes wear-in.)
Minimal accuracy. For gears used at slow speeds and light loads.
E
4
Teeth may be cast or molded in small sizes. Typically used in toys
Very low
or
12
and gadgets. May be used for low-hardness gears when limited life
accuracy
5
and lower reliability are acceptable.
1From ref. 1. Source: Dudley Engineering Company, San Diego, CA.
2See ref. 14.
3See ref. 15.
Qn

15.8 Spur Gears; Force Analysis
In Figure 15.22(a), a spur pinion (1) centered at 
, rotating clockwise at a speed of 
rpm, drives a spur gear (2) centered at 
, rotating counterclockwise at a speed of 
rpm.
From Figure 15.8 and the related discussion, the normal force 
transmitted from the driv-
ing pinion to the conjugate gear is known to be directed along the space-ﬁxed line of ac-
tion, which passes through the pitch point P. If an external power source produces a steady
operating torque 
on the pinion, and the pinion and gear are each taken as separate free
bodies, the result may be depicted as shown in Figures 15.22(b) and (c). 
and 
are re-
sultant bearing support reactions. Examining the pinion free body, for example, it is clear
that the resultant normal force 
acting on the pinion at the pitch point P, along the line
of action, may be resolved into a tangential component 
and a radial component 
, as il-
lustrated in Figure 15.22(d). Bearing reaction forces may also be resolved into components
if desired. The tangential component 
is directed along the common tangent (hence per-
pendicular to pitch radius ), so by moment equilibrium about the axis of rotation
(15-21)
Since 
is directly related to power transmission, it is the “useful” force component. By
contrast, the radial component 
is simply a residue of tooth geometry, serving no useful
Fr
Ft
T1 = Ftr1
r1
Ft
Fr
Ft
Fn
R2
R1
T1
Fn
n2
O 2
n1
O1
624
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Grinding boundary
Shaving boundary
Cutting boundary
DIN quality numbers2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
(17)(16)15 14 13 12 11 10
AGMA quality numbers1
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
Accuracy
vs. cost
100 times cost
10 times cost
Unit cost
Method
Coarse pitch
(up to 20 pitch)
Grinding
Shaving
Cutting
Slope shows cost
proportional to
accuracy
1See Table 15.4 or ref. 14.
2See ref. 15.
Figure 15.21
Cost trends for manufacturing gear teeth by different methods. (Extracted from
ref. 1. Source: Dudley Engineering Company, San Diego, CA.)

purpose, tending only to push the gears apart. Often 
is called transmitted force and 
is
called separating force. A similar force resolution could be made for the driven gear.
Transmitted force 
may be calculated by using the power transferred from pinion to
gear, as given by (4-32) or (4-34). From (4-32), for example,
(15-22)
based on the fact that transmitted power remains constant throughout a gear train if fric-
tion losses are neglected.
The pitch-line velocity V (ft/min) may be calculated as
(15-23)
where 
and 
are pitch radii in inches, and 
and 
are rotational speeds in rpm.
Combining (15-22) and (15-23) gives a convenient form of the horsepower equation for
gearing applications as
(15-24)
which allows calculation of required transmitted force as
(15-25)
The power required and the pitch-line velocity V are usually known for a speciﬁc application.
If the pressure angle 
is known, the geometry of Figure 15.22(c) allows calculation
of the separating force as
(15-26)
Fr = Fttanw
w
Ft =
33,0001hp2
V
hp =
FtV
33,000
n2
n1
r2
r1
V = 2pr1n1
12
= 2pr2n2
12
hp =
T12prn2
12133,0002 =
Ftr112pn12
12133,0002 =
Ftr212pn22
12133,0002
Ft
Fr
Ft
Spur Gears; Force Analysis 625
(a) Typical spur gearset layout showing
pitch circles and line of action.
(b) Free-body diagram of driven gear.
(c) Free-body diagram of driving pinion.
Gear (driven)
Pinion (driver)
Line of action
Common tangent




O2
O1
n1
n2
(1)
(2)
P
O1
P
O2
Fn
Fn
P

r2
r1
R1
T2
T1
R2
(d) Force resolution for pinion.

P
x
Fn
Ft
Fr
y

R1x
R1y
R1
T1
Figure 15.22
Force analysis of spur gearset.

It is also of interest to note that
(15-27)
Finally, consideration of (15-21) and (15-22) leads to a useful extension of (15-15),
namely
(15-28)
angular velocity
rotational speed
pitch radius
number of gear teeth
applied torque
15.9 Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design
Of the potential failure modes discussed in 15.4, the two most likely to govern a typical
gearset design are bending fatigue failure at the root ﬁllet of a tooth, or surface fatigue
(pitting) failure generated by the cyclic Hertz contact stresses produced by repeatedly
meshing gear teeth. In principle, gear-tooth design procedure is no different from the de-
sign procedure for any other machine element;44 loading severity parameters (e.g.,
stresses) are calculated and compared with critical capacities (e.g., strengths correspon-
ding to governing failure modes), adjusting materials and geometry until an appropriate
safety factor or reliability level is achieved.45 In practice, the results obtained by applying
fundamental principles are typically reﬁned by using a series of experience-based modify-
ing factors (sometimes called derating factors) to account for manufacturing variabilities,
operational dynamics, strength variabilities, environmental variabilities, and mounting and
assembly variabilities. A widely accepted set of procedures for this purpose, with an ex-
tensive body of supporting data, has been standardized and published by the AGMA.46 A
designer responsible for gearing applications, especially high-performance gearing, is well
advised to consult the most up-to-date AGMA standards (these standards are continuously
being updated).
The approach in this text will be to present a simpliﬁed analysis ﬁrst, followed by a
brief synopsis of the more reﬁned AGMA standard procedures for analyzing tooth bend-
ing and surface durability.
Tooth Bending: Simpliﬁed Approach
A gear tooth may be idealized as a cantilever beam subjected to an end load,47, as illus-
trated in Figure 15.23. Approximations first introduced by Lewis48 in 1893 still are used
to formulate the expression for nominal bending stress at the tensile-side root fillet des-
ignated as point a in Figure 15.23. Lewis observed that a constant-strength parabola49
T =
N =
r =
n =
where  v =
v2
v1
= n2
n1
= ; r1
r2
= ; N1
N2
= ; T1
T2
Ft = Fncosw
626
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
44See Chapter 6.
45See Chapter 5.
46American Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
47The load may actually be applied short of the end for precision gearing with a contact ratio greater than 1.0
because of load sharing with other teeth. See discussion of highest point of single tooth contact under “Mesh
Interactions” in 15.6.
48See ref. 16.
49See Figure 14.12(b) and (14-32).

inscribed within an involute tooth profile, drawn tangent to the root fillets, and with apex
located at the intersection of the normal force vector 
and the tooth centerline, lies
everywhere within the tooth profile. Assuming such a parabolic tooth shape provides a
conservative geometric description for making a cantilever beam estimate of gear-tooth
bending stresses. For a tooth of face width b, the nominal tensile bending stress at crit-
ical point a due to transmitted force 
is50
(15-29)
A small (favorable) compressive stress component at a, produced by the separating force
, is usually neglected; the small increase in compressive stress at b, already compressive,
is also usually neglected because cyclic compressive stressing is typically much less seri-
ous than cyclic tensile stressing at a.
To specialize the stress calculation of (15-29) to an involute gear tooth, as introduced
in the Lewis development, a similar triangle proportionality in Figure 15.23 gives
(15-30)
whence
(15-31)
Next, (15-29) is rearranged to the form
(15-32)
Combining (15-31) with (15-32) and multiplying by 
,
(15-33)
where
(15-34)
y K 2x
3pc
1sb2cp-a = Ft
b a1
x b a 3
2b a pc
pc
b =
Ft
bpcy
1pc>pc2
1sb2cp-a = Ft
b a
1
h2>4L
b a 1
4>6 b
x = h2
4L
h>2
x
=
L
h>2
Fr
1sb2a = 6FtL
bh2
Ft
Fn
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 627
50See (14-30).
Fn
Ft
Fr

Common tangent
Common normal
Lewis-assumed,
inscribed, constant
strength parabola
f
b
a
x
h
L
Figure 15.23
Cantilever bending model of an assumed par-
abolic spur gear tooth. Bending is produced
by force Fn acting at the apex (tip) of the
(Lewis) inscribed constant-strength parabola.
The intersection of vector Fn with the tooth
centerline deﬁnes the location of the apex.

is deﬁned as the Lewis form factor, gives the original version of the Lewis equation.
Alternative versions written in terms of diametral pitch or module are usually pre-
ferred in modern practice. Using (15-12) and (15-13) these are, for U.S. units,
(15-35)
and, for SI units,
(15-36)
where 
is a Lewis form factor based on diametral pitch or module. Both Y and y are
functions of tooth shape (but not size) and therefore vary with the number of teeth in the
gears. Values of Y are given in Table 15.5 for various numbers of gear teeth.
To continue with the simpliﬁed approach, a fatigue stress concentration factor 
should
be applied to obtain the estimated actual stress at the tensile critical point a, using the
methods discussed in 5.3.51 Theoretical stress concentration factor Kt is given in Figure 5.10
for 20 involute gear teeth as a functionof diametrical pitch Pd. Recalling (5-92) then
(15-37)
and
(15-38)
Now, using (15-35), at critical point a,
(15-39)
1sb2act = Kf aFtPd
bY b
1sb2act = Kf 1sb2nom
Kf = q1Kt - 12 + 1
Kf
Y = py
1sb2cp-a =
Ft
pmby =
Ft
mbY
1sb2cp-a = FtPd
pby = FtPd
bY
628
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
TABLE 15.5 Values for Lewis Form Factor Y for 20 Full-
Depth Involute Teeth
Number of
Number of
Teeth
Y
Teeth
Y
12
0.245
28
0.353
13
0.261
30
0.359
14
0.277
34
0.371
15
0.290
38
0.384
16
0.296
43
0.397
17
0.303
50
0.409
18
0.309
60
0.422
19
0.314
75
0.435
20
0.322
100
0.447
21
0.328
150
0.460
22
0.331
300
0.472
24
0.337
400
0.480
26
0.346
Rack
0.485
51Stress concentration was unknown at the time of the Lewis development for nominal stress at the root ﬁllet.

The ﬁnal step in the simpliﬁed approach is to obtain an appropriate value of equiva-
lent completely reversed alternating stress amplitude 
corresponding to the actual
mean and alternately stresses for the application.52
Comparing 
with fatigue strength 
or fatigue limit Sf for the selected material
under projected operating conditions53 then gives the basis for an estimate of existing
safety factor or reliability level for the proposed design. For example, the existing safety
factor 
, based on (5-7), may be written for this case as
(15-40)
Example 15.2 Simpliﬁed Approach to Spur Gear Bending Fatigue
It is desired to examine a four-gear train similar to Figure E15.1A (except N1  N3  20
teeth and N2  N4  32 teeth), to establish preliminary estimates of the resistance to fail-
ure at the root ﬁllets of gear no. 1, based on potential failure there due to tooth bending fa-
tigue. Additional speciﬁcations for this gear train are as follows:
1.
The gear train is to drive a large industrial blender (stirring machine) which requires
5 horsepower at a steady-state operating speed of 1000 rev/min at output gear 4.
2.
This preliminary calculation may be based on the assumption that friction losses are
negligible for all bearings and gear meshes.
3.
It is desired to use Grade 1 AISI 1020 low-carbon steel, if possible, for the gear blanks.
4.
Gear teeth are to be standard 20 spur full-depth involute teeth.
5.
An in-house gearing specialist has suggested that a diametral pitch of about 10 would
probably be a good initial assumption for the iterative calculation.
If a very long life is desired for this gear, and a reliability of 99 percent is required, pro-
pose an acceptable conﬁguration for gear 4 based on tooth bending fatigue.
Solution
From Example (15-2), the reduction ratio is
so the speed of gear 1 is
Also, since losses are negligible
Initially selecting 
as recommended (this may require adjustment later), the pitch
radius 
may be calculated from (15-8) as
r1 = N1
2Pd
=
20
21102 = 1.0 inch
r1
Pd = 10
hp1 = hp4 = 5 horsepower
n1 = 1000
0.4
= 2500 rpm
nout
nin
= n4
n1
= 0.4
nex =
SN
seq-CR
nex
SN
seq-CR
seq-CR
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 629
52Refer to equation (5-72) or (5-73) for a uniaxial state of stress, or (5-93) through (5-100) for multiaxial states
of stress.
53Refer to (5-55), (5-56), (5-57), and (5-58).

Next from (15-23), the pitch line velocity V is
whence, from (15-25)
To calculate the nominal bending stress at the tension-side root ﬁllet from (15-35), a Lewis
form factor Y may be read from Table 15.5, corresponding to 
, as
and a midrange face width b may be tentatively chosen, using (15-16), as
Using these values in (15-35), the nominal bending stress at critical point a may be calcu-
lated as
To calculate the actual maximum (static) bending stress at critical point a, a fatigue
stress concentration factor may be calculated using (15-37). The value of 
may be esti-
mated from Figure 5.10 and the value of q may be read from Figure 5.46.
To make the estimate of 
from Figure 5.10, the moment arm e will be taken as the
working depth (see Table 15.1) and tooth thickness h at the root will be assumed equal to
base thickness (circular thickness multiplied by cosine of pressure angle); hence
This ratio lies off the chart in Figure 5.10, so the estimate of 
(crude at best) seems to be
about
Using an estimate of root ﬁllet radius 
the value of q for 1020 steel read from Figure 5.46 is
so (15-37) gives
permitting the evaluation of (15-38) for this proposed design as
1sb2act = 11.32134032 = 4420 psi
Kf = 10.65211.5 - 12 + 1 = 1.3
q = 0.65
rf = 0.35
Pd
= 0.35
10
= 0.035 inch
rf
Kt L 1.5
Kt
e
h =
2.000>Pd
11.571>Pd2cos20 = 1.35
Kt
Kt
1sb2nom = FtPd
bY =
112621102
1.1510.3222 = 3403 psi
b = 11.5
Pd
= 11.5
10
= 1.15 inches
Y = 0.322
N1 = 20
Ft =
33,00015.02
1309
= 126 lb
V =
2p11.02125002
12
= 1309 ft>min
630
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.2
Continues

Referring to Table 3.3 the static strength properties for 1020 steel are
and from Figure 5.31, the fatigue limit for small, polished, 1020 steel specimens may be
read as
Using (5-55) and (5-57) and the methods of Example 5.3, the value of 
has been esti-
mated to be about 0.65 for this application, including the 99 percent reliability adjust-
ments. Thus
Finally, the pinion teeth experience one-way bending, producing released tension at
the critical root ﬁllet.54
Using (5-72) then,
Based on (15-40) the existing safety factor at the tension-side root ﬁllet for this proposed
design would be
Most designers would regard a safety factor of 9.3 as too large and would probably attempt
to redesign (typicallly by selecting a new value for 
) to better utilize material and space.
It should be recognized, however, that this calculation has considered neither the possible
dynamic effects of impact loading (see 2.6) nor the inﬂuence of deﬂection of shafts, bear-
ings, and gear teeth upon tooth loading. These two inﬂuences could easily reduce 
by a
factor of 2 or 3. Before redesigning on the basis of 
therefore, it would be prudent to
ﬁrst make a preliminary evaluation of this design based on resistance to failure by surface
fatigue wear (pitting), then proceed to more reﬁned design calculations. Examples 15.3,
15.4, and 15.5 illustrate the procedure.
Tooth Bending: Synopsis of AGMA Reﬁned Approach55
The AGMA approach to designing gear teeth to resist bending fatigue failure, while based
on the idealized Lewis equation, involves an extensive list of empirical adjustment factors
(sometimes called derating factors) to account for the inﬂuence of various manufacturing,
assembly, geometric, loading, and material variabilities. Many pages of charts and graphs
of supporting data are published by the AGMA. The presentation in this text represents
only a synopsis of the AGMA procedure, with an abridged selection of supporting data to
demonstrate the basic approach; any designer responsible for gearing design or develop-
ment is well advised to consult the most up-to-date AGMA standards.
nex
nex
Pd
nex =
Sf
seq-CR
= 21,400
2300
= 9.3
seq-CR =
sa
1 - sm>Su
=
14420>22
1 -
14420>22
57,000
= 2300 psi
Sf = k q1S¿f2 = 0.65133,0002 = 21,400 psi
k q
S¿f = 33,000 psi
Syp = 43,000 psi
Su = 57,000 psi
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 631
54See Figure 5.24.
55See ref. 10.

632
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
The basic AGMA bending stress56 equation may be written as57
(15-41a)
application factor (see Table 15.6)
mounting factor (see Table 15.7)
dynamic factor (see Figure 15.24)
idler factor = 1.42 for idler teeth with two-way bending; = 1.0 for gear
teeth with one-way bending.
geometry factor (see Tables 15.8 and 15.9)
diametral pitch
face width
tangential load
The SI version of (15-41a) is
(15-41b)
where m is the module
The application factor
is used to account for shock or impact loading characteris-
tics of the prime mover and the driven machine. The dynamic factor
is used to estimate
Kn
Ka
sb =
Ft
mbJKaKvKmKI
Ft =
b =
Pd =
J =
KI =
Kn =
Km =
where  Ka =
sb = FtPd
bJ KaKnKmKI
TABLE 15.6 Application Factor, Ka
Driven Machine Characteristic
Prime Mover
Moderate
Heavy 
Characteristic
Uniform
Shock
Shock
Uniform (e.g., electric motor, turbine)
1.00
1.25
1.75 or higher
Light shock (e.g., multicylinder engine)
1.25
1.50
2.00 or higher
Medium shock (e.g., single-cylinder engine)
1.50
1.75
2.25 or higher
TABLE 15.7 Mounting Factor, Km
Face Width, in
Support Properties and Gear Quality
0 to 2
6
9
16
Accurate mountings, small bearing clearances,
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.8
minimum deﬂections, precision gears
Less rigid mountings, more bearing clearance,
1.6
1.7
1.8
2.2
less accurate gears, contact across full face
Combinations of mounting properties and
——————— 2.2 or higher ———————
gearing precision that produce less than
full face contact
Ú
56Referred to as bending stress number in AGMA standard 2001-C95.
57Other factors are available from AGMA standards to account for overloads (system vibration, overspeed
events, changing process, load conditions), size effects, and thin-rim deﬂection effects.

Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 633
TABLE 15.8 AGMA Geometry Factor J for Bending of 208 Full-Depth Involute Teeth Under Tip Loading
(used for lower precision gearing)
Pinion Teeth
Gear
12
14
17
21
26
35
55
135
Teeth
P1
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
12
U2
U
14
U
U
U
U
17
U
U
U
U
U
U
21
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.24
0.24
26
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.24
0.25
0.25
0.25
35
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.24
0.26
0.25
0.26
0.26
0.26
55
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.24
0.28
0.25
0.28
0.26
0.28
0.28
0.28
135
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.24
0.29
0.25
0.29
0.26
0.29
0.28
0.29
0.29
0.29
1P  pinion; G  gear.
2U indicates a combination that produces undercutting.
°
TABLE 15.9 AGMA Geometry Factor J for Bending of 20 Full-Depth Involute Teeth Under HPSTC1 Loading
(used for higher-precision gearing)
Pinion Teeth
Gear
12
14
17
21
26
35
55
135
Teeth
P2
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
P
G
12
U3
U
14
U
U
U
U
17
U
U
U
U
U
U
21
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.33
0.33
26
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.33
0.35
0.35
0.35
35
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.34
0.37
0.36
0.38
0.39
0.39
55
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.34
0.40
0.37
0.41
0.40
0.42
0.43
0.43
135
U
U
U
U
U
U
0.35
0.43
0.38
0.44
0.41
0.45
0.45
0.47
0.49
0.49
1Highest Point of Single Tooth Contact. See discussion under “Mesh Interactions” in 15.6.
2P  pinion; G  gear.
3U indicates a combination that produces undercutting.
Dynamic factor, Kv
Pitch line velocity, V, ft/min
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10,000
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Qv = 5
Qv = 7
Qv = 9
Qv = 10
Qv = 11
Qv = 6
Qv = 8
“Very accurate gearing”
Figure 15.24
Dynamic factor Kv. The gearing quality
values Qv are a function of gearing accu-
racy (primarily based on transmission 
error). See Table 15.4 for guidance.
(Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard
2001-C95, with the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)

634
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
the effect of dynamic loading when a detailed dynamic system analysis is not available. The
gearing quality level, 
in Figure 15.24, reﬂects gearing accuracy, primarily based on
transmission error. Guidance in selecting an appropriate quality-level curve may be found
in Table 15.4. Pitch-line velocity for use in Figure 15.24 may be calculated using (15-23).
The mounting factor
is used to account for nonuniform load distribution across the tooth
face due to manufacturing variabilities, bearing clearances, and support deﬂections. The
idler factor
reﬂects the difference in fatigue resistance of a gear tooth when subjected to
completely reversed stressing (idler) as compared to released tension (typical gear tooth).
The AGMA geometry factor J embodies the Lewis form factor, stress concentration effects,
and load-sharing effects in a single parameter. Table 15.8 gives selected values of J for 20
full-depth teeth when the tangential load 
is applied at the tooth tip, and Table 15.9 gives
corresponding data for load applied at the highest point of single tooth contact (HPSTC). If
gearing precision is high, and load sharing occurs (for contact ratios between 1 and 2), the
factors in Table 15.9 for HPSTC loading are appropriate. If gearing precision is low, errors
in proﬁle and spacing may prevent effective load sharing, and a single tooth may be sub-
jected to the full load at its tip; the factors in Table 15.8 are appropriate in this case.
On the strength side, published AGMA data for tooth bending fatigue strength 
, as
illustrated in Tables 15.10 and 15.11 for steel gears, and Table 15.12 for iron and bronze
S¿tbf
Ft
KI
Km
Qn
TABLE 15.10 ANSI/AGMA Tooth Bending Fatigue Strength Stbf for Steel Gears1
Metallurgical Quality2
Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
Min. Surf.
,
Min. Surf.
,
Min. Surf.
,
Material
Heat Treatment
Hardness
ksi
Hardness
ksi
Hardness
ksi
Steel
Through hardened
————————— See Figure 15.25 ————————
—
—
Flame or induction
—
45
28 RC
3
55
—
—
hardened, includ-
ing root
Flame or induction
—
22
—
22
—
—
hardened, except
root
Carburized and 
55–64
55
58–64
65
58–64
75
hardened
RC
RC
RC
(Min. core hard.)
(21 RC)
(25 RC)
(30 RC)
AISI 4140,
Nitrided and
83.5 R15N
see 
83.5 R15N
see
83.5 R15N
—
AISI 4340
through hardened
Figure
Figure
steel
15.26
15.26
Nitralloy 135 M,
Nitrided
87.5 R15N
see
87.5 R15N
see 
87.5 R15N
see
Nitralloy N,
Figure
Figure
Figure
and 2.5%
15.27
15.27
15.27
chrome (no
aluminum)
1From ref. 10. Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95, with the permission of the publisher, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
2See Table 15.11 for quality characteristics of speciﬁed grade.
3RC  Rockwell C scale.
R15N  Rockwell 15N scale.
S¿tbf
S¿tbf
S¿tbf
¿

Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 635
Tooth bending fatigue strength, Sftb, ksi
Brinell hardness, BHN
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
10
20
30
40
50
'
Grade 2
Stbf = 102 BHN + 16,400
Grade 1
Stbf = 77.3 BHN + 12,800
'
'
Figure 15.25
ANSI/AGMA tooth bending fatigue strength 
for
through-hardened gears. Curves are based on 99 
percent reliability for a life of 107 cycles of one-way
loading. See Table 15.11 for quality characteristics of
speciﬁed grade. (Adapted from ANSI/AGMA
Standard 2001-C95, with the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear Manufacturers Association,
1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
S¿tbf
Tooth bending fatigue strength, Stbf, ksi
Core hardness, BHN
250
275
300
325
350
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
'
Grade 1
Stbf = 82.3 BHN + 12,150
'
Grade 2
Stbf = 108.6 BHN + 15,890
'
Figure 15.26
ANSI/AGMA tooth bending fatigue strength for nitrided
through-hardened gears (AISI 4140 and 4340). Curves are
based on 99 percent reliability for a life of 107 cycles of
one-way loading. See Table 15.11 for quality characteristics
of speciﬁed grade. (Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard
2001-C95, with the permission of the publisher, American
Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
Tooth bending fatigue strength, Stbf, ksi
250
275
300
325
350
30
40
50
60
70
Core hardness, BHN
'
Grade 1—nitralloy
Stbf = 86.2 BHN + 12,730
Grade 2—2.5% chrome
Stbf = 105.2 BHN + 22,280
'
Grade 1—2.5% chrome
Stbf = 105.2 BHN + 9280
'
Grade 2—nitralloy
Stbf = 113.8 BHN + 16,650
'
Grade 3—2.5% chrome
Stbf = 105.2 BHN + 29,280
'
Figure 15.27
ANSI/AGMA tooth bending fatigue
strength for nitriding-steel gears.
Curves are based on 99 percent relia-
bility for a life of 107 cycles of one-way
loading. See Table 15.11 for character-
istics of speciﬁed grade. (Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95,
with the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
TABLE 15.11 Quality Characteristics of AGMA Steel Material Grades1 (tentative)
Quality Grade
Characteristics
0 (ordinary quality)
No gross defects; no close control of quality items.2
1 (good quality)
Modest control of most important quality items; typical indus-
trial practice.
2 (premium quality)
Close control of all critical quality items; results in improved 
performance but increases material cost.
3 (super quality)
Absolute control of all critical quality items; results in ultimate 
performance but high material cost; rarely required.
1See ref. 1.
2Quality items include surface hardness, core hardness, case structure, core structure, steel cleanliness, ﬂank
surface condition, root-ﬁllet surface condition, grain size, and nonuniform hardness or structure.

636
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
gears, are all indexed to a reliability of 99 percent for a life of 107 cycles of one-way load-
ing. For design lives other than 107 cycles, the strength 
may be multiplied times a life
adjustment factor
, read from Figure 15.28 for steel gears (values for 
for materials
other than steel are not readily available). For reliability requirements other than 99 per-
cent, the strength 
may be multiplied by a gearing reliability factor, 
, read from Table
15.13.
Rg
S¿tbf
YN
YN
S¿tbf
TABLE 15.12 ANSI/AGMA Tooth Bending Fatigue Strength Stbf for Iron and Bronze
Gears1
Typical Min. 
Material
Heat
Surface
,
Material
Designation
Treatment
Hardness2
ksi
ASTM A48 gray
Class 20
As cast
—
5
cast iron
Class 30
As cast
174 BHN
8.5
Class 40
As cast
201 BHN
13
ASTM A536
Grade 60-40-18
Annealed
140 BHN
22–33
ductile iron
Grade 80-55-06
Q & T3
179 BHN
22–33
(nodular)
Grade 100-70-03
Q & T
229 BHN
27–40
Grade 120-90-02
Q & T
269 BHN
31–44
Bronze
Sand cast
Min. tensile 
5.7
strength,
40 ksi
ASTM B-148
Heat treated
Min. tensile 
23.6
Alloy 954
strength, 
90 ksi
1From ref. 10. Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95, with the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
2BHN  brinnell hardness number.
3Quenched and tempered.
S¿tbf
¿
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
Life adjustment factor, YN
Desired design life, N, cycles
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Case carb.
Nitrided
400 HB
250 HB
160 HB
YN = 2.3194 N –0.0538
YN = 3.517 N –0.0817
YN = 1.6831 N –0.0323
YN = 1.3588 N –0.0178
YN = 4.9404 N –0.1045
YN = 6.1514 N –0.1192
YN = 9.4518 N –0.148
NOTE: The choice of YN in the shaded area is
influenced by:
Pitchline velocity
Gear material cleanliness
Residual stress
Material ductility and fracture toughness
Figure 15.28
Life adjustment factor for
adjusting the ANSI/
AGMA bending fatigue
strength to a life other
than 107 cycles. Valid only
for steel materials.
(Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard
2001-C95, with the per-
mission of the publisher,
American Gear
Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King
Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)

Thus the tooth bending fatigue strength, 
, corresponding to desired reliability and
design life, becomes
(15-42)
Just as 
was compared with fatigue strength 
in the simpliﬁed approach discussed
earlier, in using the AGMA reﬁned approach the AGMA bending stress 
is compared
with the AGMA bending fatigue strength 
to determine whether the proposed design
conﬁguration is acceptable. If
(15-43)
the design is regarded as acceptable.
Example 15.3 AGMA Reﬁned Approach to Spur Gear Bending Fatigue
It is desired to compare the results of the simpliﬁed approach to designing gear teeth that
will resist failure by bending fatigue, illustrated in Example 15.2, with results using the
AGMA reﬁned approach for the same gear (gear no. 1 of the gear train shown in Figure
E15.1A except N1  N3  20 and N2  N4  32 teeth).
a.
Make the necessary calculations using the AGMA reﬁned approach.
b.
Compare results of (a) with results of Example 15.2
Solution
a.
From Example 15.2:
Material: AISI 1020 steel; Grade 1   
Reliability requirement: 99 percent
Life requirement: Very long
Tooth system: 20 full-depth involute
2500 rpm
5 horsepower
1.0 inch
10
20 teeth
32 teeth (mating gear)
N2 =
N1 =
Pd =
r1 =
hp1 =
where  n1 =
°
 BHN = 121 1Table 3.132
Syp = 43,000 psi 1Table 3.32
Su = 57,000 psi 1Table 3.32
sb … Stbf
Stbf
sb
SN
seq-CR
Stbf = YNRgS¿tbf
Stbf
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 637
TABLE 15.13 AGMA Reliability Adjustment Factor
Rg for Gears1
Desired Reliability, percent
99.99
0.67
99.9
0.80
99
1.0
90
1.18
50
1.43
1From ref. 10.
Rg

1309 ft/min
126 lb
1.15 inches
9.3
Using (15-41)
the factors may be evaluated as
1.0 (Table 15.6)
1.15 (Figure 15.24 with Q  10 and V  1309 ft/min)
1.6 (Table 15.7 with typical mounting conditions)
1.0 (one-way bending)
0.33 (Table 15.9; HPSTC assumed valid)
1.15 inches
10
126 lb
Substituting these values 
Using (15-42)
and the factors may be evaluated as
0.8 (from Figure 15.28, based on 8 years operation, 24 hr/day; ap-
prox. 1010 cycles)
1.0 (Table 15.13)
22,000 psi (extrapolated from Figure 15.25, assuming Grade 1, 
BHN  121; see Table 3.13)
whence (15-42) gives
Based on (15-43) then, for gear 1,
b.
It is seen that the calculated existing safety factor obtained by using the AGMA re-
ﬁned approach is about 2.9 compared with the calculated existing safety factor using
the simpliﬁed method of about 9.3. This result is compatible with the notion that more
accurate quantitative information about materials and operating conditions leads to
less “random uncertainty” and a lower calculated existing safety factor (which is, by
deﬁnition, associated with “random uncertainty”).
nex-1 =
1Stbf2N=1010
sb
= 17,600
6109
= 2.9
1Stbf2N=1010 = 10.8211.02122,0002 = 17,600 psi
1S¿tbf2N=1010 =
Rg =
YN =
Stbf = YNRgS¿tbf
sb =
112621102
1.1510.33211.0211.15211.6211.02 = 6109 psi
Ft =
Pd =
b =
J =
KI =
Km =
Kn =
Ka =
sb = FtPd
bJ KaKnKmKI
nex-1 =
b1 =
Ft1 =
V1 =
638
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.3
Continues

Surface Durability: Hertz Contact Stresses and Surface Fatigue
Wear
As discussed in 4.6, when curved surfaces, such as meshing gear teeth, are pressed to-
gether, the triaxial stress distributions at and below the surfaces of the contacting bodies
may be described by their pertinent Hertz contact stress equations. Equations (4-74)
through (4-79), developed for parallel cylinders in contact and graphically illustrated in
Figure 4.17, have already been discussed. Since contacting gear teeth emulate cylinders in
contact, the governing contact stress equation for surface fatigue failure of gear teeth may
be adapted from the Hertz cylindrical contact stress model. For this case the maximum
normal Hertz stress component 
, along the centerline as shown in Figure 4.17, is given
by (4-86). Reexpressing (4-86) using gear tooth terminology as summarized in Table 15.14,
the surface fatigue wear equation may be written as58
(15-44)
Surface fatigue strength data, as shown in Figure 15.29 for case-hardened spur gear
teeth, are plotted by calculating the value of 
from (15-44) that corresponds to surface
fatigue failure (signiﬁcant degradation of function because of pitting or spalling). Surface fa-
tigue strength data are not widely available.59 It is worth noting that inﬂuencing factors such
as sliding friction, lubrication, and thermal stresses, which typify gearing applications,
probably account for the lower S-N curve in Figure 15.29, so it is important to use the gear-
ing S-N curve for gearset design.
Finally, it is important to recognize that as gear teeth roll through the angle of
action, the relative motion between contacting teeth consists of rolling plus sliding,
ssf
ssf =
f
Ft a
2
dpsinw +
2
dgsinwb
pbcoswa
1 - v2
p
Ep
+
1 - n2
g
Eg
b
sz
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 639
58Based on the work of Earle Buckingham; see ref. 17.
59See ref. 19, however, for additional data.
TABLE 15.14 Gearing Notation Equivalents for Hertz Contact Stress
Equations (4-124) and (4-125)
Hertz Equation
Gearing Notation
Source or
Symbol
Equivalent
Deﬁnition
Surface fatigue wear stress
(maximum Hertz contact stress)
Normal force (see 15-27)
Face width
Basic involute geometry
Basic involute geometry
Poisson’s ratio of pinion, gear
Young’s modulus for pinion, gear
Pitch diameter of pinion, gear
Tangential force at contact site
Pressure angle
w
Ft
dp, dg
Ep, Eg
E1, E2
np, ng
n1, n2
dg sinw
d2
dp sinw
d1
b
L
Ft>cos w
F
ssf
pmax

except at the pitch point where it is pure rolling. The relative sliding velocity between
contacting tooth surfaces is proportional to the distance between the contact point and
the pitch point, and it reverses direction as a tooth pair rolls through the pitch point.
These sliding velocity components may produce adhesive or abrasive wear and, in some
cases, significant frictional heating, which may require special attention to lubrication
and cooling.
Example 15.4 Simpliﬁed Approach to Surface Durability of Spur Gear Teeth
Continuing with the preliminary design of Examples 15.1, 15.2, and 15.3, it is desired to
examine the resistance to surface fatigue wear of the teeth (see Figure E15.1A). The ten-
tative material properties, dimensions, and operating conﬁguration are summarized in
Example 15.3. In addition, it is proposed to carburize and case harden the surfaces of the
gear teeth to a hardness of approximately Rockwell C 60 (
60) to improve resistance to
failure by surface fatigue. Recalling that a very long life is desired, assess the adequacy of
the teeth in terms of resisting failure by surface fatigue wear.
Solution
Utilizing (15-44) together with the data summarized in Examples 15.2 and 15.3,
From Figure 15.29, the 90 percent reliability surface fatigue strength 
at a life of
cycles, for steel gears case hardened to 
60, may be read as (by
extrapola-tion)
1Ssf2N=1010 = 90,000 psi 1R = 90%2
RC
N = 1010
Ssf
ssf =
X
126a
2
2.0sin20 +
2
3.2sin20 b
p11.152cos20a 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 + 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 b
= A
598.65
2.06 * 10-7 = 53,910 psi
RC
640
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Surface fatigue strength, Ssf, ksi (computed)
Cycles N to significant pitting or spalling (surface fatigue failure)
105
106
107
108
109
1010
100
150
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Roller bearings
Angular-contact ball bearings
Radial ball bearings
Parallel rollers
Spur gears—high-quality
manufacture, case-hardened
steel: hardness RC60 (BHN 630)
Figure 15.29
Contact stress S-N curves correspon-
ding to 90 percent reliability. (Adapted
from ref. 19 with permission of the
McGraw-Hill Companies; also see 
ref. 18.)

Adjusting the 90 percent reliability strength data of Figure 15.29 to the required 99
percent reliability level, Table 2.3 may be used to give
Based on (5-7), the existing safety factor for resistance to failure by surface fatigue
wear is
Surface Durability: Synopsis of AGMA Reﬁned Approach
The AGMA approach to designing gear teeth to resist surface fatigue (pitting) failure is
based on the idealized Hertz contact stress equation (15-44) modiﬁed by a list of adjust-
ment factors (derating factors) to account for the inﬂuence of various manufacturing, as-
sembly, geometric, loading, and material variabilities, using a procedure very similar to
that used for assessing the seriousness of tooth bending fatigue. The basic AGMA sur-
face-pitting-resistance assessment is made by comparing the surface fatigue contact stress
with the allowable surface fatigue strength.60 The development proceeds by ﬁrst rewrit-
ing (15-44) as
(15-45)
elastic coefﬁcient 
geometry factor 
gear ratio 
(always 1.0)
then inserting the modifying factors to give61
(15-46)
Generally, the application factor
, dynamic factor
, and mounting factor
are the
same as for the tooth bending fatigue analysis, and may be read from Table 15.6, Figure
15.24, and Table 15.7 respectively.
Km
Kn
Ka
ssf = CpA
Ft
bdpIKaKnKm
dg
dp
=
Ng
Np
mG =
sinwcosw
2
a
mG
mG + 1 b
I K
Q
1
pa
1 - n2
p
Ep
+
1 - n2
g
Eg
b
where  Cp K
ssf = CpA
Ft
bdpI
nex =
1Ssf2N=1010
ssf
= 81,000
53,910 = 1.5
1Ssf2N=1010 = a0.81
0.90b90,000 = 81,000 psi 1R = 99%2
Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 641
60Referred to as allowable contact stress number in AGMA standard 2001-C95.
61Other factors are available from AGMA standards to account for load distribution (manufacturing, assembly,
alignment, and mounting variabilities), overloads (system vibration, overspeed events, changing process-load
conditions), size, and surface condition effects.

On the strength side, published AGMA data for surface fatigue strength 
, as shown
in Table 15.15 for steel gears, Table 15.16 for iron and bronze gears, and Figure 15.30 for
through-hardened steel gears, are all indexed to a reliability of 99 percent for a life of 107
cycles of one-way loading. For design lives other than 107 cycles, the strength 
may be
multiplied times a life adjustment factor
, read from Figure 15.31 for steel gears. Values
of 
for materials other than steel are not readily available. For reliability requirements
other than 99 percent, the strength 
may be multiplied by a gearing reliability factor 
read from Table 15.13.
Thus the surface fatigue strength 
corresponding to desired reliability and design life
becomes62
(15-47)
As usual, if
(15-48)
the design is regarded as acceptable.
ssf … Ssf
Ssf = ZNRgS¿sf
Ssf
Rg
S¿sf
ZN
ZN
S¿sf
S¿sf
642
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
62A hardness ratio factor is also available from AGMA standards to account for small improvements in gear
teeth (not pinion teeth) due to cold working by repetitive contacts with a harder pinion.
TABLE 15.15 ANSI/AGMA Surface Fatigue Strength (Pitting Resistance) Ssf for Steel Gears1
Metallurgical Quality2
Grade 1
Grade 2
Grade 3
Min.
Min.
Min.
Surf.
,
Surf.
,
Surf.
,
Material
Heat Treatment
Hardness3
ksi
Hardness
ksi
Hardness
ksi
Steel
Through hardened
————————— See Figure 15.30 ————————
—
—
Flame or induction
50 RC
170
—
190
—
—
hardened
54 RC
175
—
195
—
—
Carburized and
55–64
180
58–64
225
58–64
275
hardened
RC
RC
RC
(Min. core hard.)
(21 RC)
(25 RC)
(30 RC)
AISI 4140,
Nitrided (through 
83.5
150
83.5
163
83.5
175
AISI 4340
hardening)
84.5
155
84.5
168
84.5
180
steel
R15N
R15N
R15N
2.5% chrome 
Nitrided
87.5
155
87.5
172
87.5
189
(no aluminum)
R15N
R15N
R15N
Nitralloy 135M
Nitrided
90.0
170
90.0
183
90.0
195
R15N
R15N
R15N
Nitralloy N
Nitrided
90.0
172
90.0
188
90.0
205
R15N
R15N
R15N
2.5% chrome 
Nitrided
90.0
176
90.0
196
90.0
216
(no aluminum)
R15N
R15N
R15N
1From ref. 10. Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95, with the permission of the publisher, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
2See Table 15.11 for quality characteristics of speciﬁed grade.
3RC  Rockwell C scale.
R15N  Rockwell 15N scale.
S¿sf
S¿sf
S¿sf
¿

Spur Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 643
TABLE 15.16 ANSI/AGMA Surface Fatigue Strength Ssf (Pitting Resistance) for Iron
and Bronze Gears1
Typical Min. 
Material
Heat
Surface
Material
Designation
Treatment
Hardness2
ksi
ASTM A48 
Class 20
As cast
—
50–60
gray cast iron
Class 30
As cast
174 BHN
65–75
Class 40
As cast
201 BHN
75–85
ASTM A536 
Grade 60-40-18
Annealed
140 BHN
77–92
ductile iron 
Grade 80-55-06
Q & T3
179 BHN
77–92
(nodular)
Grade 100-70-03
Q & T
229 BHN
92–112
Grade 120-90-02
Q & T
269 BHN
103–126
Bronze
Sand cast
Min. tensile 
30
strength, 40 ksi
ASTM B-148
Heat treated
Min. tensile 
65
Alloy 954
strength, 90 ksi
1From ref. 10. Adapted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95, with the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
2BHN  brinnell hardness number.
3Quenched and tempered.
S¿sf
¿
Surface fatigue strength, Ssf, ksi
Brinell hardness, BHN
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
75
100
125
150
175
200
'
Grade 2
Ssf = 349 BHN + 34,300
Grade 1
Ssf = 322 BHN + 29,100
'
'
Figure 15.30
ANSI/AGMA surface fatigue strength 
for
through-hardened steel gears. Curves are
based on 99 percent reliability for a life of
107 cycles of one-way loading. See Table
15.10 for quality characteristics of speciﬁed
grade. (From ref. 10. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2001-C95, with the
permission of the publisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association, 1500 King
Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
S¿sf
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
1010
Life adjustment factor, ZN
Desired design life, N, cycles
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Nitrided
ZN = 1.249 N –0.0138
NOTE: The choice of ZN in the shaded area is influenced
by:
Lubrication regime
Failure criteria
Smoothness of operation required
Pitchline velocity
Gear material cleanliness
Material ductility and fracture toughness
Residual stress
ZN = 1.4488 N –0.023
ZN = 2.466 N –0.056
Figure 15.31
Life adjustment factor to
adjust ANSI/AGMA surface
fatigue strength to a life
other than 107 cycles. Valid
only for steel materials.
(From ref. 10. Adapted
from ANSI/AGMA
Standard 2001-C95, with
the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association,
1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)

Example 15.5 AGMA Reﬁned Approach to Surface Durability of Spur Gear Teeth
It is desired to reﬁne the preliminary assessment of surface durability conducted in Example
15.4 by utilizing the AGMA approach. How would such a reﬁnement be accomplished?
Solution
To utilize the AGMA approach, (15-46) is ﬁrst evaluated. To do this the elastic coefﬁcient
may be calculated as
The geometry factor may be evaluated as
where
Also from data in Example 15.3,
126 lb
1.15 inches
1.0
1.15
1.6
so from (15-46)
Evaluating the strength, using (15-47), the surface fatigue strength of carburized and
hardened steel (Grade 1) may be read from Table 15.15 as
The reliability factor for the original 99 percent reliability speciﬁcation may be read
from Table 15.13 as
and the life adjustment factor may be read from Figure 15.31 for a life of 1010 cycles as
ZN=1010 = 0.67
Rg = 1.0
S¿sf = 180,000 psi
ssf = 2,29 * 103
A
126
11.15212.0210.10211.0211.15211.62 = 72,705 psi
Km =
Kn =
Ka =
2r1 = 211.02 = 2.0 inches
dp =
b =
Ft =
mG =
Ng
Np
= 32
20 = 1.6    1from data in Example 15.32
I = sin20cos20
2
a
1.6
1.6 + 1 b = 0.10
Cp =
Q
1
pa 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 + 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 b
= 2.29 * 103
644
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears

Using these values, (15-47) gives
Based on (5-7) then, the existing safety factor for resistance to failure by surface fa-
tigue (pitting) is
15.10 Lubrication and Heat Dissipation
As discussed in 15.9, the relative motion between contacting spur gear teeth as they roll
through the angle of action consists of rolling plus sliding, except at the pitch point, where
it is pure rolling. The relative sliding velocity between the contacting tooth surfaces is pro-
portional to the distance between the contact point and the pitch point. Because these slid-
ing velocity components may produce adhesive or abrasive wear, and, in some cases,
signiﬁcant frictional heating, adequate lubrication and cooling capacity are important for
smooth operation and acceptable gear life. The lubrication and cooling issues become even
more important for helical and bevel gears because of additional components of relative
sliding motion, and, for worm gear sets, frictional heating is so signiﬁcant that pumped-oil
lubrication systems and external oil coolers are often required to prevent oil breakdown
and system failure.
For spur gear meshes, power losses typically range from less than 0.5 percent of the
transmitted power up to about 1 percent, depending upon materials, tooth system, surface
characteristics, pitch-line velocity, and method of lubrication. For helical and bevel gear
meshes, somewhat higher power losses are typical, often ranging from 1 to 2 percent. A
common rule of thumb for spur, helical, and bevel gear meshes is to assume each mesh,
including gears and supporting bearings, incurs a 2 percent power loss (98 percent efﬁ-
ciency). For worm gears, power loss may be estimated on the basis of a calculated efﬁ-
ciency, using the expression developed for power screws,63 as discussed later in 15.21.
For light loads, low speeds, low power transmission, and intermittent operation, unen-
closed gearing may be lubricated by using an oil can, drip oiler, or periodically brushed grease.
When gears operate in an enclosed housing, or gear case, splash lubrication is widely used for
gearing subjected to moderate loads, speeds, and transmitted power levels. In this case, one of
the gears in a pair dips into an oil supply sump at the bottom of the gear case and carries the
oil to the mesh. For high speeds and high-capacity gearing systems, positive oil circulation
systems are often required, using a separate pump to draw oil from the sump and deliver it at
a controlled rate to the meshing teeth, sometimes passing the oil through an external heat ex-
changer to maintain an acceptable oil temperature (usually less than 180F.64
In developing an acceptable lubrication system for gearing, the basic concepts presented
for plain bearing lubrication65 may be applied, and, depending upon the application, it may
be appropriate either to strive for thick ﬁlm lubrication in the mesh, or to accept thin ﬁlm op-
eration. Based on the discussion of elastohydrodynamic lubrication as related to rolling ele-
ment bearings,66 three potential gear mesh lubrication regimes may be identiﬁed. They are:67
Regime I: thin EHD oil ﬁlm; essentially full metal-to-metal contact
Regime II: thin EHD oil ﬁlm; partial metal-to-metal contact
Regime III: thick EHD oil ﬁlm; no metal-to-metal contact
nex =
Ssf
ssf
= 120,600
72,705 = 1.7
1Ssf2N=1010 = 0.6711.021180,0002 = 120,600 psi
Lubrication and Heat Dissipation 645
63See 12.4.
64See Figure 10.3.
65See 10.5.
66See (11-16) and associated discussion.
67See ref. 1.

Regime I is characterized by slow speeds, high loads, and rough surface ﬁnishes, such
as found in gearing for hand winches, food presses, and jacking devices. Regime II, with
substantial, but not total, separation of tooth surfaces by the oil ﬁlm, is typiﬁed by medium
speeds, moderate to high loads, and good surface ﬁnishes, such as found in automotive,
truck, and tractor transmission gearing. Regime III is representative of well-designed, care-
fully manufactured, high-speed gearing such as used in aerospace gearboxes and high-
speed turbine gearing. As for rolling element bearings,68 the elastohydrodynamic ﬁlm
parameter (lambda ratio) should have a value of approximately 3 for optimum lubrication
performance.69 Figure 15.32 depicts the approximate regions of operation associated with
Regimes I, II, and III, as a function of elastohydrodynamic minimum ﬁlm thickness and
effective surface roughness of the gear teeth.
As was discussed for the design of hydrodynamic bearings in 10.7, the rate at which
heat is generated by friction in the operating gear meshes (as well as in the associated sup-
port bearings) must be equal to the rate at which heat is dissipated to the ambient atmos-
phere. The oil temperature at which this balance is reached must be satisfactory in terms
of both equilibrium viscosity and limiting maximum temperature. The friction-generated
heating rate, 
, may be estimated by using thumb rules or efﬁciency calculations as just
discussed, and the heat dissipation rate 
for a gear transmission housing may be esti-
mated from Newton’s Law of cooling,70 repeated here for convenience as
(15-49)
modiﬁed overall heat transfer coefﬁcient, Btu/min-in2-F [see (10-22) and
(10-23) for approximate values]
where  k1 =
Hd = k1Ah1™s - ™a2 Btu>min
Hd
Hg
646
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
68See (11-16) and associated discussion.
69See ref. 9 for calculation of EHD ﬁlm thickness, hmin.
70See (10-19).
Surface finish, 	m (AA)
Surface finish, 	in. (AA)
EHD film hmin, 	m
EHD film hmin, 	in.
0.025
0.05
0.10 0.15
0.25
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
0.025
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
1
2
3
4
5 6
8 10
20
30 40 5060 80100
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
15
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
100
Transition zone
Transition zone
Regime III
Regime II
Regime I
Figure 15.32
Probable lubrication regimes for 
operating gear teeth as a function 
of elastohydrodynamic (EHD) 
minimum ﬁlm thickness and effec-
tive surface ﬁnish. See also (11-16).
(From ref. 1. Source: Dudley
Engineering Company, 
San Diego, CA.)

exposed surface area of housing, in2
housing surface temperature, F
ambient air temperature, F
To achieve equilibrium requires that 
equal 
and the resulting oil temperature must be
acceptable for the lubricant chosen. External oil cooling may be separately considered, if
necessary.
15.11 Spur Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure
The design of gears is typically an iterative process in which potential failure modes are
identiﬁed, tentative material candidates are selected, and initial gearing geometry is as-
sumed. The initial proposal is then iterated until the operational loads and speeds imposed
by design speciﬁcations can be applied for the speciﬁed design lifetime, or until the de-
sired design safety factor has been achieved (see Chapter 2). The following design proce-
dure is suggested for establishing a successful gearing design (many other approaches have
been presented in the literature):71
1. Based on functional specifications and contemplated system configuration, gener-
ate a first conceptual sketch of the gear train, including required reduction ratio,
proposed number of teeth for each gear (see Table 15.3 to avoid undercutting), gear
shaft centerlines and bearing locations, and any other geometrical constraints (see
Example 15.1).
2. Identify potential failure modes (see 15.4).
3. Select tentative gear materials (see 15.5).
4. Select tentative manufacturing and ﬁnishing methods appropriate to the application
(see Table 15.4).
5. Tentatively select a tooth system, then, using speciﬁed power and speed requirements,
perform a complete force analysis to determine torques, speeds, and transmitted loads
at each mesh in the gear train (see Example 15.2).
6. Select a tentative diametral pitch (or module), based on either experience or expert ad-
vice, or by arbitrarily picking one from Figure 15.13 that appears to be consistent with
the proposed design layout. Experience indicates that a balance between failure by
tooth bending fatigue and surface fatigue durability usually occurs when the diame-
tral pitch is chosen to be about 8 or 10. Coarser teeth tend to fail by surface fatigue
and ﬁner teeth by bending fatigue.
7. For each gear, calculate or estimate the tentative pitch radius, pitch-line velocity, face
width, and transmitted load (see Example 15.2).
8. For each gear, calculate the safety factor, based on tooth bending fatigue, that would
exist if the proposed (initial) selections for tooth geometry and material properties (in-
cluding reliability speciﬁcations) were used for the design. Tooth bending fatigue
stresses may be calculated using either the simpliﬁed approach (see Example 15.2) or
the AGMA reﬁned approach (see Example 15.3).
9. Compare the tentative existing safety factor with the speciﬁed design safety factor. If
they are approximately equal, no further iteration is required. If they are not equal,
Hg
Hd
™a =
™s =
Ah =
Spur Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 647
71See, for example, ref. 1.

another iteration is required, usually involving a better selection for diametral pitch.
In some cases a change in selected material may be necessary. Continue iterating un-
til the speciﬁed design safety factor is achieved. Repeat for each gear, as required.
10. Using the results of step 9, calculate the existing safety factor based on surface dura-
bility, using either the simpliﬁed Hertz contact surface fatigue approach (see Example
15.4) or the AGMA reﬁned approach (see Example 15.5). If the existing safety factor
does not agree with the speciﬁed design safety factor, additional iterations may be re-
quired.
11. Estimate friction losses, heat generation, and lubrication requirements to maintain ac-
ceptable temperature levels, noise levels, and design lives (see 15.10).
15.12 Helical Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh
Interaction
As illustrated in Figures 15.2(c) and (d), helical gear drives share many of the attributes of
straight-tooth spur gears when used to transmit power or motion between parallel shafts.
The distinguishing geometrical difference is that spur gear teeth are straight and aligned
with the axis of rotation [as shown in Figure 15.33(a)], while helical gear teeth are angled
with respect to the axis of rotation at an angle , called the helix angle, measured at the
surface of the pitch cylinder (see Figure 15.34). A straight spur gear may be thought of as
helical gear with a helix angle of zero.
The contact zone and mesh interactions of a helical gearset are much more difﬁcult to
visualize than the contact zone and mesh interactions for straight spur gears. Figure 15.33
provides one way to visualize the contact progression in a helical gear mesh by compar-
ing it ﬁrst with a straight spur gear mesh, then a stepped spur gear mesh. For the straight
spur gear of Figure 15.33(a), when mating teeth engage, the line of contact is at once es-
tablished all the way across the face width at or near the tip of the driven gear tooth. This
contact line moves from the site of ﬁrst contact, smoothly along the involute proﬁle to the
site of ﬁnal contact at or near the root of the driven gear tooth, where separation occurs 
as the gears continue to rotate. Depending upon the proﬁle contact ratio, as deﬁned by 
(15-20), the total contact length jumps from one face width to two face widths and back,72
as shown in the rotation diagram of Figure 15.33(a).
Next, visualize the straight spur gear of Figure 15.33(a) as being sliced perpendicular
to its axis of rotation into several thin gears [four shown in Figure 15.33(b)], then visual-
ize the small relative rotation of each thin gear slice, progressively, until a stepped-spur
gear cluster is formed, as shown in Figure 15.33(b). With rotation of the stepped gear, a
full-width line of contact is ﬁrst established across the face of one gear slice, then, as the
gear cluster rotates further, across the second, third, and fourth slices, successively, to gen-
erate the stepped contact length curve shown in the rotation diagram of Figure 15.33(b). It
may be noted that the engagement of the stepped gear is, on average, more gradual than
the engagement of the straight spur gear.
If the gear slices of Figure 15.33(b) are increased in number and decreased in thick-
ness to maintain a ﬁxed face width, and if each slice is progressively rotated through a
slight angle with respect to the former slice, in the limit the stepped teeth give way to par-
allel continuous smooth teeth spiraling about the axis of rotation. Such a gear is called a
helical gear. As illustrated in Figure 15.33(c), the rotation diagram for a helical gear ramps
smoothly from minimum to maximum contact length and back, as the gears rotate. If the
c
648
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
72Assuming 1  mc  2.

face contact ratio73 is an integer, the minimum contact length, 
, and the maximum con-
tact length, 
, are equal, so the contact length remains constant.
The basic terminology describing the features of helical gears is substantially the same
as for straight-tooth spur gears. This may be veriﬁed by comparing Figure 15.34(a) with
Figure 15.1(d). However, because of the angled teeth, some additional parameters are re-
quired to describe certain aspects of helical gearing. Figures 15.34(b) and (c) show sketches
of a helical rack to assist in deﬁning these additional terms. Figure 15.34(c) shows the top
view of a basic right-hand74 helical rack with helix angle 
and face width b. Lines ab and
cd are reference lines lying on the surfaces of two adjacent helical teeth where the pitch plane
c
Lmax
Lmin
Helical Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction 649
Contact length
Angle of rotation
(a) Straight tooth spur gear contact pattern; also contact
length as a function of rotation.
(b) Stepped spur gear contact pattern; also contact length
as a function of rotation.
(c) Right hand helical gear contact pattern; also contact
length as a function of rotation.
Contact
pattern
Lmin
Lmax
Contact length
Angle of rotation
Lmin
Lmax
Contact length
Angle of rotation
Lmin
Lmax
Contact
pattern
Contact
pattern
g
g
g
Figure 15.33
Comparison of contact pat-
terns for driven spur, stepped,
and right-hand helical gears.
For clarity, the (overlapping
engagement) contact patterns
for adjacent teeth are omitted.
73See (15-60).
74One easy way to quickly determine the “hand” of a helical rack or a helical gear by observation is to align
one’s body with the axis of gear rotation and then raise whichever arm will parallel the teeth. The hand of the
gear agrees with the hand raised. Helix angle is measured from the axis of rotation.

intersects the tooth proﬁles. The angle made between either of these pitch plane reference
lines and an intersecting line parallel to the axis of rotation of a mating gear is the helix angle
. In addition, transverse planes (normal to the axis of rotation), normal planes (perpendi-
cular to the teeth), and axial planes (parallel to the axis of rotation) are of interest. In Figure
15.34(c), T-T is a transverse  plane, N-N is a normal plane, and cg lies in an axial plane.
The additional parameters to be deﬁned for helical gears are related to angles and dis-
tances measured on transverse, normal, and axial planes. Thus the transverse circular pitch
(equal to 
) and transverse pressure angle
(equal to ) are measured on the trans-
verse plane, the normal circular pitch
and normal pressure angle
are measured on
the normal plane, and the axial pitch
is measured on the axial plane. By deﬁnition, the
transverse pitch is the same as circular pitch deﬁned for straight-tooth spur gears. Thus
from (15-6),
(15-50)
Then from triangles ace and acg, respectively,
(15-51)
and
(15-52)
px =
pt
tanc =
pn
sinc
pn = ptcosc
pt = pc = pd
N
px
wn
pn
w
wt
pc
pt
c
650
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Dedendum
Section N–N
n
b
T
T
N
c
b
d
a
pn
pt
t

Addendum
Transverse chordal
thickness
(a) Conceptual sketch of helical gear showing
basic shape and terminology.
(b) Conceptual sketch of helical rack showing
basic shape and terminology.
(c) Depiction of helical rack geometry
showing relationships among transverse,
normal, and axial parameters.
Front plane
Transverse
circular pitch, pt
Lead angle, 
Lead angle, 
Top land
Bottom land
Helix angle, 
Helix angle, 
Normal
plane
Normal
pitch line
Pitch radius
Outside radius
Whole depth
Base pitch
Transverse
circular pitch
Normal circular pitch
Base circle
radius
View T–T
Front (transverse) plane
e
N
g
px
Figure 15.34
Geometry and nomenclature for helical gears and racks.

As for spur gears, diametral pitch is a more common index for sizing helical gear
teeth. Based on (15-12)
(15-53)
and similarly,
(15-54)
where 
is diametral pitch in the transverse plane (same as 
for spur gears) and 
is di-
ametral pitch in the normal plane. From (15-53) and (15-54) it may be deduced that
(15-55)
It may also be deduced geometrically from Figure 15.34(c) that
(15-56)
Whether 
or 
is taken as the standard value deﬁning the helical tooth system depends
on the gear-cutting method chosen.75 Standard helical tooth proportions mimic spur gear
tooth proportions (see Table 15.1) but are based on 
and 
as illustrated in Table 15.17.
Of course, for high-performance applications, meeting design criteria for a high-qual-
ity gearset outweighs the importance of using standard available cutters, so in some appli-
cations special tooling is required.
Combining (15-8) with (15-55), the pitch diameter d of a helical gear may be calcu-
lated as
(15-57)
number of teeth
helix angle
normal diametral pitch
The equation for center distance C for a helical gear pair may be written by combin-
ing (15-10) and (15-55) as
(15-58)
C = r1 + r2 =
1N1 + N22
2Pt
=
1N1 + N22
2Pncosc
Pn =
c =
where  N =
d = 2r = N
Pd
=
N
Pncosc
wn
Pn
wn
wt
 tanwt = tanw = tanwn
cosc
Pt = Pncosc
Pn
Pd
Pt
Pn pn = p
Pt pt = p
Helical Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction 651
75For example, hobbing machines cut in the normal plane, so 
and 
, the normal pressure angle and diame-
tral pitch, are speciﬁed for the hobbing cutter. If a gear shaper is used, 
and 
usually are used to select or
design the cutting tool.
Pt
wt
Pn
wn
TABLE 15.17 Standard Proportions for AGMA Full-Depth Helical Gear Teeth 
(U.S. units)
Coarse Pitch 
Fine Pitch 
Addendum
Dedendum
Whole depth
Working depth
Clearance (basic)
Clearance (shaved or ground teeth)
Circular tooth thickness
1.571>Pn
1.571>Pn
10.350>Pn2 + 0.002 1min2
0.350>Pn
10.200>Pn2 + 0.002 1min2
0.250>Pn
2.000>Pn
2.000>Pn
12.200>Pn2 + 0.002 1min2
2.250>Pn
11.200>Pn2 + 0.002 1min2
1.250>Pn
1.000>Pn
1.000>Pn
1Pn Ú 202
1Pn 6 202

The face width b is typically made large enough so that for a given helix angle , a pos-
itive overlap of adjacent teeth will occur in the axial direction. Referring to Figure 15.34(c),
to achieve an effective overlap in the axial direction, it is often recommended that
(15-59)
Face widths smaller than 1.15 
are not recommended. These guidelines give contin-
uous contact in the axial plane as the gears rotate.
The (transverse) contact ratio mp, sometimes called proﬁle contact ratio,76 remains a
valid deﬁnition for helical gears. The positive helical overlap objective embodied in 
(15-59) can also be thought of in terms of a contact ratio  in the axial (face) direction. This
is sometimes called the face contact ratio, where
(15-60)
Just as a larger profile contact ratio corresponds to better load sharing among multiple
teeth simultaneously in contact, a larger face contact ratio corresponds to distribution of
tooth loading along a greater contact length (wider face and/or larger helix angle).
Typically, helix angles ranging from about 10 to about 35 are selected to balance
smoother, quieter operation at larger helix angles with lower axial thrust loads produced
by smaller helix angles. The sum of the profile contact ratio plus the face contact ratio
is called the total contact ratio
, a measure of overall load sharing among the helical
teeth in contact.
In addition to smoother, quieter operation, the teeth of a helical gear, geometrically
deﬁned in the normal plane, are thicker and stronger in the transverse plane [plane of trans-
mitted torque; see (15-25)] than teeth of a straight spur gear with the same normal pitch,
pitch diameter, and number of teeth. This may be veriﬁed from Figure 15.35, where
(15-61)
tt =
tn
cosc
mT
mf = b
px
= Ptbtanc
p
= Pnbsinc
p
px
b Ú c2.0px = 2.0pt
tanc = 2.0pn
sinc d
c
652
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
76Deﬁned for spur gears in (15-20).
P
Circular intersection
of transverse
cutting plane T-T
with pitch cylinder
Pitch cylinder
radius r
Radius re of virtual pitch circle
Elliptical intersection
of normal cutting plane N-N
with pitch cylinder
Virtual pitch circle
matching curvature of
the ellipse at P
Normal chordal
thickness, tn
T
T
Helical gear tooth
Transverse chordal
thickness, tt
N
N

Figure 15.35
Sketch of right-hand helical gear, il-
lustrating the concept of virtual spur
gear and virtual pitch circle, based on
elliptical intersection between normal
plane and pitch cylinder.

Also from Figure 15.35, it may be noted that the normal plane N-N intersects the pitch
cylinder in an elliptical trace whose radius 
at point P is, from analytical geometry,
(15-62)
The proﬁle shape of the tooth in the normal plane is approximately (but not exactly)
the same as the shape of a straight spur gear tooth for a pitch radius equal to instantaneous
radius 
of the ellipse at tangency point , where the curvature of the ellipse and curva-
ture of the virtual pitch circle are matched. Adapting (15-6) to the virtual pitch circle, and
utilizing (15-62),
(15-63)
Incorporating (15-51) into (15-63),
(15-64)
virtual77 number of teeth on virtual spur gear of pitch radius re and the
same actual number of teeth as the helical gear
actual number of teeth on the helical gear
helix angle
The larger number of virtual teeth reduces the tendency for undercutting, allowing the
use of a smaller minimum number of teeth for helical gears than for spur gears. When us-
ing (15-36) to calculate the critical bending stress for a helical gear tooth, the Lewis factor
Y should be selected from Table 15.5 using
as the number of teeth. When using (15-41)
to calculate the critical bending stress for a helical gear, the J factor should be selected from
Figures 15.37 and 15.38, and the I factor for critical surface durability of a helical gear
should be calculated as for spur gears.78 These matters are discussed more fully in 15.14.
15.13 Helical Gears; Force Analysis
Free-body diagrams for a straight-tooth spur gearset are shown in Figure 15.22, where the
normal (resultant) force 
, known to be directed along the line of action, is resolved into
a tangential component 
, associated with useful power transmission, and a radial force
component 
, which serves no useful purpose. For helical gears, because the teeth are an-
gled across the face of the gear, the normal (resultant) force 
is not only inclined by pres-
sure angle 
with respect to the pitch plane, but also inclined by helix angle 
with respect
to the transverse plane, as illustrated in Figure 15.36. Therefore, the resolution of 
re-
quires not only components 
and 
, as for straight spur gears, but also an axial thrust
component 
, as shown in Figure 15.36. Similar to spur gears, 
is directly related to
power transmission and torque developed, and radial component 
is a (useless) separat-
ing force between the driving pinion and driven gear. The axial force 
, generated by the
inclined helical teeth, dictates that the support bearings (shown as A and B in Figure 15.36)
must have the ability to resist not only the force components 
and 
in the transverse
Fr
Ft
Fa
Fr
Ft
Fa
Fr
Ft
Fn
c
wt
Fn
Fr
Ft
Fn
Ne
c =
N =
where  Ne =
Ne =
N
cos 3c
Ne = 2pre
pn
=
2pr
pncos 2c
P
re
re =
r
cos 2c
re
Helical Gears; Force Analysis 653
77Also called equivalent number of teeth or formative number of teeth.
78See (15-45) and associated deﬁnitions.

plane, but also the axial thrust component 
. Also, as for spur gears, (15-25) allows cal-
culation of transmitted force , based on power transmission requirements, as
(15-65)
where pitch-line velocity V may be calculated using (15-23). Using the geometric interre-
lationships depicted in Figure 15.36, if the normal pressure angle 
and helix angle 
are
known (usual case), the resulting force components of interest may be calculated as func-
tions of , also known from (15-65). These results are 
(15-66)
(15-67)
(15-68)
The transverse pressure angle 
may be calculated as a function of normal pressure
angle 
and helix angle 
(both chosen by the designer), utilizing (15-56).
15.14 Helical Gears; Stress Analysis and Design
The AGMA reﬁned approaches to the design evaluation of tooth bending and surface dura-
bility of spur gears, presented in 15.9, are also applicable to helical gears, with minor ad-
justments to account for geometry differences. Thus, for critical tooth bending stress 
in
helical gears, based on (15-41),
(15-69)
where all terms are deﬁned in the same way as for (15-41), except that helical gear geom-
etry factor J is found by using Figures 15.37 and 15.38, secured from other literature
sources, or calculated directly.79
sb = Ft Pt
bJ KaKnKmKI
sb
c
wn
wt
Fn =
Ft
coswncosc
Fa = Fttanc
Fr = Fttanwt
Ft
c
wn
Ft =
33,0001hp2
V
Ft
Fa
654
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Driven side helical
tooth elements, each
lying on pitch cylinder
Pitch cylinder
b
RAy
RAx
RAz
RBz
RBx
RBy
g
t
n

Axis of rotation
z
Bearing
A
Bearing B
T
r
Fn
Fr
Fa
Ft
P
x
y
Figure 15.36
Force analysis of right-hand driven heli-
cal gear. Compare with Figure 15.22 for
spur gears.
79Procedures are available for calculating J for helical gears, but are beyond the scope of this text; e.g., see ref.
20 or 22.

For helical gears, a slightly modiﬁed version of (15-46) may be used to calculate sur-
face fatigue contact stress 
. The modiﬁcation accounts for the increased total length of
tooth contact, because of helical geometry, which may be estimated as80
,
giving for helical gears
(15-70)
Terms in (15-70) are deﬁned or calculated in the same way as for (15-46). Angle 
and 
are helix angle and proﬁle contact ratio, respectively. For the design to be acceptable based
on tooth bending81 it must be true that
(15-71)
where bending fatigue strength values may be based on Table 15.10, properly modiﬁed for
the application. Likewise, for the design to be acceptable based on surface fatigue82 it must
be true that
(15-72)
and surface fatigue strength values may be based on Table 15.14, properly modiﬁed for the
application.
ssf … Ssf
sb … Stbf
mp
c
ssf = CpA
Ft
bdpIa cosc
mp
bKaKnKm
1b> cosc21mp2
ssf
Helical Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 655
Geometry factor, J'
Helix angle, 
0°
5°
10°
15°
20°
25°
30°
35°
20
30
60
150
500
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
Number of teeth
Figure 15.37
AGMA geometry factor 
(for tooth
bending) for standard (equal) adden-
dum helical gears with 
,
meshing with a 75 tooth gear. For
mating gears with other than 75 teeth,
multiply modifying factor MJ times
to obtain geometry factor J (see
Figure 15.38). (From ref. 22. Adapted
from ANSI/AGMA Standard 6021-
G89, with the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
J ¿
Wn = 20°
J ¿
Modifying factor, MJ
Helix angle, 
0°
5°
10°
15°
20°
25°
30°
35°
20
30
50
75
150
500
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
Number of teeth in mating element
Figure 15.38
Modifying factor MJ to be multi-
plied times geometry factor 
(see
Figure 15.37) when mating helical
gear 
has other than 75
teeth. (From ref. 22. (Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 6021-G89,
with the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)
1Wn = 20°2
J¿
80AGMA recommends that only 95 percent of this total helical contact length be used. See (15-20) for calculat-
ing mp.
81See (15-43).
82See (15-48).

15.15 Helical Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure
The design procedure for helical gears follows the same pattern as for spur gears (see 15.11)
except for the complications introduced by the inclined teeth. Thus, a successful procedure
for designing helical gear sets would usually include the following steps:83
1.
Based on functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, generate a
ﬁrst conceptual sketch of the gear train, including required reduction ratio, proposed
number of teeth for each helical gear, shaft centerline and bearing locations, and any
other geometrical constraints (see Example 15.1).
2.
Identify potential failure modes.
3.
Select tentative gear materials (see 15.5).
4.
Select tentative manufacturing and gear ﬁnishing methods appropriate to the applica-
tion (see Table 15.4), keeping in mind that higher quality and tighter tolerances tend
to improve load sharing, reduce dynamic load ampliﬁcation, reduce vibration, and re-
duce mesh noise generation (all at a higher cost). Figure 15.39, for example, illustrates
the reduction in noise level84 of a particular gearset as a function of tighter tolerances
on the tooth proﬁle,85 for a range of operating speeds.
5.
Tentatively select a helix angle and a tooth system; then, using application-speciﬁc
power and speed requirements, perform a complete force analysis to determine
torques, speeds, transmitted loads, separating forces, and axial thrust loads at each
mesh in the gear train. When selecting an appropriate helix angle for the application,
the following factors should be considered:
a. Higher helix angles tend to result in smoother engagement and quieter operation
(up to about 
). For example, Figure 15.40 illustrates the reduction in noise
level86 for a particular gearset as a function of increasing helix angle.
c = 35°
656
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
83Compare with spur gear procedure in 15.11.
84A noise level of 90 dB (decibels) roughly corresponds to a shouting voice, or to a vaneaxial fan operating at
1500 cfm. A noise level of 70 dB roughly corresponds to a conversational voice level. For a more complete in-
terpretation, a gear noise specialist should be consulted.
85However, effective noise reduction, as illustrated in Figure 15.40, can be achieved only if preliminary tooth
design, including proﬁle modiﬁcation, is ﬁrst nominally optimized for quiet operation.
86A noise-level reduction of 20 dB corresponds to a factor of 10 reduction in sound pressure. For a more com-
plete interpretation, a gear noise specialist should be consulted.
Sound pressure level (dB re: 0.0002 	bar)
Speed (rpm)
600
400
800 1,000
2,000
4,000
60
70
80
90
100
(AGMA Qv 11)
Tolerance for
involute profile error = 6 × 10–4, in.
4 × 10–4, in.
(AGMA Qv 13)
2 × 10–4, in.
(AGMA Qv 15)
Figure 15.39
Illustrative example of noise generation
produced by a particular gearset, oper-
ating over a range of speeds, as a func-
tion of manufacturing precision (gear
quality). See Table 15.4 to interpret
AGMA quality numbers Q. (Reprinted
from ref. 21, with permission from 
Machine Design, a Penton Media publi-
cation.)

b. Higher helix angles result in larger axial thrust loads. Usually, these thrust loads
must be supported by the bearings, in addition to the radial loads on the bearings
(see Chapters 10 and 11).
c. Maximum tooth strength for helical gears is typically achieved in the range of he-
lix angles between 10 and 20 degrees.
d. For a given face width, higher helix angles result in larger face contact ratios.
e. For a given number of teeth with a speciﬁed normal diametral pitch, higher helix
angles result in larger pitch diameters.
6.
Select a tentative normal diametral pitch (or module), either based on experience, ex-
pert advice, or arbitrary selection of one from Figure 15.13 that appears to be consis-
tent with the proposed design layout. Experience shows that a balance between failure
by tooth bending fatigue and surface fatigue durability usually occurs when the nor-
mal diametral pitch is chosen to be about 8 or 10. Coarser teeth tend to fail by surface
fatigue and ﬁner teeth by bending fatigue.
7.
For each gear, calculate or estimate the tentative pitch radius, pitch-line velocity, face
width, and transmitted load.
8.
For each gear, calculate the safety factor, based on tooth bending fatigue, that would
exist if the proposed (initial) selections for helix angle, tooth geometry, and material
properties (including reliability speciﬁcations) were used for the design. Tooth bend-
ing fatigue stresses may be calculated using (15-69).
9.
Compare the tentative existing safety factor with the speciﬁed design safety factor. If
they are approximately equal, no further iteration is required. If they are not equal, an-
other iteration is required, usually involving a better selection for helix angle and/or
normal diametral pitch. In some cases, a change of material may be necessary.
Continue iterating until the speciﬁed design safety factor is achieved.
10. Using the results of step 9, calculate the existing safety factor based on surface dura-
bility, using (15-70). If the existing safety factor does not agree with the speciﬁed de-
sign safety factor, additional iterations may be required.
11. Check bearing size and availability to properly support radial and thrust loads pro-
duced by the operating helical gears (see Chapters 10 and 11).
12. Estimate friction losses, heat generation, and lubrication requirements to maintain ac-
ceptable temperature levels, noise levels, and design lives (see 15.10).
Helical Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 657
Reduction in overall acoustic noise level (dB)
Helix angle, 
, degrees
0
10
20
30
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
Figure 15.40
Illustrative example of noise reduction in a particular
gearset as a function of helix angle. (Reprinted from
ref. 21, with permission from Machine Design, a
Penton Media publication.)

Example 15.6 Helical Gearset Design
Because a group of the industrial blending machines discussed in Examples 15.2 through
15.5 may be installed in the same large room, a question has been raised about the possi-
bility of unacceptable noise levels. Engineering management has requested the evaluation
of helical gears as a step toward noise reduction, even though the proposed design is still
at a preliminary stage.
a.
Using the spur gear data (see Example 15.3 for a summary) as a starting point, make
a preliminary design proposal for a pair of parallel helical gears with the same center
distance and the same angular velocity ratio as the currently proposed spur gear set.
To do this, determine the helix angle, the outside diameter, and the face width of the
new gears. Assume that the helical gears will be cut by a 10-pitch, 20 full-depth hob.
b.
Compare existing safety factors for tooth bending and surface fatigue durability for
the proposed helical gears with safety factors already found for the spur gears (2.6 for
tooth bending fatigue87 and 1.7 for surface fatigue durability88).
Solution
a.
Pertinent spur gear data extracted from Example 15.3 are:
Material: AISI 1020 steel
 57,000 psi (Table 3.3)
 43,000 psi (Table 3.3)
BHN  121 (Table 3.13)
Reliability requirement: 99 percent
Life requirement: Very long
Tooth system: 20 full-depth involute spur gears
2500 rpm
5 horsepower
1.0 inch
10
20 teeth
32 teeth (mating gear)
1309 ft/min
126 lb
1.15 inches
9.3
Based on these data, (15-10) gives
and from (15-15)
For the proposed helical gears:
Pn = 10  1matches hob2
v2
v1
= - a20
32 b = -0.625 1first mesh only2
C =
120 + 322
21102
= 52
20 = 2.600 inches
nex-1 =
b1 =
Ft1 =
V1 =
N2 =
N1 =
Pd =
r1 =
hp1 =
n1 =
Syp
Su
658
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
87See (5) of Example 15.3.
88See (8) of Example 15.5.

hence
Again from (15-10)
By speciﬁcation
hence
Iterating to ﬁnd a combination of 
, 
, and 
that maintains the same center dis-
tance and angular velocity ratio as the spur gear set, the results in Table E15.6 may be
obtained. Hence, for the proposed gearset, tentatively select
Using (15-55),
and
This helix angle exceeds the recommended range of 10 to 35, and should be reeval-
uated as the design progresses.
The pitch diameters of the pinion and gear may be calculated using (15-57), as
d1 =
N1
Pncosc =
15
10cos41.41 = 2.000 inches
c = 41.41°
 cosc = Pt
Pn
= 7.50
10
= 0.75
N2 = 24
N1 = 15
Pt
N2
N1
Pt =
N1 + a32
20bN1
2a52
20b
=
a52
20 bN1
2a52
20 b
= N1
2
N2 = 32
20N1
Pt = N1 + N2
2C
Pt 6 10  3see 115 - 5524
Helical Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 659
TABLE E15.6 Iteration to Find Compatible Set of Helical Gear
Parameters
Remarks
20
32.0
10
Original spur gears
19
30.4
9.50
not a whole number1
18
28.8
9.00
not a whole number
17
27.2
8.50
not a whole number
16
25.6
8.00
not a whole number
15
24.0
7.50
OK2
1It should be clear that every operating gear must have an integral number of teeth (no
partial teeth).
2Other combinations of numbers of teeth and helix angle exist, but this one should give
the smallest acceptable helix angle.
N2
N2
N2
N2
Pt
N2
N1

and
Nominal outside diameters of the two gears are (see Table 15.17)
and
Using (15-59) and (15-54), the face width may be estimated as
b.
The bending fatigue safety factor for the proposed helical gearset may be found using
(15-69) and (15-71) together with K-values from Example 15.3. Thus
The geometry factor J may be evaluated using Figures 15.37 and 15.38 to ﬁnd
It should be noted that extrapolation is required (because of the large helix angle)
in both Figures 15.37 and 15.38 to obtain numerical values. Extrapolation is always
undesirable, but will be utilized for this preliminary design. Ultimately, J should be
calculated directly using methods of ref. 20 or 22. Combining these two equations
Utilizing (15-71) and using the same strength value 
 16,000 psi that was de-
termined in Example 15.3, the existing safety factor, based on tooth bending fatigue
in gear 1, is
This represents an increase of over 20 percent in the value of tooth bending fatigue
safety factor found for spur gears in Example 15.3.
Finally, the surface fatigue safety factor may be found for the proposed helical
gearset using (15-70) and (15-72), together with the following data calculated in
Example 15.5:
Ka = 1.0
Ft = 126 lb
Cp = 2.29 * 103
nex-1 =
Stbf
sb
= 16,000
5084
= 3.2
Stbf
sb = 5084 psi
J = 1J¿2MJ = 10.37210.972 = 0.36
sb = FtPt
bJ KaKnKmKI =
11262110cos41.412
10.9521J2
11.0211.15211.6211.02
b = 2.0pn
sinc =
2.0p
Pnsinc =
2.0p
10sin41.41 = 0.95 inch
do2 = d2 + 2a2 = 3.200 + 2a 1
10 b = 3.400 inches
= 2.000 + 2a 1
10 b = 2.200 inches
do1 = 2ro1 = d1 + 2a1 = 2.000 + 2a1.000
Pn
b
d2 =
N2
Pncosc =
24
10cos41.41 = 3.200 inches
660
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.6
Continues

Helical Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 661
Also,
The proﬁle contact ratio 
may be calculated from (15-20) as
From (15-55), or Table E15.6,
and from (15-56)
Using these values, mp may be evaluated as
From (15-45)
where
and
Using these values in (15-70)
= 45,521 psi
ssf = 2.29 * 103
A
126
10.95212.00210.122a cos41.41
1.93
b11.0211.15211.62
I = sin25.9cos25.9
2
a
1.60
1.60 + 1 b = 0.12
mG =
Ng
Np
= 24
15 = 1.60
I = sinwtcoswt
2
a
mG
mG + 1 b
  -
7.5012.600sin25.92
pcos25.9
=
7.5010.79 + 1.08 - 1.142
2.83
= 1.93
  +
7.50211.600 + 0.20022 - 11.600cos25.922
pcos25.9
mp =
7.50211.000 + 0.20022 - 11.000cos25.922
pcos25.9
wt = tan -1
tan20
cos41.41 - 25.9°
Pt = Pncosc = 10cos41.41 = 7.50
mp =
Pt c 21rp + ap22 - 1rpcoswt22 + 21rg + ag22 - 1rgcoswt22 - Csinwtd
pcoswt
mp
b = 0.95 inch
c = 41.41°
a1 = a2 = 0.200 inch
rg = 1.600 inches
rp = 1.000 inch
Km = 1.6
Kn = 1.15

Utilizing (15-72) and the same strength value 
 120,600 psi used in
Example 15.5,
This represents an increase of about 60 percent in surface fatigue safety factor
over the value found for spur gears in Example 15.5.
Assuming these safety factors to be acceptable to engineering management, the
following preliminary recommendations are made:
Material: AISI 1020 steel carburized and case hardened to Rockwell C 60
Reduction ratio: mG  1.60
Helical pinion: Np  15 teeth
Mating helical gear: Ng  24 teeth
Helix angle: 
 41.41 (try to reduce below 35 in ﬁnal design; hand of 
pinion must be opposite to hand of gear)
Pinion pitch diameter: dp  2.000 inches
Gear pitch diameter: dg  3.200 inches
Center distance: C  2.600 inches
Pinion outside diameter: dop  2.200 inches
Gear outside diameter: dog  3.400 inches
Face width: b  0.95 inches
Governing safety factor (surface fatigue): 
15.16 Bevel Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and 
Mesh Interaction
As discussed in 15.2 and illustrated in Figure 15.3(a), when gears are chosen for use in in-
tersecting shaft applications, straight bevel gears represent the simplest (and most widely
used) type of gearing available. In contrast to the cylindrical pitch surfaces of spur and heli-
cal gears (see Figures 15.1 and 15.2), the pitch surfaces of meshing bevel gears are conical,
as sketched in Figure 15.41. The two contacting conical pitch surfaces roll together without
slipping. They share a common apex, Q, at the point of shaft-centerline intersection. When
teeth are cut on the conical pitch surfaces they must be tapered, both in tooth thickness and
height, from a large tooth proﬁle at one end to a smaller tooth proﬁle at the other end.
It is standard practice to deﬁne the size and shape of the tooth proﬁle at the larger end.
Referring again to Figure 15.41, the face width b is usually restricted to about 0.25 to 0.30
of the outer cone distance L because of the inherent difﬁculty in cutting very small teeth
closer to the apex. Thus
(15-73)
It is also recommended that the face width be limited to
(15-74)
Practical values of diametral pitch lie in the range of 1 to 64.
b … 10>Pd
b … 0.3L = 0.3a
d
2sing b
1nsf2N=1010 = 2.7
c
nex-1 =
1Ssf2N=1010
ssf
= 120,600
45,521 = 2.7
1Ssf2N=1010
662
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.6
Continues

Since all pitch cone elements are of equal length, a circumscribing sphere may be vi-
sualized, centered at the common apex Q, and in contact with the outer edges (bases) of
all the conical pitch surfaces, as illustrated in Figure 15.42. Another smaller concentric
sphere may be visualized at the inner ends of the teeth. Thus the conical frustra of all the
pitch cones lie within the spherical shell bounded by these two concentric spheres. Based
on the very successful use of the involute proﬁle for spur and helical gearing applications,
it is natural to consider the involute proﬁle for bevel gear teeth. However, because of the
spherical nature of bevel gear geometry, as illustrated in Figure 15.42, the involute shape
would have to be generated on the surface of a sphere to secure conjugate action. Such a
spherical involute tooth proﬁle is impractical to manufacture, primarily because it would
require the use of a single-point cutting tool.
Bevel Gears; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction 663
b
G
e
a
r
p
i
t
c
h
c
o
n
e
(rp)ave
dp
rbp
Mounting distance
g
p
Pinion
pitch
cone
Outer cone distance L
(rg)ave
Gear pitch
dia., dg
Gear back cone
Developed
back cone
radius, rbg
Mean cone distance M
Midface
reference
point PM for
force analysis
Po, refercence
point for
profile
geometry
and stress
analysis
Pitch cone
angles
Common apex, Q
Po
PM
Mounting surface
Pinion back cone
Dedendum
Dedendum
Addendum
Figure 15.41
Basic geometry and nomencla-
ture for straight-tooth bevel
gears.
Q
Circumscribing sphere
Smaller concentric
sphere
Figure 15.42
Frustra of conical bevel gear pitch surfaces enclosed 
between bounding concentric spheres. (From ref. 25.)

Two other tooth proﬁles that are more practical (more easily manufactured) for use
with straight bevel gears are the octoid tooth proﬁle and the Revacyle89 tooth proﬁle. The
octoid tooth form is widely used for generated bevel gear teeth because a simple recipro-
cating tool with a straight cutting edge can be used to cut the teeth. The Revacycle tooth
proﬁle is usually close to circular and is cut using a generating broach-type cutter; high
production rates are possible if the Revacycle tooth proﬁle is chosen.90
The increases in geometrical complexity just described make design calculations for
bevel gears more complicated and more empirical than for spur or helical gears, but the
underlying concepts are the same. The discussion of bevel gear design in this text is
relatively brief, and data are included only for 20 coniflex91 straight bevel gears. In any
critical design project, the designer is well advised to consult the appropriate
ANSI/AGMA standard92 or seek the advice of a gearing specialist. As already noted, the
size and shape of bevel gear teeth are deﬁned at the larger end where they intersect the back
cones, as illustrated in Figure 15.41. Therefore, by definition, both the diametral pitch
and pitch diameter are based on the pitch circle at the large end of the teeth. Because
tooling for bevel gears is not standardized according to pitch, the diametral pitch need
not be an integer. Tooth profiles resemble spur gear tooth profiles of virtual spur gears
having pitch radii equal to the developed pinion back cone radius 
, and the developed
gear back cone radius 
. The virtual numbers of teeth in these imaginary spur gears are,
for the pinion
(15-75)
and for the gear
(15-76)
Characterizing the size and shape of bevel gear teeth in terms of a virtual spur gear on the
developed back cone is known as Tredgold’s approximation for bevel gears.93
Bevel gears are generally not interchangeable because tooth form is closely tied to the
method used for producing the gears, and a different value of addendum is used for each
gear ratio. In practice, the pinion has a long addendum while the gear has a short adden-
dum (see Table 15.18) to avoid undercutting. Hence bevel gears are nearly always made
and replaced as matched sets. Tooth proportions for standard bevel gears are given in Table
15.18. Suggested minimum numbers of bevel pinion teeth are listed in Table 15.19.
The gear ratio for bevel gears can be determined from the number of teeth, the pitch
diameters, or the pitch cone angles94 as
(15-77)
mG =
vp
vg
=
Ng
Np
= tangg = cotgp  1always 7 1.02
N¿g = 2rbgPd =
Ng
cosgg
N¿p = 2rbpPd =
Np
cosgp
rbg
rbp
d
Pd
664
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
89Registered trade name of Gleason Works, Rochester, NY.
90See ref. 24.
91Coniﬂex is a registered trade name of Gleason Works, Machine Division, Rochester, NY. The side-faces of
Coniﬂex teeth are slightly crowned in their lengthwise direction, providing some tolerance to misalignment
without concentrating tooth contact at the ends of the teeth.
92For example, ANSI/AGMA 2005-C96 (see ref. 23).
93See, for example, ref. 3. This procedure is similar to that leading to (15-64) for helical gears, also attributed
to Tredgold.
94See Figure 15.41.

15.17 Bevel Gears; Force Analysis
As for all types of conjugate proﬁle gearing, the normal (resultant) force 
on a bevel gear
tooth at the site of contact is directed along the line of action. Because the pitch surfaces of
bevel gears are conical, the teeth are inclined with respect to the axis of rotation, as shown
in Figure 15.41. Similar to the case for helical gears, the resolution of normal force 
re-
sults in three mutually perpendicular components: a tangential component 
in the plane of
rotation, associated with useful power transmission, a radial separating force 
, and an ax-
ial thrust component 
. Neither 
nor 
serves a useful purpose. The midpoint of the face
width b of the inclined teeth is usually assumed to be the point of application of resultant
force 
, where the pitch cone radius is 
, as shown in Figure 15.41. The average pitch
cone radius 
to point 
may be calculated from the geometry of Figure 15.41 as
(15-78)
As with spur gears and helical gears,95 the transmitted force (tangential force) in pounds
may be calculated as
(15-79)
where hp is operational horsepower.
Ft =
33,0001hp2
Vave
rave = r - b
2 sing
PM
rave
rave
Fn
Fa
Fr
Fa
Fr
Ft
Fn
Fn
Bevel Gears; Force Analysis 665
TABLE 15.18 Tooth Proportions1 for Standard Full-Depth Straight Bevel
Gears with 90º Shaft Angle (U.S. units)
Pressure angle
Working depth
Whole depth
Clearance
Gear addendum
Pinion addendum
Gear dedendum
Pinion dedendum
Circular thickness
(see ref. 25)
1Deﬁned at larger end of tooth; see, for example, ref. 26.
310.188>Pd2 + 0.0021min24 + 30.540 + 0.4601Np>Ng224>Pd
312.188>Pd2 + 0.0021min24 - 30.540 + 0.4601Np>Ng224>Pd
12.000>Pd2 - 30.540 + 0.4601Np>Ng224>Pd
30.540 + 0.4601Np>Ng224>Pd
10.188>Pd2 + 0.0021min2
12.188>Pd2 + 0.0021min2
2.000>Pd
20°
TABLE 15.19 Minimum Number of Bevel Gear Teeth1 to Avoid
Interference Between Standard 20º Full-Depth
Pinion and Mating Bevel Gears of Various Sizes
Number of
Minimum Number of
Bevel Pinion Teeth
Mating Bevel Gear Teeth
16
16
15
17
14
20
13
31
1Extracted from ref. 1.
95See (15-25) and (15-65).

Using (15-78), the average pitch-line velocity at midface point 
may be written, using
(15-23), as
(15-80)
where 
and 
are pitch radii in inches to midpoints of the meshing tooth faces,
and 
and 
are rotational speeds in rpm; 
has units of ft/min.
Based on the selected pressure angle 
and pitch cone angle , the force components
and 
may be geometrically determined as
(15-81)
and
(15-82)
To avoid a potential point of confusion when calculating bending fatigue and surface fa-
tigue stresses, it should be carefully noted that the force components , 
and 
, just cal-
culated using (15-79), (15-81), and (15-82), are all referred to the midface reference point 
in Figure 15.41. Because of the standard custom of deﬁning bevel gear proﬁle geometry and
pitch radius r at , on the outer end of the tooth (see Figure 15.41), virtual force components
, 
, and 
, if calculated from transmitted torque, speed, and horsepower, would have
different values from , 
, and 
. Speciﬁcally, it may be deduced from (15-21) that
(15-83)
torque on gear induced by power and speed requirements of the application
tangential force and radius referred to midface reference point PM
virtual tangential force and standard pitch radius of gear referred to tooth
end reference point Po at larger (outer) end of the tooth
To avoid confusion, AGMA standard calculations for bending fatigue and surface fa-
tigue durability (pitting) for bevel gears are currently formulated using torque in the ex-
pressions for 
and 
96 rather than tangential force, as commonly used for spur and
helical gears.97 That clarifying modiﬁcation will be adopted in this text. Further, pinion
torque, , has been chosen as the basis for standard calculations. From (15-22) then, it be-
comes convenient to write
(15-84)
horsepower
pinion speed, rpm
15.18 Bevel Gears; Stress Analysis and Design
Calculations of bevel gear tooth bending stress 
and surface fatigue contact stress 
are essentially the same as presented for spur98 and helical99 gears, except for minor
adjustments associated with bevel gear geometry and the use of pinion torque in these
ssf
sb
np =
where  hp =
Tp =
63,0251hp2
np
Tp
ssf
sb
Fto, d
2 =
Ft, rave =
where  T =
T = Ftrave = Ftoad
2 b
Fa
Fr
Ft
Fao
Fro
Fto
Po
PM
Fa
Fr
Ft
Fa = Fttanwsing
Fr = Fttanwcosg
Fa
Fr
g
w
Vave
ng
np
1rg2ave
1rp2ave
Vave =
2p1rp2avenp
12
=
2p1rg2aveng
12
PM
666
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
96See (15-85) and (15-86).
97See (15-41), (15-46), (15-69), and (15-70).
98See (15-41) and (15-46).
99See (15-69) and (15-70).

expressions to avoid confusion (as discussed in 15.17). Specifically, for tooth bending
fatigue100
(15-85)
and, for surface fatigue durability
(15-86)
diametral pitch (deﬁned at larger ends of teeth)
pinion torque, in-lb
pinion pitch diameter (deﬁned at larger ends of teeth)
face width, inch
bevel gear geometry factor for tooth bending (includes adjustments to ac-
count for conically inclined and tapered teeth, load sharing, location of most
critical loading, stress concentration, and standard practice of deﬁning Pd
and dp at larger ends of teeth). See Figure 15.44 for numerical values
application factor (see Table 15.6)
dynamic factor (see Figure 15.24)
bevel gear mounting factor (see Figure 15.43)
elastic coefﬁcient for bevel gears. Comparing with equation (15-45) for
spur gears, note that the bevel gear multiplying factor 
reﬂects the
more nearly spherical contact geometry of crowned bevel gears as
compared to the more nearly cylindrical contact geometry of spur gears
I  bevel gear geometry factor for surface fatigue contact stress (includes sim-
ilar adjustments to those noted for J above). See Figure 15.45 for numeri-
cal values
23>2
=
Q
3
2pa
1 - v2
p
Ep
+
1 - v2
g
Eg
b
1Cp2bevel =
Km =
Kn =
Ka =
J =
b =
dp =
Tp =
where  Pd =
ssf = 1Cp2bevelA
2Tp
bd2
pIKaKnKm
sb =
2TpPd
dpbJ KaKnKm
Bevel Gears; Stress Analysis and Design 667
100As for spur and helical gears, additional K-factors are available to improve accuracy.
Bevel gear mounting factor, KM–bg
Face width, in.
0
50
100
150
Face width, mm
200
250
300
350
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
Neither member
straddle mounted
Both members
straddle mounted
One member
straddle mounted
Figure 15.43
Bevel gear mounting factor, Km–bg, for
20º crowned straight bevel gear teeth
(90º shaft angle). Do not extrapolate.
(From ref. 27. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2003-B97, with
the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)

15.19 Bevel Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure
Design procedure for bevel gears follows the same basic pattern established in 15.11 for
straight spur gears and 15.15 for helical gears. For bevel gears, the design steps would usu-
ally include:
1. If functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration include shafts at an
angle of 90 to each other,101 generate a ﬁrst conceptual sketch of the gear train, in-
cluding required reduction ratio, input pinion torque, gear shaft centerlines, bearing
locations, and any other geometrical constraints.
2. Identify potential failure modes (see 15.4).
668
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Number of teeth on gear for which geometry factor is desired
Geometry factor, J
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
13 15
20
25 30 35 40 45 50
100
0.30
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
60
70
80
90
Number of teeth in mate
Figure 15.44
Geometry factor J (for tooth
bending) for 20º Coniﬂex® straight
bevel gears (90º shaft angle).
(From ref. 27. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2003-B97,
with the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association, 1500
King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria,
VA 22314.)
Number of pinion teeth
Geometry factor, I
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
10
20
30
40
50
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
60
Number of gear teeth
80
90
100
70
Figure 15.45
Geometry factor I (for surface fatigue
durability) for 20º Coniﬂex® straight
bevel gears (90º shaft angle). (From
ref. 27. Adapted from ANSI/AGMA
Standard 2003-B97, with the permis-
sion of the publisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association, 1500 King
Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA
22314.)
101Actually, almost any angle can be accommodated but angles other than 90 are beyond the scope of this text.
See ref. 23.

3. Select tentative gear materials (see 15.5).
4. Select tentative manufacturing methods appropriate to the application (see Table 15.4).
5. Tentatively select a tooth system; then, using speciﬁed power and speed requirements,
perform an analysis to determine pertinent torques and speeds.
6. From the calculated bevel pinion torque requirement 
and speciﬁed gear ratio 
,
estimate the pinion pitch diameter 
, using Figure 15.46 and 15.47 to obtain an ac-
ceptable initial selection of 
; select the numbers of teeth for pinion and gear utiliz-
ing the recommendations of Figure 15.48.
7. Based on the deﬁnition of diametral pitch 
given by (15-8), the approximate diame-
tral pitch may be estimated (at the larger end of the teeth) from the results of step 6.
For bevel gears, the diametral pitch need not be “standard” and any diametral pitch
between 1 and 64, including nonintegral values, is acceptable.
8. Using the experience-based recommendations of (15-73) and (15-74), determine face
width b by adopting the smaller of the two calculated values. Also, calculate average
Pd
dp
dp
mG
Tp
Bevel Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 669
Approximate pinion pitch diameter, in.
Approximate pinion pitch diameter, mm
Applied pinion torque, in-lb
10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000
0.1
1
10
100
1.13
11.3
113
1130
11,300
113,000
Gear ratio
Ng
Np
1:1
2:1
4:1
10:1
Applied pinion torque, Nm
25.4
254
2540
2.54
Figure 15.46
Approximate pinion pitch di-
ameter requirement as a func-
tion of applied pinion torque
and gear reduction ratio for
20º Coniﬂex® straight bevel
gears, based on tooth bending
fatigue (90º shaft angle).
(From ref. 23. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2005-
C96, with the permission of
the publisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association,
1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)
Approximate pinion pitch diameter, in.
Approximate pinion pitch diameter, mm
Applied pinion torque, in-lb
10
100
1000
10,000
100,000
1,000,000
0.1
1
10
100
1.13
11.3
113
1130
11,300
113,000
Gear ratio
Ng
Np
1:1
2:1
4:1
10:1
Applied pinion torque, Nm
25.4
254
2540
2.54
Figure 15.47
Approximate pinion pitch di-
ameter requirement as a func-
tion of applied pinion torque
and gear reduction ratio for
20º Coniﬂex® straight bevel
gears, based on surface fatigue
durability (90º shaft angle).
(From ref. 23. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2005-
C96, with the permission of
the publisher, American Gear
Manufacturers Association,
1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)

pitch-line velocity from (15-80), then tangential, radial, and axial force components
(to be reacted by support bearings).
9. For each bevel gear, calculate the tentative existing safety factor, based on tooth bending
fatigue, that would exist if the proposed selections for tooth geometry and material prop-
erties (including reliability speciﬁcations) were used for the design. Tooth bending fatigue
stresses may be calculated from (15-85) and material properties may be found in 15.9).102
10. Compare the tentative existing safety factor with the speciﬁed design safety factor. If
they are approximately equal, no further iteration is required. If they are not equal, an-
other iteration is required. Continue iterating until the speciﬁed design safety factor is
achieved. Repeat for each bevel gear, as necessary.
11. Using the results of step 10, calculate the existing safety factor based on surface fa-
tigue durability, from (15-86). If this existing safety factor, based on surface fatigue,
does not equal or exceed the speciﬁed design safety factor, additional iterations may
again be required.
12. Estimate friction losses, heat generation, and lubrication requirements to maintain ac-
ceptable temperature levels, noise levels, and design lives (see 15.10).
Example 15.7 Bevel Gearset Design
In the preliminary design of a special-purpose industrial honing machine, it is being pro-
posed to use a straight bevel gearset to transform the rotation about a vertical shaft axis
(of a motor-driven pinion) into rotation about an intersecting horizontal shaft axis (of the
output gear). It is estimated that 7 horsepower will be required to drive the hone at a rotational
speed of 350 rpm. The drive motor tentatively chosen runs under full power at 1150 rpm.
Additional speciﬁcations for this straight bevel gearset are:
1.
These preliminary calculations may be based on the assumption that friction losses
are negligible for all gears and bearings.
2.
It is desired to use AISI 1020 low-carbon steel for the gear blanks, if possible; then,
after machining, it is desired to carburize and case harden the tooth surfaces to RC 60.
670
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
102However, AGMA standards include special tables of material properties for bevel gears (see ref. 27) that
should be used in any critical design project.
Approximate number of pinion teeth, Np
Pinion pitch diameter, d, in.
Pinion pitch diameter, d, mm
0
51
102
152
203
254
305
2
4
6
8
10
12
1:1
Ratio
2:1
3:1
4:1
6:1
10:1
0
10
20
30
40
Straight bevel gears
Figure 15.48
Recommended number of pinion teeth
as a function of pinion pitch diameter
and gear reduction ratio for 20º
Coniﬂex® straight bevel gears (90º shaft
angle). (From ref. 23. Adapted from
ANSI/AGMA Standard 2005-C96, with
the permission of the publisher,
American Gear Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King Street, Suite
201, Alexandria, VA 22314.)

A design life of N  1010 cycles and a reliability of 99 percent are desired. Properties
for AISI 1020 steel carburized and case hardened to RC 60 have already been found
in Examples 15.3 and 15.5, and may be summarized as follows:
a. Core properties are:
57,000 psi
43,000 psi
16,000 psi
BHN 121
b. Case properties are:
c. Gear teeth are to be standard 20 straight bevel gear teeth.
d. Total production is estimated to be 50 machines.
Propose an acceptable conﬁguration that meets the speciﬁcations and provides a
design safety factor of approximately nd  1.5.
Solution
a.
Based on the speciﬁcations, a ﬁrst conceptual layout of the bevel gearset is sketched
as shown in Figure E15.7.
b.
Potential primary failure modes appear to be tooth bending fatigue and surface fatigue
pitting.
c.
Since this is a low-production item, Coniﬂex® straight bevel gears are tentatively
selected.
d.
Using speciﬁed shaft speed requirements, the gear ratio 
may be calculated from
(15-77) as
e.
Operating pinion torque may be calculated using (15-84) as
Tp =
63,0251hp2
np
=
63,025172
1150
= 384 in-lb
mG =
vp
vg
=
np
ng
= 1150
350 = 3.29
mG
1Ssf2N=1010 = 120,600 psi
 Hardness =
1Stbf2N=1010 =
Syp =
Su =
Bevel Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 671
L
C
L
C
Output
gear
Input
pinion
90°
Tp
np = 1150 rpm
ns = 350 rpm
Figure E15.7
First conceptual sketch of proposed straight
bevel gearset.

f.
The approximate pinion pitch diameter requirement may be read from Figure 15.46
(based on tooth bending fatigue) or from Figure 15.47 (based on surface fatigue dura-
bility, which is often more critical). Using Figure 15.47, with the values mG and TP
(About the same result would be obtained from Figure 15.46.)
g.
Next, from Figure 15.48, the recommended number of pinion teeth would be
and for the gear, using (1) and (15-77),
Note that using the (required) integral number of gear teeth slightly changes the gear
ratio calculated in (1) to 
 (59/18)  3.28.
h.
The appropriate diametral pitch may next be estimated using (15-8) as
(Note that the integral value of 
is fortuitous. Fractional values are acceptable.)
i.
Using (15-73), face-width estimates may be made as
where 
is determined from (15-77) as
Thus
Also, from (15-74)
Taking the smaller value
j.
Average pitch-line velocity 
may be calculated using (15-80). First, from (15-78)
whence
k.
Using (15-79), (15-81), and (15-82),
then
1Fr2p = Fttanwcosgp = 160021tan202cos17.0 = 209 lb
Ft =
33,0001hp2
Vave
=
33,000172
385
= 600 lb
Vave =
2p1rp2avenp
12
=
2p10.642111502
12
= 385 ft>min
1rp2ave =
dp
2 - b
2 singp = 1.5
2
- a0.77
2 b sin17.0 = 0.64 inch
Vave
b = 0.77 inch
bPd … 10
Pd
= 10
12 = 0.83
bL … 0.3a
1.5
2sin17.0b = 0.77 inch
gp = cot -1mG = cot -13.28 = 17.0°
gp
bL … 0.3a
dp
2singp
b
Pd
Pd =
Np
dp
= 18
1.5 = 12.0
mG
Ng = mGNp = 3.291182 = 59.22 L 59 teeth
Np = 18 teeth
dp L 1.5 inches
672
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.7
Continues

Bevel Gears; Summary of Suggested Design Procedure 673
and
Noting from (15-77) that
the radial and axial components of force on the gear are
and
It may be noted that these force magnitudes are consistent with free-body equilibrium
of the bevel gearset pictured in Figure E15.7.
l.
The bending fatigue safety factor for the proposed bevel gearset may be found using
(15-85). To facilitate the calculation, the known data may be summarized as
384 in-lb
12.0
1.5 inches
0.77 inch
18 teeth
59 teeth
Next
1.0 (from Table 15.6; uniform loading for both the drive source and the
driven machine)
1.15 (from Figure 15.24 using 
 8 or 9 from Table 15.4, based on
good accuracy gearing)
1.1 (from Figure 15.43 for face width of 0.77 inch with one member
straddle mounted; see proposed layout in Figure E15.7.
0.24 (from Figure 15.44, for the pinion teeth, using Np  18 and Ng  59)
Placing these values in (15-85)
and the existing bending fatigue safety factor for this ﬁrst design proposal would be
A safety factor less than unity is clearly unacceptable.
To increase the safety factor on tooth bending fatigue, it is necessary to make the teeth
stronger (thicker) in bending. As a second iteration, try increasing the pitch diameter to 103
Then, following the same calculation sequence just used, iterations on 
are con-
tinued until an existing safety factor calculation results in a value approximately equal
dp
dp = 2.0 inches
nex-1 =
1Stbf2N=1010
sb
= 16,000
42,060 L 0.4
sb =
2138421122
11.5210.77210.24211.0211.15211.12 = 42,060 psi
J =
Km =
Qn
Kn =
Ka =
Ng =
Np =
b =
dp =
Pd =
Tp =
1Fa2g = 600tan20sin73.0 = 209 lb
1Fr2g = 600tan20cos73.0 = 64 lb
gg = tan -1mG = tan -13.28 = 73.0°
1Fa2p = Fttanwsingp = 600tan20sin17.0 = 64 lb
103Experience dictates that, when iterating at an early stage, larger jumps in the value of the iteration parameter
tend to be more efﬁcient in the long run.

to the specified design safety factor value of 
 1.5. Table E15.7 illustrates the
process.
m.
The surface fatigue safety factor for the proposed bevel gearset may be found using
(15-86), and it too must be 1.5 or greater, by speciﬁcation. In addition to the third-iteration
values from Table E15.7, the evaluation of (15-86) requires values for 
and I. From
deﬁnitions following (15-86),
=
Q
3
2p c a 1 - 0.32
30 * 106 b + a 1 - 0.32
30 * 106b d
= 2805
1Cp2bevel =
Q
3
2p c a
1 - v2
p
Ep
b + a
1 - v2
g
Eg
b d
1Cp2bevel
nd
674
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.7
Continues
TABLE E15.7 Iteration Process to Find Acceptable Pinion Speciﬁcations (Iterations 1–3 are based on tooth
bending fatigue; iteration 4 is required by the result of (27) for surface fatigue.)
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
, 
Iteration
in
in
in
in
in
ft/min
lb
psi
1
1.5
12.0
0.77
0.83
0.77
0.64
385
600
1.0
1.15
1.1
0.24
42,060
0.4
2
2.0
9.0
1.03
1.11
1.03
0.85
512
451
1.0
1.15
1.1
0.24
18,220
0.9
3
2.5
7.2
1.28
1.39
1.28
1.06
638
362
1.0
1.25
1.1
0.24
9,900
1.61
4
3.0
6.0
1.54
1.67
1.50
1.28
987
234
1.0
1.25
1.1
0.24
5,870
2.72
1This safety factor on bending fatigue is close enough to the speciﬁed value 
2This larger safety factor on bending fatigue is precipated by the need for an adequate safety factor on surface fatigue (more critical).
nd = 1.5.
1nex2bending
J
Km
KV
Ka
Pd
sb
Ft
Vave
1rp2ave
b
bPd
bL
dp
and from Figure 15.45,
Evaluating (15-86) then
Thus the surface fatigue safety factor for the iteration-3 design proposal would be
Because this existing safety factor is less than the speciﬁed design safety factor,
additional iteration is required. A fourth iteration is therefore recorded in Table E15.7,
based on surface fatigue requirements. Using these values, and repeating an updated cal-
culation for 
,
whence
nex-4 = 120,600
86,110 L 1.4
ssf-4 = 2805A
213842
1.5013.02210.0832
11.0211.25211.12 = 86,110 psi
ssf-3
nex-3 = 120,600
111,860 L 1.1
ssf-3 = 2805A
213842
1.2812.52210.0832
11.0211.25211.12 = 111,860 psi
I = 0.083

This safety factor is relatively close to 
 1.5, and could be iterated again if de-
sired, to increase its value. It will be regarded as acceptable for now, however.
For this design project, surface fatigue durability 
 1.4) is more critical
than tooth bending fatigue 
 2.7). Such results are typical. It may therefore be ex-
pedient (but not necessary) to make design calculations based on surface fatigue durabil-
ity ﬁrst, followed by calculations based on tooth bending fatigue.
15.20 Worm Gears and Worms; Nomenclature, Tooth
Geometry, and Mesh Interaction
Worm gearsets have been brieﬂy described in 15.2 and sketched in Figure 15.4. Only cylin-
drical worm gearing [see Figure 15.41(d)] will be discussed here104 Worm gearing is used
to transmit power and motion between nonintersecting shafts, usually at an angle of 90 to
each other, as shown in Figure 15.49. The worm resembles a power screw (see Chapter 12)
and the worm gear resembles a helical gear, except that it is throated to partially envelop
the worm. If a rotating worm is constrained axially by thrust bearings, the worm gear is
caused to rotate about its own axis, as the worm threads slide sidewise against the gear teeth.
This simulates the kinematic behavior of a linearly advancing rack105 engaged with a con-
jugate spur or helical gear. Worm gearing is often chosen to obtain large reduction ratios.106
Ratios ranging from 
to 
are common but worm gearsets can be produced to
provide ratios ranging from 
to 
. Because of the screw action, worm gearsets are
quiet, vibration free, and produce a constant output speed free of pulsations.
Lines of contact between the worm and worm gear teeth progress from the tips toward
the roots of the worm gear teeth as they pass through the mesh. Figure 15.50 illustrates the
contact lines at a given instant for the case where three teeth are in contact, giving three
lines of contact, all progressing toward the roots of the gear teeth as the worm rotates. The
360:1
1:1
100:1
312 :1
1nex-4
1nex-4
nd
Worm Gears and Worms; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction 675
Gear
pitch
dia., dg
Throat
radius, rt
Face width, b
Worm
helix
angle, 
w
Worm lead
angle w and
gear helix
angle, 
g
Axial
pitch, px
Lead, L
Worm outside
dia., dwo
Center
distance
C
Worm root dia., dwr
Worm pitch dia., dw
Note: w and 
g are
measured on pitch
surfaces.
Figure 15.49
Sketch of worm gear arrangement for
cylindrical (single-enveloping) worm, giv-
ing standard nomenclature. Shown for
double-threaded worm (see Figure 12.3).
104See ref. 1 for discussion of nonenveloping and double-enveloping worm gearsets.
105The worm, when rotated, simulates a series of rack proﬁles being continuously advanced along its axis.
106Reduction ratio is the ratio of angular velocity of the worm to angular velocity of the gear.

progression of these lines of contact sweeping across each worm gear tooth results in an
area of contact. Thus the state of stress in the contact zone between the worm and the gear
is inﬂuenced not only by cyclic Hertz contact forces, but also by sliding friction forces gen-
erated by the rotating worm, and by load distribution among the contacting teeth.
It is common practice to impose a gradual run-in period of new worm gear drives before
operating them at full load. One recommended run-in process is to operate the gearset at half-
load for a few hours, then increase the load in at least two stages to full load. This process re-
sults in smoother work-hardened surfaces, and a reduction in friction forces of up to 15 percent.
The proﬁle, or shape, of the worm threads is determined by the method used to man-
ufacture them.To insure proper contact between the worm and the gear teeth, the gear hob
(or other tooling used to produce the worm gear) typically has the same basic cutter shape
used for the worm. Figure 15.51 depicts three common proﬁle forms used in practice.
Customary tooth dimensions for worms and worm gears may be given as a function of
diametral pitch Pd of the gears, as shown in Table 15.20, or as a function of axial pitch px.107
676
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
A
A
worm
worm
gear
Line 2
Line 2
Line 3
Line 3
Line 1
Line 1
Section A–A
Figure 15.50
Instantaneous lines of contact on
worm gear teeth. (From ref. 28.
Adapted from ANSI/AGMA
Standard 6022-C93, with the per-
mission of the publisher, American
Gear Manufacturers Association,
1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)
20°
0.0000
10:1 (Nominal reduct. ratio)
20°
0.0000
50:1
Approx.
1 inch
(25 mm)
Mean
worm
diam.
22.5°
0.0000
10:1
22.5°
0.0000
Approx.
2 inch
(50 mm)
Mean
worm
diam.
17.32°
0.0000
10:1
18.67°
0.0000
50:1
18.16°
–0.0001
10:1
20.64°
0.0000
20.32°
0.005
10:1
19.93°
0.0001
50:1
24.43°
0.0168
10:1
22.49°
0.0006
(rise of curvature
above chord)
(a) Straight axial profile;
cut using a straight-sided
cutter in the axial plane.
(b) Straight normal profile;
cut using a straight-sided
cutter in the normal
plane.
(c) Involute helicoid profile; cut
using a straight-sided cutter or
grinding wheel tilted to the
worm lead angle and inclined
to the chosen pressure angle.
50:1
50:1
50:1
Figure 15.51
Three common worm-
thread proﬁle forms.
(Worm proﬁle forms are
not standardized; other
forms are also used.) 
(From ref. 28. Selectively
adapted from ANSI/
AGMA Standard 6022-
C93, with the permission
of the publisher,
American Gear
Manufacturers
Association, 1500 King
Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.)
107It is common practice to express these dimensions in terms of axial pitch px. The expressions of Table 15.20
may be rewritten in terms of axial pitch by substituting 
.
Pd = p>px

A basic requirement of a properly designed worm gearset is that the axial pitch px of
the worm108 must be equal to the circular pitch pc of the gear.109 Thus
(15-87)
and, as for other types of gearing, the diametral pitch 
(or module m) of the gear is
(15-88)
Worms may be manufactured with a single thread or with multiple threads, similar to
power screws.110 The number of threads 
on the worm is treated as if it were the num-
ber of “teeth” in the worm. The number of threads in the worm is often referred to as the
number of starts.111 Typically, reduction ratios above 
utilize a single worm thread,
and below 
multiple threads are more common.
The number of teeth in the worm gear is determined by the required reduction ratio, to-
gether with the minimum number of teeth dictated by good design practice. Table 15.21 gives
the suggested minimum number of worm gear teeth as a function of normal pressure angle.
The pitch diameter of a worm is not a function of its number of threads. The reduction
ratio of a worm gearset, therefore, is not equal to the ratio of gear and worm pitch diameters;
the reduction ratio is a function of the number of teeth on the worm and on the gear. Hence
(15-89)
vw
vg
=
Ng
Nw
30:1
30 :1
Nw
Pd =
Ng
dg
aor  m =
dg
Ng
b
Pd
px =
pn
coslw
= pc =
pn
coscg
=
pdg
Ng
Worm Gears and Worms; Nomenclature, Tooth Geometry, and Mesh Interaction 677
TABLE 15.20 Typical Tooth Proportions for Worms and Worm Gears1 (U.S. units)
Addendum
Dedendum
for
for
Whole depth
Working depth
Clearance
Root diameter of worm
Outside diameter of worm
Root diameter of gear
Throat diameter of gear
Outside diameter of gear (approx.)
1Compiled from ref. 28. Excerpted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 6022-C93, with the permission of the pub-
lisher, American Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201, Alexandria, VA 22314.
dw + 13.000>Pd2
dg + 12.000>Pd2
dg - 12.400 + 0.0022>Pd  for  Pd Ú 20
dg - 12.314>Pd2  for  Pd 6 20
dw + 12.000>Pd2
dw - 12.400 + 0.0022  for  Pd Ú 20
dw - 12.314>Pd2  for  Pd 6 20
0.157>Pd
2.000>Pd
2.157>Pd
Pd Ú 20
11.200 + 0.0022>Pd
Pd 6 20
1.157>Pd
1.000>Pd
108See Figure 15.49.
109Same deﬁnition as for other gearing; e.g., see (15-6). Similar to the development of (15-51) and (15-52) for
helical gears, the worm gear normal circular pitch is given by 
, and the worm normal circular
pitch is given by 
.
110See Figure 12.3.
111Looking at the end of a worm one can count the number of parallel threads that start at the end and wind
helically along the cylindrical worm.
pn = pxsincw = pxsin190 - lw2 = pxcoslw
pn = pccoscg

Usual practice is to select the worm pitch diameter 
to lie in the range112
(15-90)
where C is center distance (inches). The gear pitch diameter may be calculated as
(15-91)
Typically, the worm gear face width should not exceed two-thirds the worm pitch di-
ameter,113 or
(15-92)
This face-width restriction, based on experience, reﬂects the adverse effect of increasingly
nonuniform load distribution along the contact thread length, as face width is increased.114
Similar to the case of power screws (Chapter 12), the lead is the axial advance of any
point on the worm thread for one revolution of the worm, or the axial pitch of the worm
multiplied times the number of threads on the worm. Thus
(15-93)
The mean worm lead angle115
is given by
(15-94)
For the usual case, where the worm shaft is 90 to the gear shaft, the lead angle of the
worm is equal to the helix angle of the worm gear, or
(15-95)
lw = cg
lw = tan -1 Lw
pdw
lw
Lw = Nw px
b … 0.67dw
dg = 2C - dw
C 0.875
3.0
… dw … C 0.875
1.6
dw
678
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
TABLE 15.21 Suggested Minimum Number of Worm Gear Teeth1
as a Function of Normal Pressure Angle 
n
Normal Pressure
Minimum Number of
Angle, 
Worm Gear Teeth
40
27
20
21
17
25
14
12
30
10
From ref. 28. Excerpted from ANSI/AGMA Standard 6022-C93, with the permission of
the publisher, American Gear Manufacturers Association, 1500 King Street, Suite 201,
Alexandria, VA 22314.
2712
2212
1712
1412
wn
W
112Experience-based empiricism.
113More accurate guidelines may be found in ref. 28.
114Wider faces result in larger cantilever deﬂections of the worm threads near the extremities of the contact
zone, concentrating more of the transmitted load toward the center of contact. This results in high local bend-
ing stresses and increases the potential for tooth bending fatigue failure at the root ﬁllet. See ref. 30, p. 13.
115The lead angle varies signiﬁcantly from the worm outside diameter to its root diameter, so the mean worm di-
ameter is used as the basis for specifying lead angle. It is also worth noting that ambiguities in terminology exist
in the literature that have the potential to create confusion: Some authors call 
the lead angle while others call
the helix angle. In this text, the lead angle is consistently measured from a plane normal to the axis of rotation
while helix angle is measured from the axis of rotation itself. Hence, the lead and helix angles are complements.
l
l

The lead angle of the worm (complement of the worm’s helix angle) is the customary
speciﬁcation for worm threads (as opposed to helix angle). Usually the worm has a helix
angle of more than 45 and the worm gear has a helix angle less than 45. The “hand” of
the worm must be the same as the hand of the gear.
Customary pressure angles for worm gearing are, in degrees, 14
, 17
, 20, 22
, 25,
27
, and 30. Either normal pressure angle 
or transverse pressure
angle 
may be speciﬁed. They are related by
(15-96)
Higher pressure angles may be selected when higher worm gear tooth strength is required,
but consequences of selecting higher-pressure angles include fewer teeth in contact, higher
bearing reaction forces, larger shaft bending stresses, and larger deﬂections of the worm
shaft. To avoid interference, pressure angles are usually related to the worm lead angle, as
shown, for example, in Table 15.22.
15.21 Worm Gears and Worms; Force Analysis and Efﬁciency
Force equilibrium and free-body analyses for a meshing worm and gear parallel the force
analyses for a power screw assembly.116 Conceptually, the worm is analogous to the power
screw, and the worm gear is analogous to the nut. The force resolution for a power screw,
as depicted in Figure 12.7, may therefore be directly applied to the case of a worm by ob-
serving that power screw lead angle 
is equivalent to worm lead angle 
, and power
screw normal thread angle 
is equivalent to normal pressure angle 
for the worm
gearset. Making these equivalency substitutions in Figure 12.7, a tangential summation of
forces on the worm, when the worm is driving the gear, gives
(15-97)
The normal force 
may therefore be expressed as
(15-98)
where 
is the sliding coefﬁcient of friction between the worm threads and meshing gear
teeth.117
Writing an axial force summation for the worm
(15-99)
Fwa = Fn1coswncoslw - msinlw2 = Fwt
coswncoslw - msinlw
coswnsinlw + mcoslw
m
Fn =
Fwt
coswnsinlw + mcoslw
Fn
Fwt = Fn1coswnsinlw + mcoslw2
wn
un
lw
a
wn = tan -1(tan wt cos lv)
wt
wn
12
12
12
12
Worm Gears and Worms; Force Analysis and Efﬁciency 679
TABLE 15.22 Maximum Worm Lead Angle for
Selected Pressure Angles
Pressure Angle 
,
Maximum Lead Angle 
,
degrees
degrees
15
20
25
25
35
30
45
1412
lw
wn
116See 12.4.
117Coefﬁcients of friction are shown in Appendix Table A.1. Empirical data show, however, that in worm gear
applications the coefﬁcient of friction is a function of sliding velocity. See ref. 29 for detailed data.

Also, summing forces in the radial (separating) direction for the worm
(15-100)
Forces on the gear are related by equilibrium to forces on the worm as
(15-101)
(15-102)
(15-103)
Power and speed requirements are typically utilized as the bases for calculating tan-
gential force. Equation (15-25) may be used to calculate the tangential force on either the
gear, if output power and rotational gear speed are known, or the worm, if input power and
rotational worm speed are known. Since signiﬁcant power losses result from sliding fric-
tion between worm and gear, the input power 
and output power 
often differ
signiﬁcantly. Thus118
(15-104)
and
(15-105)
torque on worm, in-lb
gear torque, in-lb
worm pitch diameter, inches
gear pitch diameter, inches
pitch-line velocity of worm, fpm
pitch-line velocity of gear, fpm
The efﬁciency e for a worm gearset may be deﬁned as the ratio of driving torque on
the worm assuming no friction in the mesh, to driving torque on the worm when friction
is included; efﬁciency may also be expressed as the ratio of output power at the gear shaft
to input power at the worm shaft.119 Thus, using (15-104) and (15-105)
(15-106)
Based on the pitch line speed of the gear, sliding velocity 
is
(15-107)
and based on the pitch line speed of the worm
(15-108)
Vs =
Vw
coslw
Vs =
Vg
sinlw
Vs
e =
1hp2out
1hp2in
=
FgtVg
FwtVw
Vg =
Vw =
dg =
dw =
Tg =
where  Tw =
Fgt =
2Tg
dg
=
33,0001hp2out
Vg
Fwt = 2Tw
dw
=
33,0001hp2in
Vw
1hp2out
1hp2in
Fgr = Fwr    3see 115-10024
Fga = Fwt    3see 115-9724
Fgt = Fwa    3see 115-9924
Fwr = Fnsinwn = Fwt 
sinwn
coswnsinlw + mcoslw
680
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
118AGMA practice is to use mean diameter
instead of pitch diameter . Mean diameter is deﬁned as twice
the radius measured to the midpoint of the working depth (at the central plane of the gear). If there is a signiﬁ-
cant difference between dm and d, dm should be used.
119Assuming the worm to be driving the gear.
d
dm

Hence
(15-109)
and (15-106) may be rewritten, using (15-97), (15-99), (15-101), and (15-109), as
(15-110)
This is consistent with the efﬁciency expression for power screws given in (12-19); hence
the efﬁciency trends, as a function of lead angle 
(power screw lead angle ) and friction
coefﬁcient, as depicted in Figure 12.8, are applicable to worm gears as well as power screws.
It is also important to remember that the efﬁciency of a wormset is an index to the heat
generated in the mesh due to sliding between the worm thread and the gear teeth.120
Further, the heat generated must be dissipated to the ambient atmosphere at such a rate that
the lubricant sump temperature, under steady-state operation, does not exceed about 180 F.
As discussed more fully in 15.10, various means of cooling the housing or the oil may be
used, including the possible use of an external heat exchanger. Experience shows that if
adequate oil pumps, heat exchangers, and mesh-directed oil jets are used, virtually any
wormset can be operated at its full mechanical potential. Ultimately, experimental testing
should be conducted to verify the acceptability of the proposed design.
Depending upon coefﬁcient of friction and wormset geometry, the worm gear may or
may not be able to back-drive the worm when worm torque is released. If the worm gear
cannot back-drive the worm, the wormset is said to be self-locking. If the worm gear can
back-drive the worm, the wormset is said to be overhauling. To determine whether or not
a gearset is self-locking, the force resolution at the mesh site121 must be reexamined for
the case of the gear driving the worm. When the gear attempts to drive the worm (in the
opposite direction from the worm driving the gear), the mesh sliding direction reverses and
therefore the friction force also reverses direction. The resulting expression for tangential
force on the worm under these circumstances becomes122
(15-111)
The gear can backdrive the worm only if 
is negative. If 
is positive or zero, the
gearset is self-locking. Hence it may be deduced from (15-111) that self-locking conditions
exist if
(15-112)
or if
(15-113)
Conversely, overhauling conditions exist if
(15-114)
It should be noted that even if the wormset meets the self-locking criterion of 
(15-113), vibration or reversing cyclic torques may still cause it to “creep” backward. It is
usually recommended that a lead angle no greater than 5 or 6 degrees be used if self-lock-
ing is desired, and that a separate braking device be incorporated if no creeping action can
m 6 coswntanlw
m Ú coswntanlw
- coswnsinlw + mcoslw Ú 0
Fwt
Fwt
Fwt = Fn1coswnsinlw - mcoslw2
°
a
lw
e = a coswncoslw - msinlw
coswnsinlw + mcoslw
b tanlw = coswn - mtanlw
coswn + mcotlw
Vg
Vw
= Vssinlw
Vscoslw
= tanlw
Worm Gears and Worms; Force Analysis and Efﬁciency 681
120Wormset heat generation is not trivial. Consider that a 100-hp-capacity wormset with an efﬁciency of 75
percent (see Figure 12.8) generates an amount of heat equivalent to 25 hp, or nearly 20 kW.
121Refer again to Figure 12.7.
122As compared to the worm driving case of (15-97).

be tolerated. The low lead angles required for effective self-locking usually imply the use
of a single-thread worm and produce low efﬁciencies.123
15.22 Worm Gears and Worms; Stress Analysis and Design
In principle, the design procedure for worm gearing follows the same pattern that has been
described for spur, helical, and bevel gears, augmented by the additional consideration of
adhesive/abrasive wear124 that may result from the very signiﬁcant sliding velocities gen-
erated between worm threads and worm gear teeth. In practice, because of complexities in
proﬁle geometry, the primitive state of design procedure for estimating component life
when wear is the governing failure mode, and the sparsely populated wear databases avail-
able, the design of worm gearing is almost wholly empirical.
If a designer wished to pursue fundamental principles in the rational design of worm
gearing, one good approach would be to assess the design based on bending fatigue
stresses at the root ﬁllets of the worm and worm gear teeth, surface fatigue durability based
on cyclic Hertz contact stresses between worm threads and gear teeth, and adhesive/abra-
sive wear depths generated by the relatively high sliding velocities (resulting in large dis-
tances slid during the design lifespan of the unit) under relatively large contact
pressures.125 Such an assessment would be frustrated, however, because of sparse data for
wear constants,126 poorly deﬁned design criteria for allowable adhesive/abrasive wear
depth, and interactions among the potential failure modes (poorly understood and difﬁcult
to formulate). For these reasons an empirical approach is usually taken in wormset design.
A common empirical design approach is to assume that tooth bending fatigue is less
serious than surface durability when deﬁning an acceptable design.127 Further, the surface
durability criterion typically employed in practice is assumed to embody both surface fa-
tigue and adhesive/abrasive wear parameters.128
Since a meaningful calculation has not yet been developed for an appropriate surface
stress parameter, an alternative loading severity parameter129 for wormset design is the
tangential gear force 
. The critical capacity for this application, 
, is empirically
calculated from the experience-based expression130
(15-115)
worm gear pitch diameter, inches
face width, inches 
0.67
worm pitch diameter, inches
material factor (see expression below)
ratio correction factor (see expression below)
velocity factor (see expression below)
Kn =
Km =
Ks =
dw =
dw2
1…
b =
where  dg =
1Fgt2allow = d 0.8
g bKsKmKn
1Fgt2allow
Fgt
682
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
123See Figure 12.8.
124See 2.8.
125See, for example, equations (2-79) and (2-81) of Chapter 2 for estimating adhesive and abrasive wear depth.
126Such as given in Tables 2.6, 2.7, and 2.8.
127Based on experience in the industry, this is usually, but not always, the case. See also (15-92) and related
discussion.
128However, since cyclic Hertz contact stresses are not explicitly included, the criterion is more reﬂective of
adhesive/abrasive wear than surface fatigue.
129See Chapter 6.
130Based on experience, this allowable value for tangential force on the worm gear should produce a nominal
design life of 25,000 hours of operation. See ref. 29.

The material factor 
for a static chill-cast or forged bronze gear, running against a
steel worm with surface hardness of Rockwell C 58 or higher, is given by131
(15-116)
(15-117)
(15-118)
is taken as the largest of (15-116), (15-117), or (15-118).
The ratio correction factor 
, which depends on gear ratio 
, is given by
(15-119)
(15-120)
(15-121)
The velocity factor 
, which depends on sliding velocity , is given by
(15-122)
(15-123)
(15-124)
Using these factors, (15-115) may be evaluated. For a design to be acceptable
(15-125)
Adapting (15-105)
(15-126)
Incorporating (15-115) and (15-126) into (15-125), an acceptable design may be
achieved if
(15-127)
One approach that may be used to iterate toward an acceptable design conﬁguration
is to isolate face width b from (15-127) to give, for an acceptable design
(15-128)
If the wormset design proposal meets this face-width criterion, and also meets the condi-
tion imposed by (15-92), repeated here as
(15-129)
an acceptable solution has been reached. If not, additional iterations are required.
b … 0.67dw
b Ú
126,0501hp2out
d1.8
g ngKsKmKn
126,0501hp2out
dgng
… d 0.8
g bKsKmKn
Fgt =
12133,00021hp2out
pdgng
=
126,0501hp2out
dgng
Fgt … 1Fgt2allow
Kn = 65.52V -0.774
s
   
 1for Vs 7 3000 ft>min2132
Kn = 13.31V -0.571
s
   
 1for 700 … Vs … 3000 ft>min2
Kn = 0.659e-0.0011Vs    1for 0 … Vs … 700 ft>min2
Vs
Kn
Km = 1.1483 - 0.00658mG    1for mG 7 762
Km = 0.01071-m2
G + 56mG + 515420.5    1for 20 … mG … 762
Km = 0.02001-m2
G + 40mG - 7620.5 + 0.46    1for 3 … mG … 202
mG = Ng>Nw
Km
Ks
1for dg Ú 8.0 inches2
1Ks2dg = 1411.6518 - 455.8259log10dg
1for dg 6 8.0 inches2
1Ks2dg = 1000
1for C 6 3.0 inches2
1Ks2C = 720 + 10.37C 3
Ks
Worm Gears and Worms; Stress Analysis and Design 683
131These factors are deﬁned by AGMA in ref. 29, which includes extensive tables of values and also (informa-
tive) empirical algorithms for them. Only selected excerpts are included in this text.
132Sliding velocities greater than 6000 ft/min are not recommended.

15.23 Worm Gears and Worms; Suggested Design Procedure
The design procedure for worm gearsets follows the same basic guidelines that have been
suggested for spur, helical, and bevel gears. Many alternative procedures are discussed in
the literature, and variations are common depending upon design speciﬁcations. For worm
gearing, the design steps would usually include the following:
1. If functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration include nonintersect-
ing shafts at an angle of 90 to each other, a high reduction ratio, and a compact space
envelope, tentatively propose a worm gearset. Then, generate a ﬁrst conceptual sketch of
the gearset, specifying the required reduction ratio, input worm torque or power, output
gear torque or power, shaft centerlines, bearing locations, operating speeds, efﬁciency
limits, self-locking requirements, and any other geometrical constraints.
2. Identify potential failure modes (see 15.4).
3. Select tentative materials (see 15.5).
4. Select tentative manufacturing methods appropriate to the application, giving consid-
eration to existing facilities and inventory of cutters (See Table 15.4.)
5. Select the number of worm threads (starts) to be used. Guidelines for making an ini-
tial selection are:
a. Pick a single start if the desired reduction ratio is greater than 
.
b. Pick multiple starts if the desired reduction ratio is less than 
.
6. From the speciﬁed ratio and 
, calculate the required number of worm gear teeth,
7. Using (15-90) and known133 center distance C, calculate a tentative worm pitch diam-
eter dw.
8. Using (15-91), calculate a worm gear pitch diameter dg.
9. Using (15-87) or (15-88), calculate the axial pitch px or diametral pitch Pd. Tooth pro-
portions for worms and worm gears, as a function of 
or 
, are shown in Table
15.20.
10. Using (15-93), calculate the lead of the worm, then from (15-94) calculate the lead
angle
.
11. Select134 an appropriate normal pressure angle
for the application, following guide-
lines given in Tables 15.21 and 15.22.
12. Determine the power or torque required to drive the load, then calculate transmitted
load from (15-104) or (15-105).
13. Calculate tangential, axial, and radial force components acting on the worm threads
and on the gear teeth, in the zone of contact, using (15-99) through (15-103).
14. Calculate the efﬁciency of the wormset using (15-110), or read an approximate efﬁ-
ciency from Figure 12.8 as a function of lead angle 
(power screw lead angle ) and
friction coefﬁcient .
15. If speciﬁcations require the wormset to be self-locking, check to make sure the unit
meets the criterion given in (15-113). If speciﬁcations require the wormset to be over-
hauling, check to make sure the unit meets the criterion given in (15-114).
m
a
lw
wn
lw
px
Pd
Ng.
Nw
30 :1
30 :1
684
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
133Center distance may be independently speciﬁed if reduction ratio can be approximate. If an exact reduction
ratio is required, and it is desired to utilize an existing hob, it may be necessary to calculate the center distance
needed to accommodate these speciﬁcations.
134An initial selection of 
is often used.
wn = 20°

16. Using (15-128), and adopting the equal sign, calculate the minimum allowable face
width 
.
17. With the result from step 16, check the criterion for maximum allowable face width
given by (15-129). It satisﬁed, the tentative design is acceptable. If not satisﬁed, ad-
ditional iterations may be necessary to arrive at an acceptable design conﬁguration.
18. From the efﬁciency e (see step 14), estimate heat generation and lubricant require-
ments to maintain acceptable temperature levels and design lives (see 15.10).
19. Laboratory testing of a prototype unit is highly recommended.
Example 15.8 Worm Gearset Design
It is desired to design a simple conveyor-lift such as the one crudely sketched in Figure
E15.8A. As shown, the concept is to utilize two parallel roller chains135 to support con-
tainment “buckets” between them, using pinned connections between the buckets and
chains. The chains are to be driven by a pair of driving sprockets at the bottom (ground
ﬂoor) and supported at the top (second ﬂoor) by a pair of idler sprockets. A backing plate
is proposed to enhance stability as the buckets slide up the steeply inclined backing
plate from the ﬁrst ﬂoor to the second foor, 15 feet above. Each bucket is to carry a pay-
load of about 25 pounds, and a bucket must arrive at the second ﬂoor for unloading every
2 seconds. It may be assumed that the tare weights of ascending and descending buckets
balance each other. The buckets are to be spaced 19 inches apart along the roller chains. It
is initially suggested that a 1725-rpm electric motor be used to drive the lift at the ﬁrst ﬂoor
bmin
Worm Gears and Worms; Suggested Design Procedure 685
135See Chapter 17.
15 ft
20 in.
Backing
plate
Bucket
lift
direction
    Bucket
  return
direction
60°
Roller
chain
Parallel
roller
chains
19 in.
typ.
Speed reducer output
to be attached here at
drive sprocket shaft
Drive sprockets of
6 in. pitch diameter
First floor level
Second floor level
Typical
pin-connected
bucket
Figure E15.8A
Crude sketch of a proposed conveyor-lifting device.

sprocket shaft. For safety reasons it is speciﬁed that electrical power failure at the motor
must not result in self-driven conveyor reversal. With these speciﬁcations in mind, pro-
pose, and initially size, an appropriate speed reducer for this application.
Solution
a.
From the discussions of 15.2, it would at ﬁrst seem that either spur, helical, or worm
gearing arrangements might be used for this application. To help decide among these
possibilities, an estimate of required reduction ratio may be made. The reducer input
speed from the electric motor is speciﬁed to be 1725 rpm. The reducer output speed
(applied to drive sprocket shaft) must deliver a conveyor bucket to the second ﬂoor
every 2 seconds (30 per minute). Hence, the drive sprocket speed in rpm may be es-
timated as follows. Tentatively selecting a 6-inch-diameter drive sprocket, the dis-
tance that the chain advances during each revolution of the drive sprocket is
The approximate length of chain supporting loaded buckets between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond ﬂoor is
For the 19-inch bucket spacing, the speed of the sprocket drive shaft required to de-
liver 30 buckets per minute is
Thus the reduction ratio must be, approximately,
This relatively high reduction ratio suggests that worm gearing should be a primary
candidate. For example, if spur or helical gears were used, and a single reduction were
considered, a 2-inch drive pinion would require a 9-ft-diameter gear to give the ratio:
a clearly impractical arrangement. If multiple reductions in series were considered,
and each mesh reduction were to lie in the range of 3 to 4, a triple reduction unit
would be required. While such an arrangement should probably be investigated, it is
more complicated and may be more costly than a worm gearset. Worm gearing will
be investigated here as a ﬁrst step.
b.
Following the design procedure given in 15.23, a conceptual sketch of the proposed
wormdrive reduction unit is shown in Figure E15.8B.
c.
Reviewing 15.4, the primary failure mode candidates appear to be tooth bending fa-
tigue, surface fatigue pitting, and adhesive/abrasive wear.
d.
Materials for worm gear applications are, commonly, a steel worm with surface hard-
ness of Rockwell C 58 or higher in mesh with a chill-cast or forged bronze gear. These
material choices will be adopted for this preliminary investigation.
e.
No speciﬁc information is available about manufacturing facilities or cutter inventory,
so it will be assumed that a hobbing method will be used for this wormset, and an ac-
curacy level of AGMA 10 or 11 will be chosen, in accordance with the guidance of
Table 15.4.
mG = 1725
30.3 = 56.9
nspr L a30 buckets
min
b a
119>122 ft
bucket
b a 1 rev
1.57 ft b = 30.3 rev
min
Lch =
15
sin60 = 17.32 ft
Ladv =
p162
12
= 1.57 ft
rev
686
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Example 15.8
Continues

f.
Since the required reduction ratio exceeds 
, a single start worm thread will be
chosen, tentatively.
g.
Using (15-89) and the reduction ratio mG, the required number of worm gear teeth
may be calculated as
since 
must have an integral value. For 
and 
, the resulting ratio 
becomes, again using (15-89),
h.
From Figure E15.8B, the tentative center distance desired is 4.0 inches. Hence, from
(15-90), the tentative worm pitch diameter is estimated as
which lies midrange of the (15-90) requirement.
i.
Using (15-91), the gear pitch diameter may be calculated as
j.
From (15-88)
and from (15-87)
k.
From (15-93) the lead is
and from (15-94) the lead angle is
l.
A normal pressure angle of 
will be tentatively chosen (common initial
choice). This is consistent with Tables 15.21 and 15.22.
wn = 20°
lw = tan -1 0.36
p11.52 = 4.6°
Lw = 11210.362 = 0.36 inch
px = p
Pd
=
p
8.77 = 0.36 inch
Pd = 57
6.5 = 8.77
dg = 214.02 - 1.5 = 6.5 inches
dw = C 0.875
2.3
=
1420.875
2.3
= 1.5 inches
mG = 57
mG
Ng = 57
Nw = 1
Ng
Ng = 156.92112 = 57 teeth
30 :1
Worm Gears and Worms; Suggested Design Procedure 687
C = 4 in.
From 1775 rpm
electric motor coupling
(initial suggestion)
Worm
Worm gear
To conveyor
coupling
Figure E15.8B
First conceptual sketch of worm 
gearset layout.

688
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
m.
An estimate of power required to drive the conveyor may be made by calculating
power required to lift the load (change in potential energy per unit time), then adding
the power required to overcome frictional sliding of the loaded buckets up the back-
ing plate. This sum will correspond to minimum power output required from the
worm gear drive shaft.
The power required to lift the load may be estimated as
The power required to overcome frictional resistance of the buckets sliding up the in-
clined backing plate may be estimated by calculating the tensile force in the returning
chain required to overcome frictional sliding (assuming no lubrication between buck-
ets and backing plate).136 Thus
The frictional drag induces a tangential force on the drive sprocket at a radius of 3.25
inches, producing a friction torque of
and using (4-39)
Thus, the minimum total power required by the conveyor (provided by the worm
gear output shaft) is
n.
Using (15-105)
o.
Using (15-101)
then from (15-99)137
Fwt =
286
a cos20cos4.6 - 0.09 sin 4.6
cos20sin4.6 + 0.09 cos 4.6 b
= 51 lb
Fwa = Fgt = 286 lb
Fgt =
33,00010.412
pa 6
12 b130.12
= 286 lb
1hp2out = 1hp2req’d = 1hp2L + 1hp2fr = 0.34 + 0.07 = 0.41 horsepower
1hp2fr =
11572130.32
63,025
= 0.07 horsepower
Tfr = 13.252148.32 = 157 in-lb
Fch = mFn = 0.35a
17.32 ft
1.58 ft>bucket b a 25 lb
bucketb sin30 = 48.3 lb
  * a30.3 rev
min
b a
1 hp
33,000 ft-lb>min b d = 0.34 horsepower
1hp2L = Ja
17.32 ft
1.58 ft>bucketb a 25 lb
bucket b a 1.57sin60 ft vertically
rev
b
136See Appendix Table A.1 for unlubricated mild steel sliding on mild steel (typical value, 
.
137See typical value for dry steel on bronze of 
given in Appendix A.1 (may be conservative).
m = 0.09
m = 0.352
Example 15.8
Continues

Worm Gears and Worms; Suggested Design Procedure 689
and from (15-102)
Also, from (15-100) and (15-103),
p.
The efﬁciency of the wormset may be calculated from (15-110) as
This value may be conﬁrmed by consulting Figure 12.8.
q.
To check the self-locking requirement using (15-113), to be self-locking
Since
the wormset is self-locking by a narrow margin. An auxiliary braking device should
be recommended to assure safety.
r.
Using (15-128) with the “equal” sign
The material factor 
may be found from (15-117) as
The ratio correction factor may be found from (15-120) as
Finally, the velocity factor may be found from (15-122), using (15-107) ﬁrst, to ﬁnd
sliding velocity as
Thus
Hence
s.
Using (15-129)
bmax = 0.6711.52 = 1.0 inch
bmin =
126,05010.412
16.521.8130.1211000210.76210.332
= 0.24 inch
Kn = 0.659e-0.001116392 = 0.33
Vs =
130.12p16.5>122
sin4.5
= 639 ft/min
Km = 0.01073-157.322 + 56157.32 + 514540.5 = 0.76
Ks = 1000
Ks
bmin =
126,05010.412
16.521.8130.12KsKmKn
m = 0.09 7 0.08
m Ú cos20tan4.6 = 0.08
e = cos20cos4.6 - 0.09tan4.6
cos20 + 0.09cot4.6
= 0.45 = 45%
Fwr = Fgr = 51a
sin20
cos20sin4.6 + 0.09cos4.6b = 106 lb
Fga = Fwt = 51 lb

690
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
Based on the bracketing results of 
and 
, a tentative face width will be
speciﬁed as
t.
The minimum input horsepower from the electric motor may be estimated as
or
Thus a one-horsepower 1725-rpm electric motor is required, at a minimum.
Starting torque capacity should also be investigated since static coefﬁcients of friction
are higher than sliding coefﬁcients of friction.
u.
The approximate heat generation in the wormset is,
or138
and utilizing (10-19)
where,139 for dissipation to still air,
From Hd and (k1)std therefore, if a maximum steady-state temperature difference
(between the housing and ambient air) of 100F is deemed acceptable,
or
Thus the surface area of the housing should be at least 918 square inches. If a cube-
shaped housing were used, with each side about 10 inches, the housing surface area
would meet this criterion. It appears feasible therefore to design the unit using an oil
sump and housing (without any special external cooling provisions). Laboratory test-
ing of a prototype unit is recommended.
1Ah2req’d L 918 in2
21.2 = 2.31 *  10-4Ah11002
1k12std = 2.31 * 10-4
Btu
min - in2 - °F
Hd = Hg = k1Ah1™s - ™a2
Hg = 10.502142.412 = 21.2 Btu/min
Hg = 1hp2in11 - e2 = 0.9111 - 0.452 = 0.50 horsepower
1hp2in = 0.41
0.45 = 0.92 horsepower
1hp2in1e2 = 1hp2out
b = 0.25 inch
bmin
bmax
1381 horsepower 
.
139See (10-22).
0.7068 Btu
sec = 42.41Btu
min
Example 15.8
Continues

Problems 691
15-1. For each of the design scenarios presented, suggest one
or two types of gears that might make good candidates for
further investigation in terms of satisfying the primary design
requirements.
a. In the design of a new-concept agricultural hay-condi-
tioner, it is necessary to transmit power from one rotating
parallel shaft to another. The input shaft is to rotate at a
speed of 1200 rpm and the desired output shaft speed is
350 rpm. Low cost is an important factor. What types(s) of
gearing would you recommend? State your reasons.
b. In the design of a special speed reducer for a laboratory
test stand, it is necessary to transmit power from one ro-
tating shaft to another. The centerlines of the two shafts
intersect. The driver shaft speed is 3600 rpm and the de-
sired speed of the output shaft is 1200 rpm. Quiet opera-
tion is an important factor. What types(s) of gearing would
you recommend? State your reasons.
c. It is desired to use a 1-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor to
drive a conveyer input shaft at a speed of approximately 
30 rpm. To give a compact geometry, the motor drive shaft
is to be oriented at 90 degrees to the conveyor input shaft.
The shaft centerline may either intersect or not, depending
on designer judgment. What type(s) of gearing would you
recommend? State your reasons.
15-2. The compound helical gear train sketched in Figure P15.2
involves three simple helical gears (1,2,5) and one compound
helical gear (3,4). The number of teeth on each gear is indicated
in the sketch. If the input gear (1) is driven clockwise at a speed of
 1725 rpm, calculate the speed and direction of the output
gear (5).
15-3. The sketch of Figure P15.3 shows a two-stage reverted
gear reducer that utilizes two identical pairs of gears to enable
making the input shaft and output shaft colinear. If a 1-kw,
n1
Problems
1
2
3
4
5
N1 = 20
N2 = 66
N4 = 88
N3 = 22
N5 = 50
1
2
3
4
5

Figure P15.2
Helical gear train.
Motor-driven
input shaft “A”
cw
N1 =
16 teeth
N3 = 16 teeth
N2 = 48 teeth
N4 = 48 teeth
Compound shaft “B”
Output shaft “C”
1
2
3
4
Figure P15.3
Two-stage reverted gear reducer.
The preliminary design proposal may be summarized in the following speciﬁca-
tions:
1. Use a wormset with a reduction ratio of 
.
2. Use a single start steel worm of pitch diameter dw  1.50 inches, surface hardened
to Rockwell C 58 or harder, with a lead angle of 4.6 degrees.
3. Use a chill-cast bronze gear of pitch diameter dg  6.50 inches and face width of 
b  0.25 inch with 57 teeth (px  0.36 inch) and normal pressure angle 
.
4. Use a 4.0-inch center distance.
5. Use a splash lubrication system in a steel housing with a minimum of about 918
in2 of surface area. No special external cooling measures are required.
6. Drive the unit with a 1-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor. (A starting torque investiga-
tion should be conducted before purchasing the motor.)
7. Plan to build and test a prototype unit.
wn = 20°
57 :1

692
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
1725-rpm motor operating at full rated power is used to drive
the input shaft in the CW direction, do the following:
a. Determine the speed and direction of the compound
shaft.
b. Determine the speed and direction of the output shaft.
c. Assuming a 98 percent efﬁciency of each gear mesh,
calculate the torque available for driving the load at the
output shaft.
15-4. A two-planet epicyclic gear train is sketched in Figure
P15.4. If the ring gear is ﬁxed, the sun gear is driven at 1200
rpm in the CCW direction, and the carrier arm is used as out-
put, what would be the speed and direction of rotation of the
carrier arm?
colinear with the input shaft (1). Gear 4 is ﬁxed. If the input
shaft (1) is driven at 250 rpm in the CW direction, what would
be the output shaft (5) speed and direction?
15-6. An annular gear A on shaft S1, has 120 teeth and drives a
pinion B having 15 teeth, keyed to shaft S2. Compounded with
B is a 75-tooth gear C which drives a 20-tooth gear D on shaft
S3. Compounded with gear D is gear E having 144 teeth driving
gear F on shaft S4. The axis of S4 is collinear with the axis of
S1. All shafts are parallel and in the same plane.
(a) How many teeth must F have if all gears have the same
diametral pitch?
(b) If S1 is the driving shaft, determine the train ratio.
(c) If the gears have a diametral pitch of 4, what is the dis-
tance between shafts S1 and S3?
15-7. The 10-element gear train shown in Figure P15.7 has an
input speed of 1200 rpm (clockwise). Determine the output
speed (rpm) and direction of rotation.
ccw
Sun gear
Ring gear (fixed)
Planet
gear
Planet gear
N2 = 20 teeth
N1 = 30 teeth
N3 = 70 teeth
3
Carrier arm
2
1
2
4
Figure P15.4
Two-planet epicyclic gear train.
N3 = 16 teeth
N4 = 34 teeth
N1 = 20 teeth
N2 = 30 teeth
Compound planet gear
(rotates on carrier shaft)
5
5
5
1
4
Output shaft
from
carrier arm
Sun gear
Carrier shaft
Carrier arm
Input shaft
250 rpm CW
2–3
Bearing allows
shaft to rotate
within fixed gear
Figure P15.5
Reverted compound planetary gear train.
N2 = 20 teeth
N3 = 32 teeth
N4 = 24 teeth
N5 = 36 teeth
N6 = 28 teeth
N8 = 23 teeth
N9 = 54 teeth
N10 = 46 teeth
3
2
5
4
6
Input
Output
(Arm)
7
8
9
10
15-5. A special reverted planetary gear train is sketched in
Figure P15.5. The planet gears (2-3) are connected together
(compound) and are free to rotate together on the carrier shaft.
In turn, the carrier shaft is supported by a symmetrical one-
piece pair of carrier arms attached to an output shaft (5) that is
Figure P15.7
Ten element, speed reduction gear train.

Problems 693
15-8. The gear train shown in Figure P15.8 has an input speed
of 720 rpm clockwise and an input torque of 300 lb–in.
Determine:
(a) The speed and direction of rotation of the output–shaft
(rpm)
(b) The output torque (in–lb)
15-9. In the gear train shown in Figure P15.9, the planet carrier
(2) is turning clockwise at the rate of 500 rpm and the sun gear
(3) is turning counterclockwise at the rate of 900 rpm. All gears
have the same diametral pitch. Determine the speed and direc-
tion of rotation of the annular gear (7).
15-10. What are the kinematic requirements that must be met
to satisfy the “fundamental law of gearing”?
15-11. Deﬁne the following terms, using a proper sketch where
appropriate.
a. Line of action
b. Pressure angle
c. Addenum
d. Dedendum
e. Pitch diameter
f. Diametral pitch
g. Circular pitch
h. Pitch point
15-12. Describe what is meant by a “gear tooth system.”
15-13. A straight-tooth spur gearset is being considered for a
simple-speed reduction device at an early stage in the design
process. It is being proposed to use standard 20 involute full-
depth gear teeth with a diametral pitch of 4 and a 16-tooth pin-
ion. A reduction ratio of 2.50 is needed for the application. Find
the following:
a. Number of teeth on the driven gear
b. Circular pitch
c. Center distance
d. Radii of the base circles
e. Would you expect “interference” to be a problem for this
gear mesh?
15-14. Repeat problem 15-13, except use a diametral pitch of 8
and 14-tooth pinion.
15-15. Repeat problem 15-13, except use a reduction ratio of
3.50.
N2 = 21 teeth
N3 = 63 teeth
N4 = 30 teeth
N5 = 39 teeth
N6 = 35 teeth
N7 = 78 teeth
N8 = 24 teeth
N10 = 32 teeth
Input
Output
2
6
5
7
8
9 (Arm)
10
4
3
Figure P15.8
Ten element, speed increasing drive train.
N3 = 18 teeth
N4 = 25 teeth
N5 = 39 teeth
N6 = 21 teeth
7
6
5
4
3
2
Figure P15.9
Planetary gear train.

694
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
15-16. Repeat problem 15-13, except use a diametral pitch of
12 and a reduction ratio of 7.50.
15-17. Repeat problem 15-13, except use a diametral pitch of
12, a 17-tooth pinion, and a reduction ratio of 7.50.
15-18. A straight-tooth spur gearset has a 19-tooth pinion that
rotates at a speed of 1725 rpm. The driven gear is to rotate at a
speed of approximately 500 rpm. If the gear teeth have a mod-
ule of 2.5, ﬁnd the following:
a. Number of teeth on the driven gear
b. Circular pitch
c. Center distance
15-19. Repeat problem 15-18, except for a pinion that rotates
at 3450 rpm.
15-20. Repeat problem 15-18, except for a module of 5.0.
15-21. Repeat problem 15-18, except for a driven gear that ro-
tates at approximately 800 rpm.
15-22. A pair of 8-pitch straight-tooth spur gears is being pro-
posed to provide a 3:1 speed increase. If the gears are mounted
on 6-inch centers, ﬁnd the following:
a. Pitch diameter of each gear.
b. Number of teeth on each gear.
c. If power supplied to the driving pinion at full load is 10
hp, and power loss at the gear mesh is negligible, what is
the power available at the output gear shaft?
15-23. Repeat problem 15-22, except for a 3:1 speed decrease.
15-24. A proposed straight full-depth spur gear mesh is to con-
sist of a 21-tooth pinion driving a 28-tooth gear. The proposed di-
ametral pitch is to be 3, and the pressure angle is 20. Determine
the following, and where possible, show each feature on a simple
scale drawing of the gear mesh.
a. Pitch circle for the pinion
b. Pitch circle for the gear
c. Pressure angle
d. Base circle for the pinion
e. Base circle for the gear
f. Addendum circle for the pinion
g. Dedendum circle for the pinion
h. Addendum circle for the gear
i. Dedendum circle for the gear
j. Circular pitch
k. Tooth thickness
l. One typical pinion tooth
m. One typical gear tooth
n. Length of action
o. Base pitch
p. Proﬁle contact ratio
15-25. A proposed straight full-depth spur gear mesh is to have
a reduction ratio of 4:1 and a center distance of 7.50 inches. The
proposed diametral pitch is to be 3, and the pressure angle is
20. Determine the following, and, where possible, show each
feature on a simple scale drawing of the gear mesh.
a. Pitch circle for the pinion
b. Pitch circle for the gear
c. Pressure angle
d. Base circle for the pinion
e. Base circle for the gear
f. Addendum circle for the pinion
g. Dedendum circle for the pinion
h. Addendum circle for the gear
i. Dedendum circle for the gear
j. Circular pitch
k. Tooth thickness
l. Interference point locations
m. Whether interference will exist
15-26. Preliminary design calculations have suggested that de-
sign objectives may be met by a straight spur gearset using stan-
dard full-depth 2
-pitch involute gear teeth, and a 21-tooth
pinion meshing with a 28-tooth gear. A 25 pressure angle has
been selected for this application, and the gear teeth are to be
shaved to AGMA quality number 
. Find the following:
a. Addendum
b. Dedendum
c. Clearance
d. Circular pitch
e. Circular tooth thickness
f. Base pitch
g. Length of action
h. Proﬁle contact ratio
i. Module
15-27. Repeat problem 15-26, except for a 20 pressure angle.
15-28. A straight-tooth one-stage spur gear reducer has been
used in a high-production home appliance for many years. The
gear pair constitutes about one-half the $50 production cost of
the appliance. Consumer complaints about gear noise have
grown over the years and sales are declining. One young engi-
neer has found data that suggest the noise level would be sig-
niﬁcantly reduced if the AGMA quality number could be
increased from its current value of 
for hobbed gears to
a value of 
, achieved by shaving the gears.
a. Estimate the increase in production cost of the appli-
ance if gear shaving were used to achieve 
.
b. Can you suggest any other approach that might accom-
plish the noise-reduction goal without resorting to shaving
the gears?
Qv = 11
Qv = 11
Qv = 8
Qv = 8
12

Problems 695
15-29. A straight-toothed full-depth involute spur pinion with
a pitch diameter of 100 mm is mounted on an input shaft driven
by an electric motor at 1725 rpm. The motor supplies a steady
torque of 225 N-m.
a. If the involute gear teeth have a pressure angle of 20,
determine the transmitted force, the radial separating
force, and the normal resultant force on the pinion teeth at
the pitch point.
b. Calculate the power being supplied by the electric 
motor.
c. Calculate the percent difference in resultant force if the
pressure angle were 25 instead of 20.
d. Calculate the percent difference in resultant force if the
pressure angle were 14
instead of 20.
15-30. Referring to the two-stage gear reducer sketched in
Figure P15.3, concentrate attention on the ﬁrst-stage mesh be-
tween the pinion (1) and the gear (2). The pinion is being driven
by a 1-kw, 1725-rpm electric motor, operating steadily at full
capacity. The tooth system has a diametrical pitch of 8 and a
pressure angle of 25. Do the following for the ﬁrst-stage gear
mesh:
a. Sketch the gearset comprised of pinion 1 (driver) and
gear 2 (driven) taken together as a free body, and assume
that shaft support bearings are symmetrically straddle
mounted about the gear on each shaft. Show all external
forces and torques on the free body, speeds and directions of
the two gears (refer to Figure P15.3), and the line of action.
b. Sketch the pinion, taken alone as a free body. Show all
external forces and torques on the pinion, including the
driving torque, tangential force, separating force, and bear-
ing reaction forces. Give numerical values.
c. Sketch the driven gear, taken alone as a free body. Show
all external forces and torques on the gear, including re-
sisting torque, tangential force, separating force, and bear-
ing reaction forces. Give numerical values.
15-31. In the two-stage gear reducer sketched in Figure
P15.31, concentrate attention on the compound shaft “B,” with
attached gears 2 and 3, taken together as the free body of inter-
est. The gears have standard 20 involute full-depth teeth, with
a diametral pitch of 6. The motor driving the input shaft “A” is
a 20-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor operating steadily at full rated
power. For the chosen free body, do the following:
a. Clearly sketch a top view of shaft “B,” and show all
horizontal components of the loads and reactions.
b. Sketch a front view (elevation) of shaft “B,” and show
all vertical components of the loads and reactions.
c. If shaft “B” is to have a uniform diameter over its whole
length, identify potential critical points that should be in-
vestigated when designing the shaft.
15-32. Referring again to Figure P15.4, note that the ring gear
is ﬁxed, the sun gear is driven at 1200  rpm in the CCW direc-
tion with a torque of 20 N-m, and the two-planet carrier arm is
12°
used as output. The 20 involute gears have a module of 2.5. Do
the following:
a. Determine the circular pitch.
b. Determine the pitch diameter of each gear in the
train, and verify that they are physically compatible in the
assembly.
c. Find the center distance between planets on the 2-planet
carrier arm.
d. Sketch each member of the train as a free body, show-
ing numerical values and directions of all forces and
torques on each free body.
e. Calculate the output torque.
f. Calculate the output shaft speed and determine its 
direction.
g. Calculate the nominal radial load on each of the bear-
ings in the assembly, neglecting gravitational forces.
15-33. A 10-pitch 20 full-depth involute gearset with a face
width of 1.25 inches is being proposed to provide a 2:1 speed
reduction for a conveyor drive unit. The 18-tooth pinion is to be
driven by a 15-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor operating steadily
at full rated power. A very long life is desired for this gearset,
and a reliability of 99 percent is required. Do the following:
a. Using the simpliﬁed approach, estimate the nominal
bending stress at the tension-side root ﬁllet of the driving
pinion.
b. Estimate the fatigue stress concentration factor for the
tension-side root ﬁllet of the driving pinion.
c. Calculate the actual bending stress at the tension-side
root ﬁllet of the driving pinion.
d. Repeat (c) for the tension-side root ﬁllet of the driven
gear.
e. Based on the recommendation of an in-house materials
specialist, Grade 1 AISI 4620 hot-rolled steel is to be used
for both the pinion and the gear (see Tables 3.3 and 3.13),
Motor-driven
input shaft “A”
ccw
N1 = 24 teeth
N3 = 18 teeth
N2 = 36 teeth
N4 = 36 teeth
Compound shaft “B”
Output shaft “C”
1
2
3
4
Figure P15.31
Two-stage gear reducer.

696
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
and the value of 
[see (2-27)] has been estimated for
this application to be 0.75, including the 99 percent relia-
bility requirement but not including stress concentration
effects. Estimate the existing safety factor at the tension-
side root ﬁllet of whichever of the gears is more critical,
based on tooth bending fatigue.
15-34. For the gearset speciﬁcations of problem 15-33, do the
following:
a. Using the simpliﬁed approach, estimate the surface fa-
tigue wear stress for the meshing gear teeth.
b. If the Grade 1 4620 gear teeth are carburized and case
hardened (not including the root ﬁllet) to a hardness of ap-
proximately RC 60, maintaining the 99 percent reliability
requirement, and recalling that very long life is desired,
determine the surface fatigue strength of the case-hard-
ened teeth.
c. Estimate the existing safety factor based on surface fa-
tigue wear failure.
15-35. Using the simpliﬁed approach (do not reﬁne results by
using AGMA equations), design a single-reduction straight
spur gear unit to operate from a 5.0-hp electric motor running
at 900 rpm to drive a rotating machine operating at 80 rpm. The
motor is to operate steadily at full rated power. Near-inﬁnite life
is desired. A reliability of 90 percent is acceptable for this ap-
plication. It is proposed to use ASTM A-48 (class 40) gray cast-
iron material for both gears. Using 
, properties for
this material may be based on Chapter 3 data, except for surface
fatigue strength, which may be taken as 
psi. A safety factor of 1.3 is desired. As part of the design pro-
cedure, select or determine the following so as to satisfy design
speciﬁcations:
a. Tooth system
b. Quality level
c. Diametral pitch
d. Pitch diameters
e. Center distance
f. Face width
g. Number of teeth on each gear
Do not attempt to evaluate heat generation.
15-36. A 10-pitch 20 full-depth involute gearset, with
and face width of 1.25 inches, is being proposed to
provide a 2:1 speed reduction for a conveyor drive unit. The 18-
tooth pinion is to be driven by a 15-hp, 1725-rpm electric mo-
tor operating steadily at full-rated power. A very long life is
desired for this gearset, and a reliability of 99 percent is re-
quired. Do the following:
a. Using the AGMA reﬁned approach, calculate the tooth
bending stress at the tension-side root ﬁllet of the driving
pinion.
b. Repeat (a) for the tension-side root ﬁllet of the driven
gear.
Qv = 10
1Ssf2N=108 = 28,000
k q = 0.70
k q
c. If the proposed material for both gears is AISI 4620
through-hardened to BHN 207, estimate the existing safety
factor at the tension-side root ﬁllet of whichever gear is
more critical, based on tooth bending fatigue.
15-37. For the gearset speciﬁcations of problem 15-36, do the
following:
a. Using the AGMA reﬁned approach, calculate the sur-
face fatigue contact stress for the meshing gear teeth.
b. If the proposed material for both gears is AISI 4620
steel, and the teeth are carburized and case hardened (not
including the root ﬁllet) to a hardness of approximately RC
60, maintaining the 99 percent reliability requirement, de-
termine the AGMA surface fatigue strength (pitting resist-
ance) for the carburized and case-hardened gear teeth.
c. Estimate the existing safety factor based on surface fa-
tigue (pitting).
15-38. Using the AGMA reﬁned approach, design a high-preci-
sion 
single-reduction straight spur gear unit to op-
erate from a 50-hp electric motor running at 5100 rpm to drive
a rotating machine operating at 1700 rpm. The motor operates
steadily at full rated power. A life of 107 pinion revolutions is
desired, and a reliability of 99 percent is required. It is proposed
to use Grade 2 AISI 4620 steel carburized and case hardened to
RC 60 for both gears. An important design constraint is to make
the unit as compact as practical (i.e., use the minimum possible
number of pinion teeth without undercutting). A safety factor of
1.3 is desired. Select or determine the following so as to satisfy
the design speciﬁcations:
a. Tooth system
b. Diametral pitch
c. Pitch diameters
d. Center distance
e. Face width
f. Number of teeth on each gear
15-39. A right-hand helical gear, found in storage, has been de-
termined to have a transverse circular pitch of 26.594 mm and
a 30 helix angle. For this gear, calculate the following:
a. Axial pitch
b. Normal pitch
c. Module in the transverse plane
d. Module in the normal plane
15-40. The preliminary design proposal for a helical gearset
running on parallel shafts proposes a left-hand 18-tooth pinion
meshing with a 32-tooth gear. The normal pressure angle is 20,
the helix angle is 25, and the normal diametral pitch is 10. Find
the following:
a. Normal circular pitch
b. Transverse circular pitch
c. Axial pitch
d. Transverse diametral pitch
e. Transverse pressure angle
1Qv = 122

Problems 697
f. Pitch diameters of pinion and gear
g. Whole depth for pinion and gear
15-41. Repeat problem 15-40, except that the 18-tooth helical
pinion is right-hand.
15-42. Repeat problem 15-40, except that the normal diametral
pitch is 16.
15-43. The sketch of Figure P15.43 shows a one-stage gear
reducer that utilizes helical gears with a normal diametral
pitch of 14, normal pressure angle of 20, and helix angle of
30. The helix of the 18-tooth drive pinion 1 is left-hand. The
input shaft is to be driven in the direction shown (CCW) by a
-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor operating steadily at full rated
power, and the desired output shaft speed is 575 rpm.
Determine the following:
12
15-46. The sketch of Figure P15.46 shows a proposed two-
stage reverted gear reducer that utilizes helical gears to provide
quiet operation. The gears being suggested have a module of 
4 mm in the normal plane, and a normal pressure angle of
0.35 rad. The input shaft is driven in the direction shown by a
22-kw, 600-rpm electric motor. Do the following:
Motor-driven input shaft
N1 = 18 teeth
Output shaft
2
ccw
1
Figure P15.43
One-stage helical gear reducer.
N3 = 22 teeth L.H.

3 = 0.54 rad
N1 = 24 teeth R.H.

1 = 0.38 rad
3
N2 = 54 teeth
N4 = 50 teeth
Compound shaft “B”
Output shaft “C”
2
4
Motor-driven
input shaft “A”
1
cw
Figure P15.46
Two-stage reverted helical gear reducer.
a. Transverse pressure angle
b. Transverse diametral pitch
c. Pitch diameter of pinion (1)
d. Pitch diameter of gear (2)
e. Number of teeth on gear (2)
f. Center distance
g. Pitch-line velocity
h. Numerical values and directions of tangential, radial,
and axial force components on the pinion while operating
at full rated motor horsepower
i. Minimum recommended face width
15-44. Repeat problem 15-43, except that the 18-tooth helical
pinion is right-hand.
15-45. A parallel-shaft helical gearset is driven by an input
shaft rotating at 1725 rpm. The 20 helical pinion is 250 mm in
diameter and has a helix angle of 30. The drive motor supplies
a steady torque of 340 N-m.
a. Calculate the transmitted force, radial separating force,
axial thrust force, and normal resultant force on the pinion
teeth at the pitch point.
b. Calculate the power being supplied by the electric
motor.
a. Determine the speed and direction of the compound
shaft.
b. Determine the speed and direction of the output shaft.
c. Sketch a free-body diagram of the 54-tooth gear (2),
showing numerical values and directions of all force com-
ponents applied to the gear (2) by the 24-tooth pinion (1).
d. Sketch a free-body diagram of the 22-tooth pinion (3),
showing numerical values and directions of all force com-
ponents applied to the pinion (3) by the 50-tooth gear (4).
15-47. An existing parallel-shaft single-reduction spur gear
speed reducer is made up of a 21-tooth 8-pitch input pinion
driving a 73-tooth gear mounted on the output shaft. The center
distance between pinion and gear is 5.875 inches. The input
shaft is driven by a 15-hp, 1725-rpm electric motor operating
steadily at full rated capacity. To reduce vibration and noise, it
is desired to substitute a helical gearset that can operate on the
same center distance and provide approximately the same an-
gular velocity ratio as the existing spur gearset. Study this re-
quest and propose a helical gearset that can perform the
function satisfactorily at a reliability level of 99 percent for a
very long lifetime. Assume that the helical gears will be cut by
an 8-pitch 20 full-depth involute hob. The probable material is
through-hardened Grade 1 steel with a hardness of BHN 350.
Determine the following:
a. Using the spur gear data as a starting point, make a pre-
liminary design proposal for a pair of helical gears with
the same center distance and approximately the same an-
gular velocity ratio as the existing spur gearset.
Speciﬁcally, determine a combination of transverse diame-
tral pitch, number of teeth on the pinion, and number of

698
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
teeth on the mating gear that will satisfy speciﬁcations on
center distance and angular velocity ratio.
b. Determine the helix angle. Does it lie within the rec-
ommended range of values?
c. Determine the pitch diameter for the pinion and the
gear.
d. Determine the nominal outside diameter of the pinion
and the gear.
e. Estimate an appropriate face width for the helical gear
pair.
f. Calculate the existing safety factor for the tentatively
selected helical gear pair, based on tooth bending fatigue
as a potential failure mode.
g. Calculate the existing safety factor for the tentatively
selected helical gear pair, based on surface fatigue pitting
wear as a potential failure mode.
h. Comment on the governing safety factor.
15-48. Repeat problem 15-47, except assume that the helical
gears will be cut using a 12-pitch 20 full-depth involute hob.
15-49. A newly proposed numerically controlled milling ma-
chine is to operate from a helical-gear speed reducer designed to
provide 65 horsepower at an output shaft speed of 1150 rpm. It
has been suggested by engineering management that a 3450-rpm
electric motor be used to drive the speed reducer. An in-house
gearing consultant has suggested that a normal diametral pitch
of 12, a normal pressure angle of 20, a helix angle of 15, an
AGMA quality number of 10, and a safety factor of 1.7 would
be an appropriate starting point for the design. Design the gears.
15-50. Repeat problem 15-49, except that the suggested helix
angle is 30.
15-51. A pair of straight bevel gears, similar to those shown in
Figure 15.41, has been incorporated into a right-angle speed re-
ducer (shaft centerlines intersect at 90). The straight bevel
gears have a diametral pitch of 8 and a 20 pressure angle. The
gear reduction ratio is 3:1, and the number of teeth on the bevel
pinion is 16. Determine the following:
a. Pitch cone angle for the pinion
b. Pitch cone angle for the gear
c. Pitch diameter for the pinion
d. Pitch diameter for the gear
e. Maximum recommended face width
f. Average pitch cone radius for the pinion, assuming face
width is maximum recommended value
g. Average pitch cone radius for the gear, assuming face
width is maximum recommended value
h. Pinion addendum
i. Gear addendum
j. Pinion dedendum
k. Gear dedendum
15-52. Repeat problem 15-51, except use a diametral pitch of
12 and a reduction ratio of 4:1.
15-53. It is being proposed to use a Coniﬂex® straight bevel
gearset to provide a 3:1 speed reduction between a 15-tooth
pinion rotating at 300 rpm and a meshing gear mounted on a
shaft whose centerline intersects the pinion shaft centerline at
a 90 angle. The pinion shaft is driven steadily by a 3-hp source
operating at full rated power. The bevel gears are to have a di-
ametral pitch of 6, a 20 pressure angle, and a face width of
1.15 inches. Do the following:
a. Calculate the number of teeth in the driven gear.
b. Calculate the input torque on the pinion shaft.
c. Calculate average pitch-line velocity.
d. Calculate the transmitted (tangential) force.
e. Calculate the radial and axial forces on the pinion.
f. Calculate the radial and axial forces on the gear.
g. Determine whether the force magnitudes calculated for
the pinion and the gear are consistent with the free-body
equilibrium of the bevel gearset (see Figure 15.41 for geo-
metric arrangement).
15-54. Repeat problem 15-53, except for a diametral pitch of 10.
15-55. Repeat problem 15-53, except for a diametral pitch of 16.
15-56. For the Coniﬂex® bevel gearset described in problem
15-53, the following information has been tabulated or calcu-
lated:
630 in-lb
6
2.50 inches
1.15 inches
15 teeth
45 teeth
Further, it is proposed to use Grade 2 AISI 4140 steel ni-
trided and through-hardened to BHN 305 for both the pinion
and the gear. Other known design information includes the fol-
lowing items:
1. Input power is supplied by an electric motor.
2. AGMA quality 
is desired.
3. The gear is straddle mounted with a closely positioned bear-
ing on each side, but the pinion overhangs its support bearing.
4. A design life of 109 cycles has been speciﬁed.
A reliability of 99 percent is required, and a design safety fac-
tor of at least 1.3 is desired. Do the following:
a. Calculate the tooth bending fatigue stress for the more
critical of the pinion or the gear.
b. Determine the tooth bending fatigue strength for the
proposed AISI 4140 steel material corresponding to a life
of 109 cycles.
Qv = 8
Ng =
Np =
b =
dp =
Pd =
Tp =

Problems 699
c. Calculate the existing safety factor for the proposed de-
sign conﬁguration, based on tooth bending fatigue as the
governing failure mode. Compare this with the desired de-
sign safety factor, and make any comments you think ap-
propriate.
15-57. Based on the speciﬁcations and data for the Coniﬂex®
bevel gearset given in problem 15-56, do the following:
a. Calculate the surface fatigue durability stress for the
Coniﬂex® bevel gearset under consideration.
b. Determine the surface fatigue durability strength for
the proposed nitrided and hardened AISI 4140 steel mate-
rial corresponding to a life of 109 cycles.
c. Calculate the existing safety factor for the proposed de-
sign conﬁguration based on surface fatigue durability as
the governing failure mode. Compare this with the desired
design safety factor, and make any comments you think
appropriate.
15-58. A Coniﬂex®, straight-tooth bevel gearset is supported
on shafts with centerlines intersecting at a 90 angle. The gear
is straddle mounted between closely positioned bearings, and
the pinion overhangs its support bearing. The 15-tooth pinion
rotates at 900 rpm, driving the 60-tooth gear, which has a di-
ametral pitch of 6, pressure angle of 20, and face width of 1.25
inches. The material for both gears is through-hardened Grade
1 steel with a hardness of BHN 300 (see Figure 15.25). It is de-
sired to have a reliability of 90 percent, a design life of 108 cy-
cles, and a governing safety factor of 2.5. Estimate the
maximum horsepower that can be transmitted by this gear re-
ducer while meeting all of the design speciﬁcations given.
15-59. Repeat problem 15-58, except change the material to
through-hardened Grade 2 steel with a hardness of BHN 350
(see Figure 15.25).
15-60. It is desired to design a long-life right-angle straight
bevel gear speed reducer for an application in which an 850-
rpm, 5-hp internal combustion engine, operating at full power,
drives the pinion. The output gear, which is to rotate at approx-
imately 350 rpm, drives a heavy-duty industrial ﬁeld conveyor.
Design the gearset, including the selection of an appropriate
material, if a reliability of 95 percent is desired.
15-61. Repeat problem 15-60, except use an 850-rpm, 10-hp
internal-combustion engine, operating at full power, to drive the
pinion.
15-62. A proposed worm gearset is to have a single-start worm
with a pitch diameter of 1.250 inches, a diametral pitch of 10,
and a normal pressure angle of 14
. The worm is to mesh
with a worm gear having 40 teeth and a face width of 0.625
inch. Calculate the following:
a. Axial pitch
b. Lead of the worm
c. Circular pitch
d. Lead angle of the worm
e. Helix angle of the worm gear
12°
f. Addendum
g. Dedendum
h. Outside diameter of the worm
i. Root diameter of the worm
j. Pitch diameter of the gear
k. Center distance
l. Velocity ratio
m. Root diameter of the gear
n. Approximate outside diameter of the gear
15-63. A double-start worm has a lead of 60 mm. The meshing
worm gear has 30 teeth, and has been cut using a hob having a
module of 8.5 in the normal plane. Do the following:
a. Calculate the pitch diameter of the worm.
b. Calculate the pitch diameter of the worm gear.
c. Calculate the center distance and determine whether it
lies in the range of usual practice.
d. Calculate the reduction ratio of the worm gearset.
e. Calculate the diametral pitch of the gearset.
f. Calculate the outside diameter of the worm (mm).
g. Calculate the approximate outside diameter of the 
worm gear (mm).
15-64. A triple-start worm is to have a pitch diameter of 4.786
inches. The meshing worm gear is to be cut using a hob having
a diametral pitch of 2 in the normal plane. The reduction ratio
is to be 12:1. Do the following:
a. Calculate the number of teeth in the worm gear.
b. Calculate the lead angle of the worm.
c. Calculate the pitch diameter of the worm gear.
d. Calculate the center distance and determine whether it
lies in the range of usual practice.
15-65. It is proposed to drive an industrial crushing machine,
designed to crush out-of-tolerance scrap ceramic bearing liners,
with an in-stock 2-hp, 1200-rpm electric motor coupled to an
appropriate speed reducer. The crushing machine input shaft is
to rotate at 60 rpm. A worm gear speed reducer is being con-
sidered to couple the motor to the crushing machine. A prelim-
inary sketch of the wormset to be used in the speed reducer
proposes a double-start right-hand worm with axial pitch of
0.625 inch, a normal pressure angle of 14
, and a center dis-
tance of 5.00 inches. The proposed material for the worm is
steel with a minimum surface hardness of Rockwell C 58. The
proposed gear material is forged bronze.
Calculate or determine the following, assuming the fric-
tion coefﬁcient between worm and gear to be 0.09, and that the
motor is operating steadily at full rated power:
a. Number of teeth on the gear
b. Lead angle of the worm
c. Sliding velocity between worm and gear
d. Tangential force on the worm
12°

700
Chapter 15 / Gears and Systems of Gears
e. Axial force on the worm
f. Radial force on the worm
g. Tangential force on the gear
h. Axial force on the gear
i. Radial force on the gear
j. Power delivered to the crushing machine input shaft
k. Whether the wormset is self-locking
15-66. A worm gear speed reducer has a right-hand triple-
threaded worm made of hardened steel, a normal pressure angle
of 20, an axial pitch of 0.25 inch, and a center distance of 2.375
inches. The gear is made of forged bronze. The speed reduction
from input to output is 15:1. If the worm is driven by a 
-hp,
1200-rpm electric motor operating steadily at full rated power,
determine the following, assuming the coefﬁcient of friction be-
tween worm and gear to be 0.09:
12
a. Number of teeth in the gear
b. Pitch diameter of the gear
c. Lead angle of the worm
d. Relative sliding velocity between worm and gear
e. Tangential force on the worm
f. Tangential force on the gear
g. An acceptable range for face width that should allow a
nominal operating life of 25,000 hours. (Hint: See foot-
note 130 relating to equation (15-115).)
15-67. It is desired to utilize a worm gearset to reduce the
speed of a 1750-rpm motor driving the worm down to an out-
put gear shaft speed of approximately 55 rpm, and provide
1
horsepower to the load. Design an acceptable worm
gearset, and specify the nominal required horsepower rating
of the drive motor.
12

701
Brakes and Clutches
Chapter 16
16.1 Uses and Characteristics of Brakes and Clutches
Conceptually, brakes and clutches are nearly indistinguishable. Functionally, a clutch is a
device for making a smooth, gradual connection between two separate elements rotating
at different speeds about a common axis, bringing the two elements to a common angular
velocity after the clutch is actuated. A brake serves a similar function, except that one of
the elements is ﬁxed to the frame, so the common angular velocity is zero following actu-
ation of a brake. For example, each of the two rotating elements shown in Figure 16.1(a)
has its own polar mass moment of inertia and its own angular velocity. Actuation of the
brake/clutch package brings the rotating friction surfaces into tangential sliding contact,
initiating a frictional drag torque that works to gradually reduce the angular velocity dif-
ference between the rotating elements to zero. When the relative frictional sliding veloc-
ity is reduced to zero, both elements have the same angular velocity. This use of the
package makes it function as a clutch.
Actuating
forces
Brake/clutch package
(a) Brake/clutch package used as a clutch.
Clearance gap
(when not actuated) 
2
1
J2
J1
2
1
Actuating
forces
Brake/clutch package
(b) Brake/clutch package used as a brake.
Clearance gap
(when not actuated) 
2 = 0
(fixed to 
frame)
1
J2
J1
2
1
Figure 16.1
Functional comparison of brakes and
clutches.

In Figure 16.1(b) the same device is shown, except that element 2 is ﬁxed to the frame,
so its angular velocity is always zero. In this case, actuation of the brake/clutch package
brings the friction surfaces into contact as before, but the frictional drag torque works to
gradually reduce the ﬁnal angular velocity to zero. Therefore, for this case, the package
functions as a brake.
Brakes and clutches are well known for their use in automotive applications, but are
also extensively used in a wide variety of industrial machines including winches, hoists,
excavators, tractors, mills, and elevators, and consumer products such as mowers, washing
machines, garden tractors, chain saws, farm tractors, combines, and hay balers. Although
a variety of different types of brakes and clutches have been devised, friction clutches and
brakes are most common. In spite of the adage “friction is always against you,” for fric-
tion clutches and brakes it is an essential design ingredient. Selection of a good lining1 ma-
terial usually implies selection of a material with a high coefﬁcient of friction that remains
essentially unchanged over a wide range of operating conditions. Only friction brakes and
clutches will be discussed in detail in this text.2
16.2 Types of Brakes and Clutches
Designing or selecting a brake or a clutch for a speciﬁc application usually involves an-
swering two basic questions: (1) What physical principles and basic arrangements for
transferring energy from one element to the other seem best for this application? (2) What
actuation method is appropriate?
Potential actuation methods include mechanical linkages, pneumatic or hydraulic ac-
tuators, electrically energized actuators, or dynamic force actuation at preselected speeds.
Fail-safe actuation systems are sometimes used, in which the brake or clutch is normally
held in contact by a spring load, and when release (separation) of the friction surfaces is
desired, an actuator is energized to retract the spring. This concept3 results in automatic
actuation of the clutch or brake if actuator power is lost, preventing a potential runaway
condition.
Several basic arrangements for friction-type and positive-contact brakes and clutches
are sketched in Figure 16.2. The external contracting and internal expanding shoe-and-rim
(drum) devices shown in Figure 16.2(a) and (b) are usually used as brakes.4 The band type
and disk type sketched in Figures 16.2(c) and (d) may be used as either brakes5 or
clutches.6 The cone type device sketched in Figure 16.2(e) also may be used as either a
clutch or a brake, but cone clutches are more common. The positive contact types shown
in Figure 16.2(f) have mechanically interlocking surfaces that form a rigid mechanical
junction when engaged. These devices are virtually always used as clutches, and can be
engaged only when the relative angular velocity between the two rotating elements is near
zero. Not shown is a specialty class of clutches known as overrunning or one-way
702
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
1Typically, one of the contacting friction surfaces is metal and the other is a high-friction material called a lin-
ing. (See also 16.4.)
2For other types of brakes and clutches, see, for example, ref. 1.
3First conceived by George Westinghouse for railroad brakes.
4Often used, for example, as rear wheel brakes in automotive applications.
5Caliper-type disk brakes, in which a stationary caliper mechanism straddles the edge of a rotating metal disk
(rotor), are actuated by squeezing two opposing attached pads (linings) against the rotor (see also Figure
16.13). Typically, the pads have a rather short arc length of contact, and often the rotor embodies air-cooling
vanes.
6Band-type devices are sometimes used as clutches in agricultural and construction equipment.

Types of Brakes and Clutches 703
clutches.7 These devices allow relative rotation in only one direction, locking up if the
relative rotation attempts to reverse.
For all types of friction clutches and brakes, a designer typically ﬁnds it necessary to
calculate or estimate:
1.
Transmitted torque requirements of the application, and torque capacity for the proposed
brake/clutch package.
2.
Actuating force requirements for the proposed conﬁguration.
Fa
Pa
Fa


Fa

Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa
Fa

(i) Square-jaw
(ii) Spiral-jaw
(iii) Toothed
(a) Rim type; external contracting shoes.
(b) Rim type; internal expanding shoes.
(c) Band type
(e) Cone type.
(d) Disk type.
( f ) Positive contact type.

Figure 16.2
Various common types of
brakes and clutches.
An example of a caliper disk brake.
7Examples are the sprag clutch, the roller-ramp clutch, and the torsion spring clutch. See ref. 1.

3.
Limitations of the proposed device because of pressure, temperature, wear, or
strength.
4.
Energy generation, energy dissipation capability, and expected temperature rise in the
device, especially at the friction interface.
All of these factors will be considered in developing the design procedure for friction
clutches and brakes, as discussed below.
16.3 Potential Failure Modes
When clutches and brakes are actuated, two or more surfaces, moving with different ve-
locities, are brought into contact by the actuating forces. Relatively high interfacial pres-
sures may result. Signiﬁcant pressure and relative sliding are the basic parameters that
presage wear as a potential failure mode (see 2.3). Depending on the materials chosen and
the operating environment, clutches and brakes may fail by adhesive wear,8 by abrasive
wear9 or by corrosive wear.
Also, when friction clutches and brakes are actuated they generate heat at the rubbing
interface, often at very high rates. Depending upon the ability of the clutch/brake package
to dissipate the heat to the environment, the temperature may rise at the rubbing interface,
sometimes to very high values. Thus, many of the temperature-related failure modes listed
in 2.3 become potential failure modes for clutch or brake applications. These include tem-
perature-induced elastic deformation (warpage), yielding, thermal fatigue, corrosion fa-
tigue, creep, and in extreme cases, thermal shock. Other potential failure modes are
high-cycle fatigue, low-cycle fatigue, corrosion fatigue, corrosion by direct chemical at-
tack, or temperature-induced changes in material properties.
Of all the potential failure modes suggested, the preliminary design of a clutch or
brake usually is based on wear, thermal fatigue, and change in material properties. If the
friction lining wears away at an excessive rate, the lining may be entirely lost before an ac-
ceptable design life has been achieved. Because the metallic side of the rubbing pair may
be subjected to temperature spikes if the brake or clutch is repeatedly actuated and re-
leased, these spikes may lead to thermal fatigue, sometimes causing a system of surface
cracks called “heat checks.” Because the lining side of the rubbing pair is often a molded
or woven composite material with a polymeric binder, if the local interfacial temperature
exceeds the binder breakdown temperature, the material properties of the lining may be
transformed from a high-friction material to a lubricative material, giving rise to a poten-
tially dangerous degradation in capacity. For many lining materials the coefﬁcient of fric-
tion tends to decrease with increasing temperature, a condition known as fading. An
example of this is loss of braking ability when driving on steep mountain grades, if brakes
are constantly applied to control down-grade velocity. It is also important to consider po-
tential failure modes for the brake or clutch actuation system. Material selection is espe-
cially important to assure acceptable brake and clutch performance.
16.4 Brake and Clutch Materials
Reviewing the list of potential failure modes just discussed in 16.3, and the material 
selection guidelines of Chapter 3, candidate materials for brake and clutch applications
should have high resistance to wear, scoring, and galling, a high and stable coefﬁcient of
704
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
8See (2-79).
9See (2-81).

Basic Concepts for Design of Brakes and Clutches 705
10See Figure 16.2, for example
11See 16.3, 16.4, and Example 16.1.
12The effective inertia of a connected mass operating at a speed different from the brake/clutch package is 
proportional to the square of the ratio of the speed of the connected mass to the speed of the brake/clutch.
friction, the ability to withstand high temperatures, good thermal conductivity (to dissipate
friction-induced heat), the ability to remain stable under variations in environment (such
as the presence of moisture, dirt, or oil), high thermal fatigue resistance, good resistance
to warpage (i.e., high thermal conductivity, low thermal coefﬁcient of expansion, and high
yield strength), and high resilience (to promote favorable distribution of interfacial pres-
sure), and should be cost effective.
Under most circumstances, a brake/clutch package consists of a metallic element on
one side, which when actuated is pressed against a mating element with an attached lining
of solid, molded, woven, or sintered material having a high coefﬁcient of friction, good
temperature resistance, and good resilience. The metallic element (disk, rim, or drum) is
commonly made of gray cast iron or steel.
The friction linings are usually made of composite materials in which particles or ﬁbers
are embedded in a matrix of thermosetting or elastomeric binder material, or of sintered
metal (sometimes containing ceramic particles). Molded linings are most common and least
costly. For many years the reinforcing ﬁbers in brake and clutch linings were made of as-
bestos, but recognition that asbestos ﬁbers are potentially carcinogenic has promoted the
use of other materials, such as ﬁberglass or coated asbestos ﬁbers. Metallic particles of
brass or zinc are sometimes added to the matrix to improve thermal conductivity and wear
resistance. Sintered metal linings may be used (at a higher cost) in applications where
higher strength and higher temperature resistance are required. In some cases ceramic
particles are added before sintering to form a cermet with higher temperature resistance.
Table 16.1 gives brake/clutch lining properties for several commonly used materials.
16.5 Basic Concepts for Design of Brakes and Clutches
The procedure for analysis or design of a brake/clutch package is fundamentally the same
for all types of brakes and clutches. The suggested steps include:
1.
Select a proposed type of brake or clutch that seems best suited to the application,10
and sketch a proposed conﬁguration, including any dimensional or geometric con-
straints imposed by design speciﬁcations.
2.
Based on probable governing failure modes, speciﬁed operating conditions, and re-
quired response times for executing the braking or clutching action, select an appro-
priate material pair.11
3.
Estimate the torque required to accelerate or decelerate the proposed device to the de-
sired common speed within the speciﬁed response time. This usually involves a dy-
namics analysis of the proposed machine, including inertial effects of all signiﬁcant
rotating and translating masses, reﬂected to the rotational speed of the brake/clutch
package.12
4.
Estimate the energy to be dissipated as frictional heat in the brake or clutch contact
zone. This may be accomplished by summing changes in the kinetic energy of trans-
lation, changes in the kinetic energy of rotation, and any changes in potential energy
due to elevation changes during the response period.
5.
Estimate the pressure distribution over the contacting friction surfaces, by either cal-
culation or assumption.

706
Maximum-
Maximum-
Allowable 
Allowable Temperature
Maximum-Allowable 
Pressure, 
Velocity, 
psi
MPa
Instantaneous
Continuous
ft/min
m/min
Typical Application
Carbon-graphite (dry)
0.25
300
2.07
1000 (538)
High-performance 
brakes
Carbon-graphite (in oil)
0.05–0.10
300
2.07
1000 (538)
High-performance 
brakes
Cement
0.32
150
1.03
1500 (816)
750 (598)
Brakes and clutches
Sintered metal (dry)
0.15–0.45
400
2.76
1020 (549)
660 (349)
3600
1097
Clutches and caliper 
disk brakes
Sintered metal (in oil)
0.05–0.08
500
3.45
930 (499)
570 (299)
3600
1097
Clutches
Rigid molded-asbestos 
0.31–0.49
100
0.69
750 (598)
350 (177)
3600
1097
Drum brakes and 
(dry)
clutches
Rigid molded-asbestos  
0.06
300
2.07
660 (349)
350 (177)
3600
1097
Industrial clutches
(in oil)
Sintered molded-asbestos
0.37–0.41
100
0.69
660 (349)
300 (149)
3600
1097
Clutches and brakes
Flexible molded-asbestos
0.39–0.45
100
0.69
750 (598)
350 (177)
3600
1097
Clutches and brakes
Wound asbestos yarn 
0.38
100
0.69
660 (349)
350 (177)
3600
1097
Vehicle clutches
and wire
Wound asbestos yarn 
0.38
100
0.69
500 (260)
260 (127)
3600
1097
Industrial clutches 
and wire
and brakes
Rigid molded-
0.33–0.63
150
1.03
500–750
4800–7500
1463–2286
Clutches and brakes
nonasbestos
(260–598)
Woven cotton
0.47
100
0.69
250 (121)
170 (77)
3600
1097
Industrial clutches 
and brakes
Resilient paper (in oil)
0.09–0.15
400
2.76
300 (149)
Clutches and 
transmission bands
1Adapted from ref. 1, with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies. Brake/clutch manufacturers should be consulted for more accurate data.
2Typically, the ﬁbrous, wound, woven, or paper materials are saturated with suitable polymeric resin binder and cured under heat and pressure to form the lining.
MPa-m/min
ksi-ft/min
pV 6 1050
pV 6 500
Vmax
™max, oF (oC )
pmax
TABLE 16.1 Coefﬁcient of Friction and Design Limits for Commonly Used Brake/Clutch Friction Lining Materials Operating in Contact with
Smooth Cast Iron or Steel1
Lining Material2
Approximate
Friction
Coefﬁcient, m

6.
Determine the pressure at any point in the friction interface as a function of the max-
imum local pressure produced when the brake/clutch package is actuated.
7.
Apply the principles of static equilibrium to determine the actuating force, friction
torque, and support reactions. Determine suitable materials and dimensions that will
provide design-speciﬁed values (or ranges) for friction torque and actuating force, in-
cluding any speciﬁed factors of safety.
8.
Iterate the proposed design conﬁguration until it meets the functional speciﬁcations
and operates reliably for the speciﬁed design lifetime. Estimate potentially damaging
temperature rise induced when the friction-generated heating rate exceeds the cooling
rate. This is an important factor in the iteration process.
Several basic concepts may be illustrated by considering a simple, short, rigid, ﬁxed-
hinge brake shoe with integral lining, acting against the surface a planar translating body,
as illustrated in Figure 16.3. As shown, the translating body has a velocity 
to the right
(x-direction), and the brake shoe is constrained by the hinged connection to remain sta-
tionary in the x-y plane. Since the brake shoe is short and rigid, it is reasonable to assume
a uniform pressure distribution over the entire contacting friction surface. Hence,
(16-1)
pressure at any speciﬁed point
maximum pressure in the contact zone
Since the pressure distribution is uniform, the normal force 
may be expressed as 
(16-2)
contact area of friction surface
If the brake-shoe-and-arm unit is taken as a free body, and moments are summed
about the hinge pin, as depicted in Figure 16.3,
(16-3)
From (16-3), the required actuating force 
is
(16-4)
Fa =
N1b - ma2
b
=
pmax A1b - ma2
b
Fa
Fab - Nb + mNa = 0
where  A =
N = pmax A
N
pmax =
where  p =
p = pmax
Vx
Basic Concepts for Design of Brakes and Clutches 707
N
Fa
Rh
Rv
y
Vx
x
Note:
Fa = actuating force.
Rh, Rv = hinge reaction forces.
N = normal contact force.
 = friction coefficient.
Arm
Moving
body
Brake shoe
with integral
friction lining
Fixed pivot
location
a
b
N
Figure 16.3
Simple ﬁxed-hinge brake pad acting against
a moving planar body.

Also, a hinge reaction force, 
, in the (horizontal) direction, may be found from a hor-
izontal force summation on the free body, as 
(16-5)
giving
(16-6)
The hinge reaction force, 
, in the (vertical) direction may be found from a vertical
force summation as
(16-7)
Thus, for the simple case illustrated in Figure 16.3, the design procedure would in-
volve the selection of an appropriate friction lining material,13 and iterative determination
of dimensions a, b, and contact area A to meet the functional speciﬁcations of the appli-
cation. At the same time, it is necessary to stay within pressure, temperature, and strength
limitations of the lining material, as dictated by the governing failure mode.
Two additional concepts, self-locking and self-energizing, may also be understood by
considering the simple device shown in Figure 16.3. Examining (16-4), it may be observed
that if the coefﬁcient of friction and geometric arrangement are such that
(16-8)
no external actuation force is needed to actuate the brake; initial contact between the mov-
ing friction surfaces causes the brake to be actuated immediately and fully by the friction-
generated moment. This condition, called self-locking, is usually not desirable14 because
the braking action is sudden and uncontrollable when the brake “grabs.” On the other hand,
it is often advantageous to capitalize upon the friction-generated moment to assist in ap-
plying the brake, reducing the magnitude of the required actuating force 
to a smaller
(but not zero) value. Such an arrangement is often called a self-energizing conﬁguration.
One way of determining a conﬁguration that will provide self-energization without self-
locking is to utilize a pseudo–friction coefﬁcient,
, in (16-4) when relating the hinge lo-
cation to the required actuating force. The value of 
is often taken as
(16-9)
where 
is the maximum value of friction coefficient specified by the lining material
manufacturer.
16.6 Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes
A more detailed sketch of the rim (drum) type external shoe (block) brake depicted in
Figure 16.2(a) is shown in Figure 16.4. Such brakes may be categorized as external or in-
ternal, with short shoes (angle 
subtending contact arc is 45 or less) or long shoes.
Figure 16.4 shows a simple one-shoe, external, short block brake. As a practical matter,
b
m
m¿ L 11.25m to 1.5m2
m¿
m¿
Fa
b - ma
b
… 0
Rv = pmax A cb - ma
b
- 1d
y
Rv
Rh = -mpmax A    1i.e., directed to the left2
Rh + mpmax A = 0
x
Rh
708
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
13See, for example, Table 16.1.
14Except when a ratcheting device is desired, in which relative motion in one direction is prevented by 
self-locking while motion in the opposite direction is unfettered.

two diametrically opposing shoes, as depicted in Figure 16.2(a), are usually used to reduce
drum bearing reactions. However, basic design concepts can be demonstrated in a simpler
way by ﬁrst considering a single-shoe short block brake.
Because the shoe sketched in Figure 16.4 is short and stiff, it is reasonable to assume
a uniform pressure distribution over the whole contact interface; hence
(16-10)
and
(16-11)
Although the normal force 
and friction force 
are distributed continuously over
the contacting surfaces of the rim and shoe, for a short shoe the assumption can usually be
made that these forces are concentrated at the center of contact, shown as point .
Summing moments about hinge location , and assuming a counterclockwise (CCW)
direction of drum rotation (as shown), gives
(16-12)
whence
(16-13)
Based on the discussion of self-locking and self-energizing systems given in 16.5, the short
block brake with hinge location 
will be self-locking for the indicated CCW drum rota-
tion if15
(16-14)
The friction-based braking torque capacity for hinge location , 
, may be calculated
utilizing (16-13) by summing moments on the drum about its axis of rotation 
to obtain
(16-15)
1Tf2C = RmN = Rm a
1Fa2Ca
b - mcb = 1Fa2CcRm a
a
b - mcb d
O
1Tf2C
C
b - mc
a
… 0
C
1Fa2C =
N1b - mc2
a
Nb - mNc - 1Fa2Ca = 0
C
B
mN
N
N = pmaxA
p = pmax
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes 709
d
b
a
Fa
c
A
B
C
D
T


R
Actuating lever
Short shoe (block)
Lining
Load torque
Rim (drum)
(a) Brake system assembly.
b
a
Fa
Rv
c
B
N
N
C
(b) Free-body diagram of integral shoe and lever.
Rh
Figure 16.4
Simple external short-shoe block brake.
15Compare with (16-8).

Further, the design value of friction torque capacity must be large enough to safely bring
the moving mass of the operating system from full operational velocity to a ﬁnal velocity
of zero within a speciﬁed response time , and the energy stored in the moving mass must
be safely dissipated by the brake package as the mass is decelerated to zero velocity.
If the hinge pin location were changed from 
to 
[shown by dashed lines in Figure
6.4(a)], the friction moment for the CCW drum rotation would tend to “unseat” the shoe
(hinder actuation), and the expression for actuating force would become16
(16-16)
For hinge location , therefore, the required actuating force 
would always be posi-
tive, self-locking would not occur, and self-energization could not be utilized to assist in
applying the brake.
The horizontal and vertical reaction forces for pin location C (i.e., self-energization is
possible) may be found from horizontal and vertical force summations as
(16-17)
and
(16-18)
The torque 
(in-lb) required to decelerate the moving system to zero velocity within
a speciﬁed response time 
may be estimated as 17
(16-19)
effective polar mass moment of inertia (in-lb-sec2), including inertial ef-
fects of all connected components18 referred to the drum operating at an-
gular velocity 
angular acceleration, rad/sec2
angular velocity of drum operating at its full speed, rad/sec
rotational operating speed of drum, rpm
response time (braking time) to reduce the angular velocity 
to zero, sec
weight of rotating mass, lb
effective radius of gyration, inches
386 in/sec2
The energy 
to be dissipated (by transfer of friction-generated heat to the surround-
ings) during the braking period 
may be estimated as the sum of the kinetic energy of ro-
tation, the kinetic energy of translation, and the potential energy of elevation change and/or
tr
Ed
g =
ke =
W =
vop
tr =
nop =
            vop =
2pnop
60
=
a =
vop
where Je =
T = Jea = Je
1vop - 02
tr
=
Wk2
evop
gtr
tr
T
1Rv2C = 1Fa2C - N
1Rh2C = mN
1Fa2D
D
1Fa2D =
N1b + md2
a
D
C
tr
710
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
16Compare with (16-13) based on hinge location C.
17See any good undergraduate textbook on dynamics (e.g., ref. 2).
18In actual systems there may be several rotating components operating at different speeds but connected to the
rotating drum through gearing or other speed changers. The contribution of an ith connected mass, rotating at
speed 
, is proportional to the square of the speed ratio, or 
.
Jei = Ji1ni>nop22
ni

elastic deformation.19 For the simple case where the only signiﬁcant mass in the system is
the rotating drum, the energy to be dissipated is just the kinetic energy of rotation, or
(16-20)
For any proposed design conﬁguration, the friction-based braking torque capacity, as
given in (16-15), must exceed, by a suitable design safety factor, the torque required to de-
celerate the moving system to zero velocity within the speciﬁed response time . Thus, uti-
lizing (16-19),
(16-21)
Combining (16-21) with (16-15), the design value of the required actuating force, 
,
may be found as20
(16-22)
When the brake is actuated, the energy content of the moving system must be
wholly dissipated by converting it to frictional heat at the rubbing contact interface be-
tween the drum and the shoe. Since the metallic drum typically has a much higher ther-
mal conductivity than the friction lining of the shoe, most of the heat generated will
usually be conducted to the rim mass. An important issue is whether the proposed brake
configuration will be able to dissipate the friction-generated heat without producing a
local temperature rise so high that braking function is impaired or damage is inﬂicted upon
the lining or the drum. Unfortunately, the friction-generated temperature rise is not eas-
ily calculated because of the uncertainties associated with temperature distributions, ef-
fective heat transfer areas, effective heat transfer coefficients, and environmental factors.
If brakes are applied infrequently and for brief periods, so that the brake drum can con-
duct and radiate the friction-generated heat away before the next braking cycle begins,
there will be little or no residual temperature rise. If braking periods are too frequent
and/or too lengthy, the initial temperature for each braking cycle will be higher than for
the preceding cycle and the equilibrium temperature of the brake package may ratchet
to a much higher level.
For infrequent short-duration brake actuations, it is commonly assumed that the fric-
tion-generated heat will be absorbed by the mass of material adjacent to the frictional in-
terface, often assumed to be the rim mass for the case of a rim-type brake. For such
assumptions, the temperature rise 
may be estimated, based on classic heat capacity
concepts, as
(16-23a)
where
(16-23b)
Hf = Ed
J®
=
Jev2
op
2J®
¢® =
Hf
CW
¢®
1Fa2C =
2pndWk2
enop1b - mc2
60g atrRma
1Fa2C
1Tf2C = ndT =
ndJevop
tr
=
2pndWk2
enop
60 gtr
tr
Ed = 1
2 Jev2
op
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes 711
19See, for example, ref. 2.
20As in all calculations, care must be taken to use compatible units for all terms in the equation.

and
polar mass moment of inertia of rotating drum
operating angular velocity of drum
rotational speed of drum
mechanical equivalent of heat (e.g., 9336 in-lb/Btu)
speciﬁc heat (e.g., 0.12 Btu/lb-
for steel or cast iron)
weight of heat-absorbing mass (e.g., mass of brake rim, or weight of a selected
judgment-based thinner portion of the brake rim)
For SI units, (16-23a) becomes
(16-24)
where
Ed  kinetic energy
C  speciﬁc heat; use 
for steel or cast iron
m  heat-absorbing mass (e.g., mass of brake or rim or of a selected judgement-
based thinner portion of the brake rim), kg
When brake actuations are more frequent, of longer duration, or continuously applied,
Newton’s law of cooling21 may be utilized to estimate the temperature rise 
.
Utilizing (10-19),
(16-25)
brake package surface temperature
ambient temperature
exposed surface area of brake package
modiﬁed overall heat transfer coefﬁcient [see (10-22) and (10-23) for ap-
proximate values]
The temperature rises calculated from (16-23a) or (16-25) must not heat the proposed
brake materials to temperatures above the maximum allowable temperatures for the mate-
rials.22
Finally, when adhesive and/or abrasive wear are the probable governing failure modes,
the wear concepts leading to (2-79) and (2-81) may be utilized to estimate the wear depth
normal to the friction surface of a brake lining, called normal wear depth, 
, as
(16-26)
material pair constant23
contact pressure
total distance slid, between drum and shoe, over the design lifetime
relative sliding velocity between lining and drum
time of drum/shoe contact during the design lifetime of the brake/clutch
assembly
tcontact =
V =
Ls =
p =
where  kw =
dn = kwpLs = kwpVtcontact
dn
k1 =
As =
®a =
where  ®s =
1®s - ®a2 =
Hf
k1As
1®s - ®a2
500 J/kg-°C
¢® = Ed
Cm
W =
°F
C =
J® =
nop =
vop = 2pnop =
Je =
712
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
21Discussed earlier in connection with plain bearings and gears. See, for example, (10-19) or (15-49). Also, see
Table 16.1
22See, for example, Table 16.1
23The material pair constant may be available from the friction material manufacturer; otherwise, it must be 
determined experimentally.

The common tactic of assuming normal wear rate
to be proportional to the product
of pressure times sliding velocity 
is supported by (16-26) since
(16-27)
where, for a short block brake, wear rate 
is constant over the whole contact surface.
Typically, most of the wear occurs on the brake lining element, which should be designed
to be replaced when wear interferes with its ability to function properly. The brake drum,
or rim, is usually designed to sustain little or no measurable wear.
In preliminary design scenarios, an experience-based alternative approach is to use the
pV product as a preliminary criterion. It is common practice to express the pV product as
pressure p(lb/in2) times velocity V(ft/min). Based on this mixed-unit pV product, Table 16.2
gives approximate limiting values for several design scenarios.
Example 16.1 Preliminary Design of a Short-Shoe Drum-Brake
To meet new safety regulations, a manufacturer of push-type rotary lawn mowers is pro-
posing to modify an existing mower design by incorporating a means of quickly bringing
the rotating blade to a complete stop if the operator’s hands are removed from the mower
handle bar. The objective is to prevent injuries from the rotating blade; for example, if an
operator looses control of the mower on a steep hillside, the blade should stop before the
mower can roll back over the operator.
The basic concept being proposed is to utilize a spring-loaded lever24 arrangement at the
mower handle bar, attached by ﬂexible cables to a clutch and a separate brake. Figure E16.1A
shows a side view of the existing mower with a proposed commercial clutch inserted
between the one-cylinder engine and the ﬂywheel-and-blade assembly.25 Axial space for the
proposed clutch package is to be provided by installing a spacer shell between the engine and
the deck. A preliminary design evaluation of the clutch has already been completed, and
indicates that commercially available disk clutch packages with acceptable torque character-
istics, actuation characteristics, and space envelopes can be purchased from stock.
The most serious potential sequence of events is envisioned as follows:
a.
Operator is mowing uphill, slips on wet grass, falls (thereby releasing dead-man lever),
and mower rolls back downhill over the operator.
b.
When the spring-loaded dead-man lever is released, the clutch cable disengages the
clutch, and the brake cable actuates the brake, thereby quickly stopping the rotary blade
before the mower rolls over the operator.
dn
dn =
dn
tcontact
= kw 1pV2
V
p
dn
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes 713
TABLE 16.2 Maximum-Allowable Values of pV for Industrial Shoe Brakes
pV
Operating Conditions
Continuous braking, poor heat dissipation
30
63
Continuous braking, long rest periods, poor heat dissipation
60
126
Continuous braking, good heat dissipation (as into an oil bath)
85
179
MPa-m/min
ksi-ft/min
24Sometimes called a “dead-man” lever because if for any reason the operator looses the ability to hold the
lever down, the blade is brought to an immediate stop.
25Flywheels are used to smooth variations in speed caused by torque ﬂuctuations, due to ﬂuctuating operational
loads or ﬂuctuating prime-mover torque, over each cycle (as in the case of a one-cylinder internal combustion en-
gine, for example). The rotating blade itself also produces a “ﬂywheel effect.” For more details, see Chapter 19.

You have been asked, as a consultant, to propose a brake design that will meet the de-
sign objective of stopping the rotating blade quickly enough upon release of the dead-man
lever to prevent operator injury from the rotating blade. Estimates have been made that in-
dicate the rotating blade must be reduced to zero speed in 10 revolutions (approximately 0.5
sec) to properly protect the operator from injury. Engineering management desires that you
ﬁrst consider the use of a short-shoe block brake arrangement that utilizes the existing cast-
iron ﬂywheel, by machining a smooth outer surface that can serve as a brake drum.
Propose a preliminary design that meets these speciﬁcations if a design safety factor
of 1.5 is desired for all aspects of the design.
Solution
Utilizing the basic concepts outlined in 16.5 and 16.6, a preliminary brake package pro-
posal may be developed as follows:
1.
Management has speciﬁed that a short-shoe drum brake should be considered ﬁrst.
One tentative short-shoe arrangement that seems to have the potential for meeting
management directives and design speciﬁcations is sketched in Figure E16.1B. This
arrangement preserves much of the existing design, proposes to smooth the outer ﬂy-
wheel surface to act as the brake drum, and adds an actuation spring, lever, and short
brake shoe to accomplish the braking task.
2.
From Table 16.1, tentatively select a rigid, molded, nonasbestos lining for this appli-
cation; this lining has the following properties when used in contact with smooth cast
iron:
3.
Utilizing (16-19), estimate the torque T required to decelerate the rotating cast-iron
ﬂywheel and steel blade from 2400 rpm to 0 rpm in 0.5 sec, as
T = Je
vop
tr
Vmax = 4800-7500 ft/min
®max = 500°F
pmax = 150 psi
m = 0.33
714
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
Proposed
commecial
clutch package
Clutch disengage
cable from
"deadman" lever
I.C. Engine
(operational crankshaft
speed approx. 2400 rpm)
C.I. Flywheel
Web
tweb
Hub
Rim
Steel rotary mower blade; 1/4 in. thick  2 in. wide  20 in. long
Spacer shell
2.0 in.
Deck shell
Figure E16.1A
Sketch of proposed mower modiﬁcation, with clutch package and
spacer inserted between engine and deck. (See Figure E16.1B for
bottom view.)
Example 16.1
Continues

When the clutch disengages, the effective mass moment of inertia, 
, includes
only the ﬂywheel and the blade. For the cast-iron26 ﬂywheel, utilizing Appendix Table
A.2, and representing the ﬂywheel by the combination of a solid cylindrical mass (hub
and shaft), a thin ring (rim), and a thin disk (web),
Using case 2 of Table A.2, and dimensions from Figures E16.1A and E16.1B,
Using case 4 of Table A.2,
And using case 3 of Table A.2,
=
0.2703p14.02210.524
2132.2 * 122
14.022 = 0.1405 in-lb-sec2
Jweb = WwebR2
web
2g
=
0.2703pR2
webtweb4
2132.2 * 122
R2
web
=
0.2703p13.75210.5212.0 - 0.524
32.2 * 12
13.7522 = 0.1736 in-lb-sec2
Jrim = Wrim
g
R2
rim =
0.27032p1Rmean2rimtrimLrim4
32.2 * 12
R2
rim
=
0.2703p11.02212.0 - 0.524
2132.2 * 122
11.022 = 0.0017 in-lb-sec2  1includes shaft2
Jhub = Whub
2g R2
hub =
0.2703pR2
hubLhub4
2132.2 * 122
R2
hub
Jfw = Jhub + Jrim + Jweb
Je
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes 715
b
c
Ro = 4.0
trim = 0.5 in. typ.
Brake shoe
with integral
lining
Brake
actuation
spring
Retract
cable from
"deadman"
lever
Deck shell
Cast-iron flywheel with
smooth rim for brake
Actuation
lever
Hub
Rim
Web
45

a
Rhub = 1.0 in.
Figure E16.1B
Sketch of proposed short-shoe block
brake arrangement for quickly stopping
the rotary blade. View shown is bottom
view of mower. (See Figure E16.1A for
side view.)
26Weight density for cast iron is 0.270 lb/in3 (see Table 3.4).

Thus,
For the steel blade,27 case 2 of Table A.2 may be utilized by assuming the blade
to be a long, thin 
member, giving28
and adding (7) to (8),
Also, the operating angular velocity is
and, from speciﬁcations,
Using these values gives
Next, using (16-21), the friction-based braking torque capacity must be
Utilizing (16-15), the spring must exert an actuating force 
of
Substituting from 
The actuating force 
that must be supplied by the brake actuation spring
shown in Figure E16.1B is a function of dimensions , , and , still to be determined.
From 
, and referring to Figure E16.1B, the required actuating force may be re-
duced by selecting larger values of , larger values of , and/or smaller values of ,
but limits are placed on these values by the geometric and dimensional constraints of
the existing mower design.
b
c
a
1Fa2C
c
b
a
1Fa2C
1Fa2C =
139621b - 0.33c2
14.0210.332a
= 300ab - 0.33c
a
b
(Tf)c
1Fa2C =
Tf 1b - mc2
Rma
1Fa2C
1Tf2C = ndT = 11.5212642 = 396 in-lb
T =
0.5252251.3
0.5
= 264 in-lb
tr = 0.5 sec
vop =
2pnop
60
=
2p124002
60
= 251.3 rad
sec
Je = 0.2810 + 0.2441 = 0.525 in-lb-sec2
Jblade = WbladeL2
blade
12g
=
0.283310.25212.021202412022
12132.2 * 122
= 0.2441 in-lb-sec2
1D L 02
Jfw = 0.0017 + 0.1786 + 0.1405 = 0.2810 in-lb-sec2
716
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
27Weight density for steel is 0.283 lb/in3.
28Be careful to note in case 2 of Table A.2 that 
, so with 
, 
, where 
.
h = Lblade
1m>12210 + h22
Jblade = Jx =
R L 0
Jblade = Jx = Jy  Jz
Example 16.1
Continues

As a ﬁrst iteration, the following assumed values appear to be consistent with the
mower geometry:
Tentatively adopting these proposed “ﬁrst-iteration” dimensions, the required actuat-
ing force as
It appears that a preloaded tension spring could reasonably provide such an actu-
ating force. To develop a tentative spring design, see Chapter 14.
4.
The energy to be dissipated by the brake package during the 0.5-sec brake stopping
time may be estimated from (16-20), using Je and wop, as
5.
For a short-shoe brake (16-10) holds, so using data from above,
6.
From (16-11), the required brake contact area 
is
7.
The normal force 
may be calculated from (16-13), using the data from above,
whence,
In the proposed conﬁguration sketched in Figure E16.1B, the contact length of the
brake lining extends over a 45
segment of the cast-iron rim, giving a pro-
posed contact length 
of
Using Areq’d and Lc, the required lining contact with 
is
This width requirement is compatible with the existing 2.0-inch rim width shown
in Figure E16.1A.
wc =
Areq’d
Lc
= 2.00
3.1 = 0.65 inch
wc
Lc = Roap
4 b = 14.02a p
4 b = 3.1 inches
Lc
1p>4 rad2
Areq’d = 300
150 = 2.00 in2
N =
Faa
b - mc =
691122
3 - 0.3310.752 = 300 lb
N
Areq’d =
N
pmax
Areq’d
p = pmax = 150 psi
Ed = 1
2 10.52521251.322 = 16,590 in-lb
1Fa2C = 300 c
3 - 0.3310.752
12
d = 69 lb
c1 = 34 inch
b1 = 3 inches
a1 = 12 inches
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Short Shoes 717

To estimate the temperature rise at the braking interface, (16-23a) may be utilized,
giving
16,590 in-lb [see (18)]
9336 in-lb/Btu [see (16-24)]
0.12 Btu/lb-
[see (16-24)]
The weight of the heat-absorbing mass will be estimated as the weight of the outer 10
percent29 of the cast-iron ﬂywheel rim; hence
Therefore, the estimated temperature rise would be
Thus a maximum temperature around 114
would be estimated. This is well within
the acceptable range. It would probably be advisable to also investigate lower-cost lin-
ings such as woven cotton or resilient paper for this application.
Finally, the maximum relative tangential velocity between the lining and the cast-
iron rim is
This value of maximum velocity is within the range of 4800–7500 ft/min, and will
be regarded as acceptable, but should be checked experimentally. 
Pivot pin reactions on the free body may be calculated from (16-17) and (16-18)
as
and
The resultant reaction force on the pin, therefore, is
The preliminary design recommendations may be summarized as follows:
1. Adopt the conﬁguration sketched in Figure 16.1B.
2. Tentatively adopt rigid molded-nonasbestos lining bonded to a shoe extending
over a 45 circumferential segment of the 4.0-inch outer radius of the drum.
The lining width should be approximately 0.65 inch, or more.
3. The lever and pivot location dimensions in Figure E16.1B should be approximately
Rpin = 2R2
h + R2
v = 219922 + 123122 = 251 lb
Rv = Fa - N = 69 - 300 = -231 lb
Rh = mN = 0.3313002 = 99 lb
Vmax =
2p14.02124002
12
= 5027 ft/min
°F
¢® =
116,590>93362
10.12210.342
L  44°F 1above ambient temperature2
W = 0.27012p214.02310.10210.524 = 0.34 lb
°F
C =
J® =
where  Ed =
¢® =
Hf
CW =
1Ed>J®2
CW
718
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
Example 16.1
Continues
29This is purely a judgment call. The temperature rise should ultimately be experimentally validated before 
releasing the design to production engineering.

12 inches
3 inches
0.75 inch
and the brake actuation spring should be selected and preloaded to provide an
actuation force of 69 lb.
4. Experimental testing should be conducted to validate all aspects of the pro-
posed design before it is placed into production.
16.7 Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes
If the angle of shoe contact 
[see Figure 16.5(a)] exceeds about 45, the short-shoe as-
sumption (that contact pressure is uniformly distributed) may introduce signiﬁcant errors
into the equations developed in 16.6.30 To develop equations appropriate for long shoes, a
more accurate estimate of pressure distribution over the shoe contact surface is necessary.
One way of estimating long-shoe pressure distribution is based on the normal wear pattern
expected for the lining as wear progresses, causing the shoe and actuating lever to rotate
through angle 
about pivot point C. This rotation is shown in Figure 16.6 for an external
shoe.31 Utilizing (16-26), the normal wear depth at any arbitrary point 
along the contact
surface may be written as
(16-28)
and since the tangential velocity 
and contact time 
are constant over the whole rub-
bing contact surface,
(16-29)
constant for a material pair selected for long-shoe brakes operating at
tangential sliding velocity 
for a time of contact 
local pressure at point P
pP =
tcontact
V
where  KLS =
1dn2P = 1kwVtcontact2 pP = KLSpP
tcontact
V
1dn2P = kw pPVPtcontact
P
g
a
c =
b =
a =
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes 719
30Typically, however, the angle of contact for long-shoe brakes rarely exceeds about 120.
31A similar argument may be made for an internal shoe.
a
Fa
A
C

R
Actuating lever
Long shoe (block)
Lining of width wc
Rim (drum)
(a) Brake system assembly.
(b) Free body diagram of integral shoe and lever.
g


P
d
r1
q
O
m
1

2

h
a
Fa
C
R
Note: wc is contact width of brake shoe lining
          in and out of the paper.


P
d
r1
q
Rh
dN
dFf
Rv
dA = wcRd
Figure 16.5
External long-shoe block brake.

Kinematically, as the shoe wears, rotation occurs about pivot point . Figure 16.6 il-
lustrates that the resultant wear 
is
(16-30)
and the normal wear 
, perpendicular to the surface at , is
(16-31)
Constructing through point 
and perpendicular to 
, as illustrated in Figure 16.5(a),
(16-32)
whence, from (16-31),
(16-33)
Combining (16-29) with (16-33)
(16-34)
From this it may be deduced that the point of maximum pressure corresponds to the
point where 
reaches a maximum value, so
(16-35)
Dividing (16-34) by (16-35)
(16-36)
It should be noted in Figure 16.5(a) that
(16-37)
To sum moments about hinge pin location , it should be noted from 16.5(b) that both
the normal force components and the friction force components contribute, just as for a
short-shoe brake, but for the long-shoe case the moment of normal forces 
and the
moment of friction forces 
must be integrated over the entire arc of contact surface
dFf
dN
C
1sin w2max = 1    
 if  w2 7 90°
1sin w2max = sin w2    if  w2 … 90°
pP =
sin w
1sin w2max
pmax
KLSpmax = gr11sin w2max
 sin w
KLSpP = gr1 sin w
1dn2P = gr1 sin w
q = r1 sin w = m sin u
OP
C
q
1dn2P = dP sin u = gm sin u
P
1dn2P
dP = gm
dP
C
720
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
dp
m
P
R
O
C
Po
(dn)p
Shoe lining
surface
Path of point Po to P
as wear progresses



Figure 16.6
Displacement d of an arbitrary point on the
contact surface as the lining wears and the
shoe-and-arm unit rotates about hinge point
C. (See also Figure 16.5.)

between the lining and the drum. Considering the elemental contact area 
[see
Figure 16.5(b)], the elemental normal force at 
may be written as
(16-38)
and the elemental friction force at 
as
(16-39)
With these expressions, for counterclockwise drum rotation, the moment of normal
forces32 about hinge pin 
may be written as [see 16.5(b)]
(16-40)
Substituting from (16-36),
(16-41)
Integrating (16-41),
(16-42)
Similarly, for counterclockwise drum rotation, the moment of friction forces about hinge
pin 
may be written as
(16-43)
Again substituting from (16-36),
(16-44)
and integrating (16-44),
(16-45)
Because of the sign convention used in developing these expressions for 
and 
, if nu-
merical evaluation results in a positive moment, it is counterclockwise about . If numer-
ical evaluation results in a negative moment, it is clockwise about . The signs of these
moments depend upon hinge location and the direction of drum rotation. Keeping the sign
convention in mind, and referring to Figure 16.5(b), a moment summation about 
may be
written as
(16-46)
whence the required actuation force 
becomes33
(16-47)
Fa =
MN + Mf
a
Fa
MN + Mf - Faa = 0
C
C
C
Mf
MN
Mf =
mwcRpmax
41sin w2max
cr1
2 1cos 2w2 - cos 2w12 - 4R1cos w2 - cos w12d
Mf = mwcRpmax
1sin w2max L
w2
w1
1R sin w - r1 sin w  cos w2 dw
Mf =
L
w2
w1
1R - r1 cos w2dFf =
L
w2
w1
1R - r1 cos w2 mpPwcRdw
C
MN = wcRr1pmax
41sin w2max
12a - sin 2w2 + sin 2w12
MN =
L
w2
w1
r1c
sin w
1sin w2max
pmaxdwcR sin wdw = wcRr1pmax
1sin w2max L
w2
w1
sin 2 wdw
MN =
L
w2
w1
qdN =
L
w2
w1
r1 sin wdN =
L
w2
w1
r1pPwcR sin wdw
C
dFf = mdN = mpPwcRdw
P
dN = pPwcRdw
P
dA = wcRdw
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes 721
32Assuming counterclockwise rotation about C to be positive.
33Compare with (16-13) for a short-shoe brake.

Clearly, if MN and Mf have the same sign, self-energization is not possible. If the fric-
tion moment assists the actuating force in applying the brake34, the brake will be self-en-
ergizing (and may be self-locking), as already discussed in 16.5 and 16.6. From (16-47)
then, for counterclockwise drum rotation, the long-shoe brake becomes self-locking if35
(16-48)
Reversing the direction of drum rotation reverses the sign of 
, and the actuating
force equation for reversed drum rotation becomes
(16-49)
Because of the instability inherent in a self-locking brake, it is often recommended
that self-energizing long-shoe brakes should be conﬁgured so that
(16-50)
It is well to remember that either reversing the direction of drum rotation or moving
the hinge pin location may profoundly affect moment directions and self-energizing
capability.
The friction braking torque capacity, , for a long-shoe brake such as the one depicted
in Figure 16.5 may be written by summing moments on the drum about its axis of rotation
to obtain 
(16-51)
substituting from (16-36),
(16-52)
Just as for short-shoe brakes, the design value of friction torque capacity, , must be
large enough to safely bring the moving mass of the operating system to zero velocity
within the speciﬁed response time , and the energy stored in the moving mass must be
safely dissipated by the brake package.
For long-shoe brakes, as for short-shoe brakes,36 the horizontal and vertical hinge re-
action forces, for pin location , may be found from horizontal and vertical force summa-
tions on the lever and shoe (taken together as a free body), as illustrated in Figure 16.5(b).
However, the expressions are more complicated because of the nonuniform pressure dis-
tribution. Referring to Figure 16.5(b), a vertical force summation on the free body shown
gives
(16-53)
Rn +
L
w2
w1
1dN2n +
L
w2
w1
1dFf2n - Fa = 0
C
tr
Tf
Tf = mwcR2pmax
1sin w2max L
w2
w1
sin wdw = mwcR2pmax
1sin w2max
1cos w1 - cos w22
Tf =
L
w2
w1
RFf =
L
w2
w1
R1mpPwcRdw2
Tf
`
Mf
MN ` … 0.7
Fa =
MN - Mf
a
Mf
MN + Mf … 0
722
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
34That is, Mf has the same sense as Faa.
35Compare with (16-14) for a short-shoe brake.
36See (16-17) and (16-18).

in which the vertical component of the normal forces may be found as
(16-54)
This may be integrated to ﬁnd
(16-55)
Similarly, the vertical component of the friction forces may be written as
(16-56)
which may be integrated to obtain
(16-57)
Combining (16-55) with (16-57),
(16-58)
Following a similar logic, a horizontal force summation on the free body shown in Figure
16.5(b) gives
(16-59)
As a practical matter, the pressure distribution assumed in (16-36) is often signiﬁ-
cantly altered during the early “wear-in” period because the region of higher pressure
wears more rapidly,37 thereby redistributing the higher pressure more uniformly. All of the
long-shoe equations from (16-41) through (16-59) are affected by pressure redistribution
during the early wear-in period. For example, the torque capacity, , calculated from 
(16-52), tends to be smaller than the actual torque capacity following initial wear-in, so
(16-52) gives a conservative result in the design sense. In the ﬁnal analysis, experimental
testing should always be conducted to validate any new brake design proposal.
Tf
  + 1m cos b + sin b212a - sin 2w2 + sin 2w124
Rh =
wcRpmax
41sin w2max 31m sin b - cos b21cos 2w1 - cos 2w22
  + 1cos b + m sin b)(2a - sin 2w2 + sin 2w124
Rn = Fa -
wcRpmax
41sin w2max 31sin b - m cos b21cos 2w1 - cos 2w22
  + sin b12a - sin 2w2 + sin 2w124
1Ff2n =
mwcRpmax
41sin w2max
3-cos b1cos 2w1 - cos 2w22
1Ff2n =
L
w2
w1
1dFf2n = -
L
w2
w1
sin w
1sin w2max
pmax mwcR cos1b + w2 dw
  + cos b12a - sin 2w2 + sin 2w124
Nn =
wcRpmax
41sin w2max
3sin b1cos 2w1 - cos 2w22
=
wc Rpmax
1sin w2max L
w2
w1
sin w sin1b + w2 dw
=
L
w2
w1
sinw
1sinw2max
pmaxwcR sin1b + w2 dw
Nv =
L
w2
w1
1dN2n =
L
w2
w1
pPwc R sin1b + w2 dw
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes 723
37See (16-27).

A variation on the long-shoe brake38 is the pivoted symmetrical-shoe brake sketched in
Figure 16.7. The shoe pivot point, , is located on the vertical centerline of the symmetri-
cal shoe at the radius , selected so that the frictional moment about 
due to normal forces
is also zero. Thus there is no tendency of the shoe to rotate about . This is basically a de-
sirable condition since it tends to equalize wear over the whole arc of contact. In fact, how-
ever, because the shoe moves progressively closer to the drum as wear takes place, in turn
reducing , progressively larger friction moments are produced about , and accelerated
wear is generated at either the toe or heel of the shoe, depending upon the direction of drum
rotation. For these reasons the pivoted symmetrical-shoe brake is not often used. The sin-
gle-shoe external block brake shown in Figure 16.5 is less common than the two-shoe de-
sign crudely sketched in Figure 16.2(a). The governing equations are the same for the
two-shoe design as for the single-shoe design, except that the friction torque on the drum is
the sum of the torques from the two shoes. Since the direction of drum rotation and hinge
pin location directly inﬂuence brake performance, these details must be carefully consid-
ered in the design of a two-shoe brake.39 Depending upon these details, both shoes may be
self-energizing, neither shoe may be self-energizing, or one shoe may be self-energizing
while the other is not self-energizing, for a given direction of drum rotation.
The analysis of internal expanding shoe brakes, as crudely sketched in Figure 16.2(b),
gives the same equations for pressures, torques, forces, and moments that have been de-
veloped for external contracting shoes. Internal expanding two-shoe brake systems are
widely used in automotive applications. As sketched in Figure 16.8, each shoe typically
pivots at one end about an anchor pin, and is actuated by a hydraulic cylinder at the other
Q
rf
Q
Q
rf
Q
724
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
38See Figure 16.5.
39See (16-13), (16-16), (16-47), and (16-50).
Fa
Rv
Rh
N
A
C
R
Shoe pivot point Q
Pivoted
symmetrical
shoe
Toe
Heel
O
N

2

2
rf
Figure 16.7
External long-shoe brake with pivoted
symmetrical shoe.
R
o
Fa
C2
C1
Fa

Brake
drum
Positive
clearance
Brake
lining
Anchor pins
Adjustable
stop
Brake shoes
Return
spring
Hydraulic actuator
(wheel cylinder)
Figure 16.8
Sketch of internal expanding two-shoe
brake arrangement typical of rear-wheel
automotive applications.

end. The typical arrangement, as shown, places the hydraulic actuator between the non-
pivoted ends of the two shoes, resulting in one self-energizing shoe in the forward direc-
tion of drum rotation and the other shoe self-energizing in the reverse direction. A light
return spring is used to retract the shoes against the adjustable stops when the brake is not
actuated. The adjustable stops are used to maintain a small positive clearance between the
shoes and the drum when the brake is not actuated.
Example 16.2 Preliminary Design of an Internally Expanding Long-Shoe Drum Brake
A 400-mm diameter drum has two internally expanding shoes, as shown in Figure E16.2A.
The actuating mechanism produces the same actuating force 
on each shoe (applied at
points C and D). The width of each shoe is 75 mm, the coefﬁcient of friction is 
,
and the maximum pressure is 
. Determine the minimum required actuat-
ing force, and the friction torque, noting the drum may rotate either clockwise or counter-
clockwise.
Solution
The moments due to the normal and friction forces either add or subtract, depending on
the direction of rotation of the drum. Since the drum can rotate in either direction, we ﬁrst
determine the direction of the friction force in each case, and the angles 
and 
. Using
Figure E16.2B we can establish the direction of the friction force on each shoe and the an-
gles 
and 
.
w2
w1
w2
w1
p max = 1.0 MPa
m = 0.24
Fa
Rim (Drum) Brakes with Long Shoes 725
Figure E16.2A
Internally expanding long-shoe drum brake.
120 mm
120 mm
y
x
Fa
Fa
D
B
A
C
120 mm
120 mm
140 mm
140 mm
400 mm
Fa
Fa
C
q
D
B
A
F
N
F
N
120 mm
Counterclockwise drum rotation
Clockwise drum rotation
Fa
Fa
C
q
D
B
A
F
N
F
N
120 mm
140 mm
140 mm
Figure E16.2B
Normal and shear forces for clockwise and counterclockwise drum rotation.

Setting 
for both cases, we determine 
to be
We next determine whether the moments due to normal force and friction forces add or
subtract for each possible drum rotation. By noting the directions of the normal and fric-
tion forces in Figure E16.2B, we can determine if they add or subtract when taking
moments about hinge points for the left shoe and point B for the right shoe. For clockwise
drum rotation,
Shoe AC:
Shoe BD:
For counterclockwise drum rotation, we get
Shoe AC:
Shoe BD:
From this, we deduce that the smallest activation force results from 
. For a clockwise drum rotation, shoe AC is the primary shoe and experiences the
largest pressure, and shoe BD is the secondary shoe, which will not experience the same
pressure as shoe AC. For a counterclockwise drum rotation, shoe BD is the primary shoe,
and shoe AC is the secondary shoe. The magnitudes of 
and 
will be independent of
the shoe being considered, therefore, we take advantage of symmetry. Since 
for
both shoes, 
. The moments due to the normal and friction forces are deter-
mined from (16-42) and (16-45), in which 
, 
, 
, 
,
, 
, 
. Therefore,
= 75033.4495 - (-0.3024)4 = 2814 N-m
= (0.075)(0.20)2(1 * 106)
4
C2(0.549p) - sin (197.6o) + sin (0)D
ƒMNƒ = wcRr1pmax
4(sin f)max
32a - sin 2f2 + sin 2f14
R = r1 = 0.200 m
p max = 1.0 MPa
m = 0.24
w2 = 98.8o
w1 = 0
wc = 0.075 m
a = 0.549p
(sin w) max = 1
w2 7 90o
Mf
MN
Mf)>0.280
Fa = (MN -
Fa =
MN - Mf
0.280
0.280Fa + Mf - MN = 0
aMB = 0:
Fa =
MN + Mf
0.280
0.280Fa - Mf - MN = 0
aMA = 0:
Fa =
MN + Mf
0.280
0.280Fa - Mf - MN = 0
aMB = 0:
Fa =
MN - Mf
0.280
0.280Fa + Mf - MN = 0
aMA = 0:
w2 = 2 tan-1 140
120 = 98.8o
w2
w1 = 0
726
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
= 9003-0.1906 - (-0.9224)4 = 658.6 N L 659 N-m
= 0.24(0.075)(0.20)2(1 * 106)
4
C0.20( cos (197.6o) - cos (0)) - 4(0.20)( cos (98.8o) - cos (0))D
ƒMfƒ =
mwcRp max
4( sin f) max
3r1( cos 2f2 - cos 2f1) - 4R( cos f2 - cos f1)4
The smallest activation force (shoe AC for a clockwise drum rotation and shoe BD for a
counterclockwise drum rotation) is
(Fa) min = (Fa)primary =
MN - Mf
0.280
= 2814 - 659
0.280
= 7696 N
Example 16.2
Continues

The activation force is the same for both shoes, but since the moments due to normal and
friction forces add for the secondary shoe, the two shoes will experience different pres-
sures and different friction torques. The torque associated with the primary shoes is
The pressure on the secondary shoe can be determined by noting that 
and 
. Therefore the normal and friction moments already computed can be
used to determine the pressure on the secondary shoe. We can express the moments as 
Therefore,
The torque for the secondary shoe is, therefore,
The friction torque for the entire system is, therefore,
16.8 Band Brakes
A band brake (or clutch) employs a ﬂexible band, usually a thin metal strip lined with a
ﬂexible friction material, wrapped around a rigid drum, as shown schematically in Figure
16.2(c). This simple device is sketched in more detail in Figure 16.9, showing a band brake
actuated by a lever arrangement. For the clockwise drum rotation shown, the clockwise
friction forces on the band tend to increase tensile force P1 and decrease tensile force P2.
The angle of wrap 
is usually in the range of 270 to 330. Taking a short elemental seg-
ment of the band as a free body, as shown in Figure 16.9(b), it may be noted that the ten-
sion force 
normal to the right end of the band segment is less than the tension force
normal to the left end, because of the friction force 
. If the segment is deﬁned
by two radial cutting planes that are 
apart, and chosen to be symmetrical about a verti-
cal centerline, a horizontal force summation on the segment may be written as
(16-60)
1P + dP2 cos dw
2 - P cos dw
2 - dFf = 0
dw
dFf
P + dP
P
a
Tf = Ttotal = Tprimary + Tsecondary = 830 + 515 = 1345 N-m
Tsecondary = 515 N-m
= 0.24(0.075)(0.20)2(0.620 * 106)
1
( cos (0) - cos (98.8o)) = 515 N-m
T = mwcR2pmax
sin umax
3 cos w1 - cos w24
Fa =
MN + Mf
0.280  Q  7696 = a
1
0.280b a 2814 
106 p + 659 
106 pb Q  p = 0.620 * 106
ƒMfƒ = 659
106p
ƒMNƒ = 2814 
106 p
sin u = sin umax
pmax>sin umax = p>sin u
Tprimary = 830 N-m
= 0.24(0.075)(0.20)2(1 * 106)
1
 ( cos (0) - cos (98.8o)) = 830 N-m
T = mwcR2pmax
sin umax
3cos w1 - cos w24
Band Brakes 727

For the very small angle 
,
(16-61)
so (16-60) becomes
(16-62)
A vertical force summation gives
(16-63)
For small angles,
(16-64)
Since
is a higher order differential, (16-63) may therefore be writtten as
(16-65)
or
(16-66)
Combining (16-62) and (16-66)
(16-67)
or
(16-68)
Integrating both sides over wrap angle 
(16-69)
L
P1
P2
dP
P =
L
a
0
mdw
a
dP
P = mdw
dP - mPdw = 0
dN = Pdw
dN - 2Padw
2 b = 0
dPdw
sin dw
2 L dw
2
dN - 1P + dP2 sin dw
2 - P sin dw
2 = 0
dP - mdN = 0
 cos dw
2 L 1
dw
728
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
R
Flexible band of width b
(includes attached lining)
d


O
O
 = 0
 = 
P2
P
dN
P + dP
P1
m
a
Actuation lever
B
C
A
Fa
(a) Overall layout.
(b) Band segment taken as a free body.
Width of band = b
d/2
d/2
d
dFf = dN
R
Figure 16.9
Simple band brake.

which gives
(16-70)
or
(16-71)
Referring again to Figure 16.9, the braking torque 
may be written by taking a moment
summation about drum center, , to give
(16-72)
Also, from (16-66)
(16-73)
or
(16-74)
pressure at any point in the arc of contact
tensile force in the band at the same point
drum radius
width of band
Since pressure is proportional to , and 
is largest at the tight side where the band
leaves the drum tangentially,40 the maximum contact pressure 
is
(16-75)
Rearranging (16-75),
(16-76)
and the braking torque equation (16-72) may be rewritten as
(16-77)
As in any brake or clutch application, the maximum pressure 
is limited by the lining
material selected.41
The actuating force 
on the lever, as depicted in Figure 16.9, depends on the lever
geometry and where the ﬂexible band attachments are made. If the tight side of the band
is attached at lever pivot point , summing moments about 
gives
(16-78)
whence
(16-79)
This arrangement is usually called a simple band brake.
Fa = am
a b a bRpmax
ema
b
Faa = mP2
C
C
Fa
pmax
Tf = bR 2pmax11 - e-ma2
P2 = bRpmax
ema
pmax = P1
bR = P2ema
bR
pmax
P
P
b =
R =
P =
where  p =
p = P
bR
Pdw = dN = pbRdw
Tf = 1P1 - P22 R = P2R1ema - 12
O
Tf
P1
P2
= ema
ln P1
P2
= ma
Band Brakes 729
40P  P1 at this location.
41See Table 16.1.

If the lever shown in Figure 16.9 is redesigned so that the tight side of the band is
attached to the lever at a point away from the lever pivot point, a moment on the lever is
produced about C that assists 
in actuating the brake. This arrangement is usually
called a differential band brake. Figure 16.10 depicts a differential band brake. For this
arrangement, the actuating force 
may again be found from the lever moment summation
about 
as42
(16-80)
For the direction of rotation and lever arrangement shown in Figure 16.10, (16-80) in-
dicates that the differential band brake is self-energizing, and if
(16-81)
it is self-locking.
Example 16.3 Band Brake Design
A band brake is being considered for use in an application that requires a braking torque
capacity of 3000 in-lb on a 10-inch-radius cast-iron drum rotating clockwise, as sketched
in Figure E16.3. It is desired to design a foot-operated actuation lever to be located below
m1P1 Ú m2P2
Fa = m2P2 - m1P1
a
C
Fa
Fa
730
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
42Compare with (16-79) for a simple band brake.
Flexible band of width b
(includes attached lining)
P2
P1
Actuation lever
C
Fa
d


O
 = 0
 = 
a
m2
m1
R
Figure 16.10
Differential band brake.
a ≤ 20 in.
Steel band




O
 = 0
 = 
B
C
A
Fa ≤ 30 lb
s = 12 in.
m = 10 in.
Lining material
Width of band = b
Figure E16.3
Sketch of proposed lever arrangement for
simple band brake application.

the drum that will require an actuation force no greater than 30 lb. For ergonomic reasons,
the lever should be no longer than 
 20 inches. Propose a lever design, lining material,
and band width that would fulﬁll the design speciﬁcations.
Solution
a.
A simple band brake will be investigated ﬁrst. If necessary, a differential band brake
will be examined later. The design arrangement shown in Figure E16.3 will be se-
lected as an initial design proposal for the actuation lever.
b.
From Table 16.1, tentatively select a woven cotton lining material43 bonded to a thin
steel band attached at 
and , as sketched in Figure E16.3. The coefﬁcient of fric-
tion, from Table 16.1, is
and the allowable maximum pressure for the woven cotton lining is
c.
The initial proposal will be to place lever pivot point 
on the vertical centerline of
the drum a distance  12 inches below the center of the drum, . The band attach-
ment point 
will be placed 10 inches to the right of lever pivot point , making the
band at that location vertical and tangent to the drum. Thus the angle of wrap 
starts
at the horizontal drum centerline 
.
The band wraps around the drum, leaving tangentially at 
, and attaches to
the frame at lever pivot point . Geometrically, from Figure E16.3,
Summarizing the proposal,
d.
Utilizing (16-77),
or
If a larger width 
were chosen for the band, the 3000 in-lb torque capacity could be
produced at a 
value less than the allowable 100 psi.
e.
From (16-79) then, for a band of width 0.35 inch, the actuating force would be
Since
the design speciﬁcations are satisﬁed.
Fa = 25.3 6 1Fa2allow = 30 lb
Fa = a10
20b a
0.35110211002
e0.4714.122
b = 25.3 lb
pmax
b
bmin =
3000
8557.8 = 0.35 inch
3000 = b110221100211 - e -0.4714.1222 = b18557.82
a = 236°  14.12 rad2
R = 10 inches
m = 10 inches
a = 20 inches
a = 180 + b = 180 + sin -1 10
12 = 180 + 56.4 L 236°
C
w = a
1w = 02
a
C
B
O
s
C
1pmax2allow = 100 psi
m = 0.47
C
B
a
Band Brakes 731
43Because ﬂexibility is an important criterion.

A width of b  0.35 inch would work, therefore, but as a matter of design judg-
ment, it seems disproportionately small. One might arbitrarily choose b  1.0 inch,
with the knowledge that the design torque of 3000 in-lb could be produced with a 
value lower than44 the allowable 100 psi, and that the same (acceptable) actuating
force would produce the required braking torque. The proposed design recommenda-
tion, therefore, is to adopt the conﬁguration sketched in Figure E16.3, with the fol-
lowing speciﬁcations:
1. Use a woven cotton lining material bonded to a 1-inch-wide steel band.
2. Use a lever of length 
 20 inches.
3. Place the lever pivot point on the vertical centerline of the drum, 12 inches below
the center of the drum.
4. Position the actuation lever horizontally, with the band attachment point 
located
10 inches to the right of lever pivot point .
Of course, many other satisfactory dimensional combinations could be found.
Experimental validation would be suggested prior to production.
16.9 Disk Brakes and Clutches
A schematic diagram of a disk (plate) brake or clutch is shown in Figure 16.2(d). The unit
shown embodies two friction interfaces. The unit is actuated by clamping a central rotat-
ing disk between two straddling coaxial disks splined to a separate shaft (clutch), or
clamping a central rotating disk between two straddling coaxial disks splined to a ﬁxed
housing (brake). The device is actuated by applying opposing axial forces to the splined
outer disks, causing them to slide and clamp the central disk between them, as shown, to
bring all disks to a common velocity.45
Other versions of a disk brake or clutch may embody only a single friction interface,
as shown in Figure 16.11, or multiple friction interfaces, as shown in Figure 16.12. Disk
brakes are generally considered to provide the best performance and best fade-resistance
of any type of brake. Since the disk conﬁguration provides freedom from centrifugal force
effects,46 it is widely used for clutch applications. Using multiple-disk versions, a large
C
B
a
pmax
732
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
Example 16.3
Continues
44The value would be 
.
45For a brake, the common velocity is zero.
46If shoe-type devices are used as clutches (both shafts rotating), the shoes are subjected to a centrifugal force
ﬁeld that tends either to increase the pressure between shoes and rim (internal shoes) or to decrease the pres-
sure between shoes and rim (external shoes).
pmax = 0.35>1.011002 = 35 psi
Power
output
Lining bonded to
input disk
View A–A
dr
Lining bonded to
input disk
r
ri
ro
A
A
Na
Power
input
Radial
bearing
Radial and
thrust bearing
Friction
interface
Figure 16.11
Single-disk brake or clutch.

frictional area may be installed in a small space, and favorable pressure distributions are
usually generated by an initial wear-in period.
Due to the concentrated heat generation within a multiple-disk brake package, and the
difﬁculty in adequately dissipating the friction-generated heat, such compact devices (with
full annular interfacial contact between disks) are rarely used for brakes in high-power ap-
plications because they would usually exceed allowable temperatures. For some installa-
tions, effective heat dissipation is possible.47
Disk brakes do not offer self-energization, and typically require high axial actuation
forces; they are therefore often actuated by using power-assist devices. A common clutch
conﬁguration is to use a preloaded axial spring arrangement to provide the necessary
clamping force for proper engagement, then utilize a lever arrangement or hydraulic actu-
ator to disengage the device.
Just as for other types of brakes and clutches, a designer is interested in estimating
friction torque capacity; actuating forces required; limitations imposed by pressure, tem-
perature, or wear; strength limitations; and energy dissipation (heat dissipation) capability.
Depending upon construction details and materials chosen, an assumption of either
uniform wear or uniform pressure is usually made in order to estimate pressure distribu-
tion, braking torque, and actuation force for a disk brake or clutch.
If the disks tend to be rigid, the greatest wear will at ﬁrst occur over the outer cir-
cumferential portion of the disk because tangential velocity is greater there.48 After a cer-
tain amount of initial wear, the pressure distribution will change so as to ultimately result
in nearly uniform wear.49
If the disks tend to be ﬂexible, and are held in intimate contact,50 nominally uniform
pressure exists between the disk interfaces.51
Uniform Wear Assumption
For a design based on the uniform wear assumption, (16-27) may be utilized to give
(16-82)
normal wear rate
material pair constant52
kw =
where  dn =
dn = kw1pV2 = kw12prn2p = 12pnkw2pr
Disk Brakes and Clutches 733
Disks splined to power
output shaft (5 disks shown)
Na
Na
Na
Na
Bearing
Disks splined to power
input shell (6 disks shown)
Power
output
Power
input
Bearing
Note: As sketched, the
          number of friction
          interfaces is nf = 10.
Figure 16.12
Multiple-disk brake or clutch.
47True for caliper brakes, for example, as sketched in Figure 16.13.
48See (16-27).
49This occurs when the 
product is nominally constant over the whole interface.
50Often by suitably distributed axial spring loading.
51The uniform wear assumption is more conservative in the design sense.
52The material wear constant may be available from the friction material manufacturer.
1pV2

734
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
contact pressure at radius r
tangential relative sliding velocity between contacting disks, at radius r
radius to any selected elemental annular ring of radial thickness 
that
lies between the inner radius 
and outer radius , as illustrated in
Figure 16.11
relative rotational speed between disks, at the interface, rpm
Adopting the uniform wear assumption.
(16-83)
Combining (16-82) and (16-83) gives
(16-84)
so it may be observed that the maximum pressure 
will occur at the inner radius, giv-
ing, from (16-82),
(16-85)
Equating (16-82) to (16-85) then yields
(16-86)
For the uniform wear assumption, referring to Figure 16.11, axial normal force 
may be written as
(16-87)
The friction torque (braking torque) may be found by integrating the product of dif-
ferential tangential friction force, 
, times radius , for an elemental annular area 
,53
from inner radius 
to outer radius . This gives
(16-88)
Performing the integration, and utilizing (16-87),
(16-89)
If a multiple-disk arrangement is used as shown in Figure 16.12, the torque for each
friction interface is given by (16-88). Therefore, if there are 
friction interfaces in a mul-
tiple-disk unit, the braking torque capacity is given by
(16-90)
1Tf2uw = nf mppmax ri1r 2
o - r 2
i 2 = nf maro + ri
2
bNa
nf
1Tf2uw = mppmaxri1r 2
o - r 2
i 2 = maro + ri
2
bNa
1Tf2uw =
L
ro
ri
rdFf =
L
ro
ri
rmpdA =
L
ro
ri
rmari
r pmaxb 2prdr
ro
ri
dA
r
dFf
1Na2uw =
L
ro
ri
pdA =
L
ro
ri
ari
r pmaxb 12prdr2 = 2ppmaxri1ro - ri2
Na
p = ri
r pmax
dn = 12pnkw2 pmaxri
pmax
pr = constant
dn = constant
n =
ro
ri
dr
r =
V =
p =
53See Figure 16.11.

Disk Brakes and Clutches 735
Caliper
pivot
Lining pad
(one each
side)
Actuator location
Fa
Fa


Figure 16.13
Caliper-type disk brake.
Uniform Pressure Assumption
For a design based on the uniform pressure assumption,
(16-91)
(16-92)
and the friction torque for one friction interface is
(16-93)
Finally, if a multiple-disk unit with 
friction interfaces is used,
(16-94)
Caliper disk brakes, illustrated in Figure 16.13, are often used in automotive appli-
cations. They utilize friction lining “pads” that extend circumferentially over only a
small sector of the disk to give crescent-shaped pads54 squeezed against both sides of the
rotating disk. Since most of the rotating disk is directly exposed to the ambient atmos-
phere, convective heat dissipation is enhanced. In addition, a hollow disk with integral
vanes is sometimes used to “pump” air through interior passages of the disk, providing
substantial additional cooling. The actuating force 
, shown in Figure 16.13, is usually
provided by a hydraulic actuator. The equations for axial normal force 
and braking
torque 
may be readily developed from (16-87), (16-89), (16-92), or (16-94), by sim-
ply multiplying the selected equation by the ratio 
, where is the angle subtending
the brake pad sector. The angle usually lies in the range from 
to 
. The inner ra-
dius, , for disk brakes, including caliper brakes, usually lies in the range from 0.60 
to 0.80 .
ro
ro
ri
p>2
p>4
u
u
u>2p
Tf
Na
Fa
1Tf2up = 2pnf mpmaxar 3
o - r 3
i
3
b =
2mnf 1r 3
o - r 3
i 2
31r 2
o - r 2
i 2
Na
nf
= 2pmpmaxar 3
o - r 3
i
3
b =
2m1r 3
o - r 3
i 2
31r 2
o - r 2
i 2
Na
1Tf2up =
L
ro
ri
rdFf =
L
ro
ri
rmpdA = mpmaxL
ro
ri
r12prdr2
1Na2up =
L
ro
ri
pdA = pmaxL
ro
ri
2prdr = pmaxp1r 2
o - r 2
i 2
p = pmax
54Other shapes are sometimes used for the pad.

736
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
Example 16.4 Multiple-Disk Brake Drum
A low-cost, drum-type hoist has been designed to lift and lower a 5 kN payload attached
to the end of a ﬂexible cable which is wrapped around a 400-mm diameter drum, as shown
in Figure E16.4. A constant-speed centrifugal governor limits the lowering speed to a max-
imum velocity of 3 m/sec. The cast-iron drum weighs 1300 N and has a radius of gyration
of 180 mm.
Propose a multiple-disk brake of the type shown in Figure 16.12, mounted coaxially
with the drum, that has the capacity to completely stop the dropping payload in 0.2 sec.
An additional restriction is that the required normal actuating force Na (see Figure 16.12)
must not exceed 8.9 kN.
Solution
a.
Since this is a low-speed application, and cost is a factor, the tentative material pair
selection will be cast iron against cast iron55 (dry). From Table 16.1 and Appendix
Table A.1, we select the following properties
b.
Since the disks of cast iron are rigid, the uniform wear assumption will be used to es-
timate the actuating force 
and the friction torque 
required to meet the design
speciﬁcations. Hence, from (16-87) and (16-90), respectively,
and
(Tf)uw = nfmppmaxriAr 2
o - r 2
i B = nfmaro + ri
2
bNa
(Na)uw = 2ppmaxri(ro - ri)
Tf
Na
Vmax = 3600 ft/min (1097 m/min)
Tmax = 600oF (316oC)
(pmax)allow = 150 to 250 psi  (1.03 to 1.72 MPa)
m = 0.15 to 0.20
55See also Appendix Table A.1.
Flexible cable (wire rope)
Cast-iron drum; 1300N,
400-mm diameter
Multiple-disk brake;
details similar to
Figure 16.12
Bearing
Input from
drive motor
Bearing
Speed-limiting
centrifuge governor
Payload
(5KN)
vmax = 3m/s
Figure E16.4
Sketch of drum hoist.

Disk Brakes and Clutches 737
c.
Energy dissipation requirements may be established as
d.
To stop the drum rotation in the speciﬁed time of 
, assuming uniform de-
celeration, the angular displacement 
of the drum during the braking period may be
estimated as
The work that must be done by the braking torque to meet speciﬁcations may be es-
timated utilizing the kinetic energy and angular displacement terms above. 
e.
To be compatible with the drum radius of 0.2 meters, a somewhat smaller outer radius
for the disk will be chosen, say 
. Recalling the rule of thumb56 rela-
tionship between 
and , the inner radius will be 
f.
To fulﬁll the speciﬁcation that requires 
for 
using the results of (e),
This value of 
is much less than the material pair allowable value
of 1.03 to 1.72 MPa, given above.
g.
Solving 
for 
, using the maximum permissible pres-
sure of 0.263 MPa from (f), a conservative value of 
from above, and the re-
sults of 
friction surfaces required
h.
To estimate the temperature rise, it will be assumed that the friction-generated heat
will be transferred to only about 10 percent of the total volume of the six cast-iron
disks; or the weight of heat-absorbing cast-iron mass would be apporximately57
m = W
g = 11.93
9.81 = 1.22 kg
W = 6(0.10)p(0.152 - 0.092)(0.006)(73 280) = 11.93 N
nf =
1850
(0.15)p(0.263 * 106)(0.09)(0.152 - 0.092)
= 11.5 L 12
Tf
m = 0.15
nf
(Tf)uw = nfmppmaxri(r 2
o - r 2
i )
pmax = 0.263 MPa
p max =
8900
2p(0.09)(0.15 - 0.09) = 0.263 MPa
pmax
Na … 8900 N
ri L 0.6ro = 0.6(0.15) = 0.09 m = 90 mm
ro
ri
ro = 0.15 meters
Tf = KE
u
= 2777
1.5
= 1850 N-m
u = vavet = a
vi + vf
2
bt = a15 + 0
2
b(0.2) = 1.5 rad
u
t = 0.2 sec
KE = 1
2c a1300
9.81 b(0.18)2a 3
0.2b
2
+ a5000
9.81 b(3)2 d = 1
23966 + 45874 = 2777 N-m
= 1
2 aWdr
g k2
drb a
vpl
R b
2
+ 1
2a
Wpl
g bv2
pl
KE = (KE)rotating drum + (KE)translating payload = 1
2Jdrv2
dr + 1
2mplv2
pl
56See last paragraph of 16.9.
57It is assumed that the disks are each about 6 mm thick. Weight density for cast
iron is 73.28 kN/m3 (see Table 3.4).

738
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
Using (16-24),58 with 
and 
This is well within the 
limit. In addition, the 3 m/sec (180 m/min) tangential
velocity of the external weight is below the maximum (1097 n/min).
i.
Summarizing, the following design conﬁguration is suggested.
1. Use a multiple-disk conﬁguration, similar to that sketched in Figure 16.12, with
.
2. Make the disks of 6-mm thick cast iron with outside and inside radii of 150 mm
and 90 mm, respectively.
3. Use a hydraulic actuator to provide an axial normal force of 
to
squeeze the cast-iron friction disks together.
Of course, many other equally acceptable design conﬁgurations would work just as
well. Experimental evaluation of the brake package should be made before production.
16.10 Cone Clutches and Brakes
By comparing the cone clutch (brake) sketched in Figure 16.14 with the disk clutch (brake)
shown in Figure 16.11, it may be deduced that the disk clutch is simply a special case of
a cone clutch with a cone angle  of 90. In practice, the cone angle, , usually is selected
to lie within the range of about 8 to 15 with 12 commonly chosen. Cone angles less than
about 8 tend to produce a self-locking wedge condition, making engagement “grabby”
and disengagement difﬁcult. Large cone angles require the use of larger actuating forces
to produce a speciﬁed friction torque capacity, diminishing one of the principal advan-
tages of selecting a cone clutch or brake in the ﬁrst place.59 It should also be noted that
construction of cone clutches or brakes with more than one friction interface is usually 
impractical.
From Figure 16.14(b), the surface contact area dA may be written as60
(16-95)
Equations for normal actuating force and friction torque capacity of a cone clutch with
cone angle  may be developed by inserting (16-95) into (16-87) and (16-88) if uniform
wear conditions are assumed, or into (16-92) and (16-93) if uniform pressure conditions
are assumed. Thus, for the uniform wear assumption,
(16-96)
1Na2uw =
2ppmaxri1ro - ri2
sin a
dA = 2prdr
sin a
Na = 8900 N
nf = 12
316oC
¢® = Ed
Cm =
2777
500(1.22) = 4.6 oC
Ed = 2777 J
C = 500 J/kg-oC
Example 16.4
Continues
58Also see (KE) and (w) above.
59The wedging action of a properly designed clutch or brake permits a reduction of normal actuation force to
only about 20 percent of the normal actuation force required for an equivalent disk brake or clutch with a 
single friction interface 
.
60Compare with 
used for disk clutches and brakes.
dA = 2p rdr
1nf = 12

Problems 739
Power
output
Friction lining bonded
to input cone
Power
input
Radial bearing
 = cone angle
Radial and
thrust bearing
ri ro
ri
ro
r
Contact
pressure p
dr
dr
sin 

(b) Detail of friction lining contact interface.
(a) Sketch of cone clutch arrangement.
Friction
interface
Figure 16.14
Cone clutch or brake.
and
(16-97)
For the uniform pressure assumption,
(16-98)
and
(16-99)
1Tf2up =
2pmpmaxar 3
o - r 3
i
3
b
sin a
=
2m1r 3
o - r 3
i 2
31r 2
o - r 2
i 2
a Na
sin a b
1Na2up =
ppmax1r 2
o - r 2
i 2
sin a
1Tf2uw =
mppmaxri1r 2
o - r 2
i 2
sin a
= maro + ri
2
b a Na
sin ab
16-1. A Short-shoe block brake is to have the conﬁguration
shown in Figure P16.1, with the drum rotating clockwise at
500 rpm, as shown. The shoe is molded ﬁberglass, the drum is
aluminum-bronze, and the entire assembly is continuously water-
sprayed. Maximum-allowable contact pressure is 200 psi and the
coefﬁcient of friction of wet molded ﬁberglass on aluminum-
bronze is 0.15.
a. Using symbols only, derive an expression for actuating
force 
, expressed as a function of 
.
pmax
Fa
Problems
b. If the actuating force must not exceed 30 lb, what min-
imum lever length d should be used?
c. Using symbols only, write an expression for braking
torque .
d. Calculate a numerical value for the maximum-allow-
able braking torque that may be expected from this design.
16-2. Repeat problem 16-1, except that the drum rotates clock-
wise at 600 rpm, the shoe lining is woven cotton, the drum is
Tf

740
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
b. What is the maximum actuating force that should be used
for proper operation and acceptable design life?
c. Using symbols only, write an expression for braking
torque.
d. Calculate a numerical value for maximum braking torque
that may be expected from this design.
e. Would you classify the design as “self-energizing” or
“non–self-energizing”? Why?
16-8. For the shoe brake shown in Figure P16.8, it is difﬁcult
to determine by inspection whether the short-shoe assumption
will produce a sufﬁciently accurate estimate of braking torque
upon application of the actuating force 
.
Fa
Fa = 30 lb max
R = 5.0
A = 2 in2 contact area
N
c = 4 in.
e = 6 in.
d
B
Figure P16.1
Short-shoe block brake.
Fa = 650 lb
N = 3500 rpm
b = width of contacting
shoe = 3.0 in.
R = 6.0 in.
30 in.
10 in.
22.5
22.5
 = 0.2
45
Figure P16.8
Shoe brake assembly.
Af = 125 mm2
b = 50 mm
a = 450 mm
B
C
R = 100 mm
c = 100 mm
d = 75 mm
A
Fa

Figure P16.7
Short-shoe block brake submerged in salt water.
cast iron, and the environment is dry. In addition, referring to
Figure P16.1, is 3.0 inches, 
is 8.0 inches, the contact area 
is 8.0 in2, and 
 60 lb is the maximum-allowable value of
applied force, vertically downward.
16-3. Classify the short-shoe block brake shown in Figure P16.1
as either “self-energizing” or “non-self-energizing.”
16-4. Repeat problem 16-1 for the case where the drum rotates
counterclockwise at 800 rpm.
16-5. Repeat problem 16-1, except that the shoe lining is cermet
and the drum is 1020 steel.
16-6. Repeat problem 16-1, except that the coefﬁcient of friction
is 0.2, the maximum-allowable contact pressure is 80 psi, the
contact area 
is 10.0 in2, 
is 30.0 inches, 
is 9.0 inches, 
is
12.0 inches, and the maximum-allowable value of 
is 280 lb.
16-7. A short-shoe block brake is to have the conﬁguration
shown in Figure P16.7, with the drum rotating clockwise at
600 rpm, as shown. The shoe is molded ﬁberglass, the drum is
stainless steel, and the entire assembly is submerged in salt wa-
ter. The maximum-allowable contact pressure is 
and
the coefﬁcient of friction of wet molded ﬁberglass on stainless
steel is 
.
a. Using symbols only, derive an expression for the actuat-
ing force 
as a function of 
.
pmax
Fa
m = 0.18
0.9 MPa
Fa
c
R
e
A
Fa
A
R
e
a. Determine the percent error in calculated braking
torque that you would expect in this case if the short-shoe
assumption is used for calculation of the braking torque.
Base your determination on the premise that the long-shoe
equations are completely accurate.
b. Would the error made by using the short-shoe assump-
tion be on the “conservative” side (braking torque calcu-
lated by short-shoe assumption is less than the true value
of braking torque) or on the “nonconservative” side?
c. Do you consider the error made by using the short-shoe
assumption to be signiﬁcant or negligible for this particu-
lar case?
16-9. Repeat problem 16-8, except that 
 36 inches, Fa 
300 lb, 
, 
, R  7.0 inches, b  2.0 inches,
 0.25, and the drum rotates counterclockwise at a speed of
2500 rpm. An accurate estimate of 150 psi for the actual value
of 
has already been made.
16-10. A short-shoe block brake has the conﬁguration shown in
Figure P16.10, with the drum rotating clockwise at 63 rad/sec,
as shown The shoe is wood and the drum is cast iron. The weight
of the drum is 322 lb, and its radius of gyration is 7.5 inches. The
maximum-allowable contact pressure is 80 psi, and the coefﬁ-
cient of friction is 
 0.2. Other dimensions are shown in
Figure P16.10.
m
pmax
m
b = 22.5°
a = 22.5°
a

Problems 741
a. Derive an expression for the actuating force 
, and
calculate its maximum-allowable numerical value.
b. Derive an expression for braking torque, and calculate
its numerical value when the maximum-allowable actuat-
ing force is applied.
c. Estimate the time required to bring the rotating drum to a
stop when the maximum-allowable actuating force is applied.
d. Would you expect frictional heating to be a problem in
this application?
16-11. Repeat problem 16-10 for the case where the drum is
rotating counterclockwise at 63 radians per second.
16-12. Figure P16.12 shows a 1000-kg mass being lowered at
a uniform velocity of 3 m/s by a ﬂexible cable wrapped around
a drum of 60-cm diameter. The drum weight is 2 kN, and it has
a radius of gyration of 35 cm.
a. Calculate the kinetic energy in the moving system.
b. The brake shown maintains the rate of descent of the
1000-kg mass by applying the required steady torque of
Fa
300 kg-m. What additional braking torque would be re-
quired to bring the entire system to rest in 0.5 sec?
16-13. A short-shoe block brake is sketched in Figure P16.13.
Four seconds after the 1-kN actuating force is applied, the CW
rotating drum comes to a full stop. During this time, the drum
makes 100 revolutions. The estimated coefﬁcient of friction be-
tween drum and shoe is 0.5. Do the following:
R = 9.0 in.
c = 3 in.
b = 12 in.
a = 36 in.
H
 = 63 rad
sec
wd = 322 lb
A = 10 in2 contact area
k = 7.5 in. radius
of gyration
Fa
Figure P16.10
Short-shoe block brake with wood shoe.
Fa = 1 kN

c = 5 cm
d = 15 cm
O
D
b = 30 cm
a = 70 cm
Figure P16.13
Short-shoe block brake.
ddrum = 60 cm
Wdrum = 2 kN
v = 3 m/s
Fa
1000 kg
mass
Figure P16.12
Brake-controlled drum hoist.
a. Sketch the brake-shoe-and-arm assembly as a free-body
diagram.
b. Is the brake self-energizing or self-locking for the
direction of drum rotation shown?
c. Calculate the braking torque capacity of the system
shown.
d. Calculate the horizontal and vertical reaction forces on
the free body at pin location D.
e. Calculate the energy dissipated (work done by the
brake) in bringing the drum to a stop.
f. If it were desired to make the brake self-locking, to
what value would dimension d have to be increased?
16-14. A long-shoe brake assembly is sketched in Figure
P16.14. The estimated coefﬁcient of friction between shoe and
drum is 0.3, and the maximum-allowable pressure for the lining
Fa

C
O
Axial width of contact
shoe = 1.60 in.
Drum radius = 5.9 in.
a = 19.7 in.
7.9 in.
7.0 in.
5.9 in.
Figure P16.14
Long-shoe block brake.

742
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
material is 75 psi. Noting the CCW direction of rotation, deter-
mine the following:
a. The maximum actuating force 
that can be applied
without exceeding the maximum-allowable contact
pressure.
b. The friction braking torque capacity corresponding to
calculated in (a).
c. The vertical and horizontal components of the reaction
force at pin location C.
d. Is the brake self-energizing or self-locking?
16-15. Repeat problem 16-14 for the case where the drum ro-
tates in the clockwise direction.
16-16. The brake system shown in Figure P16.16 is to be fab-
ricated using a 
wide lining material at the contact
surface. The coefﬁcient of friction between the drum the lining
material is 
. The lining material should not be operated
at maximum pressures higher than 0.8 MPa. Determine the
minimum activation force 
.
Fa
m = 0.2
wc = 30 mm
Fa
Fa
a. What is the largest actuating force, 
, that should be
used with this braking system as now designed?
b. If this largest-allowable actuating force is applied, what
braking torque is produced on the rotating drum?
16-18. Repeat problem 16-17 for the case where the drum ro-
tates in the clockwise direction.
16-19. A 16-in diameter drum has two internally expanding
shoes, as shown in Figure P16.19. The actuating mechanism is
a hydraulic cylinder AB, which produces the same actuating
force 
on each shoe (applied at points A and B). The width of
each shoe is 2 in, the coefﬁcient of friction is 
, and the
maximum pressure is 
. Assuming the drum ro-
tates clockwise, determine the minimum required actuating
force, and the friction torque.
pmax = 150 psi
m = 0.24
Fa
Fa
Figure P16.17
Long-shoe block brake.
16-17. The shoe brake shown in Figure P16.17 is to be fabri-
cated using an impregnated asbestos lining material at the con-
tact surface. The lining material should not be operated at
maximum pressures higher than 100 psi.
Figure P16.16
Long-shoe Brake.
Fa
Fa
A
B
O
w
500 mm
200 mm
150 mm
150 mm
100 mm
45° 45°
45° 45°
6 in.
6 in.
5 in.
5 in.
5 in.
5 in.
y
x
A
B
C
16 in.
Figure P16.19
Internally expanding long-shoe drum brake.
16-20. A simple band brake of the type shown in Figure 16.9 is
to be constructed using a lining material that has a maximum-
allowable contact pressure of 600 kPa. The diameter of the
rotating drum is to be 350 mm, and the proposed width of the
band is 100 mm. The lever length is 900 mm and dimension m
is 45 mm. The angle of wrap is to be 270. Tests of the lining
material indicate that a good estimate for the coefﬁcient of fric-
tion is 0.25. Do the following:
a. Calculate the tight-side band tension at maximum-
allowable pressure.
b. Calculate the slack-side band tension at maximum-
allowable pressure.
c. Calculate the maximum torque capacity.
d. Calculate the actuating force corresponding to maximum
torque capacity.
Fa

O
Axial width of
contact shoe = 2.0 in.
Drum radius = 6.0 in.
30 in.
10 in.
45
45
 = 0.2

Problems 743
16-21. Repeat problem 16-20 for the case where the angle of
wrap is 180.
16-22. A simple band brake is constructed using a 0.050-inch-
thick by 2-inch-wide steel band to support the tensile forces.
Carbon-graphite material is bonded to the inside of the steel
band to provide the friction surface for braking, and the rotating
drum is to be a solid-steel cylinder, 16 inches in diameter and 
2 inches in axial thickness. The brake band is wrapped around
the rotating drum so that it is in contact over 270 of the drum
surface. It is desired to bring the drum to a complete stop in one
revolution from its operating speed of 1200 rpm. What would
be the maximum tensile stress induced in the 0.050-inch-thick
steel band during the braking period if the drum were brought
to a stop in exactly one revolution? Assume that the rotating
drum is the only signiﬁcant mass in the system, and that the
brake is kept dry.
16-23. A differential band brake is sketched in Figure P16.23
The maximum-allowable pressure for the band lining material
is 60 psi, and the coefﬁcient of friction between the lining and
the drum is 0.25. The band and lining are 4 inches in width. Do
the following:
16-25. A 2-m long arm is attached to a 50-mm diameter
drum, which is free to rotate about an axle at O. The arm is
required to support a 5-N force, as shown in Figure P16.25.
In order to keep the arm from rotating, a band brake is being
suggested. For the initial analysis, we assume the belt is 100 mm
wide and is made from woven cotton. The actuation force is
provided by pneumatic cylinder BC, attached to one end of
the belt. The pneumatic cylinder can supply a pressure of 
0.3 MPa. Determine the cross-sectional area of the cylinder
in order to supply enough force to keep the required force to
keep the arm in the position shown, and determine the pres-
sure on the pad.
20 in.
4 in.
1 in.
Fa
247°
R = 8 in.
Figure P16.23
Differential band brake.
a. If the drum is rotating in the clockwise direction, calcu-
late the tight-side tension and slack-side tension at maxi-
mum-allowable pressure.
b. For clockwise drum rotation, calculate the maximum
torque capacity.
c. For clockwise drum rotation, calculate the actuating
force corresponding to maximum torque capacity.
d. If the direction of drum rotation is changed to counter-
clockwise, calculate the actuating force corresponding to
maximum torque capacity.
16-24. The differential band brake sketched in Figure P16.24
has a 25-mm wide band. The coefﬁcient of friction between the
counterclockwise rotating drum and the lining is 
. If
the maximum allowable pressure is 0.4 MPa, determine the ac-
tivation force 
.
Fa
m = 0.25
Figure P16.24
Differential band brake.
Fa
A
O
w
300 mm
200 mm
500 mm
100 mm
100 mm
Figure P16.25
Band brake restraining a 5-N load.
O
D
B
A
25 mm
30°
2 m
5 N
C
16-26. In the analysis and design of disk brakes and clutches,
it is usual to hypothesize either “uniform wear” or “uniform
pressure” as a basis for making calculations.
a. What important information can be derived on the basis
of making a proper choice between these two hypotheses?

744
Chapter 16 / Brakes and Clutches
b. How would you decide whether to choose the uniform
wear hypothesis or the uniform pressure hypothesis in any
given situation?
16-27. It is desired to replace the long-shoe brake shown in
Figure P16.17 with a simple band brake of the same width b. If
the materials used are the same at the friction surface (i.e., 

0.2 and 
 100 psi are unchanged) and the drum size must
remain unchanged, what wrap angle should be used for the sim-
ple band brake to produce the same braking torque capacity as
the long-shoe brake shown in Figure P16.17?
16-28. A disk clutch is being proposed for an industrial appli-
cation in which the power-input shaft supplies 12 kw steadily at
650 rpm. The patented friction lining material, which is to be
bonded to one or more annular disk surfaces, is to be brought
into contact with stiff steel disks to actuate the clutch. The out-
side diameter of the clutch disks must be no larger than 125 mm,
and it is desired to conﬁgure the annular friction surfaces so that
the inner diameter is about 2/3 of the outer diameter. The coefﬁ-
cient of friction between the patented friction lining material
and steel is 
and the maximum-allowable contact
pressure is 
. What is the minimum number of
friction surfaces required for the clutch to function properly?
16-29. A disk brake is to be constructed for use on a high-
speed rotor balancing machine. It has been decided that a
carbon-graphite friction material will be used against a steel-
disk mating surface to provide the braking action. The environ-
ment is dry. For clearance reasons the inner diameter of the
steel brake disk must be 10.0 inches and its thickness is 0.375 inch.
Further, the brake must be able to absorb 2.5
106 in-lb of
kinetic energy in one-half revolution of the disk brake as it
brings the high-speed rotor to a full stop. Only one braking sur-
face can be used.
a. What should be the outside diameter of this disk brake?
b. What axial normal actuating force 
will be required
for the brake to function properly?
c. Due to the short stopping time, it is estimated that only
about 10 percent of the volume of the steel disk constitutes
the entire “effective” heat sink for the brake. About how
large a temperature rise would you expect in this brake
during the stop? Is this acceptable?
16-30. For use in a specialized underwater hoisting application,
it is being proposed to design a disk clutch with a 20-inch out-
side diameter. Hard-drawn phosphor bronze is to be used in con-
tact with chrome-plated hard steel to form the friction interfaces
(
 0.03,
 150 psi). The clutch must transmit 150 horse-
power continuously at a rotational speed of 1200 revolutions per
minute. Following a rule of thumb that says that for good design
practice the inner diameter of a disk clutch should be about 
of the outer diameter, determine the proper num-ber of friction
interfaces to use for this proposed clutch. Since the device oper-
ates under water, neglect temperature limitations.
16-31. A pneumatic cylinder with a 25-mm internal diameter op-
erates at a pressure of 0.50 MPa and supplies the activation force
23
pmax
m
Na
*
pmax = 1.05 MPa
m = 0.32
pmax
m
for a clutch that is required to transmit 10 kw at 1600 rpm. The
friction interfaces of the clutch are a rigid molded-nonasbestos
with 
and 
. The outer diameter of the
clutch is initially assumed to be 150 mm and the inner diameter
is assumed to be 100 mm. Determine the activation force and the
number of friction surfaces assuming both uniform wear and uni-
form pressure.
16-32. It is desired to replace a single-contact-surface disk
brake used on the end of a rotating drum by a long-shoe block
brake, as shown in Figure P16.32, without changing the drum.
The materials used at the friction interface are the same for both
cases. It may reasonably be assumed, therefore, that both brakes
will operate at the same limiting pressure 
during actuation.
The original disk brake contact surface had an outer radius
equal to the drum radius, and an inner radius of two-thirds the
outer radius. What width b is required for the new long-shoe
brake shown in Figure P16.32 to produce the same braking
torque capacity as the old disk brake?
pmax
pmax = 1.0 MPa
m = 0.45
Fa

b = Width of contact shoe
r = 6.0 in.
30 in.
10 in.
45
45
Figure P16.32
Long-shoe block brake replacement for a disk brake.
16-33. A disk clutch has a single set of mating annular fric-
tion surfaces having an outer diameter of 300 mm and an in-
ner diameter of 225 mm. The estimated coefficient of friction
between the two contacting surfaces is 0.25, and the maxi-
mum-allowable pressure for the lining material is 825 kPa.
Calculate the following:
a. Torque capacity under conditions that make the uniform
wear assumption more nearly valid.
b. Torque capacity under conditions that make the uniform
pressure assumption more nearly valid.
16-34. A multiple-disk clutch is to be designed to transmit a
torque of 750 in-lb while fully submersed in oil. Space re-
strictions limit the outside diameter of the disks to 4.0 inches.
The tentatively selected materials for the interposed disks are
rigid molded-asbestos against steel. Determine appropriate
values for the following:
a. Inside diameter of the disks
b. Total numbers of disks
c. Axial normal actuating force

Problems 745
16-35. The wheels of a standard adult bicycle have a rolling
radius of approximately 340 mm and a radius to the center of
the hand-actuated caliper disk brake pads of 310 mm (see
Figure 16.13). The combined weight of the bike plus the rider
is 890 kN, equally distributed between the two wheels. If the
coefﬁcient of friction between the tires and the road surface is
twice the coefﬁcient of friction between the caliper brake pads
and the metallic wheel rim, calculate the clamping force that
must be applied at the caliper to slide the wheel upon hand
brake application.
16-36. A cone clutch with a cone angle of 12 is disengaged
when a spring (
) is compressed by means of a
lever with a 10-lb load applied, as shown in Figure P16.37. The
clutch is required to transmit 4 hp at 1000 rpm. The lining ma-
terial along an element of the cone is 3.0 inches long. The co-
efﬁcient of friction and the maximum pressure for the lining
material are 
and 
, respectively. The
free length of the spring is 
and it is compressed by
x inches for operation (when the clutch is engaged). Determine
the amount of spring compression required for the clutch to en-
gage properly and the distance that the 10-lb force has to be
away from pivot point A (see Figure P16.36) in order to com-
press the spring an additional 0.05 in to disengage the clutch.
16-37. A cone clutch having a cone angle 
of 10 is to transmit
40 horsepower continuously at a rotational speed of 600 rpm.
a
Lf = 3.0 in.
pmax = 100 psi
m = 0.38
k = 200 lb/in
The contact width of the lining along an element of the cone is
2.0 inches. The lining material is wound asbestos yarn and wire,
operating against steel. Assuming that the uniform wear assump-
tion holds, do the following:
a. Calculate the required torque capacity.
b. Calculate the change in radius of the contact cone (i.e.,
) across the contact width of the lining.
c. Calculate an acceptable value for 
so that required
torque capacity can be satisﬁed.
d. Calculate the corresponding value of 
.
ro
ri
ro - ri
A
a
10 1b
2.0 in.
3.5 in.
k = 200 1b/in
Figure P16.36
Cone clutch.

746
Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
Chapter 17
17.1 Uses and Characteristics of Flexible Power Transmission
Elements
In the introductory discussion of gear drives in 15.1, it was noted that the transmission of
power or motion from one rotating shaft to another may be accomplished in many differ-
ent ways. The choices include ﬂat belts, V-belts, toothed timing belts, chain drives, ﬂexi-
ble shafts, friction wheel drives, and gears. Wire rope is also used in power transmission,
but is usually limited to hoisting or haulage applications, where a motor-driven input shaft
rotates a drum so as to lift or lower a payload by winding or unwinding the wire rope. Fric-
tion wheel drives and gear drives have already been discussed in Chapter 15. The other
power transmission elements just listed are discussed in this chapter.
Belt drives are well suited to applications in which the center distance between rotat-
ing shafts is large, and are usually simpler and more economical than other power trans-
mission alternatives. A belt drive often eliminates the need for a more complicated
arrangement of gears, bearings, and shafts. With proper design insight, belts are usually
quiet, easily replaced, and in many cases, because of their ﬂexibility and damping capac-
ity, they reduce the transmission of unwanted shock and vibration between shafts. Sim-
plicity of installation, minimum maintenance requirements, high reliability, and
adaptability to a variety of applications are also characteristics of belt drives. However, be-
cause of slip and/or creep,1 the angular velocity ratio between the two rotating shafts may
be inexact, and the power and torque capacities are limited by the coefﬁcient of friction
and interfacial pressure between belt and pulley.2 Belts are commercially available in
many different cross sections, as illustrated in Figure 17.1.3 Typical pulley (sheave) con-
ﬁgurations used with various types of belts are shown in Figure 17.2.
Chain and sprocket drives, like belt drives, can span long center distances, and like
gears, can provide positive transmission of speed, torque, and power. For a given (aver-
age) angular velocity ratio and power capacity, chain drives are usually more compact than
belt drives but less compact than gear drives. Mounting and alignment requirements for
chain drives are typically more precise than for belt drives, but may be less precise than
for gear drives. Properly lubricated chain drives may be expected to have long service
lives. The use of chain drives permits many shafts to be simultaneously driven from a sin-
gle powered-input shaft, as long as the angle of wrap on any given sprocket is at least
1Slip occurs uniformly along the entire surface of contact between belt and pulley (or sheave), while creep
occurs differentially along the surface of contact due to local differences in elastic deformation of the belt.
2Except for toothed belts (see 17.6 and Figure 17.1).
3Also see ref. 1 or ref. 2, for example.

Uses and Characteristics of Flexible Power Transmission Elements 747
32
1
2
7
8
1
2
1
1
2
1
4
1
3
4
3
8
5
8
5
16
5
16
21
32
13
32
17
32
17
29
32
7
8
40°
Tension cords
Tension cords
A
B
C
D
E
Cover
Cover
3V
5V
8V
1
(d) Conventional V-belts.
(e) High-capacity V-belts
(narrow V-belts).
(a) Flat belt.
(b) V-ribbed (Poly-V) belt.
(c) Toothed timing belt
(synchronous belt).
Approx. horsepower range:
    A:     – 10
    B: 2 – 20
    C: 15 – 100
    D: 40 – 200
    E: 75 – 300
Cover
Tension ply
Tension
cords
Friction ply
Ribs
Cover
band
Cover
Tension cords
Rubber
teeth
Figure 17.1
Sketches of various types of belts in common usage.
Some examples of belts and chains.

about 120. Usually, the cost of a chain drive lies between that of a gear drive (higher cost)
and a belt drive (somewhat lower cost) for equivalent power transmission capacity. Many
different power transmission chain conﬁgurations are available, some of which are shown
in Figure 17.3.4 Typical sprocket conﬁgurations are shown in Figure 17.4.
Wire rope is often used for hoisting, haulage, and conveyor applications, in which the
wire rope supports tensile loading along its length. The ﬂexibility of wire rope is achieved
by using a large number of small-diameter wires (Figure 17.5) twisted around a central
core of ﬁber, independent wire rope, or a single wire strand.5 Typically, several small wires
(e.g., 7, 19, or 37) are ﬁrst twisted into a strand. Then a number of multiwire strands, usu-
ally 6 or 8, are twisted about the core to form the bending-ﬂexible wire rope.6 The central
core, which supports the strands radially, is usually saturated with a lubricant that seeps
among the wires so they can more easily slide with respect to each other to minimize fret-
ting and wear. Many standard wire rope sizes are commercially available.7
Flexible shafts are used to transmit rotary power or motion along a curved path
between two machine shafts that are not colinear, or that may have relative motion with
respect to each other, making direct connection of driving and driven shafts impractical
748
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
Crown
(a) Crowned flat belt pulley.
(Crowning provides stable
belt tracking.)
(b) V-ribbed (Poly-V)
belt pulley.
(c) Toothed timing belt
pulley.
(d) V-belt sheave.
Figure 17.2
Typical pulley (sheave) conﬁgurations used with belts sketched in Figure 17.1.
Pin
Bushing
t
Roller
Link plate
Pitch p
D
W
t
d
Toothed link plates
(a) Precision power transmission roller chain.
(b) Extended-pitch roller chain.
(d) Inverted-tooth
chain (silent chain).
(c) Engineering
class chain.
Figure 17.3
Common types of power-
and motion-transfer chain
conﬁgurations.
4Also see ref. 3, for example.
5Designated (FC), (IWRC), and (WSC), respectively.
6It is well to note that nominal rope classiﬁcations may or may not reﬂect actual construction. For example, the
class includes constructions such as 
ﬁller wire, 
ﬁller wire, and 
Warrington Seale.
7See, for example, Table 17.9 or ref. 4.
6 * 26
6 * 25
6 * 21
6 * 19

(see Figure 17.6). Flexible shafts may also be used for remote control of machine elements
that must be manipulated or adjusted manually or mechanically while operating.
Typically, flexible shafts are built up “nearly solid” by tightly winding one layer of
wire over another about a single “mandrel wire” in the center, as shown in Figure 17.7(a).
In most applications, flexible shafts are encased in a metal- or rubber-covered, flexible
sheath, as shown in Figure 17.7(b), which acts as a supporting guide, protects the shaft
from dirt or damage, and retains the lubricant. Examples of flexible shaft applications
include portable power tools, weed whackers, speedometer drives, upholstery shampoo
heads, tractor power-takeoff drives, event-counter drives, and position controls for au-
tomotive exterior rear-vision mirrors. Many standard flexible shafts are commercially
available.8
Uses and Characteristics of Flexible Power Transmission Elements 749
Inverted-tooth sprocket
Roller chain sprocket
Silent (inverted-tooth)
chain (see Figure 17.3)
Roller chain
(see Figure 17.3)
(a) Roller chain and sprocket drive.
(b) Inverted-tooth chain and sprocket drive.
Figure 17.4
Sprocket conﬁgurations used with power transmission chain (see Figure 17.3).
Regular lay; wires in
strands twisted in
opposite direction to
strands twisted to
form rope
Lang lay; wires in
strands twisted in
same direction
as strands twisted
to form rope
(c) Wire rope winding practice.
(b) Some of the available multiwire strand patterns. Combinations of these are also available.
(a) Commonly selected wire rope cross sections.
6 × 7
(haulage)
6 × 19
(standard hoisting)
6 × 37
(special flexible)
8 × 19
(extra flexible)
7 wire
(See above)
19 Warrington
(W)
25 filler wire
(FW)
19 Seale
(S)
Figure 17.5
Various common wire rope conﬁgurations.
8See, for example, ref. 5 or ref. 6.

17.2 Belt Drives; Potential Failure Modes
As illustrated in Figure 17.8, all types of belts loop around at least two pulleys that usu-
ally have different diameters. Except for toothed timing belts, it is necessary to pretension
the belt by forcing the pulleys apart, inducing an initial static tensile force of 
in the ten-
sion cords.9 In turn, the initial tension produces a normal pressure between the belt and
each pulley contact surface. This allows power transmission by virtue of the friction force
available at each belt/pulley interface. When power is applied to the driver pulley, tension
in one side of the belt is increased to a value above the pretension level because of belt
stretching, while in the other side of the belt tension decreases to a value below the
pretension level. The belt span with increased tension is called the tight side or taut side
(tension ) and the span with decreased tension is called the slack side (tension ). As the
moving belt repeatedly passes around the pulleys, at any given cross section the tension
cords are subjected to ﬂuctuating loads ranging from 
to 
and back with each belt pass,
in addition to a constant centrifugally induced tensile force 
. Fatigue resulting from
nonzero-mean10 cyclic tension therefore becomes a potential failure mode in belt drives.
In addition to the ﬂuctuations in tensile loading, a belt is also subjected to cyclic bend-
ing as it passes about each of the pulleys (sheaves). Hence bending fatigue contributes to
potential belt failure in addition to tensile fatigue. In some cases, adhesive/abrasive wear
may be a potential failure mode,11 and degradation in belt material properties (corrosion),
Tc
Tt
Ts
Ts
Tt
To
750
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
B2
B3
B1
Bo
A
Driven
element
Driving
element
Figure 17.6
Sketch showing various potential conﬁgurations
for ﬂexible shaft applications.
Flexible shaft
(core)
Coupling nut
Sheath end fitting
Flexible sheath (casing)
Flexible shaft
(core)
end fitting
(b)
(a) Typical construction detail for
power drive flexible shafts.
Figure 17.7
Construction details and support conﬁguration for ﬂexible shafting.
9See Figure 17.1.
10See 5.6.
11For example, if enough wear occurs between a V-belt and the V-pulleys, the belt may bottom in the V-groove to
prevent wedging action and proper tensioning of load-carrying cords. Another example of failure by wear is found
in high-efﬁciency ﬂat-belt drives that use an inner high-friction ply [see Figure 17.1(a)] to transmit torque more 
effectively. If the high-friction ply wears through, excessive slippage may occur and the belt may burn (see ref. 11).

usually because of elevated temperature or adverse environments,12 is a potential failure
mode as well. Since belts may be characterized as composite structures, the failure modes
just listed may manifest themselves within the tension cords, within the elastomeric ma-
trix, or at the interface between the cords and the matrix. Macroscopically, belt failures
may express themselves as cord breakage, cord-rubber separation, radial cracking (due to
continued curing of the rubber13), or circumferential cover cracking.
Belt Drives; Potential Failure Modes 751
(a) Belt terminology and geometry.
(b) Cyclic tension during one belt pass.
Tight side (Tt)
Slack side (Ts)
Belt
driver
driven




S
L
dL
dS
C
B
E
F
A
D
C
4C2 – (dL – dS)2 +
4C2 – (dL – dS)2
1
2
S = angle of wrap (smaller pulley) =  – 2
 = sin–1
L = angle of wrap (larger pulley) =  + 2
dS = diameter of smaller pulley
dL = diameter of larger pulley
L = belt length =
dL – dS
2C
dLL – dSS
2
(For V-belt datum length, use sheave datum diameters.)
Belt tension
Location along belt
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
TbL
TbS
TbS
TbL
Ts
Ts
Tt
Tc
Tc = belt tension induced by centrifugal force
Ts = slack side tension
Tt = taut side tension
TbS = belt tension induced by bending about smaller pulley
TbL = belt tension induced by bending about larger pulley
Figure 17.8
Basic conﬁguration and tensile force
cycle typical of all belts. (See ref. 9.)
12For example, oily conditions.
13Cyclic strains induced by belt operation may produce hysteresis losses of as much as 10–18 percent of the
transmitted power. This, combined with the poor thermal conductivity of belt materials, may lead to signiﬁcant
internal temperature increases, “overcuring” and degradation of belt material properties, and cracking.
Maximum acceptable belt temperature is around 180F. One rule of thumb is that for every 30F increase above
the 180F level, the belt life is reduced about 50 percent.

17.3 Belts; Materials
Originally, belts were manufactured using prime-quality cotton cords as tension members.
The cords were embedded in a matrix of natural rubber to provide ﬂexible constraint for
the cords and a higher friction coefﬁcient at the belt surface to enhance the transfer of
torque and power. As belts of higher capacity and higher reliability were developed during
and after World War II, new tension cord materials of higher strength and higher stiffness
were utilized, and synthetic rubber compounds replaced natural rubber in belt construction.
Although cotton ﬁbers embedded in natural rubber may still be used in low-performance
applications, tension cords of modern high-performance belts (see Figure 17.1) are usually
made of polyamide strips or polyester cords for ﬂat belts; polyester cords or aramid cords
for V-ribbed (Poly-V) belts; ﬁberglass or steel strands for toothed timing belts; and poly-
ester, ﬁberglass, or aramid ﬁbers for conventional or high-capacity V-belts. The matrix for
all belt types is typically a synthetic rubber, often Neoprene, to enhance resistance to oil,
heat, and ozone. Polyurethane is sometimes used for the friction ply of modern ﬂat belts
[see Figure 17.1(a)]. Belt cover material is usually cotton or nylon cloth impregnated with
synthetic rubber and molded in place to protect the core and resist belt wear.
17.4 Belt Drives; Flat Belts
Flat belts14 are the simplest and usually the least expensive type of belt. They are most ef-
fective when operating speeds are relatively high and power transmission requirements are
relatively low. Operational linear belt velocities typically range from about 2500 ft/min to
about 7500 ft/min, with a speed around 4000 ft/min usually regarded as “ideal.” At lower
speeds, for a given power speciﬁcation, required belt tension tends to become large, often
making required belt width awkwardly large.15 As a result, shaft size, bearing capacity, and
space envelope requirements may become unacceptable in some applications.
At higher speeds, dynamic forces due to belt whip and/or vibration may reduce drive
stability and shorten belt life. V-ribbed (Poly-V) belts may be regarded as ﬂat belts with
an enhanced friction coefﬁcient due to the wedging action of the ribs as they are forced by
belt tension into the pulley grooves until the tension cords essentially “ride” on the outer
diameter of the pulley (see Figures 17.1(b) and 17.2(b)).
The basic equation for the limiting torque that can be transmitted by a low-speed ﬂat
belt is the same as for a band brake (see Figure 16.9). Adapting the band brake equations
(16-71) and (16-72) to the belting notation deﬁned in Figure 17.8, and noting that slip will
occur ﬁrst at the smaller pulley because of its smaller angle of wrap,16 the slip equation
for a low-speed ﬂat belt drive may be written as
(17-1)
and the friction torque transmitted at the smaller pulley becomes
(17-2)
Tf = 1Tt - Ts2ds
2 = Tsds
2 1emus - 12
Tt
Ts
= e mus
752
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
14See Figure 17.1(a).
15As required belt width increases, shaft-and-pulley alignment become more critical
because belt tension must be uniform over the full width.
16This may be an especially critical design issue for belt drives in which pulley diameters are greatly different
or pulleys are closely spaced. A wrap angle of at least 
 150 is recommended for ﬂat belts.
us

For higher linear velocities, signiﬁcant centripetal acceleration of the belt mass pass-
ing around the pulleys causes a centrifugal-force-induced belt tension (inertia force), ,
that must be included in the free-body segment of the belt used to derive the slip equa-
tion.17 This inertia force component may be expressed as
(17-3)
unit weight of belt, lb/ft
belt velocity, ft/sec
constant  32.2 ft/sec2
Therefore, instead of the static slip equation of (17-1), the slip equation for a moving belt
is, based on equilibrium requirements,
(17-4)
where 
is angle of wrap18 on the smaller pulley.
Utilizing the horsepower equation (4-32) to express transmissible belt horsepower,
(17-5)
tight side tension, lb
slack side tension, lb
linear belt velocity, ft/min
Also, when a ﬂat belt is initially pretensioned to , a free-body analysis gives the relationship
(17-6)
Finally, the design-allowable tight-side belt tension may be expressed as19
(17-7)
where 
is design-allowable tensile force per unit belt width (lb/in), 
is width of the belt (in),
and 
is a factor that depends upon the application. Table 17.1 provides experience-based
limiting design values for 
for a few materials.20 The tabled values for 
are usually divided
by an application factor, 
, to account for shock or impact loading characteristics of the prime
mover and the driven machine. Typical application factors are shown in Table 17.2.
Ka
Ta
Ta
Ka
bb
Ta
1Tt2d = Tabb
Ka
Tt + Ts = 2To
To
V = 60v =
Ts =
where  Tt =
hp =
1Tt - Ts2V
33,000
us
Tt - Tc
Ts - Tc
= e mus
g =
v =
where  w1 =
Tc = m1v2 = w1v2
g
Tc
Belt Drives; Flat Belts 753
17That is, referring to Figure 16.9(b), for a moving belt, an inertia force 
must be added to the free body, in
the radial direction (vertically upward), and included in the vertical force summation [expressed in (16-63) for
the static case].
18See Figure 17.8(a).
19An alternate (and more fundamental) expression might be formulated as 

, where 
is “fatigue strength” of an individual cord, 
is number of cords, 
is net area of a cord, and 
is the design
safety factor (see Chapter 2). A cord can be one or more twisted strands, each having hundreds of monoﬁla-
ment ﬁbers twisted together. The problem with this alternative calculation is that few data have been published
to support this design approach.
20These empirical values, which embody direct tension, bending, and centrifugal force effects, provide little 
insight into how failure mode interactions take place, what safety factors have been included, or which parameters
might be changed to improve belt life. Further, these allowable values are based on smooth system operation.
nd
Ac
nc
1SN2c
1SN2cncAc>nd
1Tt2d
Tcdw

Example 17.1 Flat Belt Selection
A proposed ﬂat belt drive system is being considered for an application in which the input
motor shaft speed (driving pulley) is 3600 rpm, the approximate driven shaft speed require-
ment is 1440 rpm, the power to be transmitted has been estimated as 0.5 horsepower, and the
driven device is known to operate smoothly. The desired center distance between driving and
driven pulleys is to be approximately 10 inches. Engineering management has suggested us-
ing a belt fabricated by using polyamide tension strips. Select a ﬂat belt for this application.
Solution
From (17-5),
hp =
1Tt - Ts2V
33,000
754
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
TABLE 17.1 Empirical Experience-Based Design Data1 for High-Performance Flat
Belts2
Allowable
Minimum
Tension per
Pulley
Thickness,
Unit Width,
Diameter,
Speciﬁc
Coefﬁcient
Material
, in
, lb/in
, in
Weight, lb/in3
of Friction
Polyamide
0.03
10
0.6
0.035
0.5
0.05
35
1.0
0.035
0.5
0.07
60
2.4
0.051
0.5
0.11
60
2.4
0.037
0.8
0.13
100
4.3
0.042
0.8
0.20
175
9.5
0.039
0.8
0.25
275
13.5
0.039
0.8
Urethane
0.06
5
0.38–0.50
0.038–0.045
0.7
0.08
10
0.50–0.75
0.038–0.045
0.7
0.09
19
0.50–0.75
0.038–0.045
0.7
Polyester cord
0.04
57–225
1.5
1Data from refs. 2 and 7.
2These empirical values, which embody direct tension, bending, and centrifugal force effects, provide little 
insight into how failure mode interactions take place, what safety factors have been included, or which 
parameters might be changed to improve belt life. Further, these allowable values are based on the assumption
that the system operates smoothly, without impacts or jerks.
dmin
Ta
tb
TABLE 17.2 Application Factor, Ka
Driven Machine Characteristic
Prime Mover
Moderate
Heavy
Characteristic
Uniform
Shock
Shock
Uniform
1.00
1.25
1.75
(e.g., electric motor, turbine)
or higher
Light shock (e.g.,
1.25
1.50
2.00
multicylinder engine)
or higher
Medium shock
1.50
1.75
2.25
(e.g., single-cylinder engine)
or higher

and using (15-23), pitch-line belt velocity V may be written as
where 
is in inches, 
is in rpm, and V is in ft/min.
From Table 17.1, for polyamide belts, an initial belt thickness of 0.05 inch will be
tried; the minimum recommended pulley diameter for this belt thickness is 
 1.0 inch.
Hence
and
which gives
(1)
Evaluating V as
the diameter of the larger pulley, 
, may be calculated as21
Also from Figure 17.8(a), the angle of wrap for the small pulley, , may be calculated as
The speciﬁc belt weight is given in Table 17.1 for the 0.05-inch belt thickness as
0.035 lb/in3. If the belt width is taken as 
, the weight of the belt per unit length, 
(lb/ft), may be calculated as
Utilizing (17-3), noting that belt velocity v in this expression is in ft/sec, and ﬁnding
the coefﬁcient of friction from Table 17.1 as   0.5, (17-3) becomes
Tc = w1v2
g
=
0.021bb1V>6022
g
=
0.021bb1940>6022
32.2
= 0.16bb
w1 = 1bb210.05210.03521122 = 10.0212bb lb/ft
w1
bb
  = p - 2sin -1a2.5 - 1.0
21102
b = p - 0.15 = 2.99 rad
us = p - 2a = p - 2 sin -1adL - ds
2C
b
us
dL =
194021122122
2p114402
= 2.5 inches
dL
940 =
2p1dL>22114402
12
1Tt - Ts2 =
33,00010.52
940
= 17.6 lb
10.52 =
1Tt - Ts219402
33,000
V =
2p10.52136002
12
= 940 ft/min
ds
ns
rs
V = 2prsns
12
Belt Drives; Flat Belts 755
21Pitch-line belt velocity must be the same at all points along the belt.

Then (17-4) may be written as
(2)
Note from Table 17.2 that the application factor for this case is 
 1.0, because both
the electric motor drive and the driven machine are smooth and uniform in operation.22
Thus (from Table 17.1) the limiting design-allowable tension per unit width for the initially
selected belt is
Thus (17-7) may be written as
(3)
Now, solving (1), (2), and (3) together,
or
which gives a minimum required belt width of
Other information of interest might include belt length 
and initial tension 
re-
quired for proper operation. From Figure 17.8(a), belt length may be estimated as
From (17-6) the required initial belt tension 
is
Based on the initial trial selection of a 0.05-inch-thick polyamide belt, the results all seem
reasonable. This belt will be recommended, therefore, but it is clear that many other
choices could be found that would also satisfy the design criteria.
To summarize:
1.
A polyamide belt of 0.05-inch thickness and 0.70-inch width is recommended.
2.
The approximate belt length required is 25.5 inches, based on a small driver pulley di-
ameter of 1.0 inch, a larger driven pulley diameter of 2.5 inches, and a center distance
of 10 inches.
3.
An initial belt tension of 15.6 lb is recommended to achieve optimum performance.
To = Tt + Ts
2
=
334.8410.7024 + 334.8410.702 - 17.64
2
= 15.6 lb
To
= 19.94 + 5.61 = 25.5 inches
Lb = 2411022 - 12.5 - 1.022 +
2.513.292 + 1.012.992
2
To
Lb
bb = 0.70 inch
34.84bb
34.84bb - 17.6 = 4.46
35bb - 0.16bb
135bb - 17.62 - 0.16bb
= 4.46
1Tt2d = 35bb
Ka
= 35bb
Ta = 35 lb/in
Ka
Tt - 0.16bb
Ts - 0.16bb
= e0.512.992 = 4.46
756
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
22See speciﬁcations.
Example 17.1
Continues

Belt Drives; V-Belts 757
17.5 Belt Drives; V-Belts
As with ﬂat belts, for each pass of an operating V-belt the tension cords are subjected to
ﬂuctuating tensile loads ranging from 
to , cyclic bending that is a function of sheave23
diameter, and a constant centrifugal force component.24 These nonzero-mean cyclic forces,
just as for ﬂat belts, suggest that fatigue failure is a likely failure mode for V-belts. Fur-
ther, a variation in tension occurs among the tension cords across the width of a V-belt be-
cause of the wedging action into the narrower groove of a mating sheave, as illustrated in
Figure 17.9.25 Because of this nonuniform distribution of cord tension, the edge cords have
been found to carry higher ﬂuctuating loads per cord than the intermediate cords; hence
the peak ﬂuctuating cord stresses occur in the edge cords. Often, an edge-cord factor, con-
ceptually similar to a stress concentration factor,26 is used to estimate edge cord stresses
from average cord stresses. Average cord stresses are readily calculable for any given belt
section (see Table 17.3).
Like the fatigue of metallic parts,27 V-belt fatigue is a function of both the maximum
and the minimum cyclic stress experienced by the belt during the nonzero-mean loading
of the tension cords.28
The slip equation given in (17-4) for ﬂat belts may be modiﬁed for use with V-belts
by substituting an effective coefﬁcient of friction, 
, in place of , where29
(17-8)
m¿ =
m
sin a b
2 b
m
m¿
Tt
Ts
23Often pronounced “shiv,” rhyming with “give.”
24See Figure 17.8.
25Typically, the included angle of a standard V-belt section is about 40, and the smaller included angle of the
V-groove in a sheave is usually between about 30º and 38º. For smaller sheave angles the tendency is for the
belt to self-lock in the V-groove, causing a stick-slip-induced “jerky” behavior. For larger sheave angles, the
increase in effective coefﬁcient of friction in the V-groove (due to wedging) is reduced too much.
26See 5.3.
27See 5.6.
28Nonzero-mean loading of the tension cords involves contributions from ﬂuctuat-
ing direct tension, cyclic bending, and steady centrifugal force.
29See Figure 17.9 for the deﬁnition of the sheave included angle
.
b
L
C
Single tension-cord ply
(typical of modern V-belts)
40°
 ≈ 36°
hd = radial distance from datum
diameter to outside diam.
Outside diameter do,
equal to pitch diameter dp
(also coincides with
belt pitch line)
Datum diameter dd
Pitch line of belt
(a) Unconstrained
V-belt section.
(b) V-belt section
wedged into
sheave groove.
Figure 17.9
Section of a modern V-belt before and
after it is wedged into a mating sheave
by belt tension. The sketch also illus-
trates the new standard datum diame-
ter system recently adopted by the
V-belt industry.

758
TABLE 17.3 Data-based Empirical Constants1 Developed for Use with (17-10) for Selected2 V-Belt Cross Sections (All data are for polyester
tension cords)
for3
A,B,C,D;
Belt
for4
,
,
,
,
Section
3V, 5V, in
ksi
ksi
k
in2
lb/ft
A
3
19.8
26.4
5.0
111
0.20
7.0
0.065
4
19.8
26.4
5.0
111
0.18
7.0
0.065
5
19.8
26.4
5.0
111
0.17
7.0
0.065
6
19.8
26.4
5.0
111
0.16
7.0
0.065
7
19.8
26.4
5.0
111
0.16
7.0
0.065
B
4
17.3
26.0
5.2
123
0.14
7.8
0.112
5
17.3
26.0
5.2
123
0.15
7.8
0.112
6
17.3
26.0
5.2
123
0.15
7.8
0.112
7
17.3
26.0
5.2
123
0.16
7.8
0.112
8
17.3
26.0
5.2
123
0.17
7.8
0.112
C
6
14.1
20.8
0
7.5
200
0.15
9.0
0.199
7
14.1
20.8
0
7.5
200
0.14
9.0
0.199
8
14.1
20.8
0
7.5
200
0.14
9.0
0.199
10
14.1
20.8
0
7.5
200
0.13
9.0
0.199
12
14.1
20.8
0
7.5
200
0.13
9.0
0.199
D
7
10.8
14.6
0
26.5
256
0.12
11.0
0.406
8
10.8
14.6
0
26.5
256
0.11
11.0
0.406
9
10.8
14.6
0
26.5
256
0.11
11.0
0.406
10
10.8
14.6
0
26.5
256
0.11
11.0
0.406
11
10.8
14.6
0
26.5
256
0.10
11.0
0.406
3V
3
16.9
28.3
5.0
101
0.23
5.0
0.049
4
16.9
28.3
5.0
101
0.22
5.0
0.049
5
16.9
28.3
5.0
101
0.21
5.0
0.049
6
16.9
28.3
5.0
101
0.21
5.0
0.049
7
16.9
28.3
5.0
101
0.21
5.0
0.049
5V
6
16.0
29.2
6.0
200
0.19
6.3
0.141
7
16.0
29.2
6.0
200
0.18
6.3
0.141
8
16.0
29.2
6.0
200
0.18
6.3
0.141
10
16.0
29.2
6.0
200
0.17
6.3
0.141
12
16.0
29.2
6.0
200
0.17
6.3
0.141
1Correlation coefﬁcients for all cross sections ranged from 0.81 to 0.99. A typical correlation coefﬁcient was 0.9.
2Data for other cross sections available in ref. 10. Note also that data for 
are approximate values. 
is actually a weak function of tension ratio, as given in ref. 10.
3Datum diameter.
4Outside diameter.
C4
C4
2.88 * 10-3
0.202 * 10-6
-1
9.99 * 10-8
2.88 * 10-3
0.202 * 10-6
-1
9.99 * 10-8
2.88 * 10-3
0.202 * 10-6
-1
9.99 * 10-8
2.88 * 10-3
0.202 * 10-6
-1
9.99 * 10-8
2.88 * 10-3
0.202 * 10-6
-1
9.99 * 10-8
1.73 * 10-3
0.094 * 10-6
-1
1.58 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.094 * 10-6
-1
1.58 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.094 * 10-6
-1
1.58 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.094 * 10-6
-1
1.58 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.094 * 10-6
-1
1.58 * 10-7
5.15 * 10-3
0.291 * 10-6
6.76 * 10-10
5.15 * 10-3
0.291 * 10-6
6.76 * 10-10
5.15 * 10-3
0.291 * 10-6
6.76 * 10-10
5.15 * 10-3
0.291 * 10-6
6.76 * 10-10
5.15 * 10-3
0.291 * 10-6
6.76 * 10-10
2.88 * 10-3
0.213 * 10-6
9.39 * 10-11
2.88 * 10-3
0.213 * 10-6
9.39 * 10-11
2.88 * 10-3
0.213 * 10-6
2.88 * 10-3
2.88 * 10-3
0.213 * 10-6
9.39 * 10-11
2.88 * 10-3
0.213 * 10-6
9.39 * 10-11
1.73 * 10-3
0.133 * 10-6
-1
1.78 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.133 * 10-6
-1
1.78 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.133 * 10-6
-1
1.78 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.133 * 10-6
-1
1.78 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.133 * 10-6
-1
1.78 * 10-7
1.73 * 10-3
0.101 * 10-6
-1
6.13 * 10-8
1.73 * 10-3
0.101 * 10-6
-1
6.13 * 10-8
1.73 * 10-3
0.101 * 10-6
-1
6.13 * 10-8
1.73 * 10-3
0.101 * 10-6
-1
6.13 * 10-8
1.73 * 10-3
0.101 * 10-6
-1
6.13 * 10-8
nc
C4
C3
C2
C1
Ki
w1
Ac
Km
Ko
do
dd

Belt Drives; V-Belts 759
For V-belts then, the slip equation becomes
(17-9)
The horsepower equation given in (17-5) requires no basic modiﬁcation for use with 
V-belts, but multiplication of the nominal power requirement by an application factor, 
,
to obtain a “design value” for power required, is recommended for V-belt applications (see
Table 17.2). The belt pretension equation, (17-6), remains unchanged as well.
V-belt conﬁgurations have become well standardized,30 and widely tested for reliabil-
ity and life. Because of evolving construction details associated with modern V-belt cross
sections, in particular the trend toward moving the tension cords to a more ideal location
very near the outside diameter of the sheave, industry standards have recently been
changed to adopt the datum system instead of the pitch system traditionally used for V-belt
and sheave speciﬁcations.31 The datum system reduces or eliminates inaccuracies associ-
ated with speciﬁcations framed in the older pitch system. Table 17.4 gives datum system
relationships among datum diameter 
, pitch diameter 
, and outside diameter 
for se-
lected conventional V-belt cross sections.
The following guidelines32 apply to the use of the datum system for conventional 
V-belt drives:
1.
Datum belt length is calculated using datum diameters of the sheaves.
2.
Center distance is calculated using datum diameters and datum length.
3.
Linear belt speed is calculated using pitch diameter.
4.
Horsepower is calculated using pitch diameter.
5.
Speed ratio is calculated using pitch diameter.
do
dp
dd
Ka
Tt - Tc
Ts - Tc
= em¿us = e3mus>sin1b>224
TABLE 17.4 Relationships Among Datum System Pitch Diameter, Outside
Diameter, and Datum Diameter for Classical V-Belts and Sheaves1
Difference
Difference
Between
Between
Minimum
Datum Diameter
Datum and
Pitch and
Recommended
Range
Outside
Outside
Datum
Belt Cross
(previously pitch
Diameters,2
Diameters,3
Diameter,
Section
diameter range)
, in
, in
, in
A
All
0.250
0.00
3.0
B
All
0.350
0.00
4.6
C
All
0.400
0.00
6.0
D
All
0.600
0.00
12.0
1Adopted by International Standards Organization (ISO) and Rubber Manufacturers’ Association, Engineering
Standard for Classical V-Belts and Sheaves. Data extracted from ref. 10.
2See Figure 17.9.
3For other constructions, 
may not be zero.
ap
1dd2min
2 ap
2hd
30See, for example, the standard sections shown in Figure 17.1(d), (e), and (f). Since most V-belts are manufac-
tured as continuous loops, V-belt lengths have also been standardized. A sampling of standard lengths is shown
in Table 17.5. Metric belts have also been standardized, but are not included in this textbook.
31Adopted by International Standards Organization (ISO) and Rubber Manufacturers’ Association as
Engineering Standard for Classical V-Belts and Sheaves (see ref. 10).
32See ref. 10.

Several semiempirical life prediction equations have been successfully formulated for
V-belt cross sections.33 One such formulation, based on the assumptions that edge cord
stresses govern V-belt fatigue life and that nonzero-mean stress effects are signiﬁcant, is
given by the expression34
(17-10)
where
belt failure life in cycles attributed to a single pulley35
empirical constants developed from statistical analysis of experimental
data
belt datum length, inches (see Table 17.5)
linear belt speed, ft/min
actual mean edge cord stress, psi, as calculated from (17-11)
actual amplitude of edge cord stress, psi, as calculated from (17-12)
The deﬁning equations for mean and alternating edge cord stresses, based on equilib-
rium concepts, are given by
(17-11)
sm = Tte + Tbe + 2Tce + Tse
2Ac
sa =
sm =
V =
Ld =
Ki, Ko, Km, k =
Nf =
Nf = Ki3Ko - sa423Km - sm42L1.75
d
Vk
760
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
33See refs. 8, 9, 10, and 11.
34See ref. 10.
35Since every belt drive embodies at least two sheaves, some type of cumulative damage expression becomes
necessary to account for multiple sheaves of different diameters (see 5.6).
TABLE 17.5 Selected Nominal Standard Datum Length Ld, Outside Length Lo, and
Inside Length Li for Several Standard V-Belt Sections1
Datum Length, 
Outside Length2,
Inside Length 
Belt Section
, in
, in
, in
A
22.3
23.3
21.0
32.3
33.3
31.0
42.3
43.3
41.0
52.3
53.3
51.0
62.3
63.3
61.0
72.3
73.3
71.0
82.3
83.3
81.0
92.3
93.3
91.0
101.3
102.3
100.0
137.3
138.3
136.0
181.3
183.3
180.0
B
29.8
30.8
28.0
39.8
40.8
38.0
49.8
50.8
48.0
59.8
60.8
59.0
69.8
70.8
69.0
89.8
90.8
79.0
109.8
110.8
89.0
149.8
150.8
149.0
211.8
212.8
211.0
Li
Lo
Ld

Belt Drives; V-Belts 761
TABLE 17.5 (Continued)
Datum Length, 
Outside Length2,
Inside Length 
Belt Section
, in
, in
, in
C
53.9
55.2
51.0
62.9
64.2
60.0
73.9
75.2
71.0
83.9
85.2
81.0
99.9
101.2
97.0
117.9
119.2
115.0
138.9
140.2
136.0
160.9
162.2
158.0
182.9
184.2
180.0
212.9
214.2
210.0
D
123.3
125.2
120.0
147.3
149.2
144.0
176.3
178.2
173.0
198.3
200.2
195.0
213.3
215.2
210.0
3V
25.0
40.0
56.0
67.0
80.0
95.0
112.0
125.0
140.0
5V
50.0
60.0
71.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
112.0
125.0
132.0
8V
100.0
150.0
200.0
250.0
300.0
400.0
500.0
600.0
1Many additional standard length choices are available from manufacturers’ catalogs. For example, see ref. 10.
2For 3V, 5V, and 8V belt sections, the outside length may be assumed equal to the pitch length.
Li
Lo
Ld

and
(17-12)
actual36 edge cord component of tight side belt tension 
actual edge cord component of slack side belt tension 
edge cord tension component due to bending
edge cord tension component due to centrifugal force
nominal area of each cord37
To calculate the bending-induced edge cord tension component, 
, a semiempirical
expression has been developed for various standard belt sections that embody polyester
tension cords,38 as
(17-13)
where 
and 
are constants for a given belt section and cord material (see Table 17.3),
and 
is the sheave datum diameter.
To calculate the centrifugal-force-induced edge cord component, 
, the semiempiri-
cal expression is
(17-14)
where 
is a constant for a given belt section (see Table 17.3).
To calculate the tight side edge cord tension component, 
, the empirical relationship is
(17-15)
where 
is a constant for a given belt section, cord material, and sheave diameter39 (see
Table 17.3).
For purposes of making a reasonable ﬁrst choice for belt cross section in any given
application, Figure 17.10 presents experience-based recommendations for an initial belt-
section choice based on horsepower and speed requirements of the application.
If the ﬁrst few iterations in the belt selection process seem to converge toward an un-
acceptable solution, consideration should be given to using an arrangement of several par-
allel belts operating side-by-side on multiply grooved sheaves. If such a multiple-belt drive
conﬁguration is adopted, it usually becomes necessary to install matched sets of belts40 to
assure that tolerances on the datum lengths of all belts in the set are close enough for uni-
form load sharing among all the belts. Multiply grooved sheaves are commercially available
with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, or 10 grooves, but it is usually recommended that no more than 5
parallel belts be used. If any belt fails in a multiple-belt drive, all belts must be replaced
with a new matched set. In some applications involving pulsating loads, the multiple 
C4
Tte = C4Tt
Tte
C3
Tce = C3V 2
Tce
dd
C2
C1
Tbe = C1 + C2
dd
Tbe
Ac =
Tce =
Tbe =
Ts
Tse =
Tt
where  Tte =
sa = Tte + Tbe - Tse
2Ac
762
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
36Corrected for nonuniform distribution of ﬁber loading across the belt width.
37See Table 17.3.
38Data for cords made of other materials are not readily available.
39C4 is also a weak function of tension ratio, as shown in ref. 10.
40See, for example, ref. 1.

V-belts may become unstable, whipping or slapping together. For such applications, a
banded V-belt conﬁguration may solve the problem. Banded V-belts consist of up to ﬁve
V-belt sections connected by a tie band41 to provide lateral stability. If the design application
requires the use of a serpentine belt conﬁguration in which both sides of the belt must
drive, double-V (double-angle) belt cross sections are commercially available.
Belt Drives; V-Belts 763
(a) Standard section V-belts.
RPM of faster shaft
Design horsepower
1
2
3
4
5 6 7 89 10
20
30 40 50 60 80
70
100
200 300
9,000
200
100
300
435
575
690
800
900
1,160
1,750
2,000
3,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
7,000
5,000
3,450
1,000
870
700
600
500
400
90
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1,100
1,200
1,300
Not
recommended
A
B
C
D
RPM of faster shaft
Design horsepower
1
2
3
4
5 6 7 89 10
20
30 40 50 60 80
70
100
200 300
9,000
200
100
300
435
575
690
800
900
1,160
1,750
2,000
3,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
7,000
5,000
3,450
1,000
870
700
600
500
400
90
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1,100
1,200
1,300
Not
recommended
3V
5V
8V
(b) Narrow section V-belts.
Figure 17.10
Recommended nominal belt se-
lection as a function of applica-
tion, horsepower requirement,
and speed requirement. Source:
Dayco Products, Inc. (Adapted
from ref. 1.)
41A tie band has the conﬁguration of a thin integrally attached outer ﬂat belt connecting the parallel V-belt sections.

In addition to the design procedures just discussed, experience-based recommendations
for achieving optimum performance from a proposed V-belt drive conﬁguration include:
1.
The center distance42 C should usually be no less than the datum diameter of the larger
sheave, and no more than three times the sum of the sheave datum diameters. Thus
(17-16)
2.
For best results a V-belt should run at a linear belt velocity in the range from
1500–6500 ft/min, with 4000 ft/min a usual target. Special applications, such as snow-
mobile drives, may allow linear belt velocities up to 15,000 ft/min.
3.
Within space envelope constraints, it is recommended that selected sheaves be larger
than the minimum recommended diameter. This results in longer belt life and reduced
maintenance costs.
It should be noted that most V-belt manufacturers publish extensive catalog data and
give simple belt selection procedures.43 While these catalog lookup procedures are rec-
ommended for the ﬁnal phase of belt selection, they provide little insight into how failure
mode interactions take place, what safety factors have been included, or which parameters
might be changed to improve belt life. In accordance with the objectives of this text, it is
recommended that the more fundamental design procedures just presented be implemented
to gain insight, and then manufacturers’ catalogs be consulted to conﬁrm the selection.
Finally, it is important to recognize that the belt life calculated using (17-10) is the
number of cycles attributed to a single sheave. All V-belt drives employ at least two
sheaves, usually of different diameters. Thus, from (17-13), each different sheave induces
its own bending contribution, and its own mean and alternating stress components, as il-
lustrated by (17-11) and (17-12). Consequently, the belt failure life associated with each
of the different sheave diameters will be different for each sheave.44 To determine the re-
sultant belt life when two or more sheaves are utilized in a belt drive,45 a cumulative dam-
age relationship such as the Palmgren–Miner hypothesis46 may be utilized.
If 
is deﬁned as the number of operating cycles at a stress level 
, the Palmgren–
Miner hypothesis of (5-79) may be written as
Failure is predicted to occur if (FIPTOI)
(17-17)
where 
is determined by the application and 
may be calculated from (17-10). For
example, for a two-sheave drive system, (17-17) gives
FIPTOI
(17-18)
Since each belt pass 
induces one cycle of 
and one cycle of 
,
(17-19)
and from (17-19), the number of belt passes (belt cycles) to failure, 
, is
(17-20)
1
1Np2f
=
1
1Nf21
+
1
1Nf22
1Np2f
n1 = n2 = ni = Np
s2
s1
Np
n1
1Nf21
+
n2
1Nf22
Ú 1
1Nf2i
ni
a
m
i=1
ni
1Nf2i
Ú 1
si
ni
31dd + Dd2 Ú C Ú Dd
764
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
42See Figure 17.8.
43See, for example, ref. 1.
44Assuming that no other sheaves contribute to failure.
45All practical belt drives employ at least two sheaves.
46See (5-79) and related discussion.

Example 17.2 V-Belt Selection
A newly constructed metropolitan transit authority “bus barn” will require the installation
of 12 exhaust fans to properly ventilate the facility. Preliminary engineering estimates in-
dicate that belt-driven constant-speed fans running at approximately 800 rpm should pro-
vide satisfactory ventilation. It is desired to drive the fans with 1750-rpm electric motors.
The center distance between each motor and its corresponding fan shaft would ideally lie
in the range 38–42 inches. Estimates of fan power requirements indicate that each fan will
nominally require about 5 horsepower on a steady-state basis, and that ﬂutter and ﬂow in-
stabilities will probably produce moderate shock loading. The fans are to operate 365 days
a year, 24 hours a day.
Using a design safety factor of 
 1.2 on horsepower, propose a conventional V-belt
drive arrangement that will provide a mean life of about 2 years between belt replacements.
Solution
For fan operation 24 hours/day for 2 years at a speed of approximately 800 rpm, the cor-
responding number of belt passes, 
, is
For this two-sheave belt drive, each belt pass induces one stress cycle 
at the
motor sheave, and one stress cycle 
at the fan sheave.
The design horsepower requirement for each fan system, 
, may be estimated as
Based on speciﬁcations, the speed ratio R must be
Thus
From (17-5)
where linear belt velocity is
or
A trial value for motor sheave datum diameter may be based on either Figure 17.1(d)
or Figure 17.10, from which a conventional A-section V-belt is suggested. Then from
V = 1209.4212.1921dp2mot = 458.71dp2mot
V =
p1dp2fannfan
12
=
p1dp2fan18002
12
= 209.41dp2fan
hp =
1Tt - Ts2V
33,000
1dp2fan = 2.191dp2mot
R = nmot
nfan
=
1dd2fan
1dd2mot
= 1750
800 = 2.19
1hp2d = 1hp2nomKand = 15211.25211.22 = 7.5 horsepower
1hp2d
1s2fan
1s2mot
  = 84 * 108 belt passes
Np = a800passes
min b a60min
hr b a24 hr
day b a365days
yr b12 yr2
Np
nd
Belt Drives; V-Belts 765

Table 17.4, the minimum recommended datum diameter for an A-sheave is 3.0 inches.
Experience dictates that sheave datum diameters larger than the minimum should be used
if practical. Hence a trial value for motor sheave datum diameter will be chosen to be
whence, using 2hd  0.25 inch (from Table 17.4),
Then
By rule of thumb47 this lies in the acceptable range but is toward the low-speed end. Next,
from the horsepower equation above
or
From Figure 17.8(a), the angle of wrap for the smaller motor sheave, for a nominal
40-inch center distance, is
and for the larger fan sheave
The nominal belt datum length then is
Checking A-section standard datum length belts usually in stock, shown in Table
17.5, the closest standard datum length shown in 101.3 inches, and this standard length belt
will be adopted here.48 Therefore
Reading from Table 17.3, the speciﬁc weight of an A-section belt is
w1 = 0.065 lb
ft
Ld = 101.3 inches
1Ld2nom = 2414022 - 110.15 - 4.5022 +
10.1513.282 + 4.5013.002
2
= 103.1 inches
ufan = p + 0.14 = 3.28 rad
us = umot = p - 2a = p - 2sin -1a10.15 - 4.50
21402
b = p - 0.14 = 3.00 rad
1Tt - Ts2 =
17.52133,0002
2179
= 113.6 lb
7.5 =
1Tt - Ts2121792
33,000
V = 458.714.50 + 0.252 = 2179 ft/min
1dd2fan = 2.19C1dd2mot + 0.25D - 0.25 = 10.15 inches
1dd2mot = 4.50 inches
766
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
47See text discussion in guideline 2 following (17-16).
48Standard V-belts are usually speciﬁed by the section-size letter followed by the nominal inside length of the
belt in inches. For the case at hand, this would be an A100 belt.
Example 17.2
Continues

Next, using (17-3),
and (17-9) may be evaluated as49
Solving for ,
and substitution of this into the equation above
or
and
Also, it may be noted from (17-6) that the approximate belt pretension required is
Critical point edge cord tensions may next be calculated using constants from Table
17.3. For the A-section belt in bending, using (17-13), the edge cord tensions attributable
to bending are
and
For edge cord tension attributable to centrifugal force, (17-14) gives
For tight-side and slack-side edge cord tensions attributable to power transmission,
(17-15) gives
and
Tse = 0.17519.22 = 1.6 lb
Tte = 0.1751122.82 = 21.5 lb
Tce = 0.101 * 10-61217922 = 0.48 lb
1Tbe2fan = 5.0 + 111
9.86
= 11.4 lb
1Tbe2mot = 5.0 + 111
4.5
= 25.8 lb
To = 129 + 9
2
= 66 lb
Ts = 9.2 lb
Tt = 122.8 lb
Tt - 2.66
1Tt - 113.62 - 2.66 = 18.40
Ts = Tt - 113.6 lb
Ts
Tt - 2.66
Ts - 2.66 = e30.313.0024>3sin136>224 = e2.91 = 18.40
Tc =
10.0652a 2179
60 b
2
32.2
= 2.66 lb
Belt Drives; V-Belts 767
49Using   0.3 for dry rubber on steel, from Appendix Table A.1, and assuming an included sheave angle of
  36.

Placing these values into (17-11), the edge cord mean stresses may be calculated as
and
Next, inserting these values into (17-12),
and
From (17-10), using constants for an A-section belt from Table 17.3, the number of
motor sheave cycles to produce failure would be50
Similarly, the number of fan sheave cycles to produce failure would be51
Finally, using (17-19)
whence the number of belt passes to failure becomes
Comparing this result with the belt-pass requirement for a two-year maintenance-free
period, it is clear that the chosen A-section belt falls short, and would fail early. One sim-
ple solution would be to use parallel belts on multigroove sheaves. As can be seen from
Tte, (m)mot, and (a)mot,52 a two-belt drive would cut the mean and alternating stress lev-
els by nearly a factor of two, which would produce a signiﬁcant increase in belt life. An-
other solution might be to use larger sheaves. For a larger motor sheave, the edge cord
tension due to bending would be reduced and, consequently, the mean and alternating
stress levels would be lowered, probably giving a signiﬁcant increase in belt life.
1Np2f =
1
1
5.68 * 108 +
1
2.74 * 109
= 4.70 * 108 passes
1
1Np2f
=
1
1Nf2mot
+
1
1Nf2fan
= 2.74 * 109 cycles
1Nf2fan = 6.13 * 10-8119,800 - 904622126,400 - 10,250221101.321.75121792-1
= 5.68 * 108 cycles
1Nf2mot = 6.13 * 10-8119,800 - 13,20822126,400 - 14,410221101.32175121792-1
1sa2fan = 21.5 + 11.4 - 1.6
3.46 * 10-3
= 9046 psi
1sa2mot = 21.5 + 25.8 - 1.6
3.46 * 10-3
= 13,208 psi
1sm2fan =
21.5 + 11.4 + 210.482 + 1.6
3.46 * 10-3
= 10,250 psi
1sm2mot =
21.5 + 25.8 + 210.482 + 1.6
211.73 * 10-32
= 14,410 psi
768
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
50Assuming the motor sheave is the only source of cyclic loading.
51Assuming the fan sheave is the only source of cyclic loading.
52Noting from (Np)f that the fan sheave contribution is small compared to the smaller motor sheave.
Example 17.2
Continues

17.6 Belt Drives; Synchronous Belts
As illustrated in Figures 17.1(c) and 17.2(c), toothed timing belts (synchronous belts) do
not rely upon friction for transmission of torque and power; they transmit torque and
power by virtue of positive engagement of a toothed belt meshing with toothed sprocket
grooves. Thus a toothed belt drive provides a constant angular velocity ratio (no slip or
creep), requires minimal belt pretension (only enough to prevent “tooth skipping” when
starting or braking), can be operated at high speeds (up to 16,000 ft/min), and can trans-
mit high torques and high power.
Because high-modulus tension cords53 are used in toothed belt construction, little
change in belt length or tooth pitch is experienced when the belt is loaded. Hence each belt
tooth can correctly mesh with the corresponding pulley groove as they engage and reside
until leaving the mesh site. Belt tooth proﬁle and spacing (pitch), as well as pulley tooth
shape and pitch, are precisely controlled during manufacture to enhance smooth, uniform
operation. The teeth of standard synchronous belts are trapezoidal in proﬁle. For heavy-
duty applications, the tooth proﬁle is sometimes modiﬁed to provide an enlarged shear
cross section with a corresponding reduction of transverse shearing stress in the belt teeth.
Neither the tooth shape nor the pitch has been standardized for these specialty belts, and
both may vary with the product manufacturer. At normal operating speeds toothed timing
belts tend to operate smoothly and quietly, and there is no chordal-action speed-variation
as there is for chain drives.54 If noise generation does become a problem, some manufac-
turers provide proprietary tooth shapes (e.g., parabolic proﬁles55) to reduce noise genera-
tion or increase drive capacity. Helical tooth arrangements are also used for
high-performance synchronous drive applications for smoother, quieter operation and
stronger teeth, just as for helical gear teeth.56 Two-sided toothed belts are also available
for serpentine-drive applications in which the belt must drive from both sides.
The design and selection process for synchronous belts is very similar to the V-belt se-
lection process given in 17.5, and will not be repeated here. It is worth noting, however,
that most timing belt manufacturers, like V-belt manufacturers, publish extensive catalog
data and give simple belt selection procedures.57
17.7 Chain Drives; Potential Failure Modes
Figure 17.3 illustrates some of the more commonly used power transmission chain con-
ﬁgurations.58 All precision power transmission chains are manufactured by pin-connecting
a continuous series of links which sequentially mesh with sprocket teeth as the chain loops
around two or more sprockets. Each pin-and-bushing joint articulates as the chain passes
around the sprockets; hence each joint acts as a journal and sleeve bearing. Just as for any
other journal-and-sleeve bearing application,59 proper lubrication of the sliding pin-and-
bushing interface is crucial to achieving the potential wear life of the chain. Ironically, pe-
riodic maintenance schedules, which are intended to clean and relubricate chains to
enhance wear life, may sometimes actually reduce wear life because of local lubricant
starvation unless a conscientious effort is made to properly reintroduce lubricant to the rel-
atively inaccessible pin-and-bushing interfaces.
Three different options for lubrication are: Type I—manual or drip lubrication, Type
II—oil bath or slinger-disk lubrication, and Type III—directed oil stream or pressure spray
Chain Drives; Potential Failure Modes 769
53See 17.3.
54See 17.7.
55See ref. 13.
56See 15.12 and ref. 13.
57See, for example, ref. 12.
58Many other types of chain are commercially available. See, for example, ref. 14.
59See Chapter 10.

lubrication.60 Chain manufacturers often recommend Type I for applications in which lin-
ear chain velocity is between about 170 and 650 ft/min, Type II for applications in which
linear chain velocity is between about 650 and 1500 ft/min, and Type III if linear chain ve-
locity exceeds about 1500 ft/min. Oil ﬂow rates required for effective lubrication range
from about 
gal/min for a chain drive transmitting 50 horsepower to about 10 gal/min for
drives transmitting 2000 horsepower.
The tight side chain tension forces are transferred to the sprocket teeth through rollers
or through toothed link plates.61 As the moving chain passes around the sprockets, the ten-
sile force in the chain ﬂuctuates from the tight side tension to the slack side tension,62 and
back, for each chain pass. At chain pass speeds above about 3000 ft/min, centrifugal forces
may also add signiﬁcantly to the tensile forces in the chain. In addition, superposed higher-
frequency ﬂuctuations in chain tension may be caused by a kinematic consequence of en-
gagement between the chain links and the sprocket teeth. This kinematic behavior is
known as chordal action.63 Fatigue, therefore, becomes a primary failure mode candidate
for power transmission chains. Fatigue failures may be generated in the roller-bushing link
plates, toothed link plates, roller bushings, or tooth surfaces (surface fatigue). In addition,
abrasive wear, adhesive wear, fretting wear, or galling between the bushing and pin may
be potential failure modes in some circumstances. When wear between pins and bushings
or rollers and teeth produces enough dimensional change to cause rollers to climb too high
on the sprocket teeth, the chain may skip from one tooth to the next. For wear-based chain
elongations of more than about 3 percent, chain replacement is usually necessary.
A sketch showing the probable failure regions as a function of power and speed is
shown in Figure 17.11. Empirical relationships deﬁning the boundaries of each failure re-
gion are included in 17.9.
17.8 Chain Drives; Materials
Based on material selection guidelines presented in Chapter 3 and the failure mode dis-
cussion of 17.7, candidate materials for power transmission chains should have good
strength (especially good fatigue strength), high stiffness, good wear resistance, good
resistance to surface fatigue, good resilience, and in some applications good corrosion
14
770
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
60Also see 10.5, 10.6, and 15.10.
61See Figures 17.3 and 17.4.
62Slack side tension is usually near zero.
63As discussed in 17.9, chordal action (polygonal action) results in a rise and fall of the centerline of each link
as the sprocket rotates and the links articulate. This causes speed variations and ﬂuctuations in chain tension
that range in magnitude from about 1 to 10 percent of the tight side chain tension, depending upon the number
of sprocket teeth.
Rotational speed of small sprocket
Region of acceptible
design (no failure)
Link-plate
fatigue
Roller and
bushing fatigue
Excessive
wear or
galling
Horsepower transmitted
Figure 17.11
Tent-shaped design-acceptable region
bounded by limiting failure curves for preci-
sion roller chain. See equations (17-20), 
(17-21), and (17-22).

resistance, as well as reasonable cost. Materials meeting these criteria64 include steels and
steel alloys, cast iron, malleable iron, stainless steel alloys, and, for special applications,
alloys of brass, bronze and certain polymeric materials. Chain components may be
pressed, cast, forged, machined, or welded to obtain the desired geometry. Chain parts may
be heat treated or not heat treated, as required for strength. Carburizing and case harden-
ing, through hardening, induction hardening, or plating may be used to enhance wear re-
sistance or provide corrosion protection.
In a standard commercially available roller chain65 the link plates are typically carbon
steel, heat treated if the application is demanding, and edges may be induction hardened
to improve sliding wear resistance. Bushings usually are carbon steel or alloy steel, case
hardened or through hardened. In certain applications, however, bushings may be made of
heat-treated stainless steel, bronze, graphite, or other materials. Pins are usually made of
carbon steel or alloy steel carburized and case hardened, or through hardened. Rollers are
generally made of carbon or alloy steels, carburized and surface hardened or through hard-
ened, as the application requires. Sprocket teeth, usually steel, are often surface hardened
to about Rockwell C 59–63.
17.9 Chain Drives; Precision Roller Chain
The basic conﬁguration of a single-strand standard roller chain is illustrated in Figure
17.3(a). Multiple-strand roller chain, consisting of two or more parallel strands of chain
assembled on common pins, has also been standardized, as have double-pitch chains.66 In
addition, may nonstandard chains are commercially available, including chains with sealed
joints or with sintered metal bushings, chains with extra clearance, and chains made of cor-
rosion- or heat-resistant materials. Dimensions and nominal ultimate strengths for single-
strand roller chain are shown in Table 17.6.
Multiple-strand roller chain may be utilized to transmit higher horsepower, but because
of nonuniform loading among the strands, a strand factor, 
(always less than the number
of strands), must be introduced to account for the uneven load sharing among the parallel
strands (see Table 17.7).
Referring again to Figure 17.11, link-plate fatigue governs the failure envelope at
lower speeds while roller and bushing fatigue tend to govern at higher speeds. Practical up-
per limits on linear chain speed are imposed by the onset of excessive wear or galling.
About 9000 ft/min is the maximum chain speed that can be successfully used; 2500 ft/min
is much more usual.
Empirical expressions have been developed for each of the failure boundaries
sketched in Figure 17.11. For link-plate fatigue the limiting horsepower is given by
(17-21)
0.0022 for no. 41 chain (lightweight chain)
0.004 for all other chain numbers
number of teeth in smaller sprocket
rotational speed of smaller sprocket, rpm
chain pitch, inches
p =
ns =
Ns =
=
where  Klp =
1hplim2lp = Klp N 1.08
s
n0.9
s p13.0-0.07p2
Kst
Chain Drives; Precision Roller Chain 771
64See 3.2.
65See Figure 17.3.
66See refs. 15 and 16.

772
TABLE 17.6 Dimensions and Nominal Ultimate Tensile Strengths for Single-Strand Standard Precision Roller Chain1
Recommended
Nominal
Average
ANSI
Roller
Roller
Pin
Link-Plate
Minimum Center
Ultimate Tensile
Speciﬁc
Chain
Pitch, 
Diameter,
Width,W,
Diameter,
Thickness,
Distance,
Strength,
Weight, , 
Number
in (mm)
D, (mm)
in (mm)
d, in (mm)
t, in (mm)
in (mm)
kip (kN)
lb/ft (N/m)
25
0.250
0.1302
0.125
0.091
0.030
1.05
0.09
(6.35)
(3.30)
(3.187)
(2.31)
(0.76)
(4.7)
(3.30)
35
0.375
0.2002
0.1875
0.141
0.050
6
2.4
0.21
(9.52)
(5.08)
(4.76)
(3.58)
(1.27)
(152.4)
(10.7)
(3.06)
413
0.500
0.306
0.25
0.141
0.050
9
2.6
0.25
(12.70)
(7.77)
(6.35)
(3.58)
(1.27)
(228.6)
(11.6)
(3.65)
40
0.500
0.312
0.3125
0.156
0.060
9
4.3
0.42
(12.70)
(7.92)
(7.94)
(3.96)
(1.52)
(228.6)
(19.1)
(6.13)
50
0.625
0.400
0.375
0.200
0.080
12
7.2
0.69
(15.88)
(10.16)
(9.52)
(5.08)
(2.03)
(304.8)
(32.0)
(10.1)
60
0.750
0.469
0.500
0.234
0.094
15
9.8
1.00
(19.05)
(11.91)
(12.70)
(584)
(2.39)
(381.0)
(43.6)
(14.6)
80
1.000
0.625
0.625
0.312
0.125
21
17.6
1.71
(25.40)
(15.87)
(15.88)
(7.92)
(3.18)
(533.4)
(783)
(25.0)
100
1.250
0.750
0.750
0.375
0.156
27
26.4
2.58
(31.75)
(19.05)
(19.05)
(9.52)
(3.96)
(685.8)
(117)
(37.7)
120
1.500
0.875
1.000
0.437
0.187
33
39.0
3.87
(38.10)
(22.22)
(25.40)
(11.10)
(4.75)
(838.2)
(173)
(56.5)
140
1.750
1.000
1.000
0.500
0.219
39
50.9
4.95
(44.45)
(25.40)
(25.40)
(12.7)
(5.56)
(990.6)
(226)
(72.2)
160
2.000
1.125
1.250
0.562
0.250
45
63.2
6.61
(50.80)
(28.57)
(31.75)
(14.27)
(6.35)
(1143.0)
(281)
(96.5)
180
2.250
1.406
1.406
0.687
0.281
81.5
9.06
(57.15)
(35.71)
(35.71)
(17.45)
(7.14)
(363)
(132.2)
200
2.500
1.562
1.500
0.781
0.312
57
105.5
10.96
(63.50)
(39.67)
(38.10)
(19.84)
(7.92)
(1447.8)
(469)
(159.9)
240
3.000
1.875
1.875
0.937
0.375
60
152.0
16.4
(76.70)
(47.62)
(47.63)
(23.8)
(9.52)
(1524.0)
(676)
(239.0)
1See Figure 17.3(a); For multiple-strand factors, see Table 17.7.
2Bushing diameter; chain is rollerless.
3Lightweight chain.
w

For roller and bushing fatigue, the limiting horsepower is
(17-22)
29 for chains no. 25 and 35
3.4 for chain no. 41
17 for chains no. 40 through 240
For excessive wear or galling, the limiting horsepower is
(17-23)
number of teeth in larger sprocket
rotational speed of larger sprocket
For any given application, the design horsepower must not exceed any of the horse-
power limits calculated using (17-21), (17-22), and (17-23).
Chordal action (polygonal action), which causes a fluctuation in chain speed and
chain tension each time a chain link engages a sprocket tooth, may be a serious limit-
ing design factor in chain performance, especially in high-speed applications. As illus-
trated in Figure 17.12 for roller chain, chordal action is a kinematic consequence of the
fact that the line of approach of the chain is not tangent to the pitch circle of the
nL =
where  NL =
1hplim2g = a ns pNs
110.84 b14.413 - 2.073p - 0.0274NL2 - aln nL
1000 b11.59 log p + 1.8732
=
=
where  Krb =
1hplim2rb = 1000KrbN 1.5
s p0.8
n1.5
s
Chain Drives; Precision Roller Chain 773
TABLE 17.7 Multiple-Strand Factors
Number of Strands
Strand Factor, 
1
1.0
2
1.7
3
2.5
4
3.3
5
3.9
6
4.6
Kst
(a) First contact of
roller A with sprocket.
(b) Chordal rise produced
by sprocket rotation .



A
A
B
B
rp
rch
rch
rp
p
p
Pitch
circle
Line of
approach
Chordal
rise = rp – rch
Pitch circle
chord A–B
Tangent
to pitch
circle
Figure 17.12
Depiction of chordal action
in a roller chain.

sprocket; it is colinear with a chord of the pitch circle. Therefore, as the sprocket
rotates, the link makes first contact with the sprocket when the link centerline is below
the (parallel) tangent to the pitch circle, which has the radius . As a consequence, the
link centerline is caused to rise from 
to , then fall back to 
, a behavior known as
chordal action.
In effect, chordal action causes the sprocket pitch radius to cyclically ﬂuctuate, re-
sulting in a cyclic ﬂuctuation in chain speed. Thus even if the drive sprocket rotates at con-
stant angular velocity, the driven sprocket experiences a speed ﬂuctuation. Figure 17.13
shows the estimated speed ﬂuctuation as a function of number of sprocket teeth. It may be
noted that the larger the number of teeth in a sprocket for a given chain velocity, the
smoother the action, the more uniform the chain speed, and the lower the impact loading
between chain and sprocket. Normally, however, sprockets should have no more than
about 60 teeth. This is because of the difﬁculty in maintaining proper ﬁt (as wear pro-
gresses) for larger numbers of teeth, and because of increased manufacturing costs for
sprockets with larger numbers of teeth.
17.10 Roller Chain Drives; Suggested Selection Procedure
In selecting an appropriate roller chain and sprockets for a particular application, design
decisions must be made about chain type, size, space allocation, lubricant delivery, mount-
ing methods, and other details. Usually the chain selection process is iterative. To help
make an initial choice, the experience-based recommendations of Figure 17.14 often prove
effective. A procedure for establishing the elements of a good roller chain drive conﬁgu-
ration is listed next.
1.
Establish design speciﬁcations for the application, including power to be transmitted,
input and output shaft speed requirements, allowable speed ﬂuctuation, shaft center
distance limitations, space envelope constraints, design life requirements, safety fac-
tors, and any other special design criteria.
rch
rp
rch
rp
774
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
Speed variation, percent
Number of teeth in sprocket, Ns
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Figure 17.13
Roller chain velocity ﬂuctuation as a function
of number of sprocket teeth.

2.
Determine the design horsepower requirement 
by multiplying an application
factor67
times the nominal design horsepower required, and dividing by a multiple-
strand factor68
, giving
(17-24)
3.
Tentatively select an appropriate chain pitch to use for a ﬁrst iteration, using Figure
17.14 as a guideline. Check Table 17.6 to make sure that minimum center distance re-
quirements are met. The optimum range for center distance is between about 30 and
50 chain pitches. Center distances greater than about 80 pitches are not recommended.
4.
Tentatively select the number of teeth for the small sprocket (usually the driver) using
Figure 17.13 as a guide. Even for low-speed applications the small sprocket usually
should have at least 12 teeth.
5.
Tentatively determine the number of teeth, 
, for the larger sprocket (usually the
driven sprocket). Speed ratios should not exceed about 
(
maximum). If a
10 :1
7:1
NL
1hp2d =
Ka1hp2nom
Kst
Kst
Ka
1hp2d
Roller Chain Drives; Suggested Selection Procedure 775
67See Table 17.2. More precise application factors for chain selection may be found in chain manufacturers’
catalogs.
68See Table 17.7.
Nominal power required, horsepower
Small sprocket speed, rpm
20
50
100
200
500
1000
2000
5000
10
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10.0
20.0
50.0
100.0
Larger sizes
Not recommended
Chain no. 120
Chain no. 100
Chain no. 80
Chain no. 60
Chain no. 50
Chain no. 40
Chain no. 35
Chain no. 25
Figure 17.14
First iteration selection of roller-chain pitch as a function of power and speed
requirements.

higher speed ratio is required, a double-reduction drive should be proposed. The num-
ber of teeth on the larger sprocket may be calculated from
(17-25)
number of teeth in smaller sprocket
rotational speed of smaller sprocket, rpm
rotational speed of larger sprocket, rpm
6.
Using (17-21), (17-22), and (17-23), calculate the limiting horsepowers associated
with link-plate fatigue, roller and bushing fatigue, and wear or galling, respectively.
The design horsepower calculated from (17-24) should not exceed any of these three
limiting values. On the other hand, design horsepower should be as close to all of the
limiting values as is practical.
7.
If necessary, iterate again until these requirements are satisﬁed.
8.
Calculate linear chain velocity V from
(17-26)
pitch, in
number of sprocket teeth
rotational speed of sprocket, rpm
Chain velocity V should not exceed about 9000 ft/min, with velocities in the range
2000–3000 ft/min being much more common.
9.
Calculate chain length L in pitches using
(17-27)
The chain length must be an integral multiple of the pitch, and an even number of
pitches is recommended to avoid the need for half-links. Note that center distance C
in this equation must also be expressed in pitches.
10. Select an appropriate type of lubrication based on linear chain velocity calculated from
(17-26). Lubrication options as a function of chain velocity are discussed in 17.7.
11. Summarize the recommendations.
Example 17.3 Precision Roller Chain Selection
A precision roller chain drive is being proposed to power a helicopter transmission test
stand at 600 rpm, using a 1200-rpm electric motor. It is desired to have a center distance
between the driving motor sprocket and driven test-stand sprocket of about 40 inches
and the drive should be as compact as is practical. Moderate shock loading is expected.
The nominal power to be transmitted is estimated as 20 horsepower. A single-strand
chain is preferred. Further, speed fluctuations of no more than 2 percent of the linear
chain velocity can be tolerated. Select a suitable roller chain and associated sprockets for
this application.
L = aNL + Ns
2
b + 2C +
1NL - Ns22
4p2C
n =
N =
where  p =
V = pNn
12  ft/min
nL =
ns =
where  Ns =
NL = Ns ns
nL
776
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts

Solution
a.
Following the procedure recommended in 17.10, the design horsepower may be cal-
culated from (17-24) as69
b.
For 25 design horsepower, a single-strand chain, and a motor sprocket speed (small
sprocket speed) of 1200 rpm, Figure 17.14 suggests a no. 60 chain for the ﬁrst itera-
tion. The pitch of a no. 60 chain, from Table 17.6, is
c.
The minimum center distance for a no. 60 chain is, From Table 17.6,
The maximum recommended center distance70 of 80 pitches is, for a no. 60 chain,
Since the speciﬁcations prescribe a desired center distance value of
and this lies in the acceptable range between 15 and 60 inches, a nominal center dis-
tance of approximately 40 inches will be adopted. For a no. 60 chain this corresponds
to a center distance of about 53 pitches.
d.
Speciﬁcations require that speed ﬂuctuations be no more than 2 percent of linear chain
velocity. For Figure 17.13 then, the number of teeth in the motor sprocket must be
Since compact design is a speciﬁed criterion, a driving sprocket with 16 teeth will be
adopted for the ﬁrst iteration.
e.
Next, the number of teeth on the large sprocket may be calculated from (17-25) as
f.
Using (17-21), the limiting horsepower based on link-plate fatigue for a no. 60 chain is
Using (17-22), the limiting horsepower based on roller and bushing fatigue for a no.
60 chain is
1hplim2rb =
1000117211621.510.7520.8
1120021.5
= 20.8 horsepower
1hplim2lp = 0.00411621.081120020.910.75233.0-0.0710.7524 = 20.2 horsepower
NL = Ns ns
nL
=
1162112002
16002
= 32 teeth
Ns Ú 16 teeth
C = 40 inches
Cmax = 8010.752 = 60 inches
Cmin = 15.0 inches
p = 0.75 inch
1hp2d =
Ka1hp2nom
Kst
=
11.2521202
1.0
= 25.0 horsepower
Roller Chain Drives; Suggested Selection Procedure 777
69Values for Ka and Kst are from Tables 17.2 and 17.7, respectively.
70See step 3 of 17.10.

Finally, using (17-23), the limiting horsepower based on excessive wear or galling is
Clearly, the horsepower limit based on galling is much larger than the required 25 de-
sign horsepower, but the limiting power for both link-plate fatigue and roller and
bushing fatigue are exceeded by the required design horsepower. Therefore, a larger
chain must be selected and power limits recalculated.
Repeating the above steps for a no. 80 chain,71
and
The galling horsepower limit for a no. 60 chain is already 10 times the required de-
sign horsepower, it need not be recalculated for the no. 80 chain.
From this it is clear that for a no. 80 chain, in this application, roller and bushing
fatigue would be the governing failure mode. Since the design horsepower (25 hp)
does not exceed the roller and bushing fatigue horsepower limit (26.2 hp), a no. 80
chain appears to be a good choice.
g.
Repeating step (c) for a no. 80 chain,
and
The speciﬁcation center distance goal of
therefore remains acceptable, and for a no. 80 chain this corresponds to a center dis-
tance of 40 pitches.
h.
Next, the linear chain velocity may be calculated from (17-24) as
This is an acceptable chain velocity.
i.
The chain length in pitches may be calculated from (17-27), to the nearest integral
pitch, as
L = a32 + 16
2
b + 21402 +
132 - 1622
4p21402
= 104 pitches
V =
1121162112002
12
= 1600 ft/min
C = 40 inches
Cmax = 8011.02 = 80 inches
Cmin = 21.0 inches
1hplim2rb =
1000117211621.511.020.8
1120021.5
= 26.2 horsepower
1hplim2lp = 0.00411621.081120020.911.0233.0-0.071124 = 47.2 horsepower
  - cln a 600
1000 b d31.59  log 10.752 + 1.8734 = 258 horsepower
1hplim2g = c
11200210.7521162
110.84
d34.413 - 2.07310.752 - 0.027413224
778
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
71See Table 17.6 for pertinent data.
Example 17.3
Continues

Since this is an even number of pitches, no half-links are required; this chain is there-
fore adopted.
j.
Using the lubrication guidelines of 17.7, for the chain velocity of 1600 ft/min, Type
III (directed oil stream or pressure spray) would be recommended but Type II (oil bath
or slinger-disk) would also be acceptable.
k.
Summarizing the recommendations:
1. Use a single-strand standard no. 80 precision roller chain of length equal to 104
pitches (p  1.0 inch for no. 80 chain).
2. Use a center distance of approximately 40 inches, making provision for installa-
tion and tightening.
3. Use a 16-tooth motor drive sprocket and a 32-tooth driven test-stand sprocket.
4. Specify directed oil stream lubrication but note that oil bath or slinger-disk lubri-
cation would probably be acceptable as well.
5. Use chain casings to contain the oil and provide a lubricant sump.
6. Provide adequate safety guards and shields. Chain drives can be dangerous if not
shielded.
17.11 Chain Drives; Inverted-Tooth Chain
Illustrated in Figure 17.3(d) is an inverted-tooth chain (silent chain72) of a side-by-side se-
ries of alternately interlaced, toothed, ﬂat metal link plates extending across the width of
the chain. The assemblage of ﬂat link plates is pin-connected to permit articulation. The
“tooth” proﬁles of the links are usually straight sided, but for special applications may have
an involute proﬁle. Power is transmitted through positive engagement of the chain teeth
with meshing sprocket teeth, typically giving smooth, quiet operation similar to belt drives
but with compactness and strength similar to gear drives. Various pin-joint conﬁgurations
have been developed by silent chain manufacturers, ranging from round pins in round
bushings to special rocker-joints73 designed to minimize sliding friction, compensate for
chordal action, and enhance wear life by substituting rolling friction for sliding friction in
the joints. Inverted-tooth chain usually embodies guide links either on the sides or in the
center74 to keep the chain from sliding sidewise off of the sprockets.
Inverted-tooth chain (and sprockets), like precision roller chain, has been standardized by
the industry. Standard pitch lengths ranging from 
inch to 2 inches are commercially avail-
able, and standard widths from 0.5 to 6 inches for 0.375-inch pitch chain up to widths from 4
to 30 inches for 2.0-inch pitch chain can be supplied. Just as for precision roller chain, proper
lubrication is crucial for long life and minimum wear. The selection procedure for inverted-
tooth chain parallels the precision roller chain selection procedure discussed in 17.10.
17.12 Wire Rope; Potential Failure Modes
Wire rope may be vulnerable to failure by any of several possible modes,75 depending on
load, speed, and environment, as well as type, size, construction, and materials selected for
the rope. As illustrated in Figure 17.5, wire rope is manufactured by ﬁrst helically twisting
38
Wire Rope; Potential Failure Modes 779
72So named because of its relatively quiet operation.
73HY-VO
is the tradename for a unique chain design utilizing rocker-joints, manufactured by Morse Chain
Division of Borg-Warner Corp.
74See Figure 17.3(d).
75See 2.3 and ref. 17, pp. 59–62.
®

several small wires together to form a multiwire strand, then helically twisting several
strands together to form a rope. When tensile loading is applied to the helically twisted
wires and strands, the wires tend to stretch and the helixes tend to “tighten.” Both of these
loading consequences generate Hertz contact stresses and relative sliding motions between
and among wires. As loads cycle, and as the wire rope is repeatedly bent around drums or
sheaves, the conditions just described may induce failure by tensile fatigue, bending fa-
tigue, fretting fatigue, surface fatigue wear, abrasive wear, yielding, or ultimate rupture.
Corrosion may also be a factor.
Wire rope winding practice, as shown in Figure 17.5(e), is a signiﬁcant factor in re-
sistance to fatigue and wear. As sketched, the wires in regular lay rope appear to be nom-
inally aligned with the axis of the rope; the wires in lang lay rope appear to make an angle
with respect to the axis of the rope.76 Either lay may be formed by winding strands or rope
into a right-hand helix or a left-hand helix. Lang lay rope displays as much as a 15–20 per-
cent superiority over regular lay rope in terms of fatigue and wear resistance. This superi-
ority results from77 (1) the fact that smaller geometry-dictated bending strains are induced
in the exposed outer wires of lang lay rope as the rope passes around a drum or sheave, re-
sulting in lower cyclic bending stresses and longer fatigue life, and (2) the fact that geom-
etry-dictated contact areas between individual wires of the rope are larger for lang lay
rope; hence the contact pressure is lower, and longer wear life results.
On the other hand, lang lay rope tends to rotate, sometimes severely, when axial loads
are applied, unless the rope is secured against rotation at both ends. Also, it is less able to
resist crushing action against a drum or a sheave.
Because of the complicated geometry of a wire rope, neither the kinematics nor the
stress levels at potential critical points have been well formulated.78 Standards of the wire
rope industry suggest that striking a proper balance between resistance to bending fatigue79
and abrasion resistance is essential to a wise selection of wire rope. The X-chart shown in
Figure 17.15 illustrates the comparison between bending fatigue resistance and abrasion
resistance for several different rope and strand constructions. Experience-based symptoms
observed for the various failure modes just discussed are detailed in Table 17.8,80 together
with possible causes.
In the transmission of power by a wire rope, a typical arrangement is to wind the wire
rope on a drum, which may either be grooved to guide and support the rope as it winds or
unwinds, or on a plain (smooth) drum.81 Rope attachment geometry, drum dimensions and
tolerances, and multiple-layer winding practice are all details that require attention in se-
lecting a wire rope system.82 Limited data for selecting wire rope and for sizing drums and
sheaves are given in 17.13 and 17.14. Regular inspection and maintenance of wire rope
drives are also important to the efﬁciency and life expectancy of these systems.83
780
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
76For special applications, an alternate lay rope, in which alternating regular and lang lay strands are wound to
form the rope, may sometimes be used.
77For a more detailed explanation, see ref. 17.
78In principle, it is possible to model the cyclic Hertz contact stresses and relative small-amplitude sliding 
motions within an “ideal” wire rope (e.g., see ref. 17). Relating these quantities to actual failure by fretting 
fatigue, bending fatigue, tensile fatigue, or wear, however, is very uncertain. Therefore, empirical means of
evaluating potential failure, and the use of very large safety factors, are employed to select appropriate wire
rope conﬁgurations for any given application.
79Fretting fatigue consequences are embedded in this quantity.
80Courtesy of Wire Rope Technical Board; see ref. 4.
81For smooth drums, the ﬁrst layer of rope is typically wound smoothly and uniformly to provide a helical
groove that will guide and support successive layers. The ﬁrst layer should never be unwound.
82Wire rope manufacturers are equipped to provide detailed guidelines for rope selection and optimum 
geometries for drums and sheaves.
83Detailed inspection techniques are presented in ref. 4.

Wire Rope; Potential Failure Modes 781
Number of outside wires per strand
6 × 46 SFW
6 × 41 SFW
6 × 36 WS
6 × 31 WS
6 × 25 FW
6 × 26 WS
6 × 21 FW
6 × 19 S
6 × 7
18
16
14
12
12
10
10
9
6
Strand pattern designations:
S = Seale
FW = Filler wire
WS = Warrington seale
SFW = Seale filler wire
Least
  Resistance to bending fatigue             Greatest
Least
 Resistance to        abrasion           Greatest
Figure 17.15
X-chart depicting the comparison between
bending fatigue resistance and abrasion re-
sistance for several widely used wire rope
constructions. See Figure 17.5 for sketches of
basic strand patterns. (Adapted from ref. 4,
with permission from Wire Rope Technical
Board.)
TABLE 17.8 Symptoms and Causes of Wire Rope Failures1
Type of Failure
Symptoms
Possible Causes
1Adapted from ref. 4, with permission from Wire Rope Technical Board.
Fatigue
Yielding
Abrasive wear
Combined fatigue 
and wear
Combined yield-
ing and wear
Cut, gouged, or
rough wire
Twisting
Mashing
Transverse wire breaks—either straight across or
Z-shape. Broken ends appear grainy.
Wire breaks exhibit a mixture of cup-and-cone
ruptures and diagonal shear ruptures.
Outer wires worn smooth, sometimes to a “knife
edge,” followed by rupture.
Reduced cross section of outer wires; wires bro-
ken off squarely.
Reduced cross section of outer wires; wires
necked down in a cup-and-cone conﬁguration.
Wires pinched down, mashed, and/or cut; rough
diagonal shear-like wire rupture.
Wire ends show evidence of plastic twisting
and/or corkscrew appearance.
Wires ﬂattened and spread; followed by rupture.
Rope may be bent around too small a radius; pos-
sible vibration or whipping; wobbly sheaves; re-
verse bends; bent shafts; tight grooves; small
drums or sheaves; incorrect rope construction;
improper installation; poor end terminations.
Unanticipated overloads; sticky or grabby
clutches; jerky operation; loose drum bearings;
fast starts or stops; broken sheave ﬂange; incor-
rect rope size; incorrect material grade; improper
end terminations.
Improper dimensions of drum or sheave grooves;
frozen or stuck sheaves; material or surface hard-
ness of sheaves or drums too low; misalignment
of sheaves or drum; kinks in rope; improperly at-
tached ﬁttings; grit or sand environment; objects
imbedded in rope.
Normal long-term consequence produced by typi-
cal operating conditions.
Normal long-term consequence produced by typi-
cal operating conditions.
Mechanical abuse; abnormal or accidental forces
during installation.
Mechanical abuse; abnormal or accidental forces
during installation.
Mechanical abuse; abnormal or accidental forces
during installation. (Usually occurs on the drum.)

17.13 Wire Rope; Materials
Using the material selection guidelines of Chapter 3, and considering the potential failure
modes just discussed, it may be deduced that candidate materials for wire rope applica-
tions should be resistant to failure by fatigue, fretting fatigue, surface fatigue wear, abra-
sive wear, yielding, ultimate rupture, and in some cases, corrosion. By far, the most widely
used material for wire rope is high-carbon steel. Other materials that may be selected to
meet special requirements include iron, stainless steel, Monel, and bronze.
For steel wire rope material, industry practice is to specify material strength charac-
teristics by grade.84 Standard grades include traction steel (TS), mild plow steel (MPS),
plow steel (P), improved plow steel (IPS), extra improved plow steel (EIPS), and extra, ex-
tra improved plow steel (EEIPS). Plow steel (PS) strength properties are the basis for cal-
culating the strengths of all steel rope wires. Table 17.9 shows nominal strength data for
selected steel wire rope applications.
Stainless steel wire rope is usually made of AISI 302, 304, 316, or 305 stainless steel
alloy. For Monel wire rope, Type 400 Monel is usually selected. When operating environ-
ments suggest bronze wire rope, Type A phosphor bronze is a usual alloy selection. Small-
diameter galvanized iron and stainless steel wire ropes are commonly plastic-coated to
protect against corrosion, and, in some cases, to reduce wear. Plastic ﬁlled wire rope, in
which the internal spaces among the wires are ﬁlled with a plastic matrix, are also used in
some applications to reduce both internal and external wear.
17.14 Wire Rope; Stresses and Strains
Stresses that may play a role in wire rope selection include:
1.
Direct tensile stress in the wires of the rope
2.
Bending stress in the wires, induced by bending of the rope around drums or sheaves
3.
Compressive stress (pressure) between the rope and the drum or sheave
Direct tensile stress, 
, may be estimated from
(17-28)
resultant tensile force on the rope, lb
approximate metallic cross-sectional area of the rope as a function of
rope diameter , in2 (see Table 17.9)
Force components that may contribute to resultant tensile force T include:
1.
Load to be lifted
2.
Weight of the rope
3.
Inertial effects arising from accelerating the load from a resting velocity of zero to the
speciﬁed operational lifting velocity
4.
Impact loading
5.
Frictional resistance
dr
Ar =
where  T =
st = T
Ar
st
782
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
84These steel grade names were originated during the early stages of wire rope development, and continue to
be used to specify the strength of a particular size and grade of rope.

783
TABLE 17.9 Material and Construction Data for Selected Wire Rope Classes
Nominal classiﬁcation
Number of outer strands
6
6
6
8
Number of wires per strand1
3–14
15–26
27–49
15–26
Maximum number of outer wires1
9
12
18
12
Approx. diameter of outer wires1,
, in
/9
/13–
/16
/22
/15–
/19
Materials typically available2,3
Core: (FC)
IPS (200)
I (80)
IPS (200)
I (80)
(approx. ultimate strength, ksi)
T (130)
T (130)
IPS (200)
IPS (200)
Core: (IWRC)
IPS (190)
IPS (190)
EIPS (220)
IPS (190)
EIPS (220)
EEIPS (255)
EIPS (220)
EEIPS (255)
Approx. metallic cross section
Core: (FC)
0.384 
0.404 
(S)4
0.427 
(FW)4
0.366 
(W)4
of rope, 
, in2
Core: (IWRC)
0.451 
0.470 
(S)4
0.493 
(FW)4
0.497 
(W)4
Standard nominal rope diameters
–
by 
th’s;
–
by 
th’s;
–
by 
th’s;
–
by 
th’s;
available, 
, in
–1
by 
th’s
–2
th’s
–3
by 
th’s
–1
by 
th’s
Unit weight of rope, lb/ft
1.50 
1.60 
1.55 
1.45 
Approx. modulus of elasticity 
0–20% of 
(FC)
(FC);
(FC);
(FC)
for the rope3,5, 
, psi
(IWRC)
(IWRC)
21–65% of 
(FC)
(FC)
(FC)
(IWRC)
(IWRC)
Recommended min. sheave or
42 
34 
18 
26 
drum diameter, 
, in
1While the interior wires of a strand are of some signiﬁcance, a strand’s important characteristics relate to the number and size of the outer wires.
2Typical materials are designated as I (iron), T (traction steel), IPS (improved plow steel), EIPS (extra, improved plow steel), and EEIPS (extra, extra improved plow steel). In wire ropes, the
rope ultimate strength is a function of rope size, wire size, and construction details, as well as material properties.
3Typical core constructions are ﬁber core (FC) and independent wire rope core (IWRC).
4See Figure 17.5(b) for construction details of Seale (S), Filler Wire (FW), and Warrington (W) strand conﬁgurations.
5Carefully note that the rope modulus 
is not the same as Young’s modulus of elasticity for the material.
Er
1ds2min
dr
dr
dr
dr
14.0 * 106
15.0 * 106
9.0 * 106
11.6 * 106
12.0 * 106
13.0 * 106
Su
12.6 * 106
13.5 * 106
Er
8.1 * 106
9.9 * 106
10.8 * 106
11.7 * 106
Su
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
18
12
34
18
14
34
34 by 18
34
18
12
34
dr
116
58
14
116
58
14
116
58
14
116
58
14
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
Ar
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
d 2
r
dr
dr
dr
dr
dr
dr
dw
8 * 19
6 * 37
6 * 19
6 * 7

Bending stresses in the wires, induced whenever the rope bends around the drum or a
sheave, may be estimated by utilizing the classical equation from elementary strength of
materials85
(17-29)
applied moment
modulus of elasticity of the rope86
area moment of inertia of the wire, about its neutral axis of bending
radius of curvature of bent rope (also approximately equal to radius of
sheave or drum)
diameter of sheave or drum
Solving (17-29) for 
(17-30)
Substituting (17-30) into (4-5)
(17-31)
where
 wire diameter.
It is of importance to note from (17-31) that, if necessary, the bending stresses may be
reduced by using smaller wires or larger sheaves.
Compressive stress, or unit radial pressure, between the rope and the sheave may be
estimated in the same way as for plain bearings,87 by utilizing projected contact area to cal-
culate the nominal pressure p. For the wire rope system conﬁguration shown in Figure
17.16, by equilibrium
(17-32)
or
(17-33)
unit radial pressure
projected contact area  dr ds
nominal rope diameter
diameter of sheave or drum (sometimes called “tread” diameter)
ds =
dr =
Aproj =
where  p =
p =
2T
dr ds
pAproj = p1dr ds2 = 2T
dw
sb = Mcw
Iw
=
Madw
2 b
aMds
2Er
b
= dw
ds
Er
Iw = Mds
2Er
Iw
ds =
r =
Iw =
Er =
where  M =
M
Er Iw
= 1
r = 2
ds
784
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
85See, for example, ref. 19, p. 138.
86Because each wire in the rope forms a helical spiral around an axis in space, its axial spring rate is less than it
would be for the same wire if it were straight. Referring to Figures 2.2 and 2.3, spring rate and modulus of elas-
ticity are seen to be related by a constant. The traditional approach used to account for this spring rate difference
has been to deﬁne a pseudo-modulus of elasticity for the rope, Er, smaller than Young’s modulus, which relates
stress in the wire to strain in the rope. Experimentally determined values for Er are shown in Table 17.9.
87See (10-2).

Experimental correlations between a fatigue strength parameter, 
, and the number
of bending cycles to failure, 
, have been established for several rope classes,88 as illus-
trated in Figure 17.17. One bending cycle consists of ﬂexing and unﬂexing the rope once
as it passes around the sheave or drum. The fatigue strength parameter 
may be calcu-
lated from
(17-34)
Also, since wear is a function of contact pressure,89 experience-based limiting values
have been established for maximum-allowable bearing pressure, 
, as a function of
rope class and sheave material. Some of these wear-based guidelines90 have been included
in Table 17.10.
1pmax2wear
RN = p
su
RN
Nf
RN
Wire Rope; Stresses and Strains 785
dr
ds
Rope
Drum
p
p
T
T
Figure 17.16
Typical wire rope system conﬁguration in which the rope, nestled in an accurately 
machined groove, passes around a drum.
Fatigue strength parameter RN = (p/Su)
Number of bending cycles to failure, Nf
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
0.002
0.004
0.006
6 × 24
6 × 19
6 × 12
6 × 37
Figure 17.17
Fatigue lives for several wire rope
constructions, as a function of fatigue
strength parameter RN.
88See ref. 20.
89See, for example, (2-77) or (2-81).
90See ref. 4 for additional data.

17.15 Wire Rope; Suggested Selection Procedure
In selecting an appropriate wire rope system, design decisions must be made about mate-
rial, size, and construction of the rope; geometry of the sheaves and drum; and other de-
tails. Usually, the wire rope selection procedure will be iterative. To help make an initial
choice, the experience-based recommendations of Figure 17.15 often prove effective. A
procedure for selecting a good wire rope system is presented next.
1. Establish design speciﬁcations for the application, and prioritize design goals with re-
spect to failure mode, life, safety, cost, and any other special requirements.
2. Based on design priorities established in step 1, tentatively select a rope construction
by interpreting Figure 17.15. Also select a rope material, using methods of Chapter 3,
and select a safety factor based on methods of Chapter 5.91
3. Using the tentatively selected rope material and class, initially size the rope using 
(17-28). Be sure to include all potential loading sources. Calculate a tentative rope di-
ameter 
based on static loading.
4. Using the tentatively selected rope diameter 
, ﬁnd the recommended minimum
sheave diameter, , from Table 17.9.
5. Estimate bending stress in the outer wires using (17-31) and information about wire
diameter, 
, from Table 17.9. It should be noted that (17-31) provides only an ap-
proximate value for bending stress in the wire; it usually is not used directly in design
calculations.
dw
ds
1dr2static
1dr2static
786
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
TABLE 17.10 Experience-based Wear-Related Allowable Maximum Bearing Pressure Between Rope and
Drums or Sheaves of Various Materials1 (psi)
Regular Lay Rope
Lang Lay Rope
Drum or Sheave
Material
Comments
Wood
150
250
300
350
165
275
330
400
Against end grain
of beech, hickory, 
or gum.
Cast iron
300
480
585
680
350
550
660
800
Minimum hardness 
of BHN 125.
Cast carbon steel
550
900
1075
1260
600
1000
1180
1450
30–40 points of 
carbon; minimum 
hardness of BHN 160.
Manganese steel,
1470
2400
3000
3500
1650
2750
3300
4000
induction or 
ﬂame hardened
1Abridged from ref. 4, with permission from Wire Rope Technical Board.
8 * 19
6 * 37
6 * 19
6 * 7
8 * 19
6 * 37
6 * 19
6 * 7
91Typical industry practice is to select safety factors based only on static ultimate breaking load of the 
proposed rope. Since the inﬂuences of fatigue, wear, corrosion, and other factors are not speciﬁcally addressed
when this industry practice is adopted, the chosen safety factor must be large to account for the unknown 
inﬂuences. Values of such “static-ultimate-strength based” safety factors are often chosen to be as large as 
5–8, or even higher. By contrast, in this text the selection of a safety factor is closely tied to the prediction 
of the governing failure mode in each individual application, as discussed in Chapter 2. In any case, a 
designer is always responsible for meeting safety factor requirements speciﬁed by any and all applicable 
codes and standards.

6. Using the speciﬁed design life requirement, 
, enter Figure 17.17, focus on the curve
for the tentatively selected rope class, and read the value of 
corresponding to 
.
Next, combine (17-33) and (17-34) assuming that the sheave diameter remains un-
changed, incorporate the safety factor 
from step 3, and calculate the required
rope diameter, 
, based on fatigue.
7. From Table 17.10, ﬁnd the wear-based limiting pressure for the chosen rope class and
sheave or drum material. Utilizing (17-33), calculate the required rope diameter,
, based on wear.
8. From the results of steps 4, 6, and 7, identify the largest required rope diameter among
, 
, and 
, and select the nominal standard wire rope diameter
that equals or just exceeds this value.92
9. Recheck all calculations using the standard wire rope selected. If necessary, modify
the selection.
10. Summarize results, including:
a. Standard rope size required
b. Rope construction (core, number of strands, number of wires per strand, strand
conﬁguration, nominal rope diameter, and the lay of the strands and the rope)
c. Material for rope, sheaves, and drum
d. Sheave and drum diameters
e. Other special requirements
Example 17.4 Wire Rope Selection
A small electric one-ton hoist is to be designed to operate as a low-speed overhead lift for
a small machine shop. Two lines are to be used to support the load, which is attached to a
vertically moving sheave with a swivel hook, as shown schematically in Figure E17.4. If
the desired design life of the wire rope is 2 years, and approximately 15 lifts per hour are
to be made, 8 hours a day, 250 days a year, select an appropriate wire rope for the appli-
cation. Occasional suddenly applied loads are possible. Also, specify the diameter and ma-
terial for the vertically moving sheave. Local safety codes require a safety factor of 5 based
on static ultimate strength.
Solution
Following the suggested procedure of 17.15, the following steps may be taken:
1.
Based on the speciﬁcations given, a balanced design is appropriate, in which the like-
lihood of failure by fatigue and wear should be about the same. The desired design
life of the rope is speciﬁed as 2 years. For this application, safety is an important is-
sue, and cost is also important.
2.
Figure 17.15 indicates that for a balance between failure by fatigue and failure by
wear, a 
FW construction or a 
WS construction would be an appro-
priate choice. From Table 17.9 it may be noted that the 
FW rope is classed
as a 
rope, and the 
WS rope is classed as a 
rope. For a ﬁrst it-
eration, the tentative class selection will be 
, speciﬁcally a 
WS rope
construction.
To keep the rope small, an improved plow steel (IPS) material will be tried ﬁrst,
and, to improve ﬂexibility, a ﬁber core (FC) will be investigated.
6 * 37
6 * 37
6 * 37
6 * 31
6 * 19
6 * 25
6 * 31
6 * 25
1dr2wear
1dr2fatigue
1dr2static
1dr2wear
1dr2fatigue
nfatigue
Nd
RN
Nd
Wire Rope; Suggested Selection Procedure 787
92See Table 17.9.

Using the methods of Chapter 2,93 the rating factors selected for this electric-hoist
wire rope application are chosen as follows:
Rating Factor
Selected RN
1. Accuracy of loads knowledge
2. Accuracy of stress calculation
3
3. Accuracy of strength knowledge
0
4. Need to conserve
5. Seriousness of failure consequences
2
6. Quality of manufacture
7. Conditions of operation
8. Quality of inspection/maintenance
Using (2-85),
then from (2-86)
Summarizing safety factor choices:
5.0 (code requirement; based on static ultimate strength)
1.5 [based on result of nd]
1.0 [since Table 17.10 gives values for allowable stresses
(allowable pressures) that already have a safety factor built in]
nwear =
nfatigue =
nult =
nd = 1 +
110 - 322
100
= 1.5
t = -3 + 3 + 0 - 2 + 2 - 1 - 1 - 1 = -3
-1
-1
-1
-2
-3
788
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
Overhead track
Trolley
Hoist frame
Wire rope
Vertically moving
sheave
Control
Swivel hook
Load
Swivel
Motor-driven
drum
Fixed cable
attachment
Figure E17.4
Sketch of a proposed one-ton hoist.
93Review Example 2.11 to refresh details.
Example 17.4
Continues

3.
From (17-28), the static direct tensile stress in the rope is
and from (2-59), for suddenly applied loads, and utilizing 
,
For this ﬁrst iteration, the tensile force, T, in the rope, will be based on the load to
be lifted and the suddenly applied impact factor of 2 as shown. The rope weight will
be initially neglected (small rope), inertial effects will be neglected (low-speed lift),
and frictional resistance will be neglected.
From Table 17.9, the approximate metallic cross section for a ﬁber-core 
rope is
Since two lines carry the nominal 2000-lb load, each line carries
and
Therefore
and from Table 17.9, the static ultimate strength of improved plow steel (IPS) is
Hence the design stress 
for static loading may be calculated as
Equating
and solving for required rope diameter 
,
From Table 17.9, the next larger standard rope diameter is 0.38 inch. Hence, based
on static ultimate strength requirements,
1dr2static = 0.38 inch
dr = A
2000
140,000210.4272 = 0.34 inch
dr
1smax2suddenly
applied
= sd
1sd2static = 200,000
5
= 40,000 psi
sd
su = 200,000 psi
nult = 5
1smax2suddenly
applied
= 2 1000
0.427d 2
r
T = 2000
2
= 1000 lb/line
Ar = 0.427d 2
r
6 * 37
1smax2suddenly
applied
= 2st = 2 T
Ar
st
st = T
Ar
Wire Rope; Suggested Selection Procedure 789

4.
From Table 17.9, the recommended minimum sheave diameter for this rope is
5.
As a point of reference, the bending stress in the outer wires may be estimated by us-
ing (17-31) and data from Table 17.9 to ﬁnd94
This appears to be an acceptable bending stress.
6.
The desired design life 
may be calculated as
Reading into Figure 17.17 with this life, using the curve for 
rope, the
value of 
corresponding to failure in 
cycles may be read as
Next, (17-34) may be used to calculate the value of pressure p corresponding to
failure in 
cycles as
From above, the fatigue safety factor is 
 1.5, so the design-allowable
pressure may be calculated as
Inserting this fatigue-based design pressure into (17-33), and assuming the sheave
diameter remains unchanged, the rope diameter requirement based on fatigue may be
calculated as
Hence, the chosen 0.38-inch-diameter standard rope is (barely) acceptable.
7.
From Table 17.10, for a 
rope on a cast carbon-steel sheave (BHN 160),95 the
allowable bearing pressure based on wear is
1pd2wear = 1180 psi
6 * 37
1dr2fatigue =
2T
1pd2fat ds
=
2110002
1760216.752 = 0.39 inch
1pd2fatigue =
1p2Nf
nfat
= 1140
1.5
= 760 psi
nfatigue
1p2Nf = RNfsu = 0.00571200,0002 = 1140 psi
6 * 104
RNf = 0.0057
6 * 104
RN
6 * 37
Nd = a15 lifts
hr b a8 hr
day b a250 days
yr b12 yr2 = 6 * 104 cycles 1bends2
Nd
sb = dw
ds
Er =
a0.38
22 b
6.75 111.0 * 1062 = 28,150 psi
ds = 18dr = 1810.382 = 6.75 inches
790
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
94Note that Table 17.9 gives two values of Er, depending on whether the rope is loaded to less than 20 percent
of ultimate strength, or more than 20 percent. The stiffer value has been chosen here to give a more conserva-
tive (higher) estimate of bending stress in the wires.
95Brinnel hardness number; see Table 3.13.
Example 17.4
Continues

Inserting this wear-based design pressure into (17-33), the rope diameter require-
ment based on wear may be calculated as
8.
The largest diameter requirement, based on (dr)static  0.38 inch, (dr)fatigue  0.39
inch, and (dR)wear  0.25 inch, is dictated by fatigue life requirements. It is interest-
ing to note that for this particular project the diameter requirement based on ultimate
strength using a code-required safety factor is essentially the same as the diameter re-
quirement based on fatigue strength using a logic-based safety factor.96 Such good
agreement will not always be the case.
Summarizing, the following recommendations are presented:
a.
Choose 
-inch 
WS improved plow steel (IPS) ﬁber core (FC) rope.97
b.
Choose a cast carbon-steel sheave material (BHN  160) with a diameter of 6.75
inches.
17.16 Flexible Shafts
As discussed in 17.1, when misalignment problems or large offsets between two rotating
shafts are dictated by operational design requirements, a ﬂexible shaft98 may provide a
good solution for connecting the shafts and transmitting the torque, power, or rotary mo-
tion between them. Flexible shafts (cores), as shown, for example, in Figure 17.7, are con-
structed of 1 to 12 tightly wound helical layers of wire wrapped around a mandrel wire,
alternating the hand of each successive layer. The hand (lay) of a ﬂexible shaft is deter-
mined by the hand of the outer helically wound layer of wire. For power transmission in
which the direction of rotation is always the same, the direction of the power source should
tend to wrap the outer helical layer more tightly; hence, as viewed from the power source,
a left-hand lay should be selected if the power source rotates clockwise and vice versa.
Flexible shafts are also commercially available for bidirectional operation, but torque and
power capacity are signiﬁcantly lower than for unidirectional operation.99
Since the helically wrapped wire construction of ﬂexible shafting is somewhat simi-
lar to that of wire rope, it may be deduced that when power is transmitted by the ﬂexible
shaft, Hertz contact stresses are generated between and among wires, and small-amplitude
relative sliding motion is induced between wires as well. Hence, the potential failure
modes for ﬂexible shafting, as for wire rope, include fatigue, fretting fatigue, wear, and
yielding, depending upon the characteristics of the operating loads. Corrosion may also be
a factor.
As for any other machine part, materials for ﬂexible shafts may be selected by using
the guidelines of Chapter 3. Typically, the wire used for power transmission applications
is high-carbon steel heat treated and stress relieved, but any material available in wire form
may be speciﬁed if needed to satisfy special design requirements. To accommodate such
special needs, ﬂexible shafts are usually available in stainless steel, phosphor-bronze,
Monel, Inconel, titanium, or even Hastelloy-X.
6 * 31
38
1dr2wear =
2T
1pd2wear ds
=
2110002
11180216.752 = 0.25 inch
Flexible Shafts 791
96See Chapter 2.
97If unspeciﬁed, the rope is assumed to be right regular lay.
98See Figure 17.7.
99Compare data from Tables 17.11 and 17.12.

792
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
Characteristics of a ﬂexible shaft of given diameter may be changed by varying the
number of wires per layer, number of helically wrapped layers, wire diameter, spacing be-
tween helically wrapped wires, and wire material. Just as for any other rotating shaft, the
operating torque to be transmitted by a ﬂexible shaft is determined by the power and speed
requirements of the application. The basic relationship for power as a function of torque
and speed, given in (4-39), may be solved for torque to obtain
(17-35)
torque, in-lb
shaft speed, rpm
horsepower
Tables 17.11 and 17.12 provide maximum-allowable torque requirements, 
,
as a function of bend radius, for several commercially available ﬂexible shaft sizes. These
allowable torque values have an embedded safety factor of about 4, so if a particular de-
sign application requires a different safety factor speciﬁcation, the tabled allowable torque
values should be modiﬁed. Also, the allowable torque values for continuous operation are
based on an allowable temperature rise in the shaft of about 55 above room temperature100
when the tangential surface velocity of the rotating shaft is about 500 surface feet per
minute. The maximum-allowable shaft speeds shown in Tables 17.11 and 17.12 are based
on this criterion. It is also important to note that bend radii smaller than recommended
values101 cause additional temperature increases because of the increased internal friction
developed within the ﬂexible shaft as the wires are forced to rub against each other more
1Tmax2allow
hp =
n =
where  T =
T =
63,0251hp2
n
TABLE 17.11 Recommended Maximum Operating Torque1 for Selected2 Standard Flexible Shafts of High-
Carbon Steel as a Function of Bend Radius Rb, for Unidirectional Operation
Min.-
Ultimate 
Shaft
Max.-
Allow.
Torsional 
(Core)
Allow.
Bend
Torsional
Failure3
Recommended Maximum Torque (Tmax)allow
Diam.,
Speed,
Radius,
Deﬂection,
Moment,
Corresponding to Various Bend Radii,4 in-lb
in
rpm
in
deg/ft/in-lb
in-lb
3
4
6
8
10
12
15
20
0.127
30,000
2.7
21.48
12
0.2
0.7
1.2
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
0.147
20,000
3.2
10.11
30
1.2
2.6
3.3
3.8
4.1
4.4
4.7
0.183
15,000
3.2
7.39
32
1.2
2.8
3.5
4.0
4.3
4.6
4.9
0.245
10,000
3.2
0.97
195
12.8
16.0
18.0
20.0
21.0
23.0
0.304
7,500
3.6
0.44
338
19.0
26.0
30.0
33.0
35.0
38.0
0.370
5,500
6.3
0.17
690
20.0
35.0
45.0
55.0
65.0
0.495
4,500
5.9
0.06
1230
45.0
70.0
86.0
103.0
120.0
0.620
4,000
6.7
0.019
2420
53.0
109.0
147.0
184.0
221.0
0.740
3,000
6.7
0.009
4370
96.0
198.0
265.0
332.0
400.0
0.990
2,500
8.4
0.003
9344
206.0
386.0
567.0
747.0
1From ref. 5, courtesy: S. S. White Technologies, Inc. A safety factor of approximately 4 has been embedded in these recommended allowable
torque values. The methods of Chapter 5 may be utilized to adjust these allowable torque values if necessary. These values assume that the 
applied torque acts in the direction that tends to tighten the helical outer layer of wire.
2Many other shafts and variations are commercially available. See ref. 5, for example.
3Torque at which a ﬂexible shaft will deform permanently or break.
4Listed bend radii are in inches.
100Larger temperature rises signiﬁcantly reduce shaft fatigue life.
101See Tables 17.11 and 17.12.

Flexible Shafts 793
vigorously in tighter bends. The bend radius 
may be geometrically estimated for any
particular design conﬁguration. For example, if an application requires a large offset be-
tween two parallel rotating shafts, as illustrated in Figure 17.18, the bend radius, 
, may
be calculated as
(17-36)
offset between shaft centerlines
distance between components
If recommended limits on torque, speed, and bend radius are adhered to, an operational
mean life of approximately 108 revolutions may be expected.102
y =
where  x =
Rb = x2 + y2
4x
Rb
Rb
TABLE 17.12 Recommended Maximum Operating Torque1 for Selected2 Standard Flexible Shafts of High-
Carbon Steel as a Function of Bend Radius Rb, for Bidirectional Operation
Ultimate
Min.-
Torsional 
Shaft
Max.-
Allow.
Torsional
Failure 
(Core) Allow. Bend
Deﬂection,
Moment5,
Recommended Maximum Torque (Tmax)allow
Diam., Speed, Radius,
deg/ft/in-lb
in-lb
Corresponding to Various Bend Radii,6 in-lb
in
rpm
in
TOL3 LOL4 TOL3 LOL4
3
4
6
8
10
12
15
20
25
Straight
0.127
30,000
3.0
11.65
23.71
16
12
0.4 1.2
2.1
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.5
3.9
0.147
20,000
4.0
6.55
12.50
21
26
1.8
4.1
5.2
5.9
6.3
6.8
7.2
7.5
8.6
0.183
15,000
4.0
3.07
6.94
44
41
2.8
6.3
8.0
9.1
9.8
10.5
11.1
11.6
13.2
0.245
10,000
4.0
0.74
1.23
141
121
8.4 19.0 23.0
27.0
29.0
31.0
33.0
34.0
39.0
0.304
7,500
4.5
0.28
0.55
281
207
20.0 32.0
39.0
44.0
48.0
53.0
55.0
67.0
0.370
5,500
6.0
0.11
0.21
515
384
29.0 53.0
67.0
77.0
86.0
96.0
102
125
0.495
4,500
7.0
0.044
0.081
1214
869
75.0 117
145
172
200
217
284
0.620
4,000
8.0
0.015
0.024
2135
1760
188
250
317
381
420
574
0.740
3,000
10.0
0.009
0.018
3533
2441
351
440
529
582
797
0.990
2,500
12.0
0.002
0.003
8513
6763
972
1281
1466
2209
1From ref. 5, courtesy: S.S. White Technologies, Inc. A safety factor of approximately 4 has been embedded in these recommended allowable
torque values. The methods of Chapter 5 may be utilized to adjust these allowable torque values if necessary.
2Many other shafts and variations are commercially available. See ref. 5, for example.
3Direction of operating torque tends to tighten the outer layer of helically wound wire.
4Direction of operating torque tends to loosen the outer layer of helically wound wire.
5Torque at which a ﬂexible shaft will deform permanently or break.
6Listed bend radii are in inches.
Rb
Rb
L
C
L
C
Sheath
Distance between components, y
Shaft
end
Shaft
end
Lo
Offset, x
Figure 17.18
Flexible shaft connection between offset
parallel shafts. For internal details, see
Figure 17.7.
102For longer or shorter design lives, contact a ﬂexible shaft manufacturer.

794
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
The suggested procedure for selecting an appropriate ﬂexible shaft for a particular de-
sign scenario is relatively simple. The steps are:
1.
Establish whether the application is unidirectional or bidirectional. For unidirectional
operation, select data from Table 17.11; for bidirectional operation, use data from
Table 17.12.
2.
Using (17-35), calculate the torque requirement for the ﬂexible shaft.
3.
Using (17-36), or other relationship pertinent to the geometric conﬁguration, deter-
mine the bend radius 
.
4.
If torsional stiffness is a design issue, calculate the required torsional stiffness.
5.
Utilizing either Table 17.11 or 17.12, depending upon the result of step 1, enter the
table with the required torque from step 2 and bend radius from step 3 to tentatively
read out an acceptable shaft diameter.103
6.
With the tentatively selected shaft diameter, check to make sure that torsional stiffness
requirements of step 4 are met. Check to make sure that maximum-allowable speed
restrictions are not violated. Based on (17-35), it is clear that for a given horsepower
requirement, higher speeds correspond to smaller shafts. In other words, ﬂexible shafts
like to be run fast. Thus, if the application requires that the driven device be operated
at a different speed than the power source, the speed changer should be so located in
the power train sequence so that the ﬂexible shaft operates at the higher speed.
7.
Determine shaft length, 
, accurately by measuring along the shaft centerline in a
scale layout, or by using appropriate calculations. Shaft lengths of 30 feet or more are
commercially available and may be used successfully in many cases as long as the
ﬂexible shaft (core) is properly supported in a companion sheath.104 Shorter shaft
lengths are usually more critical because of the potentially tight bend radii that might
be produced in the installation.
8.
Iterate to satisfy all design criteria, and specify the shaft of choice.
Example 17.5 Flexible Shaft Selection
Engineering management of the manufacturer of the rotary lawn mower alluded to in Ex-
ample 16.1 now believes that a signiﬁcant increase in engine efﬁciency could be achieved
by operating the engine with the crankshaft axis horizontal instead of vertical as shown in
Figure E16.1A of example 16.1. Of the various means available to connect the horizontal
crankshaft to the vertical rotary bladeshaft, a ﬂexible shaft appears to be most economical.
As a consultant, you are asked to investigate the feasibility of using a ﬂexible shaft con-
nection in this situation and propose an acceptable shaft, if possible. It has been deter-
mined geometrically that the shaft would have to accommodate a bend radius of about
8 inches, and in normal operation the engine must develop 3.5 horsepower at 2400 rpm.
Select an appropriate ﬂexible shaft for this application.
Solution
Following the steps just outlined,
1.
This application is unidirectional; hence Table 17.11 will be used.
2.
From (17-35)
Treq’d =
63,02513.52
2400
= 92 in-lb
Ls
Rb
103Usually there are many acceptable combinations.
104See Figure 17.7(b).

Problems 795
3.
By speciﬁcation,
4.
No stiffness speciﬁcation has been imposed.
5.
Entering Table 17.11 with the required torque of 92 in-lb and bend radius of 8 inches,
the required standard ﬂexible shaft diameter is
6.
No stiffness criterion needs to be satisﬁed.
7.
The operating speed of the mower unit is 2400 rpm, safely below the 3000-rpm limit
speciﬁed for the shaft selected.
8.
Shaft length is to be determined by a scale layout of the mower assembly.
9.
It appears that an appropriate ﬂexible shaft selection can be made for this application.
The recommended shaft is a 0.740-inch-diameter shaft made of high-carbon steel wire.
dshaft = 0.74 inch
Rb = 8 inches
17-1. A ﬂat belt drive system is to be designed for an applica-
tion in which the input motor shaft speed (driving pulley) is
1725 rpm, the driven shaft speed is to be approximately 960 rpm,
and the power to be transmitted has been estimated as 3.0 horse-
power. The driven machine has been evaluated and found to
have the characteristics of moderate shock loading during oper-
ation. The desired center distance between driving and driven
pulleys is approximately 18 inches.
a. If 
-inch-thick polyamide belt material were chosen
for this application, what belt width would be required?
b. What initial tension would be required for proper 
operation?
17-2. A ﬂat belt drive consists of two cast-iron pulleys, each 
4 feet in diameter, spaced 15 feet apart, center-to-center. The belt
is to be made of two-ply oak-tanned leather, each ply being 
inch thick, and the speciﬁc weight of the leather material is
0.040 lb/in3. The application involves a water-spray environ-
ment in which the belt is constantly subjected to the water spray
(see Appendix Table A.1 for coefﬁcients of friction). It has been
experimentally determined that the tensile stress in the belt
should not exceed 300 psi for safe operation. If 50 horsepower
is to be transmitted at a pulley speed of 320 rpm, what belt
width should be speciﬁed?
17-3. A 1725-rpm 5-horsepower high-torque electric motor is
to be used to drive a woodworking table saw in a storm-window
manufacturing plant. The saw is to operate 16 hours per day,
5 days per week, at full-rated motor horsepower. A V-belt drive
is to be used between the motor and the saw input pulley.
Ideally, the center distance between the motor drive sheave and
the driven saw sheave should be about 30 inches, and the driven
532-
18
sheave should rotate at approximately 1100 rpm. Saw operation
will probably produce moderate shock loading. Propose a V-belt
drive arrangement that will provide a mean life of about 1 year
between belt replacements.
17-4. A D-section V-belt is to be used to drive the main
power shaft of an agricultural combine (an agricultural com-
bine may be regarded as a combination of conveyors, eleva-
tors, beaters, and blowers). The power source is a 6-cylinder,
30-hp internal combustion engine which delivers full-rated
power to a 12-inch-diameter drive sheave at 1800 rpm. The
driven sheave is 26 inches in diameter, and the center dis-
tance between sheaves is 33.0 inches. During the harvest
season, combines typically operate continuously 24 hours
per day.
a. If a D-section V-belt were specified for use in this
application, how often would you predict that the belt
would require replacement?
b. Based on the knowledge that it takes about ﬁve hours to
change out the main drive belt, would you consider the re-
placement interval estimate in (a) to be acceptable?
17-5. a portable bucket elevator for conveying sand is to be
driven by a single-cylinder internal-combustion engine operat-
ing at a speed of 1400 rpm, using a B-section V-belt. The driv-
ing pulley and driven pulley each have a 5.00-inch pitch
diameter. If the bucket elevator is to lift two tons per minute
(4000 lb/min) of sand to a height of 15 feet, continuously for
10 hours per working day, and if friction losses in the elevator
are about 15 percent of operating power, how many working
days until failure would you estimate for the B-section belt if it
has a datum length of 59.8 inches (B 59 belt)?
Problems

796
Chapter 17 / Belts, Chains, Wire Rope, and Flexible Shafts
17-6. In a set of 5V high-capacity V-belts, each belt has a pitch
length (outside length) of 132.0 inches, and operates on a pair
of 12-inch diameter multiply grooved sheaves. The rotational
speed of the sheaves is 960 rpm. To achieve a mean life ex-
pectancy of 20,000 hours, ﬁnd the number of belts that should
be used in parallel to transmit 200 horsepower.
17-7. It is desired to use a compact roller chain drive to trans-
mit power from a dynamometer to a test stand for evaluation of
aircraft auxiliary gear boxes. The chain drive must transmit
90 horsepower at a small-sprocket speed of 1000 rpm.
a. Select the most appropriate roller chain size.
b. Determine the minimum sprocket size to be used.
c. Specify appropriate lubrication.
17-8. It is desired to use a roller chain drive for the spindle of
a new rotating shaft fatigue testing machine. The drive motor
operates at 1750 rpm and the fatigue machine spindle must op-
erate at 2170 rpm. It is estimated that the chain must transmit
11.5 hp. Spindle-speed variation of no more than 1 percent can
be tolerated.
a. Select the most appropriate roller chain.
b. What minimum sprocket size should be used?
c. Specify appropriate lubrication.
d. Would it be feasible to use no. 41 lightweight chain for
this application?
17-9. A ﬁve-strand no. 40 precision roller chain is being pro-
posed to transmit power from a 21-tooth driving sprocket that
rotates at 1200 rpm. The driven sprocket is to rotate at one-
quarter the speed of the driving sprocket. Do the following:
a. Determine the limiting horsepower that can be trans-
mitted by this drive, and state the governing failure mode.
b. Find the tension in the chain.
c. What chain length should be used if a center distance of
approximately 20 inches is desired?
d. Does the 20-inch center distance lie within the recom-
mended range for this application?
e. What type of lubrication should be used for this appli-
cation?
17-10. It is desired to market a small air-driven hoist in which
the load is supported on a single line of wire rope and the rated
design load is 
ton (750 lb). The wire rope is to be wrapped
on a drum of 7.0 inches diameter. The hoist should be able to
lift and lower the full-rated load 16 times a day, 365 days a year,
for 20 years before failure of the rope occurs.
a. If a special ﬂexible 
improved plow steel (IPS)
rope is to be used, what rope size should be speciﬁed?
b. With the rope size determined in (a), it is desired to
estimate the “additional stretch” that would occur in the
rope if a 750-lb load were being lowered at the rate of 
2 ft/sec, and when the load reaches a point 10 feet below
the 7.0-inch drum, a brake is suddenly applied. Make
such an estimate.
6 * 37
38
17-11. An electric hoist, in which the load is supported on two
lines, is ﬁtted with a 
-inch 
improved plow steel (IPS)
wire rope that wraps on an 8-inch-diameter drum and carries an
8-inch sheave with an attached hook for load lifting. The hoist
is rated at 1500-lb capacity.
a. If full-rated load were lifted each time, about how many
“lifts” would you predict could safely be made with this
hoist? Use a fatigue safety factor of 1.25. Note that there
are 2 “bends” of the rope for each lift of the load.
b. If the hoist were used in such a way that one-half the
time it is lifting full-rated load but the rest of the time it
lifts only one-third of rated load, what hypothesis or the-
ory would you utilize for estimating the number of lifts
that could safely be made under these circumstances?
c. Numerically estimate the number of lifts that could be
safely made under the mixed loading described in (b).
Again, use a fatigue safety factor of 1.25 in your estimat-
ing procedure.
17-12. It is desired to select a wire rope for use in an automo-
tive tow truck application. A single line is to be used and, con-
sidering dynamic loading involved in pulling cars back onto the
roadway, the typical load on the rope is estimated to be 7000 lb.
It is estimated that approximately 20 cars per day will be pulled
back onto the highway (i.e., the rope experiences 20 “bends”
per day) under full load. If the truck is used 360 days per year,
and a design life of 7 years is desired for the rope:
a. What size IPS wire rope would you specify if the rope
is to be of 
regular lay construction?
b. What minimum sheave diameter would you recom-
mend?
17-13. A deep-mine hoist utilizes a single line of 2-inch
extra improved plow steel (EIPS) wire rope wrapped
on a cast carbon-steel drum that has a diameter of 6 feet. The
rope is used to vertically lift loads of ore weighing about 4 tons
from a shaft that is 500 feet deep. The maximum hoisting speed
is 1200 ft/min and the maximum acceleration is 2 ft/sec2.
a. Estimate the maximum direct stress in the “straight”
portion of the 2-inch single-line wire rope.
b. Estimate the maximum bending stress in the “outer”
wires of the 2-inch wire rope as it wraps onto the 6-foot-
diameter drum.
c. Estimate the maximum unit radial pressure (compres-
sive stress) between the rope and the sheave. Hint: Model
the 2-inch single-line rope wrapped around the 6-foot
sheave as a “band brake,” utilizing equation (16-76) with
and 
, to ﬁnd 
.
d. Estimate the fatigue life of the 2-inch wire rope as used
in this application.
17-14. It is necessary to mount a 7.5-horsepower 3450-rpm
electric motor at right angles to a centrifugal processor as
shown in Figure P17.14 (also see arrangement 
of
Figure 17.6). It had been planned to use a 
bevel gearset to
1:1
A - B2
pmax
m = 0.3
a = 2p
6 * 19
6 * 19
6 * 19
14

Problems 797
connect the motor to the processor, but a young engineer sug-
gested that a ﬂexible shaft connection might be quieter and less
expensive. Determine whether a ﬂexible shaft is a viable alter-
native, and, if so, specify a ﬂexible shaft that should work.
17-15. To avoid other equipment mounted on the same frame,
the centerline of a 2-horsepower 1725-rpm electric motor must
be offset from the parallel centerline of the industrial mixer that
it must drive.
a. For the offset shown in Figure P17.15, select a suit-
able flexible shaft (also see arrangement 
of
Figure 17.6).
b. To improve mixing efﬁciency, it is being proposed to
replace the standard 2-horsepower motor with a “re-
versible” motor having the same speciﬁcations. With the
“reversible” motor, would it be necessary to replace the
ﬂexible shaft chosen in (a)? If so, specify the size of the re-
placement shaft.
c. Comparing results of (a) with (b), can you think of any
potential operational problems associated with the ﬂexible
shaft when operating in the “reverse” direction?
A - B1
12.0 in.
12.0 in.
Centrifugal
processor
5 hp motor
Figure P17.14
Sketch of motor and centrifugal processor to be connected
at right angles by a ﬂexible shaft.
12.0 in.
Industrial
mixer
2-hp motor
4.0 in.
Figure P17.15
Sketch of motor and offset industrial mixer that it must
drive.

Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
Chapter 18
798
18.1 Uses and Characteristics of Flywheels
Flywheels are rotating masses installed in rotating systems of machine elements to act as a
storage reservoir for kinetic energy, as depicted in Figure 18.1. Usually,1 the primary task of
a ﬂywheel is to control, within an acceptable band, the angular velocity and torque ﬂuctua-
tions inherent in the power source, the load, or both. Figure 18.2 illustrates the superposed
torque versus angular displacement curves for a ﬂuctuating driver and a ﬂuctuating load.
By deﬁnition, the driver torque, , is considered to be positive when its sense is in
the direction of shaft rotation and the driver is supplying energy to the shaft-ﬂywheel sys-
tem. The load torque, , is considered to be positive when its sense is in the direction of
rotation and the shaft-ﬂywheel system is supplying energy to the load. It may be noted that
Tl
Td
1Theoretically, however, a ﬂywheel could be used as the sole power source for an operating system if enough
kinetic energy could be safely prestored. This might be done by initially “spinning up” its mass to a rotational
speed high enough to supply the energy required by the driven machine during an entire mission cycle. As a
practical matter, this would be rarely feasible. One alternative currently under intense scrutiny is to  couple a
ﬂywheel with a compact prime mover such as a turbogenerator to form a hybrid power source. Energy from the
gas-turbine-driven coupled electric generator would be used to keep the ﬂywheel spinning at the proper speed.
Associated with the development of such hybrid systems are, necessarily, the development of gimbalmounts for
the ﬂywheel to prevent transmission of gyroscopic forces to the host vehicle, containment chambers to safety
contain any shrapnel in case the ﬂywheel should fail (explode), and an evacuation system for the containment
chamber to minimize hydrodynamic drag and improve system efﬁciency.

Td

Tl
Shaft
Shaft
Driver
Load
Flywheel
(net power
supplied)
(net power
consumed)
Figure 18.1
Schematic depiction of ﬂywheel system in
which either the driver, the load, or both
may ﬂuctuate.

during increments of time when the supplied driver torque exceeds the required load
torque, the ﬂywheel mass is accelerated and additional kinetic energy is stored in the
ﬂywheel. During increments of time when the required load torque exceeds the supplied
driver torque, the ﬂywheel mass is decelerated and some of the kinetic energy in the
ﬂywheel is depleted.
When the operational mission of a machine system is dependent upon restricting the
speed or torque ﬂuctuations to lie within a deﬁned control band, it is possible to estimate
the mass moment of inertia and rotational ﬂywheel speed required to accomplish the task.
Since all real machine elements have mass, the “ﬂywheel effect” from each signiﬁcant
rotating mass in the system must also be incorporated in the pertinent calculations.
By utilizing a properly designed ﬂywheel, one or more of the following potential
advantages may be realized:
1.
Reduced amplitude of speed ﬂuctuation
2.
Reduced peak torque required of the driver
3.
Reduced stresses in shafts, couplings, and possibly other components in the system
4.
Energy automatically stored and released as required during the cycle
18.2 Fluctuating Duty Cycles, Energy Management, and
Flywheel Inertia
If the average angular velocity, 
, of a rotating system is to remain unchanged over time,
the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics requires that the added kinetic energy stored in the ﬂy-
wheel during one operational cycle must be equal to the kinetic energy depleted from the
ﬂywheel during the same cycle.2 Isolating the shaft-ﬂywheel system as a thermodynamic
free body,3 as shown in Figure 18.3, therefore requires that the kinetic energy supplied to
the ﬂywheel system during each cycle must equal the work done by the ﬂywheel system
during each cycle,4 or
(18-1)
kinetic energy supplied to the rotating ﬂywheel system
net work done (energy depleted) by the rotating ﬂywheel system
W =
where  KE =
d1KE2 = d1W2
vave
Fluctuating Duty Cycles, Energy Management, and Flywheel Inertia 799

Td
T
TL
Torque
Angular displacement
1 cycle
(d)2
(d)1
Load torque exceeds
driver torque; system
is slowing down
1
4
3
2
1
Driver torque exceeds load torque;
system is speeding up
Figure 18.2
Superposed curves of torque versus 
angular displacement for a machine in
which both the drive torque, Td, and the
load torque, Tl, ﬂuctuate, as shown in
Figure 18.1.
2Assuming no losses due to friction, windage, etc.
3Sometimes called control volume.
4Otherwise, the average rotational velocity of the system would either increase or decrease over time.
Shaft
Shaft
Flywheel
d(KE)
d(W)
d(W)
Figure 18.3
Isolated shaft-ﬂywheel
system. (See also Figure
18.1.)

800
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
For a rotating mass having a mass moment of inertia J and angular velocity , it is
well known5 that
(18-2)
hence
(18-3)
Also, presuming a rigid shaft subjected to a net torque equal to 
,
(18-4)
Combining (18-1), (18-3), and (18-4),
(18-5)
Upon integration, (18-5) becomes
(18-6)
by deﬁnition, the maximum change in kinetic energy of the shaft- 
ﬂywheel system due to speed ﬂuctuation between minimum and 
maximum values
From (18-6) then,
(18-7)
Factoring the left side
(18-8)
but
(18-9)
so (18-8) may be rewritten as
(18-10)
where 
is the peak-to-peak ﬂuctuation in angular velocity during each oper-
ational cycle.
It is common practice to deﬁne a coefﬁcient of speed ﬂuctuation, 
, as
(18-11)
Cf K vmax - vmin
vave
Cf
1vmax - vmin2
Jvave1vmax - vmin2 = Umax
avmax + vmin
2
b = vave
Javmax + vmin
2
b1vmax - vmin2 = Umax
12 J1v2
max - v2
min2 = Umax
where  Umax =
12 J
L
v2
max
v2
min
d1v22 =
L
uvmax
uvmin
1Tl - Td2du K Umax
12 Jd1v22 = 1Tl - Td2du
dW = 1Tl - Td2du
1Tl - Td2
d1KE2 = 12 Jd1v22
KE = 12 Jv2
v
5See any good undergraduate textbook on dynamics (e.g., ref. 1.)

Using (18-11), (18-10) may be rewritten as
(18-12)
Since 
is known, and 
can be determined for any particular system, the required
mass moment of inertia, 
, may be calculated if the coefﬁcient of speed ﬂuctuation for
proper system operation is known.6 A few acceptable experience-based values for 
are
given in Table 18.1. Expressions for mass moments of inertia as functions of size and
shape are included in Appendix Table A.2 for several solid bodies.
To determine 
for any given system, it is ﬁrst necessary to construct and superpose
and load torque curves as a function of angular displacement over one full
operational cycle (see Figure 18.2). Next, the values of corresponding to maximum and
minimum values of angular velocity during the cycle, 
and 
, respectively, must be
identiﬁed. In some cases, this may require the preparation of a plot of angular velocity 
versus angular displacement . 
is then found as the net area enclosed within the
torque-displacement diagram7 between 
and 
. Depending upon the circumstances,
the net area, 
, may be found using either analytical, numerical, or graphical methods.
To summarize, an appropriate ﬂywheel conﬁguration may be determined for any
given application by completing the following steps:
1.
Plot 
versus for one full operational cycle of the machine.
2.
Superpose a plot of 
versus for the same operational cycle.
u
Td
u
Tl
Umax
uvmin
uvmax
Umax
u
v
uvmin
uvmax
u
u
driver torque
Umax
Cf
Jreq’d
Umax
vave
Jv2
aveCf = Umax
Fluctuating Duty Cycles, Energy Management, and Flywheel Inertia 801
6It is well to keep in mind that in actual systems there may be several rotating masses operating at different
speeds but connected through gears or other speed changers. The contribution of an ith connected rotating
mass, rotating at angular velocity 
, is proportional to the square of the angular velocity ratio with respect to
the operational velocity. Thus an equivalent mass moment of inertia, referred to 
, may be calculated for any
rotating mass in the system as 
7T vresus 
diagram. 
u
Jei = Ji1vi>vop22.
vop
vi
TABLE 18.1 Experience-Based Coefﬁcients of Speed
Fluctuation, Cf, for Successful Equipment
Performance1
Required Level of Speed Uniformity
Very uniform
Gyroscopic control systems
0.003
Hard disk drives
Uniform
AC electrical generators
0.003–0.012
Spinning machinery
Some ﬂuctuation acceptable
Machine tools
0.012–0.05
Compressors, pumps
Moderate ﬂuctuation acceptable
Excavators
0.05–0.2
Concrete mixers
Larger ﬂuctuations acceptable
Crushers
0.2
Punch presses
1See refs. 2 and 3.
7
…
Cf

3.
Plot 
versus .
4.
Identify the locations of 
and 
.
5.
Find 
.
6.
Find 
to give the desired 
.
7.
For the selected material and desired geometrical conﬁguration, ﬁnd the required ﬂy-
wheel dimensions.
Cf
Jreq’d
Umax
uvmin
uvmax
u
v
802
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
8This is probably not a very good assumption, but it yields a “conservative” initial value for 
.
Jreq’d
Tpp
Tmot
T

min
max
Torque, ft-lb
Displacement, rad
(One cycle)
4
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10,000

4

4

4
5
2
Figure E18.1A
Punch press torque and drive motor
torque plotted versus angular displace-
ment over one complete cycle of opera-
tion of the rotating system.
Example 18.1 Flywheel Design for Speed Control
A punch press is to be driven by a constant-torque electric motor that operates at 1200 rpm.
It is desired to install a ﬂywheel in the rotating system to control speed ﬂuctuations within
acceptable bounds. It is being proposed to cut a ﬂywheel disk from a 2-inch-thick steel
plate.
To good approximation, the punch press torque steps from 0 to 10,000 ft-lb, remain-
ing constant for 45, drops back to zero for the next 45, steps up to 6000 ft-lb for the next
45, then drops back to zero for the remainder of the cycle.
You are asked to estimate the ﬂywheel diameter required for satisfactory punch press
operation. For this initial estimate, assume there are no other signiﬁcant rotating masses in
the system.8
Solution
Following the steps outlined in 18.2, the ﬂywheel diameter requirement may be estimated
as follows:
1.
Plot punch press torque, 
, as speciﬁed, versus angular displacement, , as shown in
Figure E18.1A.
2.
Plot the constant drive motor torque, 
, in Figure E18.1A. To ﬁnd the drive motor
torque required for steady-state operation of the system, it may be noted that the total
energy supplied by the motor, per cycle, must equal the total energy consumed by the
punch press per cycle. Thus, for equilibrium,
L1cycle
Tppdu =
L1cycle
Tmot du
Tmot
u
Tpp

From the speciﬁed punch press torque-displacement cycle, and the knowledge that the
motor torque curve has the constant value 
, we may write this as9
so the required motor torque is
3.
Without actually knowing the magnitudes of maximum and minimum angular ve-
locities, 
and 
, their location in the cycle as a function of angular displace-
ment may be deduced from Figure E18.1A, and plotted as shown in Figure E18.1B.
Logically, the maximum angular velocity occurs after the constant motor torque has
acted continuously over the long displacement segment of 
radians. When the
punch press torque, 
, then jumps to 10,000 ft-lb, the system immediately starts to
slow, and continues to slow until 
drops back to zero. The angular velocity then
builds again, but only for a displacement segment of 
radians. The second punch
press torque-spike then slows the system again, this time to its minimum value in the
cycle.
4.
For the cycle deﬁned in Figure E18.1B, the maximum angular velocity, 
, occurs
at 
radians, and the minimum angular velocity, 
, at 
radians, as
indicated.
5.
The maximum change in kinetic energy stored in the ﬂywheel, 
, may be calcu-
lated from (18-6), based on Figure E18.1A, as
6.
From Table 18.1, an acceptable coefﬁcient of speed ﬂuctuation for punch press appli-
cations is about
Cf = 0.2
= 7854 ft-lb 194,248 in-lb2
Umax = 110,000 - 20002p
4 + 10 - 20002p
4 + 16000 - 20002p
4
Umax
u = 3p>4
vmin
u = 0
vmax
p>4
Tpp
Tpp
5p>4
u
vmin
vmax
Tmot = 16,000p
14212p2 = 2000 ft-lb
110,0002p
4 + 160002p
4 = Tmot12p2
Tmot
Fluctuating Duty Cycles, Energy Management, and Flywheel Inertia 803
min
max
max
(One cycle)
4

4

4

4
5
2
Angular velocity , rad/sec
, rad
Figure E18.1B
Angular velocitty of the rotating system plot-
ted as a function of angular displacement over
one complete cycle of operation. Also see
Figure E18.1A.
9For this case, the integrals may be readily evaluated from Figure E18.1A by summing well-deﬁned rectangular
areas.

Using (18-12),
7.
From Appendix Table A.2, case 2,
Since the material is specified to be steel (w  0.283 lb/in3) and the specified
thickness is b  2 inches, the required outer radius of the solid-disk flywheel is
The recommendation then is to use a solid-disk ﬂywheel made of steel, with a diameter of
21.3 inches and thickness of 2 inches, to obtain satisfactory operation. However, another
iteration to include the “ﬂywheel effect” of other rotating masses in the system should
probably be conducted before ﬁnal speciﬁcations are written.
ro =
4
A
2gJ
wpb =
4
A
213862129.82
10.2832p12.02 = 10.67 inches
J = 1
2 mr 2
o = Wr 2
o
2g
=
3w1pr 2
ob24r 2
o
2g
= wpbr 4
o
2g
Jreq’d =
94,248
10.22 c
2p112002
60
d 
2 = 29.8 in-lb-sec2
804
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
10See (16-20), for example.
11However, note the adverse effect of large 
and large J on stress levels, as discussed in 18.6, 18.7, and 18.8.
12See various expressions for J in Table A.2.
13See Figures 18.4(c) and (d).
v
Example 18.1 
Continues
18.3 Types of Flywheels
Since the kinetic energy stored in a rotating mass is given by10
(18-13)
it is clear that if a large capacity for storing kinetic energy is required, the angular veloc-
ity, , should be as large as possible, and the mass moment of inertia of the rotating mass
should also be as large as possible.11
Noting that J is a function of the magnitudes of the mass elements comprising the ﬂy-
wheel and their distances from its axis of rotation, the way to achieve large values of J is
to conﬁgure the rotating ﬂywheel so that as much mass as possible lies as far as possible
from the axis of rotation.12 This suggests a ﬂywheel conﬁguration in which a relatively
heavy circumferential rim is connected by a lightweight structure to a hub secured to the
rotating power transmission shaft of the ﬂywheel system. Historically, in the design and
construction of ﬂywheels for low-performance mechanical systems, these conﬁgurational
guidelines were translated into the well-known spoke-and-rim ﬂywheel conﬁguration, as
shown in Figure 18.4(a). For high-performance rotating systems in current practice (often
rotating at very high angular velocities), it is more common to use uniform-strength ﬂy-
wheel conﬁgurations13 and very-high-strength materials.
Furthermore, the rotating ﬂywheel mass must have an axisymmetric geometry to
avoid unbalanced dynamic forces induced by eccentric mass centers. Rotating unbalanced
v
KE = 1
2Jv2

forces typically induce excessive shaft deﬂections, large-amplitude vibrations, and large
forces on supporting bearings and structure.
Axisymmetric geometries that have been successfully implemented for ﬂywheel appli-
cations, in addition to the spoke-and-rim conﬁguration, include rotating solid cylindrical
disks of constant thickness, “uniformly stressed” solid disks (thickness varies with radius),
and “uniformly stressed” solid disks with rims.14 Some of these conﬁgurations are sketched
in Figure 18.4.
18.4 Potential Failure Modes
By far, the most probable potential failure modes for ﬂywheels and (especially) high-speed
rotors are brittle fracture or ductile rupture. Because efﬁcient design of high-speed rotors
is linked to placement of mass elements at large radii from the axis of rotation in these
axisymmetric structures, very large centrifugal forces may be induced, especially at high
rotational speeds. In turn, the radial and tangential stresses may become very large, giving
rise to the potential for bursting or “exploding” of the rotor into pieces.15 If a burst occurs,
the fragments are typically hurled outward with high velocities because of their high en-
ergy content. No matter what material is used, any ﬂywheel will break up if it is rotated
fast enough. As a practical safety issue, all high-speed rotating systems muse be sur-
rounded by a containment enclosure so that ﬂying shrapnel cannot escape. Spin-testing of
high-speed rotors within their containment enclosures is nearly always performed to de-
termine ﬂywheel burst speeds and deﬁne containment effectiveness.
In addition to fracture or rupture of a high-speed rotor, other possible failure modes
include fretting wear or fretting fatigue at the mounting interface between the ﬂywheel and
its shaft, or fatigue failure of the shaft because of cyclic torsion or imbalance-induced
cyclic bending.
18.5 Flywheel Materials
Low-speed, low-performance ﬂywheels can be made of virtually any material. Spoke-and-
rim ﬂywheels rotating at low speeds have traditionally been made of cast iron to keep the
cost as low as possible. Cast steel may also be used for improved strength properties to
Flywheel Materials 805
14“Uniformly stressed” conﬁgurations cannot be fully achieved in practice because of attachment constraints
where the disk meets the rim and the hub, inducing nonuniform local stresses.
15For example, disk or disk-and-rim ﬂywheels usually burst into 3–6 pieces when they fail.
A
A
B
B
A–A
B–B
(a) Spoke and rim.
(c) Uniformly stressed disk.
(d) Uniformly stressed
disk with rim.
(b) Constant thickness disk.
Figure 18.4
Sketches of various types of ﬂywheels.

allow operation at somewhat higher speeds. For higher-performance applications, wrought
or forged steels or alloy steels permit much higher operating speeds, especially if careful
consideration is given to geometric shape,16 stress concentration,17 and residual stress.18
Steel weldments may be used in some ﬂywheel applications. Recent advances in the use
of geometrically tailored ﬁlamentary composite materials have shown high promise for
ﬁlament-wound ﬂywheels. Glass-epoxy, steel-epoxy, and graphite-epoxy composites all
provide the potential for safe high-speed operation and high energy-storage capacity, if
properly conﬁgured. Other materials, such as aluminum, magnesium, and titanium, may
be utilized in special applications.
18.6 Spoke-and-Rim Flywheels
A spoke-and-rim ﬂywheel, such as the one illustrated in Figure 18.4(a), is an indetermi-
nate elastic structure with elastic coupling between rim, spokes, and hub. If an accurate
analysis is required, a ﬁnite element model should probably be developed. However, ini-
tial approximations may be made by employing appropriate simplifying assumptions.19
These approximations permit the estimation of operational stresses in the rim, the spokes,
and the hub.
Stresses in the rim, which include tangential (hoop) stresses and bending stresses, de-
pend greatly upon whether the spokes are small in cross section and radially ﬂexible (soft
springs) or large in cross section and radially inﬂexible (stiff springs). Radially ﬂexible
spokes provide little constraint to the rotating rim, so tangential stresses dominate,20 and
only small bending stresses are induced by the spoke constraints. Radially stiff spokes pro-
vide signiﬁcant radial constraint to the rim, so centrifugally induced beam-bending
stresses dominate in the rim, and only small tangential stresses are induced by rotation of
the rim mass. The spoke “springs” and the rim “hoop spring” are operationally in paral-
lel.21 Therefore, the magnitude of rim bending stress relative to hoop tensile stress depends
directly upon the relative stiffnesses of the spokes and the rim.
Stresses in the spokes include spoke-axial tensile stresses induced by centrifugal
forces on the rim mass, and spoke bending stresses caused by speed and torque ﬂuctua-
tions. The relative magnitudes of these stresses depend greatly upon whether the spokes
are bending-ﬂexible or bending-stiff compared to the rim bending stiffness.
Hub stresses are usually not calculated directly, but experience suggests that the
hub diameter should be about 2 to 2.5 times the shaft diameter, and the hub length
should be about 1.25 times the shaft diameter to meet typical keyway and key strength
requirements.
Based on the observations just made, various simplifying assumptions may be used to
“bracket” the rim stresses and spoke stresses. For example, it might be assumed that the
spokes are so ﬂexible radially that they exert no constraint; the rim hoop stresses could then
be estimated as hoop stresses in a free ring rotating about its center. Or, it might be assumed
that the spokes are so rigid that the rim cannot expand radially at the spoke-to-rim attach-
ment sites; the rim could then be modeled as a ﬁxed-ﬁxed beam22 in bending, uniformly
loaded by centrifugal forces acting on the rim mass between spokes. In the case of spoke-
axial stresses, it might be assumed that each spoke is centrifugally loaded along its radial
axis by its prorated share of rim mass, with no support from rim hoop stiffness. Spoke bend-
ing stresses might be estimated by using cantilever bending or double-cantilever bending
806
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
16See 6.2.
17See 5.3.
18See 4.9.
19See 6.5.
20See Figure 9.1.
21See Figure 4.19. 
22By symmetry, the rim’s radial cross section cannot rotate at spoke-attachment sites; thus the rim acts as a
ﬁxed-ﬁxed beam between spokes. 

models, depending upon the bending stiffness of the spokes relative to the rim.23 Other sim-
plifying assumptions might be made to accommodate special circumstances.
Stresses in a Rotating Free Ring
For the case of a ﬂywheel rim with little or no spoke constraint, the rim can be modeled as
a radially thin rotating free ring. For a thin ring the rim radial stress is approximately zero,
and the rim hoop stress is the only one that needs to be calculated. Figure 18.5(a) illus-
trates such a ring, and Figure 18.5(b) shows a differential mass element of the ring selected
as a free body. The radial centrifugal force, 
, acting outward on the mass center of the
differential element, is
(18-14)
or
(18-15)
and the tangential (hoop) force, 
, is
(18-16)
mass of differential ring element
mean radius of ring
angular velocity of rotating ring
bt  cross-sectional area of ring
weight density of ring material
rotational speed, rpm
Summing radial forces on the selected differential element,
(18-17)
Fr - 2Fhsin adu
2 b = 0
n =
w =
Ar =
v =
rm =
where  m =
Fh = shAr
Fh
Fr = armduArw
g
b1rm2a 2pn
60 b
2
Fr = mrmv2
Fr
Spoke-and-Rim Flywheels 807
23If the rim is very stiff to bending, and a torque is induced by speed change, a relative angular displacement
between hub and rim will bend each spoke as a combination of two contiguous cantilever beams, one ﬁxed at
the hub end and one ﬁxed at the rim end, with the two joined at their “free” ends. This ogee-shaped continuous
deﬂection curve is here termed double-cantilever bending. On the other hand, if the rim provides little or no
bending resistance, the angular displacement between hub and rim will be resisted by the spoke acting as a 
single cantilever beam ﬁxed at the hub and loaded at its free end by the rim.
rm
(a) Rotating ring.
(b) Free-body ring element.
Fh
Fh
Ar
Ar = bt
Fr
2
d
d
2
d
rm
d

Note: Axial
          dimension = b.
t
Ring element
Figure 18.5
Free ring rotating about its
center.

Substituting (18-15) and (18-16) into (18-17),
(18-18)
Imposing the “small angle” assumption that
(18-19)
and solving (18-18) for the hoop stress 
,
(18-20)
hoop stress, psi
mean rim radius, in
rotational speed, rpm
weight density of rim material, lb/in3
An alternative form of (18-20) may be written as
(18-21)
where 
, the weight per unit circumferential length of the rim, is deﬁned as
(18-22)
Bending Stresses in Flywheel Rim
Centrifugally induced beam-bending rim stresses may be estimated by modeling a section
of the rim betwen two adjacent spokes as a straight beam, ﬁxed at both ends, loaded by a
uniformly distributed centrifugal force, 
, as illustrated in Figure 18.6.
Applying case 9 of Table 4.1, the maximum bending moment, 
, that occurs at the
ﬁxed supports (spoke centerlines) is
(18-23)
Mmax = fc L2
12
Mmax
fc
Wur = wAr
Wur
sh = Wurr 2
mn2
35,200Ar
w =
n =
rm =
where  sh =
sh = wr 2
mn2
35,200
sh
2sin adu
2 b = 2adu
2 b = du
ar 2
mduArw
g
b a2pn
60 b
2
- 2Arshsin adu
2 b = 0
808
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
rm
fc
Ar, Ir, cr
Fixed ends dictated
by symmetry
L = 2rm/ns
Figure 18.6
Simplifying assumptions illustrated for calculat-
ing approximate rim bending stresses.

where the distributed centrifugal force per unit circumferential length may be estimated as
(18-24)
whence (18-23) becomes
(18-25)
and using (4-5), the maximum bending stress at the outer ﬁbers at the spoke centerlines
may be calculated as
(18-26)
Spoke-Axial Tensile Stresses
To estimate spoke-axial tensile stress for stiff spokes, a common simplifying assumption is
to ignore hoop-spring support from the rim and consider each spoke to be radially loaded by
its prorated share of the rim mass, as illustrated in Figure 18.7. A radial force resolution gives
(18-27)
radial centrifugal force component due to rotation of the spoke’s 
assigned rim mass about the ﬂywheel center of rotation
spoke-axial tensile force on each spoke
Based on Figure 18.7, (18-27) may be rewritten as
(18-28)
spoke-axial tensile stress, psi
spoke cross-sectional area, in2
weight density of rim material, lb/in3
mean rim radius, in
angle subtending differential element
angle from spoke axis to differential element
cross-sectional area of rim, in2
rotational speed, rpm
Solving (18-28) for 
gives the spoke-axial tensile stress as
(18-29)
18.7 Disk Flywheels of Constant Thickness
Constant-thickness disk ﬂywheels are often chosen by a designer because they can be
easily cut from plate stock, making them inexpensive. The radial and tangential stresses
generated in a rotating constant-thickness disk are both axisymmetric, making them very
ss =
wr 2
mn2aAr
As
b sin a p
ns
b
17,600
 psi
ss
n =
Ar =
u =
du =
rm =
w =
As =
where  ss =
2
L
p>ns
0
wrmduAr
g
1rm2a 2pn
60 b
2
cosu - ssAs = 0
Fs =
where  Fr =
Fr - Fs = 0
1sb2max = Mmaxcr
Ir
=
wArrmn2L2cr
135,20021122Ir
 psi
Mmax =
wrmn2L2
135,20021122 in-lb
fc = mrmv2
L
= awArLrm
gL
b a 2pn
60 b
2
 lb/in
Disk Flywheels of Constant Thickness 809
rm
Ar
Fr
Fs
As
1
2
=
2
d


ns
ns
Figure 18.7
Simplifying assumptions
illustrated for calculating
approximate spoke-axial
tensile stresses.

similar in character to the radial and tangential stresses in a thick-walled cylinder sub-
jected to internal and/or external pressure.24 The primary difference is that stresses in a
rotating ﬂywheel are induced by centrifugal body forces acting outward on the mass ele-
ments of the disk, while the stresses in a thick-walled cylinder are induced by surface
pressure forces acting on the inner and/or outer cylindrical surfaces.
Just as for thick-walled cylinders, the development of equations for radial and tan-
gential stress distributions in a rotating disk ﬂywheel requires application of the principles
of elasticity theory. These include force-equilibrium concepts, force-displacement rela-
tionships, geometrical compatibility restrictions, and boundary condition speciﬁcations.25
A constant-thickness disk ﬂywheel is sketched in Figure 18.8, showing a small dif-
ferential free-body element within the ﬂywheel mass. All forces acting on the free-body
element are shown. Writing a radial force equilibrium expression for the differential free-
body element
(18-30)
which may be reduced to
(18-31)
radial stress
tangential stress
radial distance to element inner surface
angular velocity of ﬂywheel
weight density of ﬂywheel material
The force-displacement relationships for the differential element shown in Figure 18.9
are26
(18-32)
(18-33)
et = 1
E3st - vsr4
er = 1
E3sr - vst4
w =
v =
r =
st =
where  sr =
1sr - st2dr + rdr + wr 2v2
g
dr = 0
1sr + dsr21t21r + dr2dw - sr1t21rdw2 - 2st1t2drsin dw
2 +
w1t21rdw2dr1r2v2
g
= 0
810
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
24See 9.7.
25See 9.5.
26These are the Hooke’s Law relationships given by (5-15), (5-16) and (5-17), with the axial stress 
equal to
zero since there are no forces in the axial direction.
sz
d
d
d

t
r
r
a
z
b
t(t)dr
t(t)dr
t(t)rd
2
d
2
(r + dr)(t)(r + dr)d
w(t)(rd)dr(r)2
r2
g
dr
Figure 18.8
Constant-thickness disk ﬂy-
wheel rotating at angular 
velocity 
.
V
Figure 18.9
Displacements and 
strains illustrated for a
small differential element
in a constant-thickness
disk ﬂywheel.
u
u +
d
dr
dr
r
u
r

(18-34)
normal strains in the radial, tangential, and axial (thickness) direc-
tions, respectively
Young’s modulus of elasticity
Poisson’s ratio
normal stresses in radial and tangential directions, respectively
If u is deﬁned to be displacement in the radial direction, as sketched in Figure 18.9,
geometrical compatibility may be established for the differential volume element through
the deﬁnition of engineering strain as
(18-35)
and
(18-36)
Finally, the pertinent boundary conditions may be established as
(18-37)
and
(18-38)
Solving Hooke’s Law expression (18-32) and (18-33) simultaneously for stresses 
and 
gives
(18-39)
(18-40)
Next, inserting geometrical compatibility expressions (18-35) and (18-36) into (18-39) and
(18-40) gives
(18-41)
and
(18-42)
inserting (18-41) and (18-42) into equilibrium equation (18-31), the result becomes
(18-43)
d
dr c1
r
d
dr1ur2d = -Ar
st =
E
1 - v2  cvadu
dr b + u
r d
sr =
E
1 - v2 cdu
dr + vau
r b d
st =
E
1 - v23ver + et4
sr =
E
1 - v 2 3er + vet4
st
sr
1sr2r=b = 0
1sr2r=a = 0
et = ¢Lt
Lt
=
1r + u2dw - rdw
rdw
= u
r
er = ¢Lr
Lr
=
c au + 0u
0rdrb - u d
dr
= 0u
0r = du
dr
sr,st =
v =
E =
where  er,et,ez =
ez = 1
E3-v1sr + st24
Disk Flywheels of Constant Thickness 811

where
(18-44)
Integrating (18-43) gives
(18-45)
where 
and 
are constants of integration.
Substituting (18-45) into (18-41) and (18-42)
(18-46)
and
(18-47)
Next, invoking boundary conditions (18-37) and (18-38), the constants  
and 
may be
found by solving (18-46) and (18-47) simultaneously to give
(18-48)
and
(18-49)
Finally, putting these expressions back into (18-46) and (18-47) gives
(18-50)
and
(18-51)
Noting in these expressions that
(18-52)
and
(18-53)
a2 + b2
r 2
7 0
a1 + 3v
3 + v b 6 1
st = c
13 + v2wv2
8g
d ca2 + b2 - a1 + 3v
3 + v br 2 + a2b2
r 2 d
sr = c
13 + v2wv2
8g
d ca2 + b2 - r 2 - a2b2
r 2 d
C2 =
13 + v2
811 + v21A21a2b22
C1 =
13 + v2
811 + v21A21a2 + b22
C2
C1
st =
E
1 - v2 cva -3Ar 2
8
+ C1 - C2
r 2 b + 1
r a -Ar 3
8
+ C1r + C2
r b d
sr =
E
1 - v2 c -3Ar 2
8
+ C1 - C2
r 2 + v
r a -Ar 3
8
+ C1r + C2
r b d
C2
C1
du
dr = -3Ar 2
8
+ C1 - C2
r 2
A K
wv211 - v22
Eg
812
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors

it may be deduced that for all operating conditions
(18-54)
Further, 
reaches its maximum value where r is a minimum, so
(18-55)
It may also be noted that
(18-56)
To calculate 
r  a may be substituted into (18-51) to give
(18-57)
and, because 
, the state of stress is uniaxial.
sr =  0
1st2max = wv2
4g 313 + v2b2 + 11 - v2a24
1st2max,
sr = 0  at  r = a
1st2max occurs at r = a
st
st 7 sr
Disk Flywheels of Constant Thickness 813
Example 18.2 Constant-Thickness Disk Flywheel Design
Exploratory marketing has led to a concept proposal for a new machine to crush oyster
shells, which are fed to chickens as a dietary supplement for improving eggshell strength to
minimize eggshell breakage. The proposed crushing machine has an estimated torque ver-
sus angular displacement curve as shown in Figure E18.2, and is to be driven by a constant-
torque electric motor at a rotational speed of 3450 rpm. It is being proposed to use a
constant-thickness disk ﬂywheel to limit speed ﬂuctuation to an acceptable range. As an ini-
tial conﬁguration, it is being proposed to cut the ﬂywheel from a 30-mm thick steel plate
annealed low-carbon steel 
.
a.
Assuming that there are no other signiﬁcant rotating masses in the system,27 you are
asked to estimate the ﬂywheel diameter for satisfactory crusher operation. A mount-
ing hole at the center of the disk is estimated to be 50 mm in diameter.
b.
A minimum safety factor of 4 based on the governing failure mode is being proposed
by engineering management. Would the constant-thickness disk ﬂywheel resulting
from (a) meet this proposed safety criterion? 
1Syp = 300 MPa, w = 76.81 kN/m32
27This is probably not a very good assumption, but it provides a “conservatrive” initial value for 
.
Jreq’d
Torque, kN-m
Angular Displacement, rad
2
2
2
3
5
2


12
24
36
Figure E18.2
Crusher torque versus angular displacement of the
rotating system.

Solution
a.
Since, for each cycle, the energy supplied by the driver motor must equal the total 
energy consumed by the crusher, for steady-state operation
Using Figure E19.2, this equation may be evaluated for motor torque as
or
Using methods illustrated in Example 18.1, the maximum and minimum angular
velocities during each operating cycle occur at
and
The maximum change in kinetic energy between 
and , 
, may be cal-
culated by plotting 
on Figure E18.2, from which
Selecting a value of 
from Table 18.1 (18-13) gives
From Appendix Table A.2, case 2,
whence
or
b.
For the proposed ﬂywheel disk based on (18-54), (18-55), and (18-56), the state of stress
in uniaxial (tangential component only) and the critical point is at the edge of the inner
hole, where 
. At this location the only stress is28 from (19-57),
(st)max = (76810)(361)2
4(9.81)
c(3 + 0.3)(0.25)2 + (1 - 0.3)(0.025)2 d = 52.7 MPa
ri = 0.05>2 = 0.025 m
(do)req’d = 0.5 m = 500 mm
(ro)req’d = 4
A
2Jreq’dg
wpt
= 4
A
291.44)(9.81)
(76 810)p(0.030) = 0.250 m
J = 1
2 mr 2
o = 1
2 wVr 2
o = 1
2 awtr 2
o
g
br 2
o = wtr 4
o
2g
Jreq’d =
Umax
Cf v2
ave
=
37700
(0.2)c2p(3450)
60
d
2 = 1.44 N-m-sec2
Cf = 0.2
Umax =
L
p
p/2
(Tcrush - Tmot)du = (36 - 12)p
2 = 37.7 kN-m
Tmot
Umax
p
p>2
uv min = p rad
uv max = p>2 rad
Tmot = 24p
2p = 12 kN-m (constant)
2pTmot = 2c12(p>2)
2
d + 36(p>2) = 24p kN-m
L1cycle
Tmot du =
L1cycle
Tcrush du
814
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
28Assuming no stress concentration effects from mounting constraints.
Example 18.2 
Continues

Since yielding is the probable failure mode, the safety factor would be
This is more than adequate to meet the speciﬁed minimum safety factor.
nyp =
Syp
(st)max
= 300
52.7 = 5.7
Disk Flywheels of Uniform Strength 815
18.8 Disk Flywheels of Uniform Strength
The radial and tangential stresses in a constant-thickness disk ﬂywheel vary as a function
of radius, as indicated by (18-50) and (18-51). As a result, some of the material in the ﬂy-
wheel operates efﬁciently at the speciﬁed design stress, but much of the ﬂywheel material
operates at lower stresses, resulting in inefﬁcient use of the lightly stressed material.29 If it
is desired to conﬁgure a ﬂywheel that utilizes material more efﬁciently, so that stress
everywhere is nearly the same, the condition to be met is
(18-58)
When the condition of (18-58) is met, the ﬂywheel is usually called a ﬂywheel of con-
stant strength or uniform strength. To satisfy (18-58) it is necessary to specify disk thick-
ness z as a function of radius r, so that the result is uniform stress throughout, then invoke
the principles of elasticity theory30 to determine the resulting ﬂywheel thickness proﬁle.
Because of increased complexity and cost, constant-strength proﬁles are usually restricted
to high-performance, high-speed rotors. Figure 18.10 illustrates a differential free-body
volume element from a constant-strength ﬂywheel.31 A radial force resolution on the free-
body element in Figure 18.10 gives
(18-59)
1sr + dsr231r + dr2dw1z + dz24 - sr3rdw1z24 + cw
gz1rdw2drd rv2 - 2st dr1z2sin dw
2 = 0
sr = st K s  1constant2
29See Chapter 6.
30See 18.7.
31Compare with Figure 18.8 for a constant-thickness ﬂywheel. 
ro
r
dr
d
zo
z
z + dz
d

r
tdr(z)
tdr(z)
r[rd(z)]
2
dz
2
z
2
z
2
(r + dr)[(r + dr)d(z + dz)]
w z(rd)dr r2
g
dr
Figure 18.10
Constant-strength disk ﬂywheel (high-
speed rotor) operating at angular 
velocity 
.
V

Imposing condition (18-58), and using the small angle approximation, (18-59) reduces to
(18-60)
or
(18-61)
If the disk thickness 
is deﬁned to be 
at the outer radius, , (18-61) may be inte-
grated to give
(18-62)
Thus for a constant-strength high-speed rotor, the thickness z is an exponential function of
radius between the limits
(18-63)
and disk thickness at the center of rotation, 
, given by
(18-64)
It should also be noted that no center hole can be used for mounting a constant-strength
disk ﬂywheel without destroying the uniform stress pattern.32
18.9 Uniform-Strength Disk Flywheel with a Rim
In certain applications it may be desired to increase the polar mass moment of inertia of a
constant-strength ﬂywheel by adding a rim attached at outer disk radius 
, as illustrated
in Figure 18.11. Assuming the rim to be radially thin 
, and noting that at opera-
tional angular velocity 
the rim exerts a distributed force of q lb/in outwardly around the
ﬂywheel web33 at , the uniform-strength condition requires that
(18-65)
A radial force resolution on the free-body element of the rim, shown in Figure 18.11,
gives
(18-66)
Utilizing (18-65), this may be rewritten as
(18-67)
wr 2
o Arimv2
g
- sh-rim Arim - sozoro = 0
-qrodw - 2sh-rim Arimsin adw
2 b + awArimrodw
g
brov2 = 0
s = so = q
zo
  at  r = ro
ro
v
1ro W t2
ro
zmax = zr=0 = zoe expcwv2r 2
o
2sg d
zmax
zr=ro = zo
z = zo e exp c awv2
2sg b1r2
o - r22d
ro
zo
z1r2
dz
z = - awv2
sg brdr
sdz + awzv2
g
brdr = 0
816
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
32For conﬁguring variable-thickness ﬂywheel proﬁles that do include a central hole, approximate methods are
usually employed as discussed in ref. 4, or ﬁnite element programs may be utilized.
33Likewise, the ﬂywheel exerts an equal and opposite distributed force q inwardly on the rim.

Next, it may be noted that geometrical compatibility requires that at radius 
the change
in rim radius, 
, must be equal to the change in disk radius, 
. Thus
(18-68)
Deﬁning C as circumference,
(18-69)
whence
(18-70)
For the rim,34 utilizing Hooke’s Law, the circumferential strain is
(18-71)
so, at radius ,
(18-72)
For the disk,35 utilizing Hooke’s Law, the circumferential strain is
(18-73)
so
(18-74)
1¢r2disk = ¢C
2p =
C11 - v2s
2pE
=
11 - v2s
E
ro
¢C
C
K eC = 1
E1s - vs2
1¢r2rim = ¢C
2p = Csh-rim
2pE
= sh-rim
E
ro
ro
¢C
C
K eC = sh-rim
E
¢r = ¢C
2p
r = C
2p
1¢r2rim = 1¢r2disk
1¢r2disk
1¢r2rim
ro
Uniform-Strength Disk Flywheel with a Rim 817
ro
ro
t
zo
Arim
d

d
2
wArim ro d
h – rimArim
ro2
g
q
q
q
b
Figure 18.11
Constant-strength disk ﬂywheel
with a rim.
34Since the rim is assumed to be thin, the tangential hoop stress, 
, is uniaxial.
35The disk is subjected to a biaxial state of stress in which 
.
sr = st = s
sh-rim

Combining (18-65), (18-72), and (18-74) with (18-68) gives, at 
,
(18-75)
so
(18-76)
and (18-67) may be rewritten as
(18-77)
Solving for web thickness 
at the rim-web juncture radius, ,
(18-78)
The ﬂywheel proﬁle therefore may be deﬁned, for a constant-strength rotor with a rim,
by combining (18-78) and (18-62) to give
(18-79)
z = cwr 2
ov2
gso
- 11 - v2d Arim
ro
e expc wv2
2sog d1r 2
o - r 22
zo = cwr 2
ov2
gso
- 11 - v2d Arim
ro
ro
zo
wr 2
o Arimv2
g
- 11 - v2so Arim - sozoro = 0
sh-rim =
11 - v2q
zo
= 11 - v2so
ash-rim
E
bro =
11 - v2s
E
ro =
11 - v2q
Ezo
ro
r = ro
818
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
36See Table 3.3.
Example 18.3 Constant-Strength Flywheel with a Rim
In a high-speed rotor application, the nominal rotational speed of the rotor is to be n 
12,500 rpm. It has been decided to investigate the feasibility of using a constant-strength
ﬂywheel with a rim to provide the required polar mass moment of inertia, already esti-
mated to be about 
 11.5 in-lb-sec2. As a ﬁrst approximation, engineering manage-
ment has authorized the (conservative) assumption that the rim provides all of 
and
the assumption that the radial rim thickness, t, should be about 10 percent of the mean rim
radius 
. The material being proposed is ultra-high-strength AISI 4340 steel, heat treated
to have 
 287,000 psi and 
 270,000 psi.36 A safety factor of 2 is desired, based on
yielding as the probable failure mode. For this ﬁrst approximation, it is suggested that
stress concentration effects be ignored. Because of running-clearance requirements, sur-
rounding components, and the need for a safety shield around the rotor in case of explo-
sive failure, it is desired that the outer rim radius be limited to about 11.0 inches.
Determine a uniform-strength geometry that should satisfy these requirements, and sketch
the proposed rotor proﬁle.
Solution
For the selected material, with 
 270,000 psi and a prescribed design safety factor of
 2, the design stress becomes
sd =
syp
nd
= 270,000
2
= 135,000 psi
nd
Syp
Syp
Su
rm
Jreq’d
Jreq’d

Since the available space envelope limits the outer rim radius, 
, to 11.0 inches, and
assuming
the maximum value of 
may be estimated from
as
Using case 4 of Appendix Table A.2, for 
 10.0 inches,
Setting 
equal to 
,
and solving for rim width b,
Summarizing, the proposed rim would have an inner radius37 of
 10.0 inches, a
radial thickness  1.0 inch, and an axial width 
 2.5 inches.
Next, using (18-78), the web thickness 
at the rim-web juncture radius 
becomes
From a practical standpoint, such a thin web at the point of attachment with the rim
may pose serious manufacturing problems. For this ﬁrst iteration, therefore, a web thick-
ness at 
will arbitrarily be speciﬁed to be
and a generous blend radius between web and rim will also be suggested.
Using (18-79) and z0, the web proﬁle may be deﬁned by
z = 0.188e expJ P
10.2832a
2p112,5002
60
b
2
3861221135,0002
Q1102 - r 22K = 0.188e0.0011100-r 22
zo = 0.188 inch
ro
zo = J
10.2832110.022a
2p112,5002
60
b
2
3861135,0002
- 11 - 0.32K 
11.0212.52
10
= 0.06 inch
ro
zo
b
t
ro
b = 11.5
4.61 = 2.5 inches
Jro=10 = 4.61b = Jreq’d = 11.5
Jreq’d
Jro=10
Jro=10 = mr 2
o = 2ptbwr 3
o
g
=
2p11.02b10.2832110.023
386
= 4.61b in-lb-sec2
ro
1ro2max = 11.0
1.1 = 10.0 inches
ro + t = 1.1ro = 11.0 inches
ro
t = 0.1ro
rrim-outer
Uniform-Strength Disk Flywheel with a Rim 819
37Because the rim is radially “thin,” the mean radius and inner radius may be assumed to be the same.

As illustrated in the sketch of Figure E18.3, for this particular case the web thickness
variation is small. Thus a straight-sided tapered web should probably be investigated, or
perhaps a web of constant thickness should be considered.
820
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
b = 2.5 in.
t = 1.0 in.
ro = 10 in.
tr = 0 = 0.208 in.
tr = 10 = 0.188 in.
Figure E18.3
Sketch of proposed proﬁle for con-
stant-strength rotor with a rim.
38See Chapter 8.
39See 18.8.
40See Figure 5.12.
41Also see Figure 8.10.
42One ring is internaly tapered and the other ring is externally tapered. This provides a cylindrical interface
with both shaft and ﬂywheel.
Example 18.3 
Continues
18.10 Flywheel-to-Shaft Connections
Like gears, pulleys, sprockets, or any other rotating component, ﬂywheels must be
mounted on rotating power transmission shafts accurately and securely, and with a mini-
mum of stress concentration at geometrical discontinuities.38 In fact, ﬂywheel-to-shaft
connections are typically more critical than for other shaft-mounted components because
rotational speeds are often very high for ﬂywheels. Also, constant-strength ﬂywheel pro-
ﬁles are based on the assumption that no center hole exists.39 Mounting is made very dif-
ﬁcult if no center hole is allowed. Finite element modeling is often necessary for
optimization of the hub and hub-to-web transition geometry.
Several conﬁgurations for mounting a ﬂywheel to a shaft are sketched in Figure 18.12.
The simplest conﬁguration, shown in Figure 18.12(a), utilizes an interference ﬁt between
the shaft and center hole of the constant-thickness ﬂywheel. This conﬁguration, however,
induces signiﬁcant stress concentration40 at the critical point (c.p.), and may make assem-
bly difﬁcult if the ﬂywheel must be pressed onto the shaft over a long distance. The use
of a raised mounting pad with a generous blend radius, as shown in Figure 18.2(b), both
reduces stress concentration and eliminates the need to press the ﬂywheel over long dis-
tances. A similar concept involves the addition of a locating shoulder at the end of the
mounting pad for proper axial placement of the ﬂywheel.
In some cases a tapered connection may be used, such as the one sketched in Figure
18.12(c). Tightening the retaining nut wedges the conical surfaces together to produce
highly accurate concentricity of the ﬂywheel and shaft, and also provides high transfer
torque capacity between them.41 An alternative tapered connection is illustrated in Figure
18.12(d), where two matching oppositely tapered42 concentric rings are nested as shown.

Because of the taper, the rings deform radially when compressed axially, locking every-
thing in place.
To avoid the penetration of a constant-strength ﬂywheel by a center hole, the alterna-
tive mounting conﬁguration shown in Figure 18.12(e) has sometimes been used. Careful
attention must be directed toward potential stress concentration sites if the conﬁguration is
adopted. In other cases the uniform stress pattern of a constant-strength ﬂywheel may be
adequately approximated by the use of an appropriately designed hub surrounding the cen-
ter hole as sketched in Figure 18.12(f). 
Problems 821
c.p.
(a) Straight press fit.
(d) Tapered-ring connection.
(c) Tapered connection.
(e) Nonpentrating
connection.
( f ) Reinforcing-hub press
fit on raised pad.
(b) Press fit on raised pad.
Raised
mounting
pad
Blend
radius
Tapered
outer
ring
Tapered
inner
ring
Locating
shoulder
Taper
Retention
screws
Reinforcing
hub
Figure 18.12
Various ways of securing ﬂy-
wheels to supporting shafts.
18-1. A deep-drawing press is estimated to have the load
torque versus angular-displacement characteristics shown in
Figure P18.1. The  machine is to be driven by a constant-torque
electric motor at 3600 rpm. The total change in angular veloc-
ity from its maximum value to its minimum value must be con-
trolled to within 
3 percent of the average angular velocity of
the drive.
a. Compute and sketch the motor input torque versus an-
gular displacement curve.
b. Sketch a curve of angular velocity (qualitative) versus
angular displacement (quantitative).
c. On the torque versus angular displacement curve, care-
fully locate angular displacement values corresponding to
maximum and minimum angular velocity.
d. Calculate 
.
e. Calculate the required mass moment of inertia for a
flywheel that would properly control speed fluctuation
to within
3 percent of average angular velocity, as
specified.
;
Umax
;
18-2. A hammermill has the load torque versus angular dis-
placement curve shown in Figure P18.2, and is to be driven by
a constant-torque electric motor at 3450 rpm. A ﬂywheel is to
be used to provide proper control of the speed ﬂuctuation.
Problems
Torque, ft-lb
1 cycle
0

2
3
4
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
, radius
Tload
Figure P18.1
Torque versus angular displacement curve for a deep-
drawing press.

a. Compute and plot the motor input torque versus angu-
lar displacement.
b. Sketch angular velocity (qualitative) of the shaft-ﬂy-
wheel system as a function of angular displacement (qual-
itative). Speciﬁcally, note locations of maximum and
minimum angular velocity on the torque versus angular
displacement curve.
c. Calculate
d. Calculate the mass moment of inertia required for the
ﬂywheel to properly control the speed ﬂuctuation.
18-3. A natural gas engine is to be used to drive an irrigation
pump that must be operated within
2 percent of its nominal
operating speed of 1000 rpm. The engine torque versus angu-
lar displacement curve is the sawtooth 
curve shown in
Figure P18.3. The pump torque verse angular displacement
curve is the stepped 
curve shown. It is desired to use a
solid-steel ﬂywheel of 10-inch radius to obtain the desired
speed control.
Tpump
Tengine
;
Umax
822
Chapter 18 / Flywheels and High-Speed Rotors
a. Sketch the angular velocity (qualitative) of the ﬂywheel
system as a function of angular displacement (quantita-
tive), and identify points of maximum and minimum an-
gular velocity on the torque versus angular displacement
curve.
b. Calculate 
.
c. Calculate the mass moment of inertia of the ﬂywheel
that would be required to properly control the speed.
d. Of what thickness should the ﬂywheel be made?
18-4. A spoke-and-rim flywheel of the type shown in Figure
18.4 (a) is made of steel, and each of the six spokes may be
regarded as very stiff members. The mean diameter of the fly-
wheel rim is 970 mm. The rim cross section is rectangular,
100 mm in the radial dimension and 50 mm in the axial di-
mension. The flywheel rotates counterclockwise at a speed of
2800 rpm.
a. Calculate your best estimate of the maximum bending
stress generated in the rim.
b. At what critical sections in the rim would this maxi-
mum bending stress occur?
18-5. A spoke-and-rim ﬂywheel of the type shown in Figure
18.4(a) has a mean rim diameter of 5 ft and rotates at 300 rpm.
The rim cross section is 8 inches by 8 inches. During the duty
cycle, the ﬂywheel delivers energy at a constant rate over 
rev-
olution, during which time the ﬂywheel speed drops 10 percent.
There are six spokes of elliptical cross section, with major axis
twice the minor axis. The major axes of the elliptical spokes are
parallel to the circumferential direction. The cast-iron material
weighs 280 lb/ft3 and has a design-allowable stress of 3000 psi.
a. Determine the required dimensions of the spoke cross
section.
b. Estimate the hoop stress in the rim.
c. Estimate the bending stress in the rim.
d. Dimension the hub if a 1020 steel shaft is used and is
sized only on the basis of transmitted torque.
18-6. A disk ﬂywheel has a 600-mm outside diameter, 75-mm
axial thickness, and is mounted on a 60-mm-diameter shaft.
The ﬂywheel is made of ultra-high-strength 4340 steel (see Ta-
bles 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5). The ﬂywheel rotates at a speed of 10,000
rpm in a high-temperature chamber operating at a constant tem-
perature of 425C. Calculate the existing safety factor for this
ﬂywheel, based on yielding as the governing failure mode.
18-7. A disk-type ﬂywheel, to be used in a punch press appli-
cation with 
 0.04, is to be cut from a 1.50-inch-thick steel
plate. The ﬂywheel disk must have a central hole of 1.0-inch
radius, and its mass moment of inertial must be 50 in-lb-sec2.
a. What would be the maximum stress in the disk at 3600
rpm?
b. Where would this stress occur in the disk?
c. Would the state of stress at this critical point be multi-
axial or uniaxial? Why?
Cf
14
Umax
Torque, kN-m
1 cycle

Angular
displacement,
rad
0
2
0
4
8
12
16
20

3
2
2
Figure P18.2
Torque versus angular displacement curve for a hammer-
mill.
1 cycle
0

2
3
4
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
, rad
Tpump
Tengine
Torque, ft-lb
Figure P18.3
Torque versus angular displacement curve for an irriga-
tion pump.

Problems 823
d. Would low-carbon steel with a yield strength of 40,000
psi be an acceptable material for this application?
18-8. A steel disk-type ﬂywheel, to be used in a V-belt test
stand operating at 3000 rpm, must have a coefﬁcient of speed
ﬂuctuation of 
. The ﬂywheel has been analyzed in a
preliminary way and it is proposed to use a constant-thickness
disk, 75 mm thick, with a central hole of 50 mm radius and
an outer radius of 250 mm. Further, it is desired to drill one
small hole through the disk at a radius of 200 mm, as shown in
Figure P18.8.
Cf = 0.06
Hint: J =
wpt1r 4
o - r 4
i 2
2g
a. At the location of the small hole, neglect stress concen-
tration factors, and determine the magnitude of the tangen-
tial and radial stresses and identify the stress as uniaxial or
multiaxial and explain your answer.
b. At the location of the small hole, take into account the
stress concentration factors, and approximate the magni-
tude of the tangential and radial stresses.
c. Would the state of stress at this location (
be uniaxial or multiaxial? Why?
d. At the location of the small hole, not neglecting stress
concentration, what would be a rough approximation of
the magnitude of tangential and radial stress components
at the edge of the small hole? (Hint: See Figure 5.9)
18-9. A proposed constant-strength ﬂywheel is to be 1.00 inch
in axial thickness at the center of rotation, and 0.10 inch thick
at its outer radius, which is 15.00 inches. If the material is AM
350 stainless steel, and the ﬂywheel is operating in a 400 F
ambient air environment, estimate the rotational speed in rpm
at which yielding should initiate.
18-10. A constant-strength steel ﬂywheel with a rim is being
considered for an application in which the allowable stress of
the ﬂywheel material is 135 MPa, the outer radius of the disk is
300 mm, the rim loading is 780 kN per meter of circumference,
and the ﬂywheel rotates at 6000 rpm. Calculate the thickness of
the ﬂywheel web at radii of 0, 75, 150, 225, and 300 mm, and
sketch the proﬁle of the web cross section.
°
r = 200 mm
Small hole
50 mm
rad
250 mm rad
N = 3000 rpm
200 mm
75 mm
Figure P18.8
Disk ﬂywheel with a small axial hole drilled through the
disk at a radius of 8 inches.

Cranks and Crankshafts
Chapter 19
19.1 Uses and Characteristics of Crankshafts
In applications where the functional design objective is to conceive a mechanism that can
transform rotary motion into rectilinear motion, or the reverse, the slider-crank mechanism,1
sketched in Figure 19.1(a), is a frequent choice. When considering the kinematics2 of a
slider-crank mechanism, or any other mechanism, it is usual to ﬁrst establish theoretical
full-cycle motion capability. This is done by proposing the types and locations of the joints,
and the lengths of all the links. After establishing theoretical full-cycle motion capability
for a proposed design conﬁguration, it is very important to follow up by examining the
potential for topological interference between and among the links in an operating mecha-
nism. Topological interference, which is related to the ability of a rotating link to complete
a full cycle of motion without interference, is a fundamental property of a linkage conﬁgu-
ration, and cannot be avoided by simply reshaping the links. It is based on the physical fact
that links cannot pass through each other. It becomes important, therefore, for a designer to
investigate the three-dimensional consequences of topological interference, even for planar
824
1See, for example, ref. 1 or ref. 2.
2Kinematics is the study of positions, displacements, velocities, and accelerations of points, and the angular
positions, angular displacements, angular velocities, and angular accelerations of solid bodies.
Crank (crankshaft)
Connecting
rod bearing
Connecting link (connecting rod)


Slider (piston)
(a) Kinematic depiction.
(b) Physical depiction.
Main bearing
Crank
Connecting rod
Counterweight
Piston
Frame
Frame
Wrist-pin bearing
Figure 19.1
Kinematic and physical representations of a slider-crank mechanism.

motion mechanisms. Figure 19.1(b) illustrates a three-dimensional embodiment of the pla-
nar slider-crank device sketched in Figure 19.1(a) that avoids topological interference.
Concentrating on the link called the crank, or crankshaft, as depicted in Figure 19.1,
the following discussion highlights a useful design procedure for conﬁguring a successful
crankshaft. Although textbooks rarely examine the detailed design of a crankshaft, this
topic represents an excellent opportunity to integrate virtually all of the basic concepts pre-
sented in this text, including failure prevention principles, material selection, safety factor
selection, geometry determination, manufacturing aspects, and assembly requirements. A
discussion of crankshaft design is therefore included here.
19.2 Types of Crankshafts
Basically, crankshafts may be divided into two types: side cranks (overhung cranks) and
center cranks (straddle-mounted cranks). A side crank variation called a disk crank is
sometimes used, especially when the required crank radius, or “throw,” is small. These
variations are all sketched in Figure 19.2.
The advantages of a side crank conﬁguration include geometric simplicity, relative ease
of manufacture, relative ease of assembly, ability to use simple slide-on bearings, and relatively
low cost. The advantages of a center crank conﬁguration include good stability, balanced
forces, and lower stresses, but cost is higher and a split connecting rod bearing is required for
assembly. For applications that require properly phased multiple sliders (pistons), a multithrow
crankshaft may be developed by placing several center cranks side-by-side, in sequence, along
a common centerline of rotation. The throws are rotationally indexed to provide the desired
phasing. Multicylinder internal combustion engines utilize such an arrangement.
All types of crankshafts are subjected to dynamic forces generated by the rotating
eccentric mass center at each crank pin. Connecting rods and sliders also contribute their
inertial effects to the resultant dynamic forces on the crank pins. It is usually necessary to
utilize counterweights3 and dynamic balancing to minimize shaking forces and rocking
couples generated by these inertia forces. Details of dynamic balancing are beyond the
scope of this brief discussion, but have been extensively presented in the literature.4
Types of Crankshafts 825
3See Figure 19.1(b).
4See, for example, ref. 1 or ref. 2.



(a) Side crank.
(b) Disk crank.
(c) Center crank.
Crank arm
(cheek)
Disk crank
Crank pin
Crank pin
Crank pin
Main bearing support
(frame)
Main bearing support
(frame)
Main bearing no. 2
(frame)
Throw (eccentricity)
Throw
Throw
Main bearing
no. 1 (frame)
Cheeks
Figure 19.2
Types of crankshafts.

19.3 Potential Failure Modes
As shown in Figure 19.2, typical crankshafts are made up of structural elements (shafts,
cheeks) and bearing elements (main bearings, crank pin bearings). Reviewing the list of
potential failure modes given in 2.3, and in view of the stress concentration sites generated
by a complex geometry and the cyclic nature of the loads acting on a rotating crankshaft,
the structural elements are most susceptible to failure by fatigue, brittle fracture, or yield-
ing. Although some crankshaft applications utilize rolling element bearings,5 the use of
plain bearings6 is more common. Plain bearing elements are most susceptible to failure by
adhesive wear, abrasive wear, corrosive wear, surface fatigue wear, galling, seizure, or, in
some applications, yielding or brittle fracture. The most probable of these potential failure
modes depends upon the speciﬁc requirements of each application.
19.4 Crankshaft Materials
Crankshaft materials must be selected to meet both the structural strength requirements
and the bearing-site wear requirements. Plain bearing material candidates have been dis-
cussed in 10.4, where it was noted that most successful bearing applications embody a
bearing pair consisting of a hard material sliding on a replaceable element of soft ductile
material. In the typical crankshaft application, soft, ductile sleeves are attached to the con-
necting rod or the frame, so the crankshaft material must have the ability to provide a hard
surface at the bearing sites. Structural strength requirements may be met by many materi-
als, but providing wear resistance at the bearing sites narrows the list of acceptable candi-
dates. Because of the asymmetric geometry, many crankshafts have been manufactured by
casting or forging a “blank,” to be ﬁnish-machined later. Built-up weldments are used in
some applications. Traditionally, cast iron, cast steel, and wrought steel have been used for
crankshafts. The use of selectively carburized and hardened bearing surfaces is also com-
mon. The methods of Chapter 3 should be utilized to select appropriate material candidates
for any given crankshaft application.
19.5 Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure
Based on the discussions of 19.1 through 19.4, the procedural steps in developing a suc-
cessful crankshaft design may be summarized as follows:
1. Based on functional speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, generate a
ﬁrst conceptual sketch for the crankshaft.
2. For the initially proposed conﬁguration, determine displacements, velocities, and accel-
erations of importance for each (critical) kinematic phase7 of the overall mechanism,
throughout a full cycle.
3. Conceive a tentative basic shape for the crankshaft in view of its function and
constraints.
4. Perform a global force analysis including all surface and body forces on the mecha-
nism at all (critical) kinematic phases.
826
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
5See Chapter 11.
6See Chapter 10.
7When the parts of a mechanism have passed through all the possible positions that they can assume after 
starting from a speciﬁed set of relative positions, and have returned to their original relative positions, they
have completed a cycle of motion. The simultaneous relative positions of a cycle constitute a phase.

Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 827
5. Taking the crankshaft as a free body, calculate and display all forces acting during
each (critical) phase.
6. Select potential critical points in the proposed crankshaft conﬁguration (see 6.3), and
perform local force analyses to determine forces and moments acting at each critical
section.
7. Identify potential failure modes for the proposed crankshaft (see 19.3).
8. Select a tentative crankshaft material, and identify probable manufacturing processes
(see 19.4).
9. Select an appropriate design safety factor (see Chapter 2).
10. Calculate design stresses appropriate to each potential failure mode identified in
step 7.
11. Employ appropriate stress and failure prevention calculations for all critical phases
and all critical points, iterating until critical dimensions are found that will meet func-
tional design speciﬁcations and provide acceptable operating life.
12. Sketch the updated crankshaft conﬁguration so that further reﬁnements may be con-
sidered.
As for any design project, certain simplifying assumptions may be required to
expedite the calculations. Initial assumptions are often made with respect to forces act-
ing, critical phases, critical sections, critical points, stresses at the critical points, gov-
erning failure modes, material properties, or others. Also, see 8.7 for additional useful
guidelines.
8Also see Chapter 17.
Example 19.1 Crankshaft Design
It is desired to design a crankshaft for a newly proposed single-piston belt-driven compres-
sor. A preliminary design study has been reported to engineering management suggesting
the following design speciﬁcations and guidelines:
a.
Piston force P due to gas pressure, and including dynamic effects, will range from
3000 lb down on the crankshaft at the connecting rod bearing site to 1000 lb up at the
same location.
b.
Piston “stroke” should be 5.0 inches (i.e., crank throw should be 2.5 inches).
c.
Because of stability advantages and life requirements, a straddle-mounted crankshaft is
suggested.
d.
A preliminary bearing study indicates that an allowable bearing pressure of 

500 psi should provide an acceptable wear life for this application.
e.
For reasons of standardization, inventory control, and cost reduction, it is desired to
make all bearings alike.
f.
The proposed V-belt drive pulley is to have a pitch diameter of 8.0 inches.
g.
It is known from experience8 that the ratio of 
to 
should be about 10.
h.
To accommodate the space envelopes of adjacent components, preliminary centerline
spacings have been established as shown in the sketch of Figure E19.1A.
Propose a ﬁrst-iteration crankshaft conﬁguration, complete with dimensions, that will
satisfy these design requirements and guidelines.
Ts
Tt
sw-allow

Solution
Following the steps suggested in 19.5, a design proposal for the crankshaft may be devel-
oped as follows:
1. Based on the design speciﬁcations and contemplated system conﬁguration, a prelim-
inary conceptual sketch may be prepared, as shown in Figure E19.1A.
2. To temporarily avoid the need for a complete kinematic analysis for the proposed
compressor, it will be assumed (conservatively) that the maximum operating force on
the piston acts vertically on the crankshaft when the crankshaft is in its most vulner-
able phase. The most vulnerable phase is assumed to be the phase for which the axial
828
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
3.0 in.
z
y
x
Mx
Mz
My
RL
RR
Ts
Tt
2
3
1
4
5
6
7
P
F
E
dp = 8.0 in.
D
C
B
A
Figure E19.1A
Preliminary sketch of proposed compressor crankshaft conﬁguration, includ-
ing centerline location dimensions and externally applied forces.

3.0 in.
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
Ts
RL
Tt
RR
P
5.0 in.
2.5 in.
A
d
B
l
b
h
C
D
E
F
Figure E19.1B
Tentative basic crankshaft shape.
Example 19.1 
Continues

centerlines of main bearings and crank pin all lie in a common horizontal plane. This
phase has been sketched in Figure E19.1A. Later iterations should incorporate a more
accurate kinematic analysis.
3. A tentative basic shape for the crankshaft, based on the preliminary design data
embodied in the sketch in Figure E19.1A, is shown in Figure E19.1B.
4. A global force analysis is not required for this particular case since sufﬁcient data are
provided by the speciﬁcations and the assumptions of step 2.
5. A local force analysis for the crankshaft taken as a free body, utilizing Figures E19.1A
and E19.1B, may next be conducted. Using the coordinate system deﬁned in Figure
E19.1A, the static equilibrium equations of (4-1) may be adapted to this particular
crankshaft design scenario to give, based on force equilibrium,
and by summing forces in the z-direction,
Next, examining moment equilibrium,
and by summing moments about the x- and y-axes, respectively,
and
Also, by speciﬁcation,
Since P is a known force (maximum value of 3000 lb by specification and ver-
tically downward on crank pin by assumption), the four independent equations may
be utilized to solve for the four unknown forces
, 
, , and . Substituting P 
3000 into the equations above gives
Substituting Tt into the other three equations, and solving them simultaneously gives
RL = 2186 lb
RR = -1474 lb 1hence, direction is down2
Tt = 2080 lb
Ts = 208 lb
Tt = 10Ts
 10RR + 51-30002 + 131Tt + Ts2 = 0
 2.51-30002 + 4Tt - 4Ts = 0
RL + 1-30002 + RR + Tt + Ts = 0
-
Tt
Ts
RR
RL
Tt = 10Ts
10RR + 5P + 131Tt + Ts2 = 0
2.5P + 4Tt - 4Ts = 0
aMz K 0    1identically satisfied2
RL + P + RR + Tt + Ts = 0
aFy K 0    1identically satisfied2
aFx K 0    1identically satisfied2
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 829

To clarify the results of this force analysis, Figure E19.1C may be prepared to
show the magnitudes, directions, and locations of all forces on the crankshaft at its
most vulnerable phase.
6. The initial selection of potential critical points in the crankshaft is a function of de-
signer judgment and experience.9 Tentatively, seven potentially critical sections have
been selected for this crankshaft conﬁguration. These potential critical sections have
been designated 1 through 7, as shown in Figure E19.1C. Referring to the tentative
geometry proposed in Figure E19.1B, it is clear that at many of the selected critical
sections two different geometric shapes must be examined. For example, at critical
section 2, the circular cross section of element A and rectangular cross section of
element B must both be investigated to determine appropriate dimensions. It is also
important to notice that the external forces may induce transverse shear, torsion,
and/or bending in any of the crankshaft elements A through E. The basis for critical-
section selection in this example has been to assume that a potential critical section
exists at each location where either a load is applied or a geometric transition takes
place.
Noting from Figure E19.1C that there are no forces in the x- or y-directions, and no
moments about the z-axis,10 the local forces and moments at each of the seven selected
critical sections may be calculated on the basis of static equilibrium. Examining Fig-
ure E19.1B and E19.1C together, the local force analyses produce the results summa-
rized in Table E19.1A. To determine tentative dimensions for each element at each
critical section, calculations may be made for each of the 11 potential critical sections
listed in Table E19.1A. However, calculational detail may be reduced by the following
logic. By speciﬁcation, all bearings are to be made the same. Therefore, by reviewing
the relative magnitudes of the forces and moments on each circular element tabulated
in Table E19.1A, it may be deduced that sections 4C, 6E, and 7E are more critical than
830
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
x
y
z
RL = 2186 lb (up)
Ts = 208 lb (up)
P = 3000 lb (down)
Tt = 2080 lb (up)
RR = 1474 lb (down)
2
3
1
4
5
6
7 E
F
D
C
B
A
Figure E19.1C
Graphic summary of results from the overall force analysis.
9Critical points are points within a machine part that have high potential for failure because of high stresses or
strains, low strength, or a critical combination of these (see 6.3).
10See also equations (1), (2), and (4).
Example 19.1 
Continues

any of the other circular critical sections. If the rectangular cheeks are also made alike,
3B and 6D are more critical than any of the other rectangular sections.
Summarizing, the 11 potential critical sections of Table E19.1A may be reduced
to 5: circular elements 4C, 6E, and 7E, and rectangular elements 3B and 6D.
7. Based on the discussion of 19.3, the failure modes to be investigated here should
include wear, fatigue, and yielding.
8. Selection of material candidates for this crankshaft application may be expedited by
implementing the material selection methods discussed in Chapter 3. As a matter of
fact, the detailed material selection process for a crankshaft similar to the one under
consideration here has been presented in Example 3.1 of Chapter 3. For the crankshaft
under consideration here, based on the methods of Example 3.1, the tentative material
selection will be forged 1020 steel, case hardened at the bearing sites.11 The basic core
properties for 1020 steel are, from Tables 3.3 and 3.10,
e12 in2 = 15 percent
Syp = 51,000 psi
Su = 61,000 psi
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 831
TABLE E19.1A Local Forces and Moments1 at the Seven Selected
Critical Sections
Critical
Section
,
,
,
Section
Element
Shape
lb
in-lb
in-lb
1
A
2186
0
0
2
A
2186
0
5465
2
B
2186
5465
0
3
B
2186
5465
5465
3
C
2186
5465
5465
4
C
2186
5465
10,930
5
C
814
5465
8895
5
D
814
8895
5465
6
D
814
8895
7500
6
E
814
7500
8895
7
E
2214
7500
6860
1Note that 
is transverse shear force on the element in the z-direction, 
is torsional
moment on the element, and 
is bending moment on the element. The sign convention
is as depicted in Figure E19.1A.
Mb
Mt
FzBts
-
-
-
-
-
Mb
Mt
Fz-ts
11Consultation with a materials engineer is suggested for help in choosing a suitable case-hardening method and
specifying appropriate temperatures and times required to develop the desired properties of both case and core.

9. Determination of a design safety factor for this crankshaft application may be based on
Chapter 2, and in particular, Example 2.11. For the crankshaft application under con-
sideration here, the selected values for the rating factors12 are given in Table E19.1B.
From (2-85)
and, since 
, from (2-86) the desired design safety factor may be calculated as
10. To calculate design stresses related to each of the three failure modes listed in step 7,
the crankshaft material properties from step 8 and the safety factor from step 9 may
be combined to calculate the wear-based design stress 
, the fatigue-based design
stress 
, and the yielding-based design stress 
.
The wear-based design stress is, by speciﬁcation,
The fatigue-based design stress will be predicated upon inﬁnite-life properties13
so, utilizing the procedure for estimating inﬁnite-life fatigue strength,14
the fatigue-based design stress may be estimated, using (5-70), as15
where
mt =
Su1Se>Kf2
Su
1smax-N2d = a 1
nd
b a
1Se>Kf2
1 - mtRt
b
SN= q = Se = 0.5Su = 0.5161,0002 = 30,500 psi
1sw2d = 500 psi
1syp2d
1smax-N2d
1sw2d
nd = 1 +
110 - 322
100
= 1.5
t Ú -6
t = -1 + 0 + 0 - 2 + 2 + 0 - 2 + 0 = -3
832
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
TABLE E19.1B Rating Factors for Crankshaft Design
Application
Selected Rating
Rating Factor
Number (RN)
1. Accuracy of loads knowledge
1
2. Accuracy of stress calculation
0
3. Accuracy of strength knowledge
0
4. Need to conserve
2
5. Seriousness of failure consequences
2
6. Quality of manufacture
0
7. Conditions of operation
2
8. Quality of inspection and maintenance
0 
-
-
-
12See 2.12.
13A reasonable ﬁrst assumption, although not stated explicitly in the speciﬁcations.
14See “Estimating S-N Curves” in 5.6.
15Note that an estimated strength-reduction factor [see discussion following (5-92)], 
may be arbitrarily in-
cluded to make this ﬁrst iteration more nearly reﬂect stress concentration in the ﬁnal geometry. After initial
dimensions are established, Figure 5.11 may be used to improve the estimate of Kf.
Kf,
Example 19.1 
Continues

and
By speciﬁcation, 
lb and 
lb, so
and arbitrarily selecting a trial value of 
 2,
so
Finally, the yielding-based design stress is
11. Next, tentative dimensions will be determined by estimating critical stresses and
establishing dimensions so that none of the design stresses calculated in step 10 are
exceeded.
a. Based on wear, where 
is projected bearing area,16 the maximum operating
bearing pressure may be calculated as
Selecting 
to be the force on the most heavily loaded bearing (crank pin bear-
ing), setting 
equal to the wear-based design stress, and solving for 
,
It is common to specify a “square” bearing,17 so
Combining these and solving for the diameter,
Tentatively, therefore, it will be proposed that both of the main bearings and the
crank pin bearing have a diameter of 2.5 inches and a bearing length of approxi-
mately 2.5 inches.
l = d = 26 = 2.45 inches
Ap = dl = d2 = l 2
Ap =
Pmax
1sw2d
= 3000
500 = 6 in2
Ap
sw-max
Pmax
sw-max = Pmax
Ap
Ap
1syp2d = a 1
1.5 b151,0002 = 34,000 psi
1smax-N2d = a 1
1.5 b a
130,500>22
1 - 10.33210.752b = 13,510 psi
mt =
61,000 - 130,500>22
61,000
= 0.75
Kf
Rt =
sm
smax
=
Pm
Pmax
=
c
3000 + 1-10002
2
d
3000
= 0.33
Pmin = -1000
Pmax = 3000
Rt =
sm
smax
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 833
16Also see, for example, (9-4) and (10-2).
17Terminology for a plain bearing with length equal to diameter.

b. Comparing 
with 
, the fatigue-based design stress is more critical
(lower) than the yielding-based design stress. Dimensions based on fatigue will
therefore automatically satisfy yielding18 requirements. The equation for 
will be used as the strength basis for this design.
Using the fatigue-based design stress, dimensions may be established at each
of the ﬁve more-probable critical sections summarized in step 6, namely, circular
elements 4C, 6E, and 7E, and rectangular elements 3B and 6D.
At circular section 4C, using data from Table E19.1A, the maximum values of
transverse shear, torsion, and bending stresses may be calculated for a 2.5-inch-
diameter circular section19 as
and
Based on the discussions of 4.3, the locations of each of these maximum
stresses may be identiﬁed as shown in Figure E19.1D. Thus at critical point i of
section 4C, bending and torsion combine, and at critical point ii torsion and trans-
verse shear combine. Using (5-45) the equivalent stress, or von Mises stress, may
be calculated at point i as
1seq2i = A
1
2 C1s1 - s222 + 1s2 - s322 + 1s3 - s122D
sb = Mbc
I
=
110,930211.252
a
p12.524
64
b
= 7125 psi
ttor = Mta
J
=
15465211.252
a
p12.524
32
b
= 1780 psi
tts = 4
3 a
Fz-ts
A b = 4
3  ± 2186
p12.522
4
≤= 595 psi
(smax-n)d
(syp)d
(smax-n)d
834
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
i
ii
b
ts
tor
tor
Figure E19.1D
Sketch showing states of stress at critical points in
circular critical sections 4C, 6E, and 7E.
18Such might not be the case if occasional high loads occurred in the loading spectrum.
19The value of 2.5 inches diameter is used as a starting point since the wear-based dimensions must be 2.5 inches
or larger. See 4.4 for appropriate stress equations.
Example 19.1 
Continues

Using stress cubic equation (5-1), the principal stresses for critical point i of sec-
tion 4C may be calculated, giving
or
and
Comparing this with 
, it is clear that critical point i is well below the
design stress, and the wear-based diameter of 2.5 inches is therefore also accept-
able for fatigue and yielding as potential failure modes.
Likewise, for critical point ii of section 4C, (5-1) gives
or
and for the critical point ii,
Comparing this with 
, it is clear that critical point i governs for section
4C, so, as already observed, the wear-based diameter of 2.5 inches is very
acceptable.
Following a similar procedure for critical section 6E, using data from Table
E19.1A,
sb =
18895211.252
a
p12.524
64
b
= 5800 psi
ttor =
17500211.252
a
p12.524
32
b
= 2445 psi
tts = 4
3P
814
p12.522
4
Q
= 220 psi
(seq)i
1seq2ii = A
1
2 C1237522 + 1237522 + 1-475022D = 4115 psi
s3 = -2375 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 2375 psi
s3 - s2102 + s3-1ttor + tts224 = 0
(smax-N)d
1seq2i = A
1
2 C1754022 + 142022 + 1796022D = 7760 pri
s3 = -420 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 7540 psi
s3 - s21sb2 + s1-t2
tor2 = 0
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 835

The reduced version of the stress cubic equation is also valid for critical point
i of section 6E, giving solutions
whence, for section 6E at critical point i,
Comparing this with 
, it may be observed that critical point i of
section 6E is well below the design stress, and again the wear-based diameter
of 2.5 inches governs the design.
The principal stresses at critical point ii of section 6E are
and for critical point ii of section 6E,
As before, the 2.5-inch diameter dictated by wear requirements results in very
acceptable states of stress at section 6E.
By similar reasoning for section 7E, using data from Table E19.1A,
giving principal stresses at critical point i,
s3 = -1080 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 5550 psi
sb =
16860211.252
a
p12.524
64
b
= 4470 psi
ttor =
17500211.252
a
p12.524
32
b
= 2445 psi
tts = 4
3  ±
2214
a
p12.522
4
b
≤= 600 psi
1seq2ii = A
1
2 C1266522 + 1266522 + 1-533022D = 4615 psi
s3 = -2665 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 2665 psi
(smax-N)d
1seq2i = A
1
2 C1669522 + 189522 + 1-759022D = 7185 psi
s3 = -895 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 6695 psi
836
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
Example 19.1 
Continues

and
This too is acceptable
At critical point ii of section 7E the principal stresses are
and
This being acceptable, the preliminary conclusion is that all circular section
critical points are safe from the standpoint of potential failure by either fatigue or
yielding if the wear-based diameter of 2.5 inches is used for all circular sections.
It may be noted in passing that if weight-saving were important, these bearing
cross sections could be “hollowed out” without much loss of strength.20
For the critical points in rectangular sections 3B and 6D, identiﬁed in step 6 
as the more critical rectangular sections, wear is not a factor; the fatigue design
stress from 
may be used as the basis for determining rectangular section
dimensions.
At rectangular section 3B, illustrated in Figure E19.1E, and using data from
Table E19.1A, the maximum values of transverse shear, torsion, and bending
stresses may be calculated for the rectangular cross section from21
and
Before proceeding further, minor design decisions must be made relative to the
aspect ratio, b/h, of the rectangular cheek section. Referring to Figure E19.1B, it
is reasonable to make cheek dimension h a little larger than the bearing diameter
d so that a generous “blend” radius may be incorporated at the bearing-to-cheek
transition. Since d  2.5 inches, cheek dimension h will be arbitrarily chosen as
h = 3.0 inches
sb =
Mb
a I
cb
=
5465
abh2
6 b
ttor = Mt
Q =
5465
a
0.5h2b2
1.5h + 0.9b b
tts = 3
2a
Fz-ts
A b = 3
2 a2186
bh b
(smax-N)d
1seq2ii = A
1
2 C1304522 + 1304522 + 1-609022D = 5275 psi
s3 = -3045 psi
s2 = 2
s1 = 3045 psi
1seq2i = A
1
2 C1555022 + 1108022 + 1-663022D = 6160 psi
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 837
20See 6.2.
21See 4.4 for appropriate stress equations. Also note that the expression for Q is derived from Table 4.5, case 3,
by setting 
and 
, where b and h are deﬁned in ﬁgure E19.1E.
b = b>2
a = h>2

Experience suggests that aspect ratios less than about 0.5 are often vulnerable to
failure by buckling. As a ﬁrst iteration on cheek dimensions, the aspect ratio will
be arbitrarily chosen as
Using these, the cheek width b may then be calculated as
The stresses may then be explicitly calculated as
and
The locations of each of these maximum stresses may be identiﬁed as shown
in Figure E19.1E.
Thus, at critical point i of section 3B, bending and torsion combine, and at criti-
cal point ii torsion and transverse shear combine.22 Using the reduced stress cubic
equation, the principal stresses for critical point i of section 3B may be calculated as
s3 = -2175 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 4605 psi
sb =
5465
a
1.513.022
6
b
= 2430 psi
ttor =
5465
a
0.513.02211.522
1.513.02 + 0.911.52b
= 3160 psi
tts = 3
2 a
2186
11.5213.02b = 730 psi
b = 0.513.02 = 1.5 inches
b
h = 0.5
838
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
i
ii
b
ts
tor
tor
Figure E19.1E
Sketch showing states of stress at critical points
in rectangular critical sections 3B and 6D.
22Actually
 3160 psi, as calculated above, is valid only for critical point ii. The torsional shear stress 
at critical point i will be smaller (see Figure 4.12). It will be (conservatively) assumed for this calculation
that
 3165 psi is valid for both critical points i and ii.
ttor
ttor
Example 19.1 
Continues

and
This is acceptable when compared with the design stress 
 13,510
psi given previously.
Likewise, for critical point ii of section 3B, the cubic stress equation may be
used to determine the principal stresses as
and
again acceptable when compared to 
.
Finally for rectangular section 6D, using data from Table E19.1A,
and
and
The principal stresses at critical point i of section 6D are
which gives
For critical point ii of section 6D,
s3 = -5405 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 5405 psi
1seq2i = A
1
2 31707022 + 1373022 + 1-10,800224 = 9500 psi
s3 = -3730 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 7070 psi
sb =
7500
a
1.513.022
6
b
= 3335 psi
ttor =
8895
a
0.513.02211.522
1.513.02 + 0.911.52b
= 5135 psi
tts = 3
2a
814
11.5213.02b = 270 psi
(smax-N)d
1seq2ii = A
1
231389022 + 1389022 + 1-7780224 = 6740 psi
s3 = -3890 psi
s2 = 0
s1 = 3890 psi
1smax-N2d
1seq2i = A
1
2 C1460522 + 1217522 + 1-678022D = 6000 psi
Summary of Suggested Crankshaft Design Procedure 839

which gives
From the above calculations, a summary table of equivalent (von Mises)
stresses at the critical points selected in step 6 may be prepared as shown in Table
E19.1C.
It may be noted from Table E19.1C that all critical point stresses are safely
below the fatigue-based design stress of 13,510 psi, and from step 11, bearing
wear speciﬁcations are also met.
12. Based on the specifications and tentative dimensions just determined, the crude
sketch of Figure E19.1B may now be transformed into a more refined first-itera-
tion sketch, as shown in Figure E19.1F.
Having completed this ﬁrst-iteration proposal, the next step would be to submit the
proposal to a design review, then incorporate appropriate changes arising from the review.
Next, it would be necessary to go through the entire design calculation procedure again,
using more accurate stress analyses, stress concentration factors, and materials properties;
incorporating manufacturing speciﬁcations; and paying attention to production costs. The
process should typically be repeated until management is satisﬁed. Finally, prototype
testing should be conducted.
1seq2ii = A
1
2 C1540522 + 1540522 + 1-10,81022D = 9360 psi
840
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
TABLE E19.1C Resultant Stresses at Selected Crankshaft Critical
Points
Resultant
Equivalent Stress
Critical
Section
Critical
(von Mises stress),
Section1
Shape
Point2
psi
4C
i
7760
4C
ii
4115
6E
i
7185
6E
ii
4615
7E
i
6160
7E
ii
5275
3B
i
6000
3B
ii
6740
6D
i
9500
6D
ii
9360
1See Figure E19.1C.
2See Figures E19.1D and E19.1E.

Problems 841
2.5 in. D.
(typ brg)
5.5 in.
3.0 in.
4
4
4
2.5 in.
2.5 in.
5.0 in.
2.5 in. 3.0 in.
1.5 in.
1
8 in. r. (typ)
Mat’l: 1020 steel-forged;
           carburize and harden
           at 3 bearing sites.
Figure E19.1F
Reﬁned ﬁrst-iteration sketch of proposed crankshaft 
conﬁguration. Compare with Figure E19.1B.
19-1. The cylindrical bearing journal of an overhung crankshaft
has been sized for wear and found to require a diameter of 38
mm based on wear analysis. A force analysis of the journal has
shown there to be a transverse shear force of 45 kN, torsional
moment of 1000 N-m, and bending moment of 900 N-m at
the critical cross section of the cylindrical journal bearing. If the
fatigue-based stress governs, and has been found to be 270 MPa,
calculate whether the 38-mm diameter journal is safely designed
to withstand the fatigue loading.
19-2. The overhung crankshaft shown in Figure P19.2A is sup-
ported by bearings at 
and 
, and loaded by P on the
crankpin, vertically, as shown. The crank position shown may
be regarded as the most critical position. In this critical position,
load P ranges from 900 lb up to 1800 lb down. The material
properties are given in Figure P19.2B. Based on wear esti-
mates, all cylindrical bearing diameters should be 0.875 inch.
R2
R1
Problems
T1 = 10T2
1.25 in.
1.0 in.
1.0 in.
1.0 in.
R2
R1
Not to scale
P
T2
Figure P19.2A
Overhung crankshaft.
Stress (S), thousands of psi
Life (N), cycles
103
104
105
106
107
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2 34 5 6
2 34 5 6
2 34 5 6
2 34 5 6
Su = 140,000 psi
G = 11.5 × 106 psi
v = 0.3
E = 30 × 106 psi
e = 18% in 2.0 in.
Syp = 115,000 psi
(completely
reversed loading)
Figure P19.2B
Material properties for overhung crankshaft.

Neglecting stress concentration effects, and using a safety fac-
tor of 1.5, determine whether the diameter of 0.875 inch at 
is adequate if inﬁnite life is desired.
19-3. The overhung crankshaft shown in Figure P19.3 is sup-
ported on bearings 
and 
and loaded by force P on the
crank pin.  This is taken to be the most critical crank position.
The load P ranges from 6.25 kN up to 6.25 kN down. The
crankshaft is made from forged carburized AISI 4620 steel
(
, 
. It has been
determined that wear is the governing failure mode for the
bearing journal, and the allowable bearing design pressure,
based on wear, is 5 MPa. A 5-mm- radius ﬁllet is desired where
cylindrical journal A blends into rectangular cheek B, which
has a width to height ratio of 
. A factor of safety of
3 is to be used for all failure modes except wear, for which the
safety factor has already been included in allowable stress for
wear (5 MPa).
a. For cheek member B, determine the governing design
stress.
b. Assuming a “square” bearing, determine the diameter
and length of journal A.
c. Based on the results of (b) and other pertinent data
given, ﬁnd the rectangular cross-section dimensions w and
h for cheek B.
w/h = 0.5
S'
f L 348 MPa)
Syp = 586 MPa
Su = 696 MPa,
R2
R1
R1
842
Chapter 19 / Cranks and Crankshafts
d. Identify the most critical section of cheek B, and the
critical point location(s) within the critical cross section.
e. For each critical point identiﬁed in (d), specify the types
of stress acting.
f. Calculate all pertinent forces and moments for these
critical points.
g. Calculate all pertinent stresses for these critical points.
h. Calculate equivalent combined stresses for these critical
points.
i. Is the design for cheek B acceptable?
j. Is the design for cheek B controlled by yielding, fatigue,
journal wear, or something else?
19-4. The cylindrical bearing journal of a straddle-mounted
crankshaft has been tentatively sized based on wear require-
ments, and it has been found that a diameter of 1.38 inches is
required for this purpose. A force analysis of the journal at the
critical cross section has shown there to be a transverse shear
force of 8500 lb, torsional moment of 7500 in-lb, and bending
moment of 6500 in-lb. If the governing failure mode is fatigue,
and the design stress based on fatigue has been found to be
40,000 psi, calculate whether the 1.38-inch-diameter journal is
properly designed to safely withstand the fatigue loading.
19-5. A straddle-mounted crankshaft for a belt-driven single-
cylinder refrigeration compressor is to be designed to meet the
following speciﬁcations:
a. The force on the connecting rod bearing ranges from
3500 lb down to 1300 lb up.
b. The belt tension ratio is 
.
c. The crank throw is 2.2 inches.
d. Allowable maximum bearing pressure is 700 psi.
e. The pulley pitch diameter  8.0 inches.
f. All bearings are to be made alike.
g. Main bearings are 12 inches apart center-to-center, with
the connecting rod bearing halfway between.
h. The pulley overhangs the main bearing 4 inches.
Design a suitable crankshaft and construct good engineering
sketches of the ﬁnal design.
T1 = 8T2
T1 = 10T2
34 mm
50 mm
50 mm
50 mm
R2
R1
P
h
w
A
B
C
D
T2
Figure P19.3
Overhung crankshaft.

843
Completing the Machine
Chapter 20
20.1 Integrating the Components; Bases, Frames, and Housings
Just as for any of the components discussed in Chapters 8 through 19, a machine base or
frame may be designed by giving attention to forces and moments placed on these sup-
porting structures by the mounted components as the machine operates. In some cases the
weight of structural frame members themselves must be considered. The tasks of evaluat-
ing potential failure modes,1 selecting appropriate materials,2 and establishing an effective
structural geometry3 are all important when designing a frame. Necessary attributes of an
effective structural geometry include maintaining the accuracy of required spatial rela-
tionships between and among mounted components, and providing failure-free component
support during the design life of the machine.
The function of a base or a frame is to provide a structural backbone for mounting the
various operating components in their prescribed positions and securing them together.
Types of frames, as illustrated in Figure 20.1, include baseplates, open-truss frames, shell
structures, C-frames, O-frames, housings, and special-purpose combinations of these.
A baseplate is the simplest type of machine frame. Baseplates are typically ﬂat plates
with mounting holes or T-slots, and have a thickness that is small relative to length and
width. Reinforcing ribs on the bottom side are sometimes used to increase rigidity or de-
crease weight. In some applications, bottom-side ribs may run in both the length-direction
and the width-direction to form a wafﬂe-grid rib pattern.
Open-truss spatial structures are widely used as machine frames because they com-
bine good strength and rigidity with minimum weight and efﬁcient use of material.4 Such
structures are often fabricated from rectangular or round tubes, rods, or other rolled shapes,
pinned or welded at the joints. The truss conﬁguration can be tailored to any speciﬁc
application so that mounting pads have the positions and orientations needed for easily at-
taching the various components. The conﬁgurational guidelines listed in 6.2 are especially
important when conﬁguring an efﬁcient open-truss frame.
When operational forces and moments are small, or when structural deﬂections are
not critical, a simple table, with a mounting plate supported by sturdy legs, may sometimes
be used. For higher-performance design requirements, however, the cross-braced truss
structure is usually more effective.
Shell structures are also used as frames in some instances. Examples of thin-walled
shell structures, sometimes called stressed-skin structures, include airframes, spacecraft
structures, and some ground-based transportation vehicle frames. Such structures typically
embody bulkheads, stringers, and local stiffeners to prevent the thin skin from buckling.
1See Chapter 2.
2See Chapter 3.
3See Chapter 6.
4See 6.2 and Figure 6.3.

844
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
(g) Housing.
(e) Basic C-frame.
( f ) Basic O-frame.
(c) Open-truss frame.
(d) Simple shell structure.
(a) Simple baseplate;
permanent installation.
(b) Ribbed baseplate; mounted
on vibration-isolation pads.
Isolation
pads
Mounting pad
Upper
mounting
pad
Lower
mounting
pad
Simple
shell
Mounting
holes
T-slots
Figure 20.1
Illustration of several common types of machine frames.
The term “stressed-skin” derives from the fact that the thin wall of the shell, efﬁcient in re-
sisting high-tensile membrane stresses, provides direct structural support when properly
integrated with bulkheads and stiffeners. Heavier-walled shells may be used as supporting
structure for electric motors, gearboxes, and other similar subassemblies where bearings,
shafts, and gears must be accurately held in alignment. When shell structures are conﬁg-
ured to protect the components mounted within the shell from dust, dirt, or other foreign
material, they are usually called housings. Housings may also be designed to provide a lu-
bricant sump if needed.
Other types of frames, such as C-frames or O-frames, are sometimes used. For sta-
tionary machinery such as drill presses, milling machines, stamping machines, and punch
presses, the C-frame (see Figure 20.1) is probably the most widely used. If more stability
is required than a C-frame can provide, or if worksite deﬂections must be held to very
small values, an O-frame may be the best choice. Accessibility for C-frame workspace is
usually better than for O-frames.
As for any machine element, the potential failure modes for machine frames are
strongly dependent upon loading characteristics, operating environment, and material
properties corresponding to the governing failure mode. Reviewing the potential failure
modes listed in 2.3, the more likely failure modes for frames include force-induced elastic
deformation, yielding, brittle fracture, fatigue, and corrosion.
Common materials used for baseplates, frames, and housings include cast iron, cast
steel, and wrought steel. For high-performance applications, or in corrosive environments,
other materials such as titanium, aluminum, or magnesium may sometimes be used. Be-
cause of its inherent damping capacity, relatively low cost, and relative ease of obtaining
the desired shape, cast iron is frequently chosen. This is especially true if mass production
quantities are anticipated. Typical applications include baseplates, electric motor frames,

Integrating the Components; Bases, Frames, and Housings 845
pumps, compressors, and machine tools. If large or medium-size frames having intricate
shapes are required, welded construction may be used to build up a frame from wrought
steel or cast steel parts. Welded construction, however, must be undertaken with the knowl-
edge that built-in stresses (residual stresses) produced by the welding process may cause
signiﬁcant warpage, sometimes a serious drawback.
In the ﬁnal analysis, the design procedure for frames follows the same guidelines as for
all other components. That is, the size, shape, and selected material must satisfy the func-
tional requirements of supporting the loads without failure and maintaining the necessary
dimensional accuracy throughout the prescribed design life, and do it at an acceptable cost.
Example 20.1 Frame Design
To successfully compete in a specialized “sheet goods” production application, it is nec-
essary to continuously control the sheet goods thickness to within
10 percent all across
a production width of 20 feet. The nominal target thickness of t  0.010 inch is to be con-
trolled in the production process by adjusting a thin rectangular aperture through which
the slurry material issues before it is dried, trimmed, and rolled. It is being proposed to use
a special on-line sheet-thickness measurement and control system to continuously scan
the sheet product and, when necessary, adjust the aperture to keep sheet thickness within
the speciﬁed
10 percent of the target thickness. Sheet goods production is to be
continuous over long periods of time.
A proposed measurement and control system has already been developed. It integrates
a scanning sensor package tied to a computer-controlled aperture-adjustment device. As
presently conceived, the scanning sensor package consists of an upper carriage unit and a
lower carriage unit, with a clearance space of approximately 0.040 inch between their sen-
sor faces, to allow continuous noncontacting passage of the sheet goods. The fully instru-
mented upper carriage unit and lower carriage unit each weigh about 50 pounds. Figure
E20.1A illustrates the concept. The details of this scanning sensor system have been satis-
factorily worked out to synchronously drive both upper and lower scanner carriages to-
gether, back and forth across the 20-foot width of the sheet goods, at a scanning rate of
5 feet per second. The sheet goods also feed at a rate of 5 feet per second. The required ver-
tical clearance between the frame’s upper and lower support beams, to accommodate the
two scanning sensor packages, is estimated to be about 2 feet. Special high-precision sup-
port rails and rollers have been designed and tested, and a laser-based alignment procedure
has been developed to assure vertical (thickness direction) position accuracy of the moving
sensors to within
0.0005 inch, if the support rails are solidly mounted to the frame.
;
;
;
Synchronized width scan
Synchronized width scan
20 ft (width)
Upper high-precision
support rail
Sheet goods (feeds
perpendicular to plane
of the paper)
High-precision roller (typ)
Lower high-precision
support rail
0.040-inch sheet
pass clearance space
(50 lb)
(50 lb)
Upper
carriage
Lower
carriage
Figure E20.1A
Sketch showing the proposed thickness
measurement system for continuous produc-
tion of 20-foot-wide special sheet goods.

For the system just described, conceive a frame to support the measurement system
as it scans back and forth to continuously monitor and adjust production sheet thickness.
Solution
Reviewing the skeleton sketch of the proposed component layout, shown in Figure
E20.1A, important design requirements and observations include:
1.
The continuously fed sheet has a width of 20 feet. Therefore the selected frame style
must accommodate an unobstructed clearance space at least 20 feet wide.
2.
Tolerances on sheet thickness are tight (
10 percent of the 0.010-inch target thickness
is 
0.001 inch). Hence, midspan transverse (vertical) frame deﬂections must be kept
small enough to accommodate moving sensor package accuracy of
0.0005 inch, and
still maintain control of sheet thickness to within tolerances of
0.001 inch.
Reviewing these requirements in light of the various types of frames sketched in Figure
20.1, it appears that an O-frame should be a good conﬁgurational choice because it would be
naturally compatible with the passage of wide sheet goods, and it has the potential for sup-
porting the required small midspan deﬂections if transverse beam stiffnesses can be made
high enough. For these reasons, a ﬁrst-iteration choice for frame style will be an O-frame.
Because the tolerances are tight, the span is large, and the sensor package weight is
moderate (50 pounds), the weight of the structure itself might, at ﬁrst, be thought a factor
in determining midspan frame deﬂections as the scanning packages move transversely
across the sheet. However, by speciﬁcation, a laser beam high-precision alignment proce-
dure has been developed for measuring and adjusting the thickness-direction sensor loca-
tions to within
0.0005 inch vertically, all across the width. Since the sensor system,
together with its precision rails and rollers, can be mounted on the frame (already deﬂected
due to self-weight), and then aligned using the laser beam device, any frame deﬂection due
to self-weight can be “calibrated out.” Thus frame deﬂections due to self-weight need not
be considered here.
Combining these observations with the proposed layout of components, as sketched
in Figure E20.1A, a ﬁrst-iteration proposal for an O-frame structure, built up from hollow
box-section beams and columns,5 seems appropriate. Such an arrangement is sketched in
Figure E20.1B. As discussed earlier in this section, and in view of the operational re-
quirements for the O-frame proposed in Figure E20.1B, the most likely failure mode
;
;
;
;
;
846
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
20 ft (approx)
Top scanner-support beam
Left support
column
Right
support
column
Bottom scanner-support beam
Note: All beams and columns to be hollow box-sections.
2 ft (approx)
Figure E20.1B
Proposed conﬁguration for O-frame
structure built up from hollow box-
section beams and columns.
5See conﬁgurational guidelines of 6.2.
Example 20.1 
Continues

would appear to be force-induced elastic deformation.6 Less likely, but worth checking,
would be yielding.
Since stiffness is so important, and large beams and columns of hollow cross section
are to be joined to build up the O-frame, an initial material choice of 1020 wrought steel
is proposed.7 Ductility, cost, strength, weldability, and availability, in addition to stiffness,
are favorable attributes supporting the choice of low-carbon steel.
Accepting the proposed conﬁguration shown in Figure E20.1B, the next step is to es-
timate beam section sizes required to maintain the speciﬁed sheet goods tolerances. The
procedure will be to ﬁnd minimum values of I (area moment of inertia of hollow beam sec-
tion) based on scanner package weight, and associated changes in midspan beam deﬂec-
tion as the 50-pound scanners move back and forth along each support beam.
Considering the top scanner support beam, shown in Figure E20.1B, the midspan de-
ﬂection, when the 50-pound scanner is at midspan, may be calculated from
where P is a concentrated midspan load of 50 lb, L  beam length of 240 inches, E  mod-
ulus of elasticity of 30  106 psi, I  area moment of inertia, in4, and 
is an end con-
dition constant. In this redundant structure, the end supports for the beam are neither ﬁxed
nor simple. For this ﬁrst approximation, it will be assumed that the end constraints lie half-
way between ﬁxed and simple. Using deﬂection equations from Table 4.1, cases 1 and 8, the
value of 
that lies half-way between ﬁxed and simply supported ends would be
so
Since the allowable sheet thickness t  0.010 inch must be maintained to within
inch, and sensor package accuracy is known to be 
inch, the maximum-
allowable midspan beam deﬂection is
Using this maximum-allowable deﬂection in ymidspan and solving for the minimum re-
quired value for area moment of inertia,
Arbitrarily proposing a hollow box beam cross section, as sketched in Figure E20.1C,
with aspect ratio of 2 (depth 
is twice the width 
), and arbitrarily deﬁning the wall
thickness t to be 5 percent of width 
,8 the area moment of inertia may be expressed as9
Ibox = bod 3
o
12
- bid 3
i
12
bo
bo
do
1Ireq’d2min =
1502124023
72130 * 106210.00052
= 640 in4
1ymidspan2max = 0.0010 - 0.0005 = 0.0005 inch
; 0.0005
; 0.0005
ymidspan = a 1
72b a
50124023
130 * 1062I
b
Kends = 192 - 48
2
= 72
Kends
Kends
ymidspan = a
1
Kends
bPL3
EI
Integrating the Components; Bases, Frames, and Housings 847
6See 2.3.
7See Chapter 3.
8The quality of these assumed initial values usually improves with designer experience, but virtually all sets of
assumed cross-sectional dimensions will, through repeated iteration, converge to similar ﬁnal numerical values.
9See Table 4.2 and Example 4.4.

By initial assumption,
so, based on the geometric details shown in Figure E20.1C, it may be determined that
and
The required minimum box beam area moment of inertia, based on the initial assumptions
just discussed, may next be calculated as
Starting the iteration process to determine the cross-sectional dimensions of the box
beam, a tentative selection of 
 8 inches would give
Comparing this with the minimum required to judge the suitability of the proposed
box beam dimensions, the question that may be posed is
Or, is
The answer is no, but 
is very close to being large enough. To satisfy this, it will be pro-
posed to increase thickness t slightly. The ﬁrst-iteration thickness is therefore
For the second iteration, it will be proposed to increase the thickness to a nominal 
inch, or
Thus, the second-iteration proposal for the box beam dimensions will be
t2 = 0.44 inch
do = 16.0 inches
bo = 8.0 inches
t2 = 0.44 inch
716
t1 = 0.05182 = 0.40 inch
Ibox
623 7
?
640
Ibox 7
?
1Ireq’d2min
Ibox = 10.01921823218243 = 623 in4
bo
= a1 - 0.77
12
bbod3
o = 0.019bod3
o
Ibox = bod 3
o
12
- bid 3
i
12
= 1
123bod 3
o - 10.90bo210.95do234
di = 0.95do
bi = 0.90bo
do = 2bo
t = 0.05bo
848
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
Neutral axis
bo
bi
di
do
t
Figure E20.1C
Nominal cross-sectional conﬁguration of proposed
scanner top support beam.
Example 20.1 
Continues

From these
Substituting gives
For this set of box beam dimensions, the question posed is
The answer to this question is yes, so the proposed top beam cross-sectional dimensions
will be
Since the bottom beam is no more critical than the top beam, it is suggested that its
dimensions be made the same. As a matter of uniformity, it is further suggested that the
short columns also be given the same cross-sectional dimensions, but they should be
checked for yielding potential, as should the top and bottom beams.
To check the columns for yielding, the direct compressive stress may be calculated
from the top beam weight,10 the sensor package weight, and the column cross-sectional
area. The top beam weight may be approximated as
so the nominal compressive stress, 
, in the column walls would be11
Compressive stress in the column walls is, therefore, negligibly small.
Checking next for possible midspan yielding of the top beam, and assuming the top
beam to be simply supported (the most vulnerable possibility), Table 4.4, case 3, gives the
maximum midspan moment as
Using (4-5), with numerical values above,
This bending stress is also negligibly small compared to the yield strength of 1020 steel
(see Table 3.3).
The governing failure mode, therefore, is force-induced elastic deformation of the
beam (midspan deﬂection).
1sb2max = Mmaxc
I
=
43,060a16
2 b
680
= 505 psi
Mmax = wL2
8
=
30.28318 + 16212210.4424124023
8
= 43,060 in-lb
sc =
1
Anet cWbeam
2
+ Wsensor d =
1
21.1 c1435
2
+ 50 d = 36 psi
sc
Wbeam = WAnetL = 10.28323218 + 16210.4424120 * 122 = 1435 lb
t = 0.44 inch
do = 16.0 inches
bo = 8.0 inches
Ibox = 680 7
?
1Ireq’d2min = 640
Ibox =
18211623
12
-
17.122115.1223
12
= 680 in4
di = 16.0 - 210.442 = 15.12 inches
bi = 8.0 - 210.442 = 7.12 inches
Integrating the Components; Bases, Frames, and Housings 849
10Using 1020 steel.
11Assuming that the scanner unit’s weight adds directly to column load when the scanner is positioned at the
adjacent edge of the sheet product.

850
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
12See, for example, ref. 1 or ref. 2.
13For example, a machine tool may be judged “safe” in the hands of an adult, but “unsafe” in the hands of a child.
14See also 2.12.
15Also see 1.3.
16See, for example, refs. 3–7.
To summarize, an O-frame style is recommended for this application, as sketched in
Figure E20.1B. It is proposed that each of the four frame members have a hollow box cross
section with an outer width of 8.0 inches, outer depth of 16.0 inches, and wall thickness of
inch.
Before proceeding further, this proposal should be reviewed from the standpoints of
aesthetics, ergonomics, and cost, as well as functionality, reliability, inspectability, safety,
and environmental factors.
Finally, since the design is so sensitive to midspan beam deﬂection, an astute designer
might think to check the possibility of temperature-induced elastic deformation as an ad-
ditional potential failure mode in this application. Logically, if the sheet, which passes
within about a foot of the inner surface of the top beam, were above ambient temperature,
an additional thermally induced elastic midspan deﬂection might render the proposed
frame unacceptable.
20.2 Safety Issues; Guards, Devices, and Warnings
A good rule of thumb for designers is that any machine, machine part, machine function,
or machine process that may cause injury must be safeguarded. Good safeguarding meth-
ods12 should prevent all operator contact with dangerous moving parts, make safeguard re-
moval or tampering difﬁcult, protect against falling objects, create no new hazards, create
no interference, and allow safe lubrication. Because each design (or design modiﬁcation)
is unique, the designer needs to give full attention to the safety aspects of the product.
Safety, often deﬁned as “freedom from danger, injury, or damage,” is actually a rela-
tive attribute that may change from time to time, and may be judged differently in differ-
ent circumstances.13 Further, two distinctly different activities are required for determining
how “safe” a product is: (1) estimating or measuring risk, and (2) judging the acceptabil-
ity of the estimated risk. The estimation or measurement of risk may be quantitatively ex-
pressed as an objective, data-based, probabilistic attribute of the product under
consideration. Judging the acceptability of the estimated risk is a much more subjective
matter of personal or societal value judgment.14
A primary obligation of a designer (and manufacturer) is to make the product “safe,”
that is, to reduce the risks associated with the product to an acceptable level. Stated in other
words, the designer’s obligation in this context is to eliminate danger from using the prod-
uct. Danger may be deﬁned as an unreasonable or unacceptable combination of hazard and
risk. A hazard is deﬁned as a condition or changing set of circumstances that presents a
potential for injury. Risk is the probability and severity of an adverse outcome. On this ba-
sis, a designer would typically proceed by taking the following steps:15
1.
As far as possible, design all hazards out of the product.
2.
If it is not possible to design out all hazards, provide guards or devices to eliminate
the danger.
3.
If it is not possible to provide proper and complete protection through the use of guards
and safeguarding devices, provide appropriate directions and post “clear warnings.”
A brief summary of common types of guards is given in Table 20.1. Types of
safeguarding devices are described in Table 20.2. Standards16 have been developed for
716
Example 20.1 
Continues

Safety Issues; Guards, Devices, and Warnings 851
TABLE 20.1 Types of Guards1
Method
Safeguarding Action
Advantages
Limitations
Fixed
Provides a barrier
Can be constructed to
May interfere with
suit many speciﬁc
visibility.
applications.
Can be limited to
In-plant construction is
speciﬁc operations.
often possible.
Machine adjustment
Can provide maximum
and repair often
protection.
require its removal,
thereby necessitating
Usually requires
other means of
minimum
protection for
maintenance.
maintenance
personnel.
Can be suitable to high-
production, repetitive
operations.
Interlocked
Shuts off or disengages
Can provide maximum
Requires careful
power and prevents
protection.
adjustment and
starting of machine
maintenance.
when guard is open;
Allows access to
should require the
machine for removing
May be easy to
machine to be stopped
jams without time-
disengage.
before the worker can
consuming removal of
reach into the danger
ﬁxed guards.
area.
Adjustable
Provides a barrier that
Can be constructed to
Hands may enter
may be adjusted to
suit many speciﬁc
danger area—
facilitate a variety of
applications
protection may not be
production operations.
complete at all times.
Can be adjusted to
admit varying sizes of
May require frequent
stock.
maintenance and/or
adjustment.
The guard may be
made ineffective by the
operator.
May interfere with
visibility.
Self-adjusting
Provides a barrier that
Off-the-shelf guards
Does not always
moves according to the
are often commercially
provide maximum
size of the stock
available.
protection.
entering the danger
area.
May interfere with
visibility.
May require frequent
maintenance and
adjustment.
1Reprinted from ref. 2, with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

852
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
TABLE 20.2 Types of Devices1
Method
Safeguarding Action
Advantages
Limitations
Photoelectric
Machine will not start
Can allow freer
Does not protect
cycling when the light
movement for operator.
against mechanical
ﬁeld is interrupted.
failure.
When the light ﬁeld is
May require frequent
broken by any part of
alignment and
the operator’s body
calibration.
during the cycling
Excessive vibration
process, immediate
may cause lamp
machine braking is
ﬁlament damage and
activated.
premature burnout.
Limited to machines
that can be stopped.
Radio frequency
Machine cycling will
Can alow freer
Does not protect
(capacitance)
not start when the
movement for operator.
against mechanical
capacitance ﬁeld is
failure.
interrupted.
Antennae sensitivity
When the capacitance
must be properly
ﬁeld is disturbed by
adjusted.
any part of the
operator’s body during
Limited to machines
the cycling process,
that can be stopped.
immediate machine
braking is activated.
Electromechanical
Contact bar or probe
Can allow access at the
Contact bar or probe
travels a
point of operation.
must be properly
predetermined
adjusted for each
distance between the
application; this
operator and the
adjustment must be
danger area.
properly maintained.
Interruption of this
movement prevents the
starting of machine
cycle.
Pullback
As the machine begins
Eliminates the need for
Limits movement of
to cycle, the operator’s
auxiliary barriers or
operator.
hands are pulled
other interference at
out of the danger area.
the danger area.
May obstruct
workspace around
operator.
Adjustments must be
made for speciﬁc
operations and for
each individual.

TABLE 20.2 (Continued)
Method
Safeguarding Action
Advantages
Limitations
Restraint
Prevents the operator
Little risk of
Limits movement of
(holdback)
from reaching into the
mechanical failure.
operator.
danger area.
May obstruct workspace.
Adjustments must be
made for speciﬁc
operations and for each
individual.
Requires close
supervision of the
operator’s use of the
equipment.
Safety trip
Stops machine when
Simplicity of use.
All controls must be
controls
tripped.
manually activated.
Pressure-
May be difﬁcult to
sensitive body
activate controls
bar.
because of their
location.
Safety tripod.
Only protects the
operator.
Safety tripwire
May require special
ﬁxtures to hold work.
May require a machine
brake.
Two-hand control
Concurrent use of both
Operator’s hands are
Requires a partial-cycle
hands is required,
at a predetermined
machine with a brake.
preventing the operator
location.
from entering the
Some two-hand ontrols
danger area.
Operator’s hands are
can be rendered unsafe
free to pick up a new
by holding with arm or
part after ﬁrst half of
blocking, thereby
cycle is completed.
permitting one-hand
operation.
Protects only the
operator.
Two-hand trip
Concurrent use of two
Operators hands are
Operator may try to
hands on separate
away from danger
reach into danger area
controls prevents
area.
after tripping machine.
hands from being in
danger area when
Can be adapted to
Some trips can be
machine cycle starts.
multiple operations.
rendered unsafe by
Safety Issues; Guards, Devices, and Warnings 853

854
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
TABLE 20.2 (Continued)
Method
Safeguarding Action
Advantages
Limitations
holding with arm or
No obstruction to hand
blocking, thereby
feeding.
permitting one-hand
operation.
Protects only the
Does not require
operator.
adjustment for each
operation.
May require special
ﬁxtures.
Gate
Provides a barrier
Can prevent reaching
May require frequent
between danger area
into or walking into the
inspection and regular
and operator or other
danger area.
maintenance.
personnel.
May interfere with
operator’s ability to see
the work.
Automatic feed
Stock is fed from rolls,
Eliminates the need for
Other guards are also
indexed by machine
operator involvement
required for operator
mechanism, etc.
in the danger area.
protection—usually
ﬁxed barrier guards.
Requires frequent
maintenance.
May not be adaptable
to stock variation.
Semiautomatic
Stock is fed by chutes,
(Same as automatic
(Same as automatic
feed.
movable dies, dial feed,
feed—see above)
feed—see above)
plungers, or sliding
bolster.
Automatic ejection
Workpieces are ejected
(Same as automatic
May create a hazard of
by air or mechanical
feed—see above)
blowing chips or
means.
debris.
Size of stock limits the
use of this method.
Air ejection may
present a noise hazard.
Semiautomatic
Workpieces are ejected
Operator does not have
Other guards are
ejection
by mechanical means,
to enter danger area to
required for operator
which are initiated by
remove ﬁnished work.
protection.
operator.
May not be adaptable
to stock variation.

Design Reviews; Releasing the Final Design 855
TABLE 20.2 (Continued)
Method
Safeguarding Action
Advantages
Limitations
Robots
They perform work
Operator does not have
Can create hazards
usually done by
to enter danger area.
themselves.
operator.
Are suitable for
Require maximum
operations where high
maintenance.
stress factors are
present, such as heat
Are suitable only to
and noise.
speciﬁc operations.
1Reprinted from ref. 2, with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
accident-prevention signs and warning labels to establish suggestions for effective word-
ing, colors, and placement.
20.3 Design Reviews; Releasing the Final Design
Reducing the time-to-market and completing a product design within budget are very im-
portant goals for design success. Using cross-functional product design teams17 and con-
current engineering strategies18 greatly enhances the likelihood of achieving these goals.
In addition, it is prudent to schedule periodic design reviews to assess progress, to moni-
tor design and development activities, to ensure that all requirements and speciﬁcations are
being met, and to provide feedback of information to all concerned. Usually, at least three
design reviews will be necessary to meet design goals: one at the preliminary design stage,
one during the intermediate design stage, and one before releasing the ﬁnal design to pro-
duction.19 More sophisticated products may require several additional design reviews dur-
ing the design process.
The preliminary design review (concept review) is probably the most important be-
cause it usually has a major impact on the design conﬁguration. Intermediate design reviews
and the ﬁnal design review (before releasing to production) usually have less impact.
A design review is typically conducted by an ad-hoc design review board made up of
materials engineers, mechanical design engineers, reliability engineers, electrical engineers,
safety engineers, a management representative, a marketing representative, an insurance
consultant, a “products-liability” attorney, and “outside experts,” as needed. Members of the
design review board usually should not be drawn from those involved in the day-to-day
design and development of the product under review.
Releasing the ﬁnal design on-time and on-budget is often crucial to a manufacturer’s
good reputation, and is usually demanded by the marketplace. It is important, therefore,
for a designer to stay focused on meeting speciﬁcations effectively without incorporating
“nice but unnecessary” features into the product.20
17See 1.1.
18See 7.1.
19See 1.6.
20Unneeded features, no matter how desirable, virtually always increase complexity, cost, and time-to-market.
Inexperienced designers often fall prey to this trap.
However vast the darkness, we must supply our own light.
—Stanley Kubrick

856
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
20-1. Splined connections are widely used throughout industry,
but little research has been done to provide the designer with ei-
ther analytical tools or good experimental data for spline
strength or compliance estimates. In question are such matters
as basic spline-tooth strength, shaft strength, notch effect, and
spline geometry effects, as well as spline-compliance effects on
the torsional spring rate of a system containing one or more
splined connections.
It is desired to construct a splined-joint testing setup versa-
tile enough to facilitate both strength and life testing of various
splined connections, as well as to perform torsional compliance
testing on such joints. The testing setup is to accommodate 
in-line splined connections, offset parallel shafts connected by
double universal joints, and angular shaft connections. Parallel
shaft offsets up to 250 mm must be accommodated, and angular
shaft centerline displacements up to 45 may be required. Splines
up to 75 mm in diameter may need to be tested in the device, and
shafting samples, including splined connections, may be up to 
1 meter in length. Rotating speeds up to 3600 rpm may be required.
The basic setup, sketched in Figure P20.1, is to utilize a
variable-speed drive motor to supply power to the input shaft of
the testing setup, and a dynamometer (device for measuring
mechanical power) used to dissipate from the output shaft of the
test setup.
a. Select an appropriate type of frame or supporting struc-
ture for integrating the drive motor, testing setup, and dy-
namometer into a laboratory test stand for investigating
splined-connection behavior, as discussed above.
b. Sketch the frame.
c. Identify potential safety issues that should, in your opin-
ion, be addressed before putting the test stand into use.
20-2. You have been given the task of designing a special
hydraulic press for removing and replacing bearings in small to
medium-size electric motors. You are to utilize a commercially
available 
-ton (3000 lb) capacity hydraulic actuator,
112
mounted vertically, as sketched in Figure P20.2. As shown, the
actuator body incorporates a 2-inch-diameter mounting boss. A
lower platen for supporting the motor bearing packages is to be
incorporated, as sketched. A minimum vertical clearance of 
3 inches is required, as indicated, and a minimum unobstructed
horizontal clearance of 5 inches between the vertical centerline
of the hydraulic press and the closest structural member is also
required. The operator’s intended position is indicated in Figure
P20.2, as well.
a. Select an appropriate type of frame or supporting struc-
ture for integrating the hydraulic actuator and support
platen into a compact, stand-alone assembly, giving rea-
sons for your selection.
b. Make a neat sketch of the frame, as you envision it.
c. Design the frame that you have sketched in (b) so that
it may be expected to operate for 20 years in an industrial
setting, without failure. It is estimated that the press will
be operated, on average, once a minute, 8 hours each day,
250 days a year.
20-3. Cutting ﬁrewood is popular with “do-it-yourselfers” in
many parts of the world, but hand-splitting the logs is a less-
popular task. You are being asked to design a compact,
“portable,” moderately priced, ﬁrewood splitting machine for
“home” use. The device should be capable of handling logs up
to 400 mm in diameter and 600 mm long, splitting them into
ﬁreplace-size pieces. A cord of wood (a stack of wood 1.2 m 
1.2 m  4.4 m) should take no longer than a hour to split.
Management has decided that a power-screw-driven splitting
wedge should be investigated as a ﬁrst choice. The concept is
sketched crudely in Figure P20.3. Safety is to be considered, as
well as compactness and portability.
a. Select an appropriate type of frame or supporting
structure for integrating the power-screw-driven wedge
and adjustable log-support arm into a compact, portable,
stand-alone assembly, giving reasons for your selection.
Splined connection
Splined connection
Test sample
Drive
motor
Dynamometer
Up to 1 m
 up to 45°
Up to 250 mm
1
2
Figure P20.1
Plan view of proposed testing setup for investigating splined connections.
Problems

Problems 857
g. Design any other subassembly that you have named in (c).
h. Design the frame that you have sketched in (b).
i. Discuss any potential safety issues that you envision to
be important.
20-4. The input shaft of a rotary coal-grinding mill is to be
driven by a gear reducer through a ﬂexible shaft-coupling, as
shown in Figure P20.4. The output shaft of the gear reducer is
to be supported on two bearings mounted 10 inches apart at A
and C, as shown. A 1:3 spur gear mesh is being proposed to
drive the gear-reducer output shaft. A spur gear is mounted on
the output shaft at midspan between the bearings, as shown, and
is to have a pitch diameter of 9 inches. The pitch diameter of the
drive pinion is to be 3 inches. The coal-grinding mill is to be
b. Make a sketch of the frame as you envision it.
c. From your sketch, identify each coherent subassembly,
and give each subassembly a descriptive name.
d. Make a neat sketch of each coherent subassembly, and,
treating each subassembly as a free body, qualitatively
indicate all signiﬁcant forces on each subassembly.
e. Design the power-screw subassembly. Preliminary esti-
mates indicated that with a properly shaped splitting
wedge, the wedge travel need not exceed half the length of
the log, and that the “splitting force” required of the power
screw need not exceed about 38 kN in the direction of the
screw axis.
f. Design the adjustable log-support unit.
Log support unit
(200 mm vertical travel)
Splitting
wedge
V-notch
Log to be split
(up to 400 mm diameter;
approx. 600 mm long)
200 mm
travel
Power screw
subassembly
Power screw
Figure P20.3
Home-use ﬁrewood splitting machine.
1
1 2
       ton capacity
hydraulic cylinder
Actuator stem
2 in.-diameter
mounting boss
3 in. min.
req'd.
Platen
5 in. min.
req’d.
Workbench
L
C?
Figure P20.2
Schematic arrangement for proposed hydraulic press.

858
Chapter 20 / Completing the Machine
operated at 600 rpm, and requires 100 horsepower continuously
at its input shaft.
An 1800-rpm electric motor is to supply power to the pin-
ion input shaft. Concentrating attention on the spur gear speed
reducer sketched in Figure P20.4, do the following:
a. Select an appropriate type of frame or supporting struc-
ture for integrating the gears, shafts, and bearings into a
compact stand-alone subassembly, giving reasons for your
selection.
b. Make a neat sketch of the frame, as you envision it.
c. Design or select the spur gear set.
d. Design the gear-reducer output shaft.
e. Design the pinion input shaft.
f. Select appropriate bearings for the gear-reducer output
shaft.
g. Select appropriate bearings for the pinion input shaft.
h. Specify appropriate lubrication for the gears and bearings.
i. Design the frame that you have sketched in (b).
20-5. a. In the context of mechanical design, deﬁne the terms
safety, danger, hazard, and risk.
b. List the actions a designer might take to provide proper
safeguards before releasing a machine to customers in the
marketplace.
c. Make a list of safeguarding devices that have been
developed to help reduce to an acceptable level the risks
associated with engineered products.
1800 rpm
Pinion input shaft
Flexible coupling
Motor
output
shaft
Gear-reducer
output shaft
Output spur gear; dg = 9 in.
z
z
z
z
x
x
x
y
y
y
y
Coal-grinder
input shaft
(100 hp req’d)
Flexible
coupling
A
B
C
600 rpm
5 in.
10 in.
Drive pinion; dp = 3 in.
Figure P20.4
Schematic arrangement of components for a proposed gear-reducer 
subassembly.

NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers1
Appendix
859
Preamble
Engineering is an important and learned profession. As members of this profession, engi-
neers are expected to exhibit the highest standards of honesty and integrity. Engineering
has a direct and vital impact on the quality of life for all people. Accordingly, the services
provided by engineers require honesty, impartiality, fairness and equity, and must be ded-
icated to the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Engineers must perform
under a standard of professional behavior that requires  adherence to the highest principles
of ethical conduct.
I. Fundamental Canons
Engineers, in the fulﬁllment of their professional duties, shall:
1.
Hold paramount the safety, health and welfare of the public.
2.
Perform services only in areas of their competence.
3.
Issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner.
4.
Act for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees.
5.
Avoid deceptive acts.
6.
Conduct themselves honorably, responsibly, ethically, and lawfully so as to enhance
the honor, reputation, and usefulness of the profession.
II. Rules of Practice
1.
Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public.
a. If engineers’ judgment is overruled under circumstances that endanger life or prop-
erty, they shall notify their employer or client and such other authority as may be
appropriate.
b. Engineers shall approve only those engineering documents that are in conformity
with applicable standards.
c. Engineers shall not reveal facts, data or information without the prior consent of
the client or employer except as authorized or required by law or this Code.
1Source: Reprinted by permission of the National Society of Professional Engineers.

860
Appendix / NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
d. Engineers shall not permit the use of their name or associate in business ventures
with any person or ﬁrm that they believe are engaged in fraudulent or dishonest
enterprise.
e. Engineers having knowledge of any alleged violation of this Code shall report
thereon to appropriate professional bodies and, when relevant, also to public au-
thorities, and cooperate with the proper authorities in furnishing such information
or assistance as may be required.
2.
Engineers shall perform services only in the areas of their competence.
a. Engineers shall undertake assignments only when qualiﬁed by education or expe-
rience in the speciﬁc technical ﬁelds involved.
b. Engineers shall not afﬁx their signatures to any plans or documents dealing with
subject matter in which they lack competence, nor to any plan or document not
prepared under their direction and control.
c. Engineers may accept assignments and assume responsibility for coordination of
an entire project and sign and seal the engineering documents for the entire proj-
ect, provided that each technical segment is signed and sealed only by the quali-
ﬁed engineers who prepared the segment.
3.
Engineers shall issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner.
a. Engineers shall be objective and truthful in professional reports, statements, or testi-
mony. They shall include all relevant and pertinent information in such reports, state-
ments, or testimony, which should bear the date indicating when it was current.
b. Engineers may express publicly technical opinions that are founded upon knowl-
edge of the facts and competence in the subject matter.
c. Engineers shall issue no statements, criticisms, or arguments on technical matters
that are inspired or paid for by interested parties, unless they have prefaced their
comments by explicitly identifying the interested parties on whose behalf they are
speaking, and by revealing the existence of any interest the engineers may have in
the matters.
4.
Engineers shall act for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees.
a. Engineers shall disclose all known or potential conﬂicts of interest that could in-
ﬂuence or appear to inﬂuence their judgment or the quality of their services.
b. Engineers shall not accept compensation, ﬁnancial or otherwise, from more than one
party for services on the same project, or for services pertaining to the same project,
unless the circumstances are fully disclosed and agreed to by all interested parties.
c. Engineers shall not solicit or accept ﬁnancial or other valuable consideration, di-
rectly or indirectly, from outside agents in connection with the work for which they
are responsible.
d. Engineers in public service as members, advisors, or employees of a governmen-
tal or quasi-governmental body or department shall not participate in decisions
with respect to services solicited or provided by them or their organizations in
private or public engineering practice.
e. Engineers shall not solicit or accept a contract from a governmental body on which
a principal or ofﬁcer of their organization serves as a member.
5.
Engineers shall avoid deceptive acts.
a. Engineers shall not falsify their qualiﬁcations or permit misrepresentation of their
or their associates’ qualiﬁcations. They shall not misrepresent or exaggerate their
responsibility in or for the subject matter of prior assignments. Brochures or other
presentations incident to the solicitation of employment shall not misrepresent

861
pertinent facts concerning employers, associates, joint venturers, or past accom-
plishments.
b. Engineers shall not offer, give, solicit or receive, either directly or indirectly, any
contribution to inﬂuence the award of a contract by public authority, or which may
be reasonably construed by the public as having the effect of intent of inﬂuencing
the awarding of a contract. They shall not offer any gift or other valuable consid-
eration in order to secure work. They shall not pay a commission, percentage, or
brokerage fee in order to secure work, except to a bona ﬁde employee or bona ﬁde
established commercial or marketing agencies retained by them.
III. Professional Obligations
1.
Engineers shall be guided in all their relations by the highest standards of honesty and
integrity.
a. Engineers shall acknowledge their errors and shall not distort or alter the facts.
b. Engineers shall advise their clients or employers when they believe a project will
not be successful.
c. Engineers shall not accept outside employment to the detriment of their regular
work or interest. Before accepting any outside engineering employment they will
notify their employers.
d. Engineers shall not attempt to attract an engineer from another employer by false
or misleading pretenses.
e. Engineers shall not promote their own interest at the expense of the dignity and
integrity of the profession. 
2.
Engineers shall at all times strive to serve the public interest.
a. Engineers shall seek opportunities to participate in civic affairs; career guidance
for youths; and work for the advancement of the safety, health and well-being of
their community.
b. Engineers shall not complete, sign, or seal plans and/or speciﬁcations that are not
in conformity with applicable engineering standards. If the client or employer in-
sists on such unprofessional conduct, they shall notify the proper authorities and
withdraw from further service on the project.
c. Engineers shall endeavor to extend public knowledge and appreciation of engi-
neering and its achievements.
3.
Engineers shall avoid all conduct or practice that deceives the public.
a. Engineers shall avoid the use of statements containing a material misrepresentation
of fact or omitting a material fact.
b. Consistent with the foregoing, Engineers may advertise for recruitment of personnel.
c. Consistent with the foregoing, Engineers may prepare articles for the lay or tech-
nical press, but such articles shall not imply credit to the author for work per-
formed by others.
4.
Engineers shall not disclose, without consent, conﬁdential information concerning the
business affairs or technical processes of any present or former client or employer, or
public body on which they serve.
a. Engineers shall not, without the consent of all interested parties, promote or
arrange for new employment or practice in connection with a speciﬁc project for
which the Engineer has gained particular and specialized knowledge.
Professional Obligations

862
Appendix / NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
b. Engineers shall not, without the consent of all interested parties, participate in or
represent an adversary interest in connection with a speciﬁc project or proceeding
in which the Engineer has gained particular specialized knowledge on behalf of a
former client or employer.
5.
Engineers shall not be inﬂuenced in their professional  duties by conﬂicting interests.
a. Engineers shall not accept financial or other considerations, including free
engineering designs, from material or equipment suppliers for specifying their
product.
b. Engineers shall not accept commissions or allowances, directly or indirectly, from
contractors or other parties dealing with clients or employers of the Engineer in
connection with work for which the Engineer is responsible.
6.
Engineers shall not attempt to obtain employment or advancement or professional
engagements by untruthfully criticizing other engineers, or by other improper or ques-
tionable methods.
a. Engineers shall not request, propose, or accept a commission on a contingent
basis under circumstances in which their judgment may be compromised.
b. Engineers in salaried positions shall accept part-time engineering work only to the
extent consistent with policies of the employer and in accordance with ethical
considerations.
c. Engineers shall not, without consent, use equipment, supplies, laboratory, or ofﬁce
facilities of an employer to carry on outside private practice.
7.
Engineers shall not attempt to injure, maliciously or falsely, directly or indirectly, the
professional reputation, prospects, practice, or employment of other engineers.
Engineers who believe others are guilty of unethical or illegal practice shall present
such information to the proper authority for action.
a. Engineers in private practice shall not review the work of another engineer for the
same client, except with the knowledge of such engineer, or unless the connection
of such engineer with the work has been terminated.
b. Engineers in governmental, industrial, or educational employ are entitled to review
and evaluate the work of other engineers when so required by their employment
duties.
c. Engineers in sales or industrial employ are entitled to make engineering compar-
isons of represented products with products of other suppliers.
8.
Engineers shall accept personal responsibility for their professional activities, pro-
vided, however, that Engineers may seek indemniﬁcation for services arising out of
their practice for other than gross negligence, where the Engineer’s interests cannot
otherwise be protected.
a. Engineers shall conform with state registration laws in the practice of engi-
neering.
b. Engineers shall not use association with a nonengineer, a corporation, or partner-
ship as a “cloak” for unethical acts.
9.
Engineers shall give credit for engineering work to those to whom credit is due, and
will recognize the proprietary interests of others.
a. Engineers shall, whenever possible, name the person or persons who may be indi-
vidually responsible for designs, inventions, writings, or other accomplishments.

863
b. Engineers using designs supplied by a client recognize that the designs remain the
property of the client and may not be duplicated by the Engineer for others with-
out express permission.
c. Engineers, before undertaking work for others in connection with which the Engineer
may make improvements, plans, design, inventions, or other records that may justify
copyrights or patents, should enter into a positive agreement regarding ownership.
d. Engineers’ designs, data, records, and notes referring exclusively to an employer’s
work are the employer’s property. Employer should indemnify the Engineer for use
of the information for any purpose other than the original purpose.
As Revised February 2001
“By order of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, former
Section 11(c) of the NSPE Code of Ethics prohibiting competitive bidding, and all policy
statements, opinions, rulings or other guidelines interpreting its scope, have been rescinded
as unlawfully interfering with the legal right of engineers, protected under the antitrust
laws, to provide price information to prospective clients; accordingly, nothing contained in
the NSPE Code of Ethics, policy statements, opinions, rulings or other guidelines prohibits
the submission of price quotations or competitive bids for engineering services at any time
or in any amount.”
Statement by NSPE Executive Committee
In order to correct misunderstandings which have been indicated in some instances since
the issuance of the Supreme Court decision and the entry of the Final Judgment, it is noted
that in its decision of April 25, 1978, the Supreme Court of the United States declared:
“The Sherman Act does not require competitive bidding.”
It is further noted that as made clear in the Supreme Court decision: 
1.
Engineers and ﬁrms may individually refuse to bid for engineering services.
2.
Clients are not required to seek bids for engineering services.
3.
Federal, state, and local laws governing procedures to procure engineering services
are not affected, and remain in full force and effect.
4.
State societies and local chapters are free to actively and aggressively seek legislation
for professional selection and negotiation procedures by public agencies.
5.
State registration board rules of professional conduct, including rules prohibiting
competitive bidding for engineering services, are not affected and remain in full force
and effect. State registration boards with authority to adopt rules of professional con-
duct may adopt rules governing procedures to obtain engineering services.
6.
As noted by the Supreme Court, “nothing in the judgment prevents NSPE and its
members from attempting to inﬂuence governmental action . . .”
NOTE: In regard to the question of application of the Code to corporations vis-à-vis
real persons, business form or type should not negate nor inﬂuence conformance of
individuals to the Code. The Code deals with professional services, which services
must be performed by real persons. Real persons in turn establish and implement poli-
cies within business structures. The Code is clearly written to apply to the Engineer
and it is incumbent on members of NSPE to endeavor to live up to its provisions. This
applies to all pertinent sections of the Code.
Statement by NSPE Executive Committee

864
Appendix / NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers
TABLE A.1 Coefﬁcients of Friction1
Friction Coefﬁcient
Static,
Sliding, or
Surface
Approximate
Typical 
Material Pair
Application
Rolling
Conditions
Range
Value2
Hard steel on hard steel
general
static
dry
0.15–0.78
0.45
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.10–0.42
0.25
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.005–0.23
0.11
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.03–0.12
0.08
Mild steel on mild steel
general
static
dry
0.11–0.74
0.50
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.11–0.57
0.35
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.09–0.19
0.11
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.01–0.09
0.08
Steel on bronze
general
static
dry
0.08–0.10
0.09
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.06–0.15
0.08
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.0004–0.06
0.06
“ 
“
“
sliding 
“
0.0004–0.03
0.03
Steel on cast iron
general
static
dry
0.15–0.29
0.20
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.09–0.39
0.12
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.05–0.18
0.10
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.0035–0.13
0.06
Steel on aluminum
general
static
dry
0.61
0.61
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.47
0.47
Steel on brass
general
static
dry
0.51
0.51
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.44
0.44
Steel on tungsten carbide
general
static
dry
0.50
0.50
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.08
0.08
Cast iron on cast iron
general
static
dry
0.16–1.10
0.60
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.12–0.25
0.18
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.05–0.15
0.10
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.06–0.16
0.10
Cast iron on bronze
general
sliding
dry
0.13–0.22
0.17
“ 
“
“
“
lubricated
0.05–0.08
0.07
Cast iron on brass
general
sliding
dry
0.30
0.30
Steel on steel
conical surfaces
static
dry
0.22
0.22
“ 
“
“
“
shrink ﬁtted
0.13
0.13
Steel on cast iron
conical surfaces
static
dry
0.16
0.16
“ 
“
“
“
shrink ﬁtted
0.33
0.33
Any metal on another
conical surfaces
static
lubricated
0.15
0.15
metal
Hard steel on babbitt
plain bearings
static
dry
0.42
0.42
metal
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.08–0.25
0.17
“ 
“
“
static
lubricated
0.35
0.35
“ 
“
“
sliding
“
0.055–0.14
0.10
Mild steel on cadmium-
plain bearings
sliding
lubricated
0.097
0.10
silver

865
TABLE A.1 (Continued)
Friction Coefﬁcient
Static,
Sliding, or
Surface
Approximate
Typical
Material Pair
Application
Rolling
Conditions
Range
Value2
Mild steel on phosphor
plain bearings
sliding
dry
0.34
034
bronze
“ 
“
“
“
lubricated
0.17
0.17
Steel on Teﬂon
plain bearings
static
dry
0.04–0.18
0.10
“ 
“
“
sliding
lubricated
0.04
0..04
Typical rolling element
deep groove ball 
rolling3
0.001–0.004
0.002
bearing materials
bearings
“ 
“
angular contact 
rolling3
0.002–0.003
0.002
ball bearings
“ 
“
thrust ball bearings
rolling3
0.001–0.006
0.002
“ 
“
roller bearings
rolling3
0.001–0.003
0.002
“ 
“
tapered roller bearings
rolling3
0.002–0.020
0.003
“ 
“
needle bearings
rolling3
0.003–0.010
0.003
Typical gearing materials
gearing
sliding
boundary 
0.06–0.20
0.15
lubrication
“ 
“
“
“
mixed
0.03–0.07
0.05
lubrication
“ 
“
“
“
full ﬁlm 
0.01–0.04
0.03
lubricaton
Cast iron on cast iron
clutches
sliding
dry
0.15–0.20
0.15
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.05
0.05
Cast iron on bronze
clutches
sliding
dry
0.13–0.22
0.15
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.05
0.05
Hard steel on hard steel
clutches
sliding
dry
0.10–0.42
0.15
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.05
0.05
Woven asbestos on cast
clutches
sliding
dry
0.3–0.6
0.30
iron or steel
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.1–0.2
0.10
Carbon graphite on cast
clutches
sliding
dry
0.25
0.25
iron
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.1–0.15
0.10
Cast iron on cast iron
brakes
sliding
dry
0.20
0.20
“ 
“
“
“
oily
0.07
0.07
Asbestos fabric on metal
brakes
sliding
dry
0.35–0.40
0.35
“ 
“
“
“
oily
0.25
0.25
Steel band on cast iron
belts
sliding
dry
0.18
0.18
Oak–tanned leather on
belts
sliding
dry
0.25
0.25
cast iron or steel
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.20
0.20
“ 
“
“
“
greasy
0.15
0.15

866
Appendix
TABLE A.1 (Continued)
Friction Coefﬁcient
Static,
Sliding, or
Surface
Approximate
Typical
Material Pair
Application
Rolling
Conditions
Range
Value2
Canvas on cast iron or 
belts
sliding
dry
0.20
0.20
steel
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.15
0.15
“ 
“
“
“
greasy
0.12
0.12
Rubber on cast iron or 
belts
sliding
dry
0.30
0.30
steel
“ 
“
“
“
wet
0.18
0.18
1Sources include the following:
1. Baumeister, T., ed., Mark’s Mechanical Engineers Handbood, 6th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958.
2. Carmichael, Colin, ed., Kent’s Mechanical Engineer’s Handbook, 12th ed., Wiley, New York, 1950.
3. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994.
4. Peterson, M. B., and Winer, W. O., eds., Wear Control Handbook, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1980.
5. Hindhede, U., et al., Machine Design Fundamentals: A Practical Approach, Wiley, New York, 1983.
6. Szeri, A. Z., Tribology: Friction, Lubrication, and Wear, Hemisphere Publishing, McGraw-Hill, 1980.
7. Orlov, P., Fundamentals of Machine Design (4 volumes), Mir Publishers, Moscow, 1977.
2”Typical” values shown are estimates made by the author of this textbook, and are thought to be appropriate unless more speciﬁc information 
is available. Coefﬁcient of friction ( ) data are remarkably variable and often contradictory. Designers must always accept responsibility for the
value chosen, so if speciﬁc data are not available, the axiom “friction is always against you” leads to the conservative choice of a high-end-of-
range value for 
when low friction forces are critical, and a low-end-of-range value when high friction forces are critical. It is sometimes 
necessary to conduct well-controlled experiments to obtain a speciﬁc value of 
for a given critical application.
3Friction torques calculated using this value are to be based on bearing bore.
m
m
m

867
TABLE A.2 Mass Moments of Inertia J and Radii of Gyration k for Selected Homogeneous Solid Bodies
Rotating About Selected Axes, as Sketched1
Mass Moment
Radius of 
Description of Body
of Inertia, J
Gyration, k
Case 1. Sphere
Case 2. Cylinder
Case 3. Thin circular disk
Case 4. Thin ring
Case 5. Cone
1Extracted from Hibbler, R. C., Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics, 2nd ed., Macmillan, New York, 1978. Also note that m is the mass of the 
rotating body.
kx = ky = A
3
8014R2 + h22
Jx = Jy = 3
80m14R2 + h22
kz = A
3
10R
Jz = 3
10mR2
kx = ky = A
1
2R
Jx = Jy = 1
2mR2
kz = R
Jz = mR2
kx = ky = A
1
4R
Jx = Jy = 1
4mR2
kz = A
1
2R
Jz = 1
2mR2
kx = ky = A
1
1213R2 + h22
Jx = Jy = 1
12 m13R2 + h22
kz = A
1
2 R
Jz = 1
2mR2
kx = ky = kz = A
2
5 R
Jx = Jy = Jz = 2
5mR2
V =
R3
4
3
V = R2h
V =
R2h
1
3
z
x
y
G
R
z
x
y
G
R
z
x
y
G
R
z
x
y
h
2
G
R
z
x
y
G
R
h
h
2
h
4

868
TABLE A.3 Section Properties of Selected W (Wide Flange) Shapes1
W
Shapes
A,
d,
,
,
,
T,
k,
,
,
,
,
,
W,
Designation
in2
in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in4
in
in4
in
lb/ft
W36  300
88.3
36.7
0.95
16.7
1.68
30.9
2.63
1.69
20,300
15.2
1300
3.83
300
W36  135
39.7
35.6
0.60
12.0
0.79
32.1
1.54
1.13
7,800
14.0
225
2.38
135
W24  162
47.7
25.0
0.71
13.0
1.22
20.8
1.72
1.19
5,170
10.4
443
3.05
162
W24  55
16.3
23.6
0.40
7.0
0.51
20.8
1.11
1.00
1,360
9.1
29
1.34
55
W18  119
35.1
19.0
0.66
11.3
1.06
15.1
1.46
1.19
2,190
7.9
253
2.69
119
W18  35
10.3
17.7
0.30
6.0
0.43
15.5
0.83
0.75
510
7.0
15
1.22
35
W16  100
29.7
17.0
0.59
10.4
0.99
13.3
1.69
1.13
1,500
7.1
186
2.50
100
W16  57
16.8
16.4
0.43
7.1
0.72
13.6
1.12
0.88
758
6.7
43
1.60
57
W16  50
14.7
16.3
0.38
7.1
0.63
13.6
1.03
0.81
659
6.7
37
1.59
50
W16  45
13.3
16.1
0.35
7.0
0.57
13.6
0.97
0.81
586
6.7
33
1.57
45
W16  40
11.8
16.0
0.31
7.0
0.51
13.6
0.91
0.81
518
6.6
29
1.57
40
W16  36
10.6
15.9
0.30
7.0
0.43
13.6
0.83
0.75
448
6.5
25
1.52
36
W16  26
7.7
15.7
0.25
5.5
0.35
13.6
0.75
0.75
301
6.3
9.6
1.12
26
W14  730
215.0
22.4
3.07
17.9
4.91
10.0
5.51
2.75
14,300
8.2
4,720
4.69
730
W14  500
147.0
19.6
2.19
17.0
3.50
10.0
4.10
2.31
8,210
7.5
2,880
4.43
500
W14  233
68.5
16.0
1.07
15.9
1.72
10.0
2.32
1.75
3,010
6.6
1,150
4.10
233
W14  145
42.7
14.8
0.68
15.5
1.09
10.0
1.69
1.56
1,710
6.3
677
3.98
133
W14  90
26.5
14.0
0.44
14.5
0.71
10.0
1.31
1.44
999
6.1
362
3.70
90
ryy
Iyy
rxx
Ixx
k1
tf
bf
tw
d
X
X
T
Y
Y
tf
bf
k1
k
k
tw

869
TABLE A.3 (Continued)
W
Shapes
A,
d,
,
,
,
T,
k,
,
,
,
,
,
W,
Designation
in2
in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in4
in
in4
in
lb/ft
W14  48
14.1
13.8
0.34
8.0
0.60
10.9
1.19
1.00
484
5.9
51
1.91
48
W14  22
6.5
13.7
0.23
5.0
0.34
11.6
0.74
0.75
199
5.5
7.0
1.04
22
W12  336
98.8
16.8
1.78
13.4
2.96
9.1
3.55
1.69
4,060
6.4
1,190
3.47
336
W12  96
28.2
12.7
0.55
12.2
0.90
9.1 
1.50
1.13
833
5.4
270
3.09
96
W12  50
14.6 
12.2
0.37
8.1 
0.64
9.3 
1.14
0.94
391
5.2
56
1.96
50
W12  14
4.2 
11.9 
0.20
4.0 
0.23
10.4
0.53
0.56
89 
4.6
2.4
0.75
14
W10  112
32.9
11.4
0.76
10.4
1.25
7.5 
1.75
1.00
716
4.7
236
2.68
112
W10  45
13.3
10.1
0.35
8.0 
0.62
7.5 
1.12
0.81
248
4.3
53 
2.01
45
W10  12
3.5 
9.9 
0.19
4.0 
0.21
8.4 
0.51
0.56
54 
3.9
2.2
0.79
12
W8  67
19.7
9.0 
0.57
8.3
0.94  
5.8
1.33  
0.94
272
3.7
89 
2.12
67
W8  28
8.2 
8.1 
0.29
6.5 
0.47 
6.1 
0.86
0.63
98 
3.5
22 
1.62
28
W8  10
3.0 
7.9
0.17
3.9 
0.21
6.5 
0.51
0.50
31 
3.2
2.1
0.84
10
W6  25
7.4 
6.4 
0.32
6.1 
0.46
4.5 
0.75
0.56
54 
2.7
17 
1.52
25
W6  9
2.7 
5.9 
0.17
3.9 
0.22
4.5 
0.47
0.50
16 
2.5
2.2
0.91
9 
W5  19
5.6 
5.2 
0.27
5.0 
0.43
3.5 
0.73
0.44
26 
2.2
9.1
1.28
19
W4  13
3.8 
4.2 
0.28
4.1 
0.35
2.6 
0.60
0.50
11
1.7
3.9
1.00
13
1Condensed from Manual of Steel Construction, Load and Resistance Factor Design, 3rd ed., Chicago, 2001, with permission from American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc.
Many additional commercially available sections are tabulated. Some dimensions have been rounded.
ryy
Iyy
rxx
Ixx
k1
tf
bf
tw
d
X
X
T
Y
Y
tf
bf
k1
k
k
tw

870
TABLE A.4 Section Properties of Selected S (Standard I) Shapes1
S
Shapes
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Designation
in2
in
in
in
in
in
in
in4
in
in4
in
lb/ft
S24  121
35.5
24.5
0.80
8.1
1.09
20.5
2.00
3,160
9.4
83
1.53
121
S20  75
22.0
20.0
0.64
6.4
0.80
16.8
1.63
1,280
7.6
30
1.16
75
S18  70
20.5
18.0
0.71
6.3
0.69
15.0
1.50
923  
6.7
24
1.08
70
S15  50
14.7
15.0
0.55
5.6
0.62
12.3
1.38
485  
5.8
16
1.03
50
S12  50
14.6
12.0
0.69
5.5
0.66
9.1 
1.44
303  
4.6
16
1.03
50
S10  35
10.3
10.0
0.59
4.9
0.49
7.8 
1.13
147  
3.8
8 
0.90
35
S8  23
6.8
8.0 
0.44
4.2
0.43 
6.0 
1.00
65   
3.1
4.3
0.80
23
S6  17.25
5.1
6.0 
0.47
3.6
0.36
4.4 
0.81
26   
2.3
2.3 
0.68
20
S6  12.5
3.7
6.0 
0.23
3.3
0.36
4.4 
0.81
22   
2.5
1.8
0.71
12.5
S5  10
2.9 
5.0 
0.21
3.0
0.33
3.5 
0.75
12   
2.1
1.2
0.64
10
S4  7.7
2.3 
4.0 
0.19
2.7
0.29
2.5 
0.75
6.1
1.6
0.7
0.58
7.7
S3  5.7
1.7
3.0 
0.17
2.3
0.26
1.8 
0.63
2.5  
1.2
0.5
0.52
5.7
1Condensed from Manual of Steel Construction, Load and Resistance Factor Design, 3rd ed., Chicago, 2001, with permission from American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc. 
Many additional commercially available sections are tabulated. Some dimensions have been rounded.
W
ryy
Iyy
rxx
Ixx
k
T
tf
bf
tw
d
A
X
X
T
d
tf
Y
Y
bf
k
k
tw

871
TABLE A.5 Section Properties of Selected C (Channel) Shapes1
C
Shapes
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
Designation
in2
in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in4
in
in4
in
lb/ft
C15  50
14.7
15.0
0.72
3.7
0.65
12.1
1.44
0.80
0.58
404
5.2
11
0.87
50
C12  30
8.8 
12.0
0.51
3.2
0.50
9.8 
1.13
0.67
0.62
162
4.3
5.1
0.76
30
C10  20
5.9 
10.0
0.38
2.7
0.44
8.0 
1.00
0.61
0.64
79 
3.7
2.8
0.69
20
C9  15
4.4 
9.0 
0.29
2.5
0.41
7.0 
1.00
0.59
0.68
51 
3.4
1.9
0.66
15
C8  11.5
3.4
8.0 
0.22
2.3
0.39
6.1
0.94
0.57
0.70
33
3.1 
1.3
0.62
11.5
C7  9.8
2.9 
7.0 
0.21
2.1
0.37
5.3 
0.88
0.54
0.65
21  
2.7
1.0
0.58
9.8
C6  10.5 
3.1
6.0 
0.31
2.0 
0.34
4.4 
0.81
0.50
0.49
15 
2.2
0.9 
0.53
10.5
C5  9
2.6 
5.0 
0.33
1.9
0.32
3.5 
0.75
0.48
0.43
8.9 
1.8
0.6
0.49
9 
C4  5.4
1.6 
4.0 
0.18
1.6
0.30
2.5 
0.75
0.46
0.50
3.9 
1.6
0.3
0.44
5.4
C3  4.1
1.2 
3.0 
0.17
1.4
0.27
1.6 
0.69
0.44
0.46
1.7 
1.2
0.2
0.40
4.1
1Condensed from Manual of Steel Construction, Load and Resistance Factor Design, 3rd ed., Chicago, 2001, with permission from American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc.
Many additional commercially available sections are tabulated. Some dimensions have been rounded.
W,
ryy
Iyy
rxx
Ixx
eo
x
k
T
tf
bf
tw
d
A
T
X
X
Y
Y
d
tf
bf
k
k
tw
eo
x

872
TABLE A.6 Section Properties of Selected Equal-Leg L (Angle) Shapes1
L
Shapes
,
,
,
,
,
,
, 
Designation
in
in2
in
in4
in
in
lb/ft
L8  8 
1.13
16.8
2.40
98
2.4
1.6
57.2
L8  8 
0.50
7.8 
2.17
49
2.5
1.6
26.7
L6  6  1
1.00
11.0
1.86
35
1.9
1.2
37.5
L6  6 
0.38
4.4 
1.62
15
1.9
1.2
14.9
L5  5 
0.88
8.0 
1.56
18
1.5
1.0
27.3
L5  5 
0.31
3.1 
1.35
7.4
1.6
1.0
10.4
L4  4 
0.75
5.4 
1.27
7.6
1.2
0.8
18.5
L4  4 
0.25
1.9 
1.08
3.0
1.3
0.8
6.6
L3  3 
0.50
2.8
0.93
2.2
0.90
0.6
9.4
L3  3 
0.19
1.1 
0.81
0.95
0.93
0.6
3.7
L2
 2

0.38
1.7 
0.76
0.97
0.75
0.5
5.9
L2  2 
0.13
0.5 
0.53
0.19
0.62
0.4
1.7
1Condensed from Manual of Steel Construction, Load and Resistance Factor Design, 3rd ed., Chicago, 2001, with permission from American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc.
Many additional commercially available sections are tabulated. Some dimensions have been rounded.
18
38
12
12
316
12
14
34
516
78
38
12
118
W
rzz = rmin
rxx = ryy
Ixx = Iyy
x = y
A
t
Y
Y
X
X
Z
Z
x
y

References
Chapter 1
1. Dieter, G. E., Volume Chair, ASM Handbook, vol. 20,
Material Selection and Design, ASM International, Materials
Park, OH, 44073, 1997.
2. Kelley, R. E., “In Praise of Followers,” Harvard Business
Review, v. 66, no. 6, Nov–Dec 1988, pp. 142–148. 
3. Hauser, J. R., and Clausing, D., “The House of Quality,”
Harvard Business Review, v. 66, no. 3, May–June 1998, pp.
63–73.
4. “3-D Static Strength Prediction Program,” version 4.2,
Center for Ergonomics, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor, May
1999.
5. Ricks, Thomas E., “Lesson Learned,” Wall Street Journal,
May 23, 1997.
6. American National Standards Institute, 11 West 42nd
Street, New York, 10036.
7. International Organization for Standardization, Geneva,
Switzerland.
8. Humphreys, K. K., What Every Engineer Should Know
About Ethics, Marcel Decker, New York, 1999.
9. American Association of Engineering Societies, Model
Guide for Professional Conduct, Washington, DC, Dec. 13, 1984.
10. National Society of Professional Engineers, Code of Ethics
for Engineers, Alexandria, VA, July, 2001.
11. Hoversten, P., “Bad Math Added Up to Doomed Mars
Craft,” USA Today, McLean, VA, Oct 1, 1999, p. 4A.
12. Standard for Use of the International System of Units (SI):
The Modern Metric System, IEEE/ASTM SI ID-1997, ASTM
Committee E43 on SI Practice, American Society for Testing
and Materials, West Conshohocken, PA., 1997.
Chapter 2
1. Collins, J. A., Failure of Materials in Mechanical Design:
Analysis, Prediction, and Prevention, 2nd ed., Wiley, 1993.
2. Hayden, H. W., Moffat, W. G., and Wulff, J., The Structure
and Properties of Materials, vol. III, Mechanical Behavior,
Wiley, 1965.
3. Popov, E. P., Introduction to Mechanics of Solids, Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
4. Crandall, S. H., and Dahl, N. C., An Introduction to the
Mechanics of Solids, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1957.
5. Timoshenko, S. P., and Gere, J. M., Theory of Elastic
Stability, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1961.
6. Shanley, F. R., Mechanics of Materials, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1967.
7. Shanley, F. R., Strength of Materials, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1957.
8. Military Standardization Handbook, Metallic Materials
and Elements for Aerospace Vehicle Structure. MIL-HDBK-
5B, Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D.C.,
September, 1971.
9. Horton, W. H., Bailey, S. C., and McQuilkin, B. H., An
Introduction to Instability, Stanford University, Paper No. 219,
ASTM Annual Meeting, June 1966.
10. Timoshenko, S. P., Theory of Elastic Stability, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1936.
11. Juvinall, R. C., Engineering Considerations of Stress,
Strain, and Strength, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
12. Larson, F. R. and Miller, J., “Time-Temperature
Relationships for Rupture and Creep Stresses”, ASME
Transactions, v. 74, 1952, pp. 765 ff.
13. Strum, R. G., and Howell, F. M., “A Method for Analyzing
Creep Data,” ASME Transactions, v. 58, 1936, p. A62.
14. Robinson, E. L., “The Effect of Temperature Variation on
the Long-Time Rupture Strength of Steels,” ASME Transactions,
v. 74, 1952, pp. 777–781.
15. Burwell, J. T., Jr., “Survey of Possible Wear Mechanisms,”
Wear, v. 1, 1957, pp. 119–141.
16. Peterson, M. B., Gabel, M. K., and Derine, M. J.,
“Understanding Wear”; Ludema, K. C., “A Perspective on Wear
Models”; Rabinowicz, E., “The Physics and Chemistry of
Surfaces”; McGrew, J., “Design of Wear of Sliding Bearings”;
Bayer, R. G., “Design for  Wear of Lightly Loaded Surfaces”;
ASME Standardization News, v. 2, no. 9, September 1974, 
pp. 5–32.
873

874
References
17. Rabinowicz, E., Friction and Wear of Materials, Wiley,
New York, 1966.
18. Lipson, C., Wear Consideration in Design, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967.
19. Fontana, M. G., Corrosion Engineering, 3rd ed., McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1986.
20. Fontana, M. G., and Green, N. D., Corrosion Engineering,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
21. Collins, J. A., “A Study of the Phenomenon of Fretting-
Fatigue with Emphasis on Stress Field Effects,” PhD.
Dissertation, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 1963.
22. Marin, J., Mechanical Properties of Material and Design,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1952.
23. Hoeppner, D. W., Chandrasekaran, V., and Elliot, C. B.,
Fretting Fatigue: Current Technology and Practice, ASTM STP
1367, American Society of Testing of Materials, West
Conshohocken, PA, 2000.
24. Juvinall, R. C., and Marshek, K. M., Fundamental of
Machine Component Design, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1991.
25. Norton, R. L., Machine Design, Prentice-Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
26. Burr, A. H., and Cheatham, J. B., Mechanical Analysis and
Design, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991.
27. Spotts, M. F., Design of Machine Elements, 6th  ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
28. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R., Mechanical Engineering
Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
29. Kapur, K. C., and Lamberson, L. R., Reliability
Engineering Design, Wiley, New York, 1977.
30. Mischke, C. R., “Stochastic Methods in Mechanical
Design: Part 1: Property Data and Weibull Parameters” (pp.
1–10); “Part 2: Fitting the Weibull Distribution to the Data” (pp.
11–16); “Part 3: A Methodology” (pp. 17–20); “Part 4:
Applications” (pp. 21–28), Failure Prevention and Reliability,
S. Sheppard, ed., American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
New York, 1989.
31. Jenkins, Jr., H. W., “Business World,” Wall Street Journal,
Dow Jones & Co., New York, Dec. 15, 1999.
32. Kopala, D., and Raabe, A., “Redundancy Management:
Reducing the Probability of Failure,” Motion, Applied Motion
Products, Inc., Watsonville, CA, Fall, 1997.
33. Parker, E. R., “Modern Concepts of Flow and Fracture.”
Transactions of American Society of Metals, 1959, p. 511.
Chapter 3
1. Materials Engineering, Materials Selector, Penton
Publishing, Cleveland, December 1991.
2. Damage Tolerant Design Handbook, Metals and Ceramics
Information Center, Battelle, Columbus, 1983.
3. Ashby, M. F., Materials Selection in Mechanical Design,
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 1999.
4. Machine Design, Materials Reference Issue, Penton
Publishing, Cleveland, 1991.
5. Marks’ Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers, 9th
ed., Avallone, E. A., and Baumeister III, T., McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1996.
6. Metallic Materials and Elements for Aerospace Vehicle
Structures, MIL-HDBK-5, Department of Defense, Washington,
DC, 1971.
7. ASM Handbook, vol. 1, Properties and Selection: Irons,
Steels, and High Performance Alloys, ASM International,
Materials Park, OH, 1990.
8. ASM Handbook, vol. 2, Properties and Selection:
Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose Materials, ASM
International, Materials Park, OH, 1991.
9. Metals Handbook, Desk Edition, ASM International,
Materials Park, OH, 1985.
10. ASM Materials Handbook, Desk Edition, ASM
International, Materials Park, OH, 1995.
11. Westbrook, J. H., and Rumble, J. R., eds., Computerized
Materials Data Systems, Workshop Proceedings, Fairfield
Glade, TN, National Bureau of Standards, 1983.
12. Fontana, M. G., and Green, N. D., Corrosion Engineering,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
13. Gough, H. J., and Sopwith, D. G., “The Resistance of Some
Special Bronzes to Fatigue and Corrosion Fatigue,” J. Inst.
Metals, v. 60, no. 1, 1937, pp. 143–153.
14. Smith, C. O., ORSORT, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.
15. Johnson, R. L., Optimal Design of Mechanical Elements,
Wiley, New York, 1961.
16. “MSC/MVISION 
Materials 
Information 
System,”
MacNeal-Schwendler Corporation, 815 Colorado Blvd., Los
Angeles, CA 90041.
17. “CMS Cambridge Materials Selector,” Granta Design Ltd.,
20 Trumpington St., Cambridge CB @ 1QA, UK.
18. “MAPP,” EMS Software, 2234 Wade Ct., Hamilton, OH
45013.
19. Westbrook, J. H., “Sources of Material Property Data and
Information,” in ASM Handbook, Vol. 20, Material Selection and
Design, ASM International, Materials Park, OH 44073, 1997.
20. CMS: Cambridge Material Selector, Cambridge University
Engineering Department, Cambridge, UK, 1992.
21. PERITUS, Matsel Systems, Ltd., Liverpool, UK.
Chapter 4
1. Timoshenko, S. P., Strength of Materials, Part I, Van
Norstrand Press, New York, 1955.
2. Manual of Steel Construction, 8th ed., American Institute
of Steel Construction, Inc., 400 North Michigan Ave., Chicago,
IL 60611, 1988.
3. Juvinall, R. C., and Marshek, K. M., Fundamentals of
Machine Component Design, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1991.

References 875
4. Young, W. C., Roark’s Formulas for Stress and Strain, 6th
ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
5. Faupel, J. H., Engineering Design, Wiley, New York, 1964.
6. Timoshenko, S. P., and Goodier, J. N., Theory of Elasticity,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
7. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1994.
8. Boresi, A. P., Sidebottom, O. M., Seely, F. B., and Smith,
J. O., Advanced Mechanics of Materials, 3rd ed., Wiley, New
York, 1978.
9. Juvinall, R. C., Stress, Strain and Strength, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1967.
10. Lyst, J. O., “The Effect of Residual Strains upon Rotating
Beam Fatigue Properties of Some Aluminum Alloys,”
Technical Report No. 90-60-34, Alcoa, Pittsburgh, 1960.
Chapter 5
1. Collins, J. A., Failure of Materials in Mechanical Design:
Analysis, Prediction, Prevention, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1993.
2. Pilkey, W. D., Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors, 2nd
ed., Wiley,  New York, 1997.
3. Young, W. C., and Budynas, R., Roark’s Formulas for
Stress and Strain, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
4. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1994.
5. Spotts, M. F., Shoup, T. E., and Hornberger, L. E. Design
of Machine Elements, 8th ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle
River, NJ, 2004.
6. Juvinall, R. C., Engineering Considerations of Stress,
Strain and Strength, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
7. Tada, H., Paris, P. C., and Irwin, G., Stress Analysis of
Cracks Handbook, 3rd. ed., ASME Press, New York, 2000.
8. “Standard Test Method for Plane Strain Fracture
Toughness of Metallic Materials,” Designation: E399-90,
Annual Book of ASTM Standards, V. 3.01, American Society
for Testing Materials, Philadelphia, 1992.
9. Rolfe, S. T., and Barsom, J. M., Fracture and Fatigue Control
in Structures, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1977.
10. Hertzberg, R. W., Deformation and Fracture Mechanics of
Engineering Materials, 4th ed., Wiley, New York, 1996.
11. Gallagher, J., Damage Tolerant Design Handbook, MCIC-
HB-01R, December 1983.
12. Matthews, W. T., “Plane Strain Fracture Toughness (KIC)
Data Handbook for Metals,” Report No. AMMRC M573-6,
U.S. Army Material Command, NTIS, Springﬁeld, VA, 1973.
13. Kanninen, M. F., and Popelar, C. H., Advanced Fracture
Mechanics, Oxford University Press, New York, 1985.
14. Irwin, G. R., “Fracture Mode Transition for a Crack
Transversing a Plate,” Journal of Basic Engineering, Trans.
ASME, V 82, 1960, pp. 417–425.
15. Rice, R. C., ed., Fatigue Design Handbook AE-10, 2nd ed.,
Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, 1988.
16. Madyag, A. F., Metal Fatigue Theory and Design, Wiley,
New York, 1969.
17. Grover, H. J., Gordon, S. A., and Jackson, C. R., Fatigue of
Metals and Structures, Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington,
DC, 1954.
18. Higdon, A., Olsen, E. H., Stiles, W. R., Weese, J. A., and
Riley, W. F., Mechanics of Materials, 4th ed., Wiley, New York,
1985.
19. Stephens, R. I., Fatemi, A., Stephens, R. R., and Fuchs, H. O.,
Metal Fatigue in Engineering, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 2001.
20. Budynas, R. G., and Nisbett, J. K., Shigley’s Mechanical
Engineering Design, 8th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008.
21. Bannantine, J. A., Comer, J. J., and Handrock, J. L.,
Fundamentals of Metal Fatigue Analysis, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
22. Burr, A. H., and Cheatham, J. B., Mechanical Analysis and
Design, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
23. Proceedings of the Conference on Welded Structures, V. I
and II, Welding Institute, Cambridge, England, 1971.
24. Stulen, F. B., Cummings, H. N., and Schulte, W. C.,
“Preventing Fatigue Failures-Part 5,” Machine Design, v. 33,
no. 13, 1961.
25. Manson, S. S., and Halford, G. R., Fatigue and Durability
of Structural Materials, ASM International, Materials Park,
Ohio, 2006.
26. Morrow, J., “Fatigue Properties of Metals”, Sec. 3.2, SAE
Advances in Engineering, V4, 1968, pp. 21–29.
27. Grover, H. J., Fatigue of Aircraft Structures, Government
Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC, 1966.
28. Dowling, N. E., Mechanical Behavior of Materials, 3rd ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 1990.
29. Dowling, N. E., “Fatigue Failure Predictions for
Complicated Stress-Strain Histories,” Journal of Materials,
v. 7, no. 1, March 1972, pp. 71–87.
30. Morrow, J. D., Martin, J. F., and Dowling, N. E., “Local
Stress-Strain Approach to Cumulative Fatigue Damage
Analysis,” Final Report, T. & A.M. Report No. 379, Dept. of
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, University of Illinois,
Urbana, January, 1974.
31. Wundt, B. M., Effects of Notches on Low Cycle Fatigue,
STP-490, 
American 
Society 
for 
Testing 
Materials,
Philadelphia, 1972.
32. Hoeppner, D. W., and Krupp, W. E., “Prediction of
Component Life by Application of Fatigue Crack Growth
Knowledge,” Engineering Fracture Mechanics, v. 6, 1974,
pp. 47–70.
33. Paris, P. C., and Erdogan, F., “A Critical Analysis of Crack
Propagation Laws,” Journal of Basic Engineering, ASME
Transactions, Series D, v. 85, no. 4, 1963, pp. 528–534.

876
References
34. Rolfe, S. T., and Barsom, J. M., Fracture and Fatigue
Control in Structures, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1977.
Chapter 6
1. Marshek, K. M., Design of Machine and Structural Parts,
Wiley, New York, 1987.
2. Young, W. C., Roark’s Formulas for Stress and Strain, 6th
ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
3. Preferred Limits and Fits for Cylindrical Parts, ANSI
B4.1-1967, reafﬁrmed 1999; Preferred Metric Limits and Fits,
ANSI B4.2-1978, reaffirmed 1999, American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, New York.
4. Dimensioning and Tolerancing for Engineering Drawings,
ANSI Y14.5M-1994, American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, New York.
5. Spotts, M. F., Design of Machine Elements, 6th ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
6. Foster, L. W., Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing,
Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1970.
7. Baumeister, T., Mark’s Standard Handbook for
Mechanical Engineers, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
8. DeDoncker, D., and Spencer, A., “Assembly Tolerance
Analysis with Simulation and Optimization Techniques,” SAE
Technical Paper 870263, Society of Automotive Engineers,
Warrendale, PA, 1987.
9. “Improve Quality and Reduce Cost Through Controlled
Variation and Robust Design,” Brochure SW308, Engineering
Animation, Inc. (EAI), Ames, IA.
Chapter 7
1. Dixon, J. R., and Poli, C., Engineering Design and Design
for Manufacturing, Field Stone Publishers, Conway, MA, 1995.
2. Kalpakjian, S., Manufacturing Processes for Engineering
Materials, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1984.
3. DeGarmo, 
E. 
P., 
Materials 
and 
Processes 
in
Manufacturing, 5th ed., MacMillan, New York, 1979.
4. Redford, A., and Chal, J., Design for Assembly, McGraw-
Hill, London, 1994.
5. Boothroyd, G., and Dewhurst, P., Product Design for
Assembly Handbook, Boothroyd Dewhurst, Inc., Wakeﬁeld, RI,
1987.
6. Boothroyd, G., and Dewhurst, P., “Design for Assembly:
Selecting the Right Method,” Machine Design, Penton
Publishing, Cleveland, Nov. 10, 1983, pp. 94–98.
7. Boothroyd, G., and Dewhurst, P., “Design for Assembly:
Manual Assembly,” Machine Design, Penton Publishing,
Cleveland, Dec. 8, 1983, pp. 140–145.
8. Dewhurst, P., and Boothroyd, G., “Design for Assembly:
Automatic Assembly,” Machine Design, Penton Publishing,
Cleveland, Jan. 26, 1984, pp. 87–92.
9. Dewhurst, P., and Boothroyd, G., “Design for Assembly:
Robots,” Machine Design, Penton Publishing, Cleveland, Feb.
23, 1984, pp. 72–76.
10. Boothroyd, G., and Dewhurst, P., Design for Assembly
Handbook, University of Mass., Amherst, MA, 1983.
11. McMaster, R. C. (ed.). Nondestructive Testing Handbook,
2nd ed., American Society for Nondestructive Testing,
Columbus, OH, 1987, vols. 1 and 2.
12. Pere, E., Gomez, D., Langrana, N., and Burdea, G.,  “Virtual
Mechanical Assembly on a PC-Based System,” Proceedings of
the 1996 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences,
Irvine, CA, August 18–22, 1996.
13. Shyamsundar, N., Ashai, Z., and Gadh, R., “Design for
Disassembly Methodoly for Virtual Prototypes,” Proceedings
of the 1996 ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences,
Irvine, CA, August 18–22, 1996.
14. Bulkeley, W. M., “Parametric Resets Its Design Software to
Match Engineering’s Needs,” Wall Street Journal, Dow Jones &
Co., New York, Dec. 27, 1999.
Chapter 8
1. Den Hartog, J. P., Mechanical Vibrations, McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1947.
2. Inman, D. F., Engineeing Vibrations, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1996.
3. Norton, R. L., Machine Design—An Integrated Approach,
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
4. Spotts, M. F., Design of Machine Elements, 6th ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
5. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R., Mechanical Engineering
Design, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
6. Faires, V. M., Design of Machine Elements, 4th ed.,
Macmillan, New York, 1965.
7. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R. eds., Standard Handbook
of Machine Design, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986.
8. Burr, A. H., and Cheatham, J. B.,  Mechanical Analysis and
Design, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.
9. Deutschman, A. D., Michels, W. J., and Wilson, C. E.,
Machine Design—Theory and Practice, Macmillan, New York,
1975.
10. Peterson, R. E., Stress Concentration Factors, Wiley, New
York, 1974.
11. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1994.
12. Walsh, R. A., McGraw-Hill Machining and Metalworking
Handbook, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1994.
13. Pestel, E. C., and Leckie, F. A., Matrix Methods in
Elastomechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1963.
14. Rieder, W. G., and Busby, H. R., Introductory Engineering
Modeling Emphasizing Differential Models and Computer
Simulations, Wiley, New York, 1986.

References 877
Chapter 9
1. The ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, Sections I–XI,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1995.
2. Timoshenko, S., and Goodier, J. N., Theory of Elasticity,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1951.
3. Pilkey, W. D., Peterson’s Stress Concentration Factors, 2nd
ed., Wiley, 1997.
Chapter 10
1. Machine Design: Mechanical Drives Reference Issue,
Penton Publishing, Cleveland, Oct. 13, 1988.
2. Hersey, M. D., Theory and Research in Lubrication, Wiley,
New York, 1966.
3. Burr, A. H., and Cheatham, J. B., Mechanical Analysis and
Design, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1995.
4. Hamrock, B. J., Fundamentals of Fluid Film Lubrication,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993.
5. Juvinall, R. C., and Marshek, K. M., Fundamentals of
Machine Component Design, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1991.
6. Raymondi, A. A., and Boyd, J., “A Solution for the Finite
Journal Bearing and Its Application to Analysis and Design,”
Parts I, II, III, Trans. American Society of Lubrication
Engineers, v. 1, no. 1, pp. 159–209, 1958.
7. Tower, B., “Reports on Friction Experiments,” Proc. Inst.
Mech. Engr., First Report Nov. 1883, Second Report 1885,
Third Report 1888, Fourth Report, 1891.
8. Reynolds, O., “On the Theory of Lubrication and Its
Application to Mr. Beauchamp Tower’s Experiments,” Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. (London), v. 177, p. 157 ff., 1886.
9. Spotts, M. F., Design of Machine Elements, 2nd ed.,
Prentice-Hall, New York, 1953.
10. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R., Mechanical Engineering
Design, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
11. Currie, I. G., Fundamental Mechanics of Fluids, 2nd ed.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
12. Sommerfeld, A., “Zur Hydrodynamischen Theorie der
Schmiermittel-Reibung” (“On the Hydrodynamic Theory of
Lubrication”), Z. Math. Physik, v. 50, p. 97 ff., 1904.
13. Fuller, D. D., Theory and Practice of Lubrication for
Engineers, Wiley, New York, 1956.
Chapter 11
1. “Power and Motion Control,” Machine Design, Penton
Publishing, Cleveland, June 1989.
2. Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Ball Bearings,
ANSI/AFBMA Standard 9-1990, American National Standards
Institute, New York, 1990.
3. Load Ratings and Fatigue Life for Roller Bearings,
ANSI/AFBMA Standard 11-1990, American National
Standards Institute, New York, 1990.
4. Shaft and Housing Fits for Metric Radial Ball and Roller
Bearings (Except Tapered Roller Bearings) Conforming to
Basic Boundary Plans, ANSI/ABMA Standard 7-1995,
American National Standards Institute, New York, 1995.
5. SKF,® “General Catalog 4000 US,” SKFUSA, King of
Prussia, PA, 1991.
6. Timken,® “The Tapered Roller Bearing Guide,” Timken
Company, Canton, OH, 1994.
7. Tallian, T. E., “On Competing Failure Modes in Rolling
Contact,” Trans. ASLE, v. 10, pp. 418–439, 1967.
8. Skurka, J. C., “Elastohydrodynamic Lubrication of Roller
Bearings,” J. Lubr. Technology, v. 92, pp. 281–291, 1970.
9. Hamrock, B. J., Fundamentals of Fluid Film Lubrication,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1993.
Chapter 12
1. Acme Screw Threads, ASME B1.5-1988, American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1988.
2. Stub Acme Screw Threads, ASME B1.8-1988, American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1988.
3. Buttress Inch Screw Threads, 7deg/45deg Form with 0.6
Pitch Basic Height of Thread Engagement, ASME B1.9-1973
(R1992), American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New
York, 1992.
4. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1994.
5. Parker, L., and Levin, A., “ ’97 Check Found Stabilizer
Piece Worn,” USA Today, v. 18, no. 107, p. 73A, Arlington, VA,
Feb. 14, 2000.
Chapter 13
1. Parmley, R. O., ed., Standard Handbook of Fastening and
Joining, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
2. DeGarmo, E. P., Materials and Processes in Manufacturing,
Macmillan, New York, 1979.
3. Uniﬁed Inch Screw Threads (UN and UNR Thread Form),
ASME B1.1-1989, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
New York, 1989.
4. Metric Screw Threads—M Profile, ASME B1.13M-1995,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1995.
5. Metric Screw Threads—MS Proﬁle, ASME B1.21M-1978,
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 1978.
6. Ito, Y., Toyoda, J., and Nagata, S., “Interface Pressure
Distribution in a Bolt-Flange Assembly,” ASME Paper No. 77-
WA/DE-11, 1977.
7. Little, R. E., “Bolted Joints; How Much Give?,” Machine
Design, Nov. 9, 1967.
8. Bruhn, E. F., Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicle
Structures, Tristate Offset Company, 817 Main Street,
Cincinnati, OH 45202, 1965.

878
References
9. Connor, L. P., ed., Welding Handbook, 8th ed., v. 1,
American Welding Society, Miami, FL, 1987.
10. Norris, C. H., “Photoelastic Investigation of Stress
Distribution in Transverse Fillet Welds,” Welding Journal, v.
24, p. 557, 1945. 
11. Deutschman, A. D., Michels, W. J., and Wilson, C. E.,
Machine Design, Theory and Practice, Macmillan, New York,
1975.
12. Wileman, J., Choudhury, M., and Green, I., “Computation
of Member Stiffness in Bolted Connections,” Journal of
Mechanical Design, Transactions of the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, v. 113, Dec., 1991, New York.
13. Jenny, C. L., and O’Brien, A., eds., Welding Handbook,
9th ed., v. 1, American Welding Society, Miami, FL, 2001.
Chapter 14
1. Spring Design Manual, AE-21, 2nd ed., Society of
Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, 1996.
2. Design Handbook: Engineering Guide to Spring Design,
Associated Spring, Barnes Group, Bristol, CT, 1987
3. Wahl, A. M., Mechanical Springs, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1963
4. Timoshenko, S., and Goodier, J. N., Theory of Elasticity,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1951.
5. Collins, J. A., Failure of Materials in Mechanical Design,
2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1993.
6. Juvinall, R. C., and Marshek, K. M., Fundamentals of
Machine Component Design, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York,
1991.
7. Maier, K. W., “Springs That Store Energy Best,” Product
Engineering, v. 29, no. 45, Nov. 10, 1958.
Chapter 15
1. Dudley, D. W., Handbook of Practical Gear Design,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1984.
2. Phelan, R. M., Fundamentals of Mechanical Design, 3rd
ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1970.
3. Wilson, C. E., Sadler, J. P., and Michels, W. J., Kinematics
and Dynamics of Machinery, Harper & Row Publishers, New
York, 1983.
4. Mabie, H. H., and Ocvirk, F. W., Mechanisms and
Dynamics of Machinery, Wiley, New York, 1975.
5. Juvinall, R. L., and Marshek, K., Fundamentals of Machine
Component Design, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1991.
6. Norton, R. L., Machine Design, Prentice-Hall, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 1996.
7. Houser, D. R., “Gear Noise Sources and Their Prediction
Using Mathematical Models,” Gear Design, AE 15, SAE
International, Warrendale, PA, 1990.
8. ANSI/AGMA 1010-E95 (Revision of AGMA 10.04),
American National Standard, Appearance of Gear Teeth—
Terminology of Wear and Failure, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, Alexandria, VA, Dec. 13, 1995.
9. Breen, D. H., “Fundamentals of Gear/Strength Relationships;
Materials,” Gear Design, AE15, SAE International, Warrendale,
PA, 1990.
10. ANSI/AGMA 2001-C95, American National Standard,
Fundamental Rating Factors and Calculation Methods for
Involute and Helical Gear Teeth, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, Alexandria, VA, Jan. 12, 1995.
11. USAS 
B6.1-1968, 
USA 
Standard 
System—Tooth
Proportions for Coarse Pitch Involute Spur Gears, American
Gear Manufacturers Association, Alexandria, VA, Jan. 27,
1968.
12. AGMA 370.01, AGMA Design Manual for Fine-Pitch
Gearing, American Gear Manufacturers Association,
Alexandria, VA, April 1973.
13. Szczepanski, G. S., Savoy, J. P., Jr., and Youngdale, R. A.,
“Chapter 14, The Application of Graphics Engineering to Gear
Design,” Gear Design, AE 15, SAE International, Warrendale,
PA, 1990.
14. ANSI/AGMA 2000-A88, American National Standard,
Gear Classiﬁcation and Inspection Handbook, American Gear
Manufacturers Association, Alexandria, VA.
15. DIN, Toleranzen für Stirnrädverzahnungen, DIN 3962 and
DIN 3963, Aug. 1978 (German).
16. Lewis, Wilfred, “Investigation of the Strength of Gear
Teeth,” Proceedings of Engineers Club, Philadelphia, 1893.
17. Buckingham, Earle, Analytical Mechanics of Gears,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1949.
18. Lipson, C., and Juvinall, R. L., Handbook of Stress and
Strength, Macmillan, New York, 1963.
19. Juvinall, R. L., Engineering Considerations of Stress,
Strain and Strength, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1967.
20. AGMA 908-B89, Geometry Factors for Determining the
Pitting Resistance and Bending Strength of Spur, Helical, and
Herringbone Gear Teeth, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, Alexandria, VA, April 1989.
21. Drago, R. J., “How to Design Quieter Transmissions,”
Machine Design, Penton Media, Inc., Cleveland, Dec. 11,
1980.
22. ANSI/AGMA 6021-G89, For Shaft-Mounted and Screw
Conveyor Drives Using Spur, Helical and Herringbone Gears,
American Gear Manufacturers Association, Alexandria, VA,
November 1989.
23. ANSI/AGMA 2005-C96, Design Manual for Bevel Gears,
American Gear Manufacturers Association, Alexandria, VA,
1996.
24. Coleman, W., “Guide to Bevel Gears,” Product
Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, June 10, 1963.

References 879
25. Coleman, W., “Design of Bevel Gears,” Product
Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, July 8, 1963.
26. Straight Bevel Gear Design, Gleason Works, Machine
Division, Rochester, NY, 1980.
27. ANSI/AGMA 2003-B97, Rating the Pitting Resistance and
Bending Strength of Generated Straight Bevel, Zerol Bevel, and
Spiral Bevel Gear Teeth, American Gear Manufacturers
Association, Alexandria, VA,  1997.
28. ANSI/AGMA 6022-C93, Design Manual for Cylindrical
Worm Gearing, American Gear Manufacturers Association,
Alexandria, VA, Dec. 16, 1993.
29. ANSI/AGMA 6034-B92, Practice for Enclosed Cylindrical
Worm Gear Speed Reducers and Gearmotors, American Gear
Manufacturers Association, Alexandria, VA, 1992.
30. Buckingham, E., and Ryffel, Design of Worm and Spiral
Gears, Buckingham Associates, Springfield, VT, 1973.
Reprinted 1984 by Hurd’s Offset Printing Corp., Spring-ﬁeld,
VT.
Chapter 16
1. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R., Standard Handbook of
Machine Design, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York,
1996.
2. Hibbeler, R. C., Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics, 2nd
ed., Macmillan, New York, 1978.
Chapter 17
1. Industrial V-Belt Drives–Design Guide, Publication
102161, Dayco Products Inc., Dayton, OH, 45401, 1998.
2. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R, Standard Handbook of
Machine Design, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996.
3. Whitney Chain Catalog WC97/CAT.R1, Jeffrey Chain
Corp., Morristown, TN, 37813, 1997.
4. Wire Rope Users Manual, 3rd ed., Wire Rope Technical
Board, (888)289-9782.
5. Ready-Flex Standard Flexible Shafts and Ratio Drives, S.
S. White Technologies, Inc., Piscataway, NJ, 08854, 1994.
6. Flexible Shaft Engineering Handbook, Stow Mfg. Co.,
Binghamton, NY, 13702, 1965.
7. Shigley, J. E., and Mischke, C. R., Mechanical Engineering
Design, 5th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
8. Marco, S. M., Starkey, W. L., and Hornung, K. G., “Factors
Which Inﬂuence the Fatigue Life of a V-belt,” Engineering for
Industry, Transactions of ASME, Series, 3, vol. 82, no. 1, Feb.
1960, pp. 47–59.
9. Worley, W. S., “Design of V-Belt Drives for Mass Produced
Machines,” Product Engineering, vol. 24, 1953, pp. 154–160.
10. Oliver, L. R., Johnson, C. O., and Breig, W. F., “V-Belt Life
Prediction and Power Rating,” Paper No. 75-WA/DE 26,
ASME, 1975.
11. Gerbert, Goran, Traction Belt Mechanics, Machine and
Vehicle Design, Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96
Goteborg, Sweden, 1999.
12. Dayco Synchro-Cog® Drive Design, Publication 105180,
Dayco Products, Inc., Dayton, OH, 45401, 1998.
13. Eagle Pd ® Synchronous Belts and Sprockets, Engineering
Manual, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, Akron, OH,
1999.
14. Engineering Class Chain Publication 2M-3/86, Jeffrey
Chain Corp., Morristown, TN, 37813, 1986.
15. ANSI B29.1M-1993, “Precision Power Transmission
Roller Chains, Attachments, and Sprockets,” ASME, New
York, 1993.
16. ANSI B29.3M-1994, “Double-Pitch Power Transmission
Roller Chains and Sprockets,” ASME, New York, 1994.
17. Starkey, W. L., and Cress, H. A., “An Analysis of Critical
Stresses and Mode of Failure of a Wire Rope,” Engineering for
Industry, Trans. ASME, v. 81, 1959, p. 307 ff.
18. Timoshenko, S., Strength of Materials, Part I, D. Van
Nostrand, New York, 1955.
19. Drucker, D. L., and Tachau, H., “A New Design Criterion
for Wire Rope,” Trans. ASME, v. 67, 1945. p. A-33.
20. Spotts, M. F., Design of Machine Elements, 6th ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1985.
Chapter 18
1. Hibbeler, R. C., Engineering Mechanics: Dynamics, 2nd
ed., Macmillan, New York, 1978.
2. Lingaiah, K., Machine Design Data Handbook, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 1994.
3. Shigley, J. H., and Mishke, C. R., Standard Handbook of
Machine Design, 2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996.
4. Faupel, J. H., and Fisher, F. E., Engineering Design, 2nd
ed., Wiley, New York, 1981.
Chapter 19
1. Waldron, K. J., and Kinzel, G. L., Kinematics, Dynamics
and Design of Machinery, Wiley, New York, 1999.
2. Mabie, H. H., and Ocvirk, F. W., Mechanisms and
Dynamics of Machinery, Wiley, New York, 1975.
Chapter 20
1. Dieter, G. E., Volume Chair, Volume 20—Material
Selection and Design, ASM Handbook, ASM International,
Material Park, OH, 1997.
2. Kutz, M., ed., Mechanical Engineers’ Handbook, Wiley,
New York, 1986.
3. ANSI Z535.4, “American National Standard for Product
Safety Signs and Labels,” American National Standards
Institute, 1991.

4. ANSI Z535.1 “American National Standard Safety Color
Code,” American National Standards Institute, 1991.
5. ANSI Z535.2, “American National Standard for
Environmental and Facility Safety Signs,” American National
Standards Institute, 1991.
880
References
6. ANSI 2535.3, “Criteria for Safety Symbols,” American
National Standards Institute, 1991.
7. ANSI Z535.5, “Speciﬁcations for Accident Prevention
Tags,” American National Standards Institute, 1991.

881
Photo Credits
All Chapter Openers
© CORBIS
Chapter 11
Page 411: Courtesy RBC Bearings.
Chapter 12
Page 441: Courtesy RBC Bearings.
Chapter 14
Page 515: Courtesy Associated Spring.
Chapter 15
Page 559:  Courtesy Quality Transmission Components.
Chapter 16
Page 660:  Photo by George Achorn. Courtesy Swedespeed.
Chapter 17
Page 698:  Courtesy Rexnord Corporation.

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
883
Abrasive wear, 23, 25, 59, 62
Acme threads, 463, 464, 470, 471
Adhesive bonding, 538–542
Adhesive wear, 23, 25, 59, 62
American Bearing Manufacturers
Association (ABMA), 430
American Gear Manufacturers Association
(AGMA), 607
Angle shapes (equal leg), section 
properties, 872
Angular velocity ratio, 595, 600–605
Anthropometrics, 5
Archard adhesive wear constant, 60
Area moment of inertia (table), 135
Ashby charts, 105–111, 114–120
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 382
Asperities, surface, 59, 409
Assembly, design for, 337, 338
Assembly process, selection, 337, 338
Backlash (gears), 618
Ball screws (see power screws)
Baseplates, 843, 844
Bases, 843
Beam springs, 568–578 (also see springs)
Bearings:
antifrictional (see rolling element bearings)
basic load rating, 62
journal (see plain bearings)
plain (see plain bearings)
rolling element (see rolling element 
bearing)
sleeve (see plain bearings)
sliding (see plain bearings)
Belleville springs (coned disk), 581, 582
Belts:
failure modes, 750, 751
ﬂat, 752–756
ﬂat belt selection. 754–756
materials, 752
synchronous, 769
timing, 769
uses, 746
V-belts, 756–768
V-belt datum system, 759
V-belt pitch system, 759
V-belt selection, 763–768
Bending:
curved beams, 137–142
gear teeth (see gears)
load, shear, and moment diagrams (table),
128–133
neutral axis, 134, 138, 144
pure bending, 134
spring rate, 180, 181
straight beams, 128–137
transverse loads, 142–150
transverse shear, 142–150
Bevel gears, 662–675 (also see gears)
Biaxial brittle fracture strength data, 226
Biaxial state of stress, 127, 205–213
Biaxial yield strength data, 227
Body force, 123
Boundary conditions, 385, 387, 388
Bolts, (see fasteners)
Brakes:
band, 727–732
caliper, 735, 736
cone, 738, 739
design procedure, 705–707
disk, 732–738
external shoe, 703, 708, 724
failure mode, 704
friction coefﬁcient (table), 706
friction lining material, 706
internal shoe, 703, 708, 724
long-shoe drum type, 719–727
multiple disk, 732–738
materials, 704–706
self-energizing, 708
self-locking, 708
short-shoe drum type, 708–719
temperature rise, 711, 712
types, 702–704
uniform pressure assumption (disk), 735
uniform wear assumption (disk), 733, 734
uses, 701, 702
Brinnelling, 23, 24
Brittle fracture, 23, 24, 225, 233–241
Buckling, 23, 27, 34–45
Buckling:
column, 35, 36
critical buckling load, 35–44
critical unit load, 40
effective column length, 38
effective slenderness ratio, 39
end support inﬂuence, 36, 38
Euler’s critical load, 38
Euler-Engesser equation, 39
externally pressurized thin-walled 
tubes, 44
helical coil springs, 559–561
initially crooked columns, 39, 40
local buckling, 41
long columns, 41
long thin rod, 43, 44
onset of, 35
pin-jointed mechanisms, 35, 36
primary buckling, 41
secant formula, 39, 40
short columns, 40, 41
thin deep beams, 44
Buckling avoidance guideline, 309, 310
Butt welds, 528
Buttress thread, 463, 464 
Castigliano’s theorem, 164–171
Cathodic protection, 66
Chains:
chordial action, 773, 774
failure modes, 769, 770
inverted tooth, 779
materials, 770, 771
multiple strand factor (table), 773
precision roller chain, 771–779
precision roller chain, selection, 774–779
polygonal action, 773, 774
silent, 779
uses, 746
Channel shape, section properties, 871
Clutches:
band, 727–732
cone, 738, 739
design procedure, 705–707
disk, 732–738

Clutches (Continued)
failure modes, 704
friction coefﬁcients (table), 706
friction lining material, 706
materials, 704–706
multiple disk, 732–738
temperature rise, 711, 712
types, 702–704
uniform pressure assumption (disk), 735
uniform wear assumption (disk), 733, 
734
uses, 701, 702
Code of ethics (NSPE), 14, 15, 859–863
Codes, 13
Codes and standards, 13
Coefﬁcient of speed ﬂuctuations 
(ﬂywheels), 800, 801
Cold-rolling, 189
Columns (see buckling)
Combined creep and fatigue, 23–28
Combined stress design equations, 317, 318
Combines stress theory of failure, 33,
224–233, 317, 318
Conceptual design, 8
Concurrent design, 333, 336
Concurrent engineering, 333, 336
Conforming surface guideline, 310, 311
Conﬁgurational guidelines, 306–315
Conﬁgurational guidelines:
buckling avoidance, 309, 310
conforming surfaces, 310, 311
direct load path, 306, 307
hollow cylinder and I-beam, 310
lazy material removal, 311, 312
load spreading, 314
merging shape, 313
strain matching, 313, 314
triangle-tetrahedron, 308, 309
tailored shape, 307, 308
Constant thickness disk ﬂywheel, 809–815
(also see ﬂywheels)
Contact stress (Hertz), cylinders, 176–179
Contact stress (Hertz), spheres, 174–175
Corrosion:
biological corrosion, 23, 25, 64
cathodic protection, 66
cavitation corrosion, 23, 25, 64, 65
direct chemical attack, 23, 25, 64
erosion corrosion, 23, 25, 64
galvanic corrosion, 23, 25, 64, 65
hydrogen damage, 23, 25, 64
intergranular corrosion, 23, 25, 65
pitting corrosion, 23, 25, 65
protection, 65
sacriﬁcial anode, 65 
selective leaching, 23, 25, 64
stress corrosion, 23, 25, 64–66
Corrosion fatigue, 23, 28, 64
Corrosion fatigue strength properties 
(table), 102
Corrosion wear, 23, 28
Couplings:
bellows, 363, 364
elastomeric disk, 363, 364
failure modes, 363–365
ﬂexible, 361, 363–365
ﬂexible disk, 362, 363
gear, 363, 364
rigid, 361, 362, 369–372
roller chain, 363, 364
rubber cap, 364
sliding disk, 363, 364
spring, 363, 364
universal joint (U-joint), 365
Crack:
initiation, 241, 242, 273–279
length, 233
opening mode (Mode I), 233
propagation, 233, 241, 276–279
size, unstable (critical), 241, 276–279
surface, 233
surface ﬂaw shape parameter, 233, 236
through-the-thickness, 234–237
Crankshaft:
center cranks, 825
design procedure, 826–841
disk cranks, 825
failure modes, 826
materials, 826
side cranks, 825
types, 825
uses, 824, 825
Creep, 23, 26, 52–58
Creep:
constant creep rate, 56
cumulative creep, 57, 58
Larson-Miller theory, 54
logarithmic creep, 56
log-log stress-time creep, 65
long-term creep, 53–58
parabolic creep, 56
Robinson hypothesis, 57, 58
Stage I transient creep, 56
Stage II steady-state creep, 56
true creep strain, 56
under axial stress, 55–58
Creep buckling, 23, 28
Creep deformation, 53
Creep-limited maximum stress (table), 98
Creep strain, 52
Creep rupture, 52, 53
Creep testing:
abridged method, 53
mechanical acceleration method, 53
thermal acceleration method, 53
Critical points, 315–317, 474–481,
494–497, 582, 583
Critical point accessibility, design for, 339,
340
Critical sections, 315–317
Critical speed, rotating shafts, 358–360
Critical stress intensity factor, 234, 237, 238
Cumulative creep prediction, 57, 58
Cumulative damage, 241, 242, 266–272
Cumulative distribution function, 253
Curved beams, 137–142
Curved surfaces in contact, 174–179
Customer attributes, 3, 4
Customer perceptions, 5
CV joints, 365
Cycle counting, rain ﬂow method, 266–272
Cyclic equivalent stress, 283–291
Cyclic multiaxial state of stress, 283–291
Cyclic stresses, 242–291
Deﬂection:
axial loading, 161
bending, 129–133, 162, 164
Castigliano’s theorem, 164–171
cylinders in contact, 176
shafts, 353–358
spheres in contact, 174
Hertz contact, 161, 174, 176
torsional loading, 161
Deﬂection analysis, 126
Design:
concurrent, 333, 336
detail design, 8
embodiment design, 8
fail safe design, 9
intermediate design, 8
mechanical design, 1
preliminary design, 7, 8
safe life design, 9
Design equations, combined stress, 317, 318
Design for assembly (DFA), 337, 338
Design for manufacturing (DFM), 337
Design for “X” (DFX), 333, 334
Design reviews, 10, 855
Design safety factors, 7, 33, 71–74, 84
Design steps, 9–11
Detail design, 8
Development and ﬁeld service, 9 
Dilatation energy per unit volume, 227, 228
Direct load path guideline, 306, 307
Direct shear, spring rate, 181
Disassembly, design for, 339, 340
Distortion energy design equation, 228
Distortion energy failure theory, 33, 224,
225, 227–232
Distortion energy per unit volume, 228
Distribution function (see probability 
density function)
Ductile rupture, 23, 24, 33, 34
Ductility properties (table), 99, 100
Durability of gear teeth (see gears)
Effective stress, 228
Efﬁciency:
power screws, 467–473
worm gears, 679–682
Elastic instability (see buckling)
Elastic strain, 31, 32
884
Index

Elastic stress-strain relationships, 214, 215
Elasticity theory (see theory of elasticity)
Elevated temperature strength (table), 96, 97
Embodiment design, 8
Energy methods:
Castigliano’s theorem, 164–171
Impact, 47–52
Engineering strain, 29, 30
Engineering stress-strain diagram, 30
Environmental effects, 194, 195
Epicylic gears, 600–605
Equilibrium, 123, 124, 385, 393, 412
Equivalent alternating stress amplitude,
283–291
Equivalent cyclic stress, 283–291
Equivalent mean stress, 283–291
Equivalent stress, 228, 272, 283–291
Ergonomics, 5
Ethics, 13, 14
Ethics, code of, 14, 15, 859–863
Ethical dilemma, 14
Euler’s critical load, 38
External energy, 47
Fail safe design, 9, 82
Failure analysis, 70, 71
Failure criteria, 22
Failure modes, 23–28 (also see mechanical
failure)
Failure prevention perspective, 22–70, 
233–280
Failure theories:
distortional energy theory (also known as
octahedral shear stress theory,
Huber-von-Mises- Henky theory, or
von-Mises theory), 33, 225
fatigue, 224–232, 241–291
maximum normal stress theory (also
known as Rankine theory), 225
maximum shearing stress theory (also
known as Tresca Guest theory), 226,
227
selection of, 229
Fasteners:
bolts, 487, 496, 497
critical points, 494–497, 518–522
failure modes, 495–497
head styles, 488
lead (thread), 489
materials, 492–494
metric threads, 491
multiple threads, 489
reduced-body bolts, 487
rivets, 517–522
screw thread standards, 488, 489
thread angle, 489
thread series, 492
thread major diameter, 489
thread minor diameter, 489
thread speciﬁcations, 492
thread stresses, 494–497
tightening, 507, 508
torque coefﬁcient, 508
uniﬁed inch, threads, 490, 491
Fastener loosening, 507–508
Fatigue:
completely reversed stress, 242, 258
corrosion fatigue, 28
crack growth rate, 276
crack initiation, 241, 242, 273–279
crack propagation, 233, 241, 276–279
critical (unstable) crack size, 241, 276–279
cumulative damage, 241, 242, 266–272
cycle ratio, 266–269
cyclic strain-hardening exponent, 274,
275
cyclic strength coefﬁcients, 274, 275
damage fraction, 266–269
deﬁnitions for constant-amplitude stress
time pattern, 242, 243
estimating properties of a part, 257
elastic strain amplitude, 274, 275
estimating S-N curves, 246–248
factors that may affect S-N curves,
248–258
failure theories, 283–291
fatigue life, 241
fatigue limit, 244, 245
fatigue strength, 244, 245
ﬁnal fracture, 276–278
ﬂuctuating loads, 241
fracture mechanics approach 
(F-M approach), 242
fretting fatigue, 23, 26, 66, 67, 69
high-cycle fatigue, 23, 24, 241–280
histogram, 245
impact fatigue, 23
inﬁnite life diagram, 256
life improvement from residual stress,
288–291
life improvement form shot-peening,
288–291
linear damage rule, 266–269
loading spectra, 242
local stress-strain approach to crack 
initiation, 273–279
low-cycle fatigue, 23, 24, 242
master diagram, 258, 259
modiﬁed Goodman relationships, 260,
261–266
multiaxial cyclic stress, 272
Neuber rule, 274
nonzero mean stress, 243, 258–266
Palmgren-Miner hypothesis, 266–269
Paris law, 277
plastic strain amplitude, 274, 275
probability of failure, 245
rain ﬂow cycle counting, 254, 266–272
range of stress, 243, 276
released tension, 243
reliability, 245
reversals to failure, 274, 275
sample standard deviation, 245
sample mean, 245
scatter of life diagram, 244, 245
S-N curves, 244
SNP curves, 244, 245
standard deviation of fatigue strength, 253
strain-controlled fatigue (see low-cycle
fatigue)
stress life approach (S-N approach), 242,
243, 248
strength-inﬂuencing factors for S-N
curves, 247–258
strength reliability factors, 247
stress intensity factor range, 276, 277
stress spectra, 242, 266
surface fatigue, 23, 24
test method inﬂuence on S-N data, 248
thermal fatigue, 23, 24
total strain amplitude, 274, 275
zero-mean stress, 243, 258
Fatigue limit, 244, 246
Fatigue strength, 244, 246
Fatigue strength reduction factor, 281–283
Fatigue stress concentration factor, 280–283
Fillet welds, 529–537
Finishes, 328, 330
Fits, 323–329
Flexible shafts:
maximum operating torque (tables), 792,
793
selection procedure, 793–795
uses, 748–750
Fluctuating loads, 242
Flywheels:
bending in ﬂywheel rims, 808, 809
coefﬁcient of speed ﬂuctuation, 800, 801
connection to shaft, 820, 821
constant thickness disk, 809–815
design for speed control, 799–804
energy management, 799–804
failure modes, 805
ﬂuctuating duty cycle, 799–804
materials, 805, 806
rotating free ring, 807, 808
spoke-and-rim, 806–809
tension in ﬂywheel spokes, 808, 809
types, 804, 805
uniform strength disk, 815, 816
uniform strength disk with rim, 816, 817
uses, 798
Force analysis, 124–126
Force ﬂow lines, 124,125, 215
Force-induced elastic deformation, 23, 24,
28–31
Fracture mechanics, 233–241
Fracture mechanics approach to fatigue,
273–279
Fracture toughness, plane strain, 237
Frames:
C-frame, 844
design procedure, 845–850
Index 885

Frames (Continued)
failure modes, 844
materials, 844
O-frame, 844
open truss, 843, 844
stressed-skin structure, 843, 844
thin-walled shell, 843, 844
Free body diagram, 123–126, 191, 386, 467
Fretting, 23, 26, 66–70
Fretting:
fretting action, 26, 66
fretting corrosion, 23, 26, 66
fretting fatigue, 23, 26, 66–68
fretting wear, 23, 26, 66, 68, 69
maps, 69
minimizing or preventing fretting 
damage, 69, 70
Friction coefﬁcients (table), 864–866
Friction wheel drives, 594, 595
Galling, 23, 27, 61
Gasketed joint, 497–507 
Gasket materials, (table), 503
Gears:
angular velocity ratio, 595, 600–605, 609
backlash, 618
bevel:
applications, 597, 598
bending (tooth) – AGMA reﬁned 
approach, 667, 668
design procedure, 668–675
force analysis, 665, 666
nomenclature, 662–665
standard AGMA tooth proportions,
(table), 665
stress analysis, 666–668
surface durability using AGMA reﬁned
approach, 667, 668
compound, 600–605
epicyclic, 600–605
external, 594, 595
face gear, 598
failure modes, 605–607 
fundamental law, 595
helical:
applications, 597
bending (tooth) – AGMA reﬁned 
approach, 654, 655
contact-pattern, 649
design procedure, 656–662
force analysis, 653, 654
nomenclature, 648, 650
standard AGMA tooth proportions,
(table), 651
stress analysis, 654, 655
surface durability using AGMA reﬁned
approach, 654, 655
herringbone, 597
hypoid, 598
internal, 594, 595
involute, 608–618
Lewis equation (bending), 626–629
Lewis form factor, 628
line of action (pressure line), 609
manufacturing cost trends, 624
manufacturing methods:
accuracy requirements (table), 623, 
624
gear cutting, 618–620
gear ﬁnishing, 620
proﬁle modiﬁcation, 621, 622
materials, 607, 608
rack and pinion, 597
reduction ratios, 600–605
selection of type, 595–600
simple, 600–605
spiroid, 598
straight tooth spur:
angular velocity ratio, 595, 600–605,
609
applications, 595, 597
approximate actual size, 614
bending (tooth) – AGMA reﬁned 
approach, 631–638
bending (tooth) – simpliﬁed approach,
626–631
conjugate action, 609
design procedure, 647, 648
force analysis, 624–626
involute proﬁle, 608–618
lubrication, 645–647
nomenclature, 594, 610
standard AGMA tooth proportions,
(table), 613
stress analysis, 631–645
surface durability using AGMA reﬁned
approach, 641–645
surface durability using Hertz contact
stresses, 639–641
tooth proﬁle, 608–618
surface durability, 62, 639–645, 655, 667,
668
tooth bending, 626–638, 654, 655, 667,
668
tooth durability, 632–645, 655, 667, 668
trains, 600–605
types, 595–600
uses, 594, 595
worm:
allowable tangential gear force, 682,
683
applications, 599
bending (tooth), 682
common thread proﬁles, 676
design procedure, 684–691
efﬁciency, 679–682
force analysis, 679–682
nomenclature, 675
stress analysis, 682, 683
surface durability, 682
typical tooth proﬁles, (table), 677
Zerol, 597, 598
Geometric compatibility, 385, 387, 392
Geometry determination, 305–330
Hardness properties, (table), 101
Heat affected zone (HAZ), 528
Helical coil springs, 546, 552–568 
(also see springs)
Helical gears, 648–662 (also see gears)
Hertz contact deﬂection, 177, 453–457
Hertz contact spring rate, 181–182, 453
Hertz contact stress, 24, 62, 160, 161,
174–179
High-speed-rotors (see ﬂywheels)
Hollow cylinder guidelines, 310
Hooke’s Law, 32, 47, 162, 214, 215, 228,
385, 387, 393
Horsepower relationship, 152
Housing, 844
Huber-von-Mises-Hencky Theory 
(see distortional energy theory)
Human factors engineering, 5
House of quality, 3
I-beam guidelines, 308
I-beams, section properties, 870
Impact, 23, 26
Impact:
deﬂection, 47–52
deformation, 23, 26
energy method, 47–52
fatigue, 23
fracture, 23, 26
fretting, 23
stress, 47–52
stress wave propagation, 46
suddenly applied load, 46, 48
wear, 23, 26 
Industrial designers, 2
Inspectability, 9
Inspectability, design for 339, 340
Interference ﬁts:
design procedures, 396–400
failure modes, 386
uses, 382, 386
Intermediate design, 8
Involute gear teeth, 609–618
Involute splines, 373, 374
Iteration, 7, 319
Jack screws (see power screws)
Joints:
adhesively bonded, 538–542
advantages of adhesive bonding, 838
bolted, 486, 487–516
butt weld, 528
centroid of bolt pattern, 510, 511
centroid of weld pattern, 530
eccentric loading, 509–516, 529–537
failure modes, 487, 488
ﬁllet welds, 529–537
gasketed, 497–507
886
Index

Joints (Continued)
moment of inertia, 510, 512
multiply bolted, 509
multiply riveted, 519
multiply welded, 529–537
preload, 495–507
rivet material, 517
riveted, 517–522
stiffness, 497–507
torsion-like shear, 509–516
types, 485, 486
weld edge preparation, 525, 526
weld electrode speciﬁcations, 527
weld types, 525, 526
weldability, 527
welded, 522–537
weld heat affected zone (HAZ), 528
weld stress concentration factors, 525
weld symbol, 524
Keys, 361–372
Keys:
failure modes, 366
square, 365–372
stress concentration factors (keyway),
220, 367, 369
Woodruff, 365, 367
Kinematic viscosity, 410, 411, 414
Larson-Miller parameter, 54
Lazy-material removal guideline, 611, 612
Lead screw (see power screws)
Leaf springs, 568–578 (also see springs)
Lessons learned strategy, 12
Lewis equation (see gears), 626–629
Line of action (see gears), 609
Linear actuators (see power screws)
Linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM),
233–241
Load sharing, 179–186
Load spreading guideline, 314
Loading severity parameter, 225
Lubrication:
boundary, 406–409
elastohydrodynamic (squeeze ﬁlm), 406,
452, 645–647
hydrodynamic, 406, 409–425
hydrostatic, 409
Petroff’s equation, 411
pV product, 406–409
Raimondi and Boyd data, 413–417
Reynolds equation, 412, 413
plain bearings, 403, 405–425
rolling element bearings, 452
solid ﬁlm, 406
Sommerﬁeld data, 413–417
thick ﬁlm (full ﬁlm), 405, 409–425
thin ﬁlm (partial ﬁlm), 405–409
Tower experiments, 412
viscosity, 410, 411, 414
zero ﬁlm, 405
Machinability index (table), 104
Maintenance, design for, 333, 339, 340
Manufacturing, 333–340
Manufacturing, design for, 337 
Manufacturing process, selection, 334–337
Manufacturing process suitability (table), 103
Marketing specialists, 1, 2
Mass moments of inertia (table), 867
Materials:
application requirements, 94
Ashby charts, 105–111, 114–120
mechanical properties (tables), 95–105,
106–109, 238
performance evaluation indices, 94
selection by Ashby method, 105–111,
114–120
selection by rank-ordered data (table),
105–114
selection steps, 93
Materials cost index, 104
Maximum shearing stress design 
equation, 318
Maximum shearing stress failure 
theory, 225–227
Maximum normal stress design equation, 318
Maximum normal stress failure theory, 225,
226
Mean, 77
Mechanical design:
concepts, 6
deﬁnition, 6
failure prevention perspective, 22–75
Mechanical failure:
brinnelling, 23, 24
brittle fracture, 23, 24, 233–241
buckling, 23, 27, 34–45
combined creep and fatigue, 23, 28
corrosion, 23, 24, 64–66
corrosion fatigue, 23, 28, 64
corrosion wear, 23, 28, 64
creep, 23, 26, 27, 52–58
creep buckling, 23, 28
ductile rupture, 23, 24, 33, 34
fatigue, 23, 24, 241–291
force-induced elastic deformation, 23, 
24, 30
fretting, 23, 26, 66–70
galling, 23, 27, 61
impact, 23, 26, 46–52
modes of, 23–28
radiation damage, 23, 27, 102, 103
seizure, 23, 27, 61
spalling, 23, 27
stress corrosion, 23, 28, 65, 66
stress rupture, 23, 27, 52–58
temperature-induced elastic deformation,
23, 24, 31, 32
thermal relaxation, 23, 27
thermal shock, 23, 27
wear, 23, 25, 59–63
yielding, 23, 24, 32, 33
Membrane analogy, 153–155
Merging shape guidelines, 313
Mode I crack displacement, 233
Mode II crack displacement, 233
Mode III crack displacement, 233
Modiﬁed square thread, 463, 464
Mohr’s circle (strain), 213, 214
Mohr’s circle (stress), 210, 211
Moment diagrams, bending (table), 
129–133
Moment of inertia, area (table), 135
Moment of inertia, mass (table), 867
Multiaxial cyclic stress, 283–291
Multiaxial fatigue failure theories, 283–291
Multiaxial state of stress, 127, 205–215
Multiple threads, 464, 465
National Society of Professional Engineers
(NSPE), Code of Ethics, 14, 15,
859–863
Neuber rule, 274
Newtonian ﬂuid, 410 
Newton’s law of cooling:
bearings, 418
brakes, 712
gears, 646
Nondestructive evaluation (NDE), 339
Normal (Gaussian) distribution, 76–80
Normal stress, 126, 127
Notch sensitivity, 280–283
Octahedral shear stress theory of failure (see
distortion energy failure theory)
Paris law (fatigue), 277
Petroff’s equation, 411
Pins, 376, 377
Plain bearings:
advantages, 403, 404
design criteria, 419, 420
design procedure, 420–425
eccentricity ratio, 413, 421
failure modes, 404
lubrication, 403, 405–425
materials, 405
oil ﬁlm temperature rise, 416, 418
recommended clearances (table), 420, 421
uses, 403, 404
Plane cross section properties (table), 135
Plane strain:
critical stress intensity factor, 237
deﬁnition, 237
minimum thickness for, 237
Plain strain fracture toughness, 237, 276
Plane stress, critical stress intensity factor,
237
Planetary gears, 600–605
Plastic strain, 32
Policy of least commitment, 3
Power, as related to torque and speed, 151,
152
Index 887

Power screws:
Acme threads, 463, 464, 470, 471
back driving, 467
ball screw, 465
buttress thread, 463, 464
design procedures, 473, 474
efﬁciency, 467–473
failure modes, 466
helix angle, 464
lead (thread), 464
lead angle, 464, 469
materials, 466
modiﬁed square thread, 463, 464
multiple threads, 464, 465
overhauling, 469
pitch, 464
self-locking, 469 
square thread, 463, 464
thread angle, 463
threads, 463–470
torque, 467–473
uses, 462
Preliminary design, 7, 8
Preloading, 186–189, 453–457
Presetting, 189
Pressure vessels:
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code,
382
failure modes, 383
longitudinal stress, 386 
materials, 383, 384
tangential (hoop) stress, 385 
thick wall, 382, 386–392
thin wall, 382, 385, 386
uses, 382 
Prestressing, 190–192
Principal normal stress, 205–213
Principal planes, 205–213
Principal stresses, 205–213, 389
Principal shearing stress, 205–213
Projected area, 386
Probability density function, 76–79
Probability of failure, 76–79, 245
Probabilistic design, 76
Product design team, 1, 2, 3
Product marketing concept, 3
Radiation damage, 23, 27, 102, 103
Radiation exposure inﬂuence on properties
(table), 102, 103
Rain ﬂow cycle counting (fatigue), 254,
266–272
Rankine’s theory (see maximum normal
stress theory)
Recycling, design for, 339, 340
Redundant assemblies, 179–186
Redundant supports, 166–169, 179–186
Redundancy, component level, 82, 83
Redundancy, sub-assembly level, 82, 83
Reliability, 76–84, 245
Reliability:
allocation, 80
block diagrams, 81
deﬁnition, 76
equal apportionment, 83
functional block diagrams, 81–83
goals, 80, 81
log-normal distribution, 76 
normal cumulative distribution, 77–79 
normal distribution, 77–80
parallel components, 82, 83
population mean, 77
population standard deviation, 77
population variance, 77
redundancy at component level, 82, 83
redundancy at subsystem level, 82, 83
series components, 82
Six Sigma, 81
standard normal variable (table), 78
system, 80–83
speciﬁcation, 84
Weibull distribution, 76
Residual stresses, 189–194, 525
Residual stresses:
cold-rolling, 190
estimating, 190–194
fatigue life improvement, 288–291
presetting, 189
prestressing, 190–192
shot-peening, 190, 526
weldments, 525, 526
Resilience properties (table), 100
Resonance, 344, 359
Retrospective design, 70, 71 
Reynolds equation, 412
Rivets (see fasteners)
Rolling element bearings:
ball, 430, 431
basic dynamic load rating, 435
basic static load rating, 435
enclosure, 457, 458
failure modes, 433
force-deﬂection curves, 453–457
lubrication, 451, 452
materials, 433, 434
mounting practices, 457, 458 
preloading, 453, 457
reliability, 435, 436
roller, 430, 432
selection for spectrum loading, 434,
448–451
selection for steady loads, 434, 436–448
stiffness, 453–457
types, 430–432
uses, 429
Rotors, high-speed (see ﬂywheels)
Rotating free ring, 407, 408
Safe life design, 9
Safety factor:
design, 7, 33, 72–74, 84
existing, 75
rating factors, 73 
rating numbers, 72, 73, 84
Safety issues:
devices, 850, 852–854
guards, 850, 851
hazards, 850
risk, 850
Sample mean, 245
Sample standard deviation, 245
Screw threads:
Acme, 463, 464, 470, 471
buttress, 463, 464
failure modes, 466
helix angle, 464
lead, 464
lead angle, 464, 469
modiﬁed square, 463, 464
multiple threads, 464, 465
pitch, 464
square, 563, 464, 468
thread angle, 463
Screws, power (see power screws)
Seizure, 23, 27, 61
Setscrews, 365, 275, 376
Setscrews:
holding power, 376
types of points, 375
Shaft deﬂection, 353–358
Shaft strength, 345–353
Shafts:
connection to ﬂywheels, 820, 821
critical speed, 358–360
design equations, deﬂection based,
353–358
design equations, strength based,
345–353
design layout, 343
design procedure, 360, 361
failure modes, 343, 344
ﬂexible (see ﬂexible shafts)
materials, 344, 345
standard for design of, 345
uses, 341–343
vibration, 358–360
Shear center, 158–160
Shearing stress, 126, 127, 142–148
Shock (see impact)
Shot-peening, 190
Shot-peening, fatigue life improvement,
288–291
Simplifying assumptions, 318
Six Sigma, 81
Slider-crank mechanism, 824
Solid bodies, properties of (table), 867
Spalling, 23, 27
Speciﬁcation, reliability, 84
Speciﬁcations, engineering, 2, 8, 11, 93
Speciﬁcations, thread, 492
S-N curves, estimating, 246–248
S-N curves, strength-inﬂuencing factors,
247–258
888
Index

Splines, 361, 373, 374
Splines:
failure mode, 373
ﬁts, 373
involute, 374
straight, 373, 374
stress concentration factors, 374
Spoke-and-rim ﬂywheel, 806–809 
(also see ﬂywheel)
Spring index, 554
Springs:
Belleville (coned disk), 581, 582
buckling of helical coil, 559, 560
curvature factor in helical coil, 554
end loop stress concentration, 555, 556
energy storage, 582–586
fatigue shearing strength (table), 563
helical coil, 546, 552–568, 579
helical coil design procedure, 562–568
helical coil nomenclature, 552
helical coil spring index, 554
helical coil spring rate, 558
leaf springs, 568–578
leaf spring design procedure, 574–578
leaf spring spring-rate, 572
linear, 181
machine elements as, 180–186
nonlinear softening, 181
nonlinear stiffening (hardening), 181
parallel, 176–186
series, 179–186
shackles, 572–573
spiral torsion, 579, 580
surging of helical coil, 561
torsion bar, 578–581
torsion in helical coil, 553 
torsion springs, 578–581
torsion tubes, 578
torsional shear yield strength (table), 560
transverse shear in helical coil, 553
Wahl factor, 554, 555
Spring rate (spring constant), 29, 179–186,
557, 558
Spring rate:
axial, 30, 181
bending, 181
direct shear, 181
helical coil, 557–559
Hertz contact, 181
leaf spring, 572
linearized, 181, 453
torsional, 181
Spur gears, 608–618 (also see gears)
Square thread, 463, 464, 469
Stages of design, 7–9
Standard deviation, 77
Standard normal variable, 253, (table), 78
Standards, 13
State of stress:
biaxial, 127, 205–213, 386
multiaxial, 127, 205–213, 225
multiaxial cyclic, 272, 283–291
triaxial, 127, 205
uniaxial, 127, 225
Stiffness, joint, 497–507
Stiffness properties of materials (table), 
99
Straight toothy spur gears, 608–648 
(also see gears)
Strain amplitude, elastic, 274, 275
Strain amplitude, plastic, 274, 275
Strain amplitude, total, 274, 275
Strain cubic equation, 213
Strain energy, 47, 126, 162–173, 227
Strain energy per unit volume, 227
Strain gage, 214
Strain-matching guideline, 313
Strain rosette, 241
Strength at elevated temperature (table), 
96, 97
Strength properties (table), 95, 96
Strength reduction factor, 281
Strength/weight ratio (table), 96
Stress (see “stress patterns” and “state of
stress”)
Stress, equivalent, 272
Stress concentration, 215–224
Stress concentration:
actual local stress, 216
highly local, 216–224
multiple notches, 217, 223
nominal stress, 216
notch root, 216
notch sensitivity index, 280–283
strength reduction factor, 281
widely distributed, 138, 139, 216
Stress concentration factors:
crankshaft ﬁllet, 222
curved beams, 138, 139
cyclic multiaxial states of stress, 281, 
282
end-of hub pressed on shaft, 223
fatigue, 216, 217
fatigue of brittle materials, 282
fatigue of ductile materials, 282
ﬂat bar with shoulder ﬁllet, 221
gear tooth ﬁllet, 222
helical coil spring in torsion, 580
intermediate and low-cycle range, 
282
keyways (proﬁled, slender runner), 367,
369
keyways (Woodruff), 367
screw threads, 217
shaft diametral hole, 220
shaft ﬁllet, 218
shaft groove, 219
shaft keyway, 220, 366–369
shaft splines, 220, 374
theoretical elasticity, 216
torsion of helical coil spring, 580
weldment, 525
Stress corrosion, 23, 28, 64
Stress cubic equation, 206–209
Stress intensity:
critical, 234
stress intensity factor, 233
Stress intensity factor, 233–237
Stress patterns:
bending, 128–137
direct stress, 128
surface contact stress, 128, 160
torsional shear, 128, 150–160
transverse shear, 128, 142–150
Stress relaxation, 27
Stress rupture, 23, 27, 52–58
Stress rupture strength (table), 97
Stress wave propagation, 46
Structural adhesives (table), 541 
Structural shapes, section properties,
867–872
Suddenly applied load, 48
Superposition, principal of, 32
Surface contact stress, 160
Surface forces, 123
Surging, helical coil springs, 561
System reliability, 80–83
Tailored-shape guidelines, 307, 308
Tapered ﬁts, 274, 375
Temperature-induced elastic deformation,
23, 24, 31, 32
Theoretical stress concentration factor, 216
Theories of failure:
distortional energy theory, 225, 227, 
228
maximum shearing stress theory,
225–227
maximum normal stress theory, 225, 
226
selection of, 229
Theory of elastic principles, 384–386
Thermal conductivity (table), 104, 105
Thermal expansion coefﬁcients (table), 98
Thermal shock, 23, 27
Thermal relaxation, 23, 27
Thermal stress (temperature induces stress),
32
Threads:
fasteners, 488–497
power screws, 463–470
Tolerances, 323–329
Tooth bending, 631–639, 654, 655, 667, 668
(also see gears)
Topological interference, 824
Torsion:
circular cross section, 150–156
deﬂection, 161
noncircular cross section, 152–155
shear center in bending, 157–160
spring rate, 181
Torsion bar springs, 578–581 (also see
springs)
Index 889

Total strain energy per unit volume, 227
Toughness properties (tables), 100, 238
Transverse shear, 142–147
Tresca-Guest theory (see maximum 
shearing stress theory)
Triangle-tetrahedron guideline, 308, 309
Uniaxial state of stress, 127, 225, 233
Unit inertia (table), 532, 533
Units, 14–20
Units:
absolute system, 15, 16
base units, 15
conversion table, 17
derived units, 15
foot-pound-second system (fps), 14
gravitational system, 15
inch-pound-second system (ips), 14
International system (SI), 14
standard preﬁxes, 17
Universal joint, 365
Variance, 77
Virtues of simplicity, 10
Viscosity, 410, 411, 414
von Mises stress, 228
von Mises theory (see distortional 
energy theory)
Whal factor, 554, 555
Wear, 23, 25, 59–63
Wear:
abrasive wear, 23, 25, 59, 61, 62
abrasive wear constant, 62
adhesive wear, 23, 25, 59, 61, 62
Archard adhesive wear constant, 60
corrosion wear, 23, 25, 59
deformation wear, 23, 26, 59
fretting wear, 23, 26, 66, 68
impact wear, 23, 26
mean normal contact pressure, 60, 61
principle of conversion, 61
principle of diversion, 61
principle of protective layers, 61
surface fatigue wear, 23, 25, 59, 62
three-body wear, 61
two-body wear, 61
Weibull distribution, 76
Weldability, 526
Welded joints (see joints, welded)
Weld symbol, 524–526
Wide ﬂange beam, section properties, 868,
869
Wire rope:
failure modes, 779–781
fatigue data, 785
materials, 782
selection procedure, 786–791 
stresses, 782, 784–791
uses, 748, 749
Worm gears, 675–691 (also see gears)
Yielding, 23, 24, 32, 33
Yield strength (table), 95 
890
Index

Strength Properties of Selected Materials
Ultimate Tensile Strength,
Yield Strength, 
Material
Alloy
Su (psi)
Syp (psi)
Ultra-high-strength steel
AISI 4340
287,000
270,000
Stainless steel (age hardenable)
AM 350
206,000
173,000
High-carbon steel
AISI 1095a
200,000
138,000
Graphite-epoxy composite
—
200,000
—
Titanium
Ti-6A1-4V
150,000
128,000
Ceramic
Titanium carbide (bonded)
134,000
—
Nickel-based alloy
Inconel 601
102,000
35,000
Medium-carbon steel
AISI 1060 (HR)b
98,000
54,000
AISI 1060 (CD)c
90,000
70,000
Low-carbon, low-alloy steel
AISI 4620 (HR)
87,000
63,000
AISI 4620 (CD)
101,000
85,000
Stainless steel (austenitic)
AISI 304 (annealed)
85,000
35,000
Yellow brass
C 26800 (hard)
74,000
60,000
Commercial bronze
C 22000 (hard)
61,000
54,000
Low-carbon (mild) steel
AISI 1020 (CD)
61,000
51,000
AISI 1020 (annealed)
57,000
43,000
AISI 1020 (HR)
55,000
30,000
Phosphor bronze
C 52100 (annealed)
55,000
24,000
Gray cast iron
ASTM A-48 (class 50)
50,000d
—
Gray cast iron
ASTM A-48 (class 40)
40,000
—
Aluminum (wrought)
2024-T3 (heat treated)
70,000
50,000
Aluminum (wrought)
2024 (annealed)
27,000
11,000
Aluminum (perm. mold cast)
356.0 (sol’n. treated; aged)
38,000
27,000
Magnesium (extruded)
ASTM AZ80A-T5
50,000
35,000
Magnesium (cast)
ASTM AZ63A
29,000
14,000
Thermosetting polymer
Epoxy (glass reinforced)
—
10,000
Thermoplastic polymer
Acrylic (cast)
—
7000
a Quenched and drawn to Rockwell C-42.
b Hot-rolled.
c Cold-drawn.
d Ultimate compressive strength is 170,000 psi.

Stiffness Properties of Selected Materials
Young’s Modulus of Elasticity,
Shear Modulus of Elasticity,
Material
E (106 psi)
G (106 psi)
Poisson’s Ratio, v
Tungsten carbide
95
—
0.20
Titanium carbide
42–65 (77 °F)
—
0.19
Titanium carbide
33–48 (1600–1800 °F)
—
—
Molybdenum
47 (RT)1
—
0.29
Molybdenum
33 (1600 °F)
—
—
Molybdenum
20 (2400 °F)
—
—
Steel (most)
30
11.5
0.30
Stainless steel
28
10.6
0.31
Iron base superalloy (A-286)
29.1 (RT)
—
0.31
23.5 (1000 °F)
—
—
22.2 (1200 °F)
—
—
19.8 (1500 °F)
—
—
Cobalt base superalloy
29
—
—
Inconel
31
11.0
—
Cast iron
13–24
5.2–8.5
0.21–0.27
Commercial bronze (C 22000)
17
6.3
0.35
Titanium
16
6.2
0.31
Phosphor bronze
16
6.0
0.35
Aluminum
10.3
3.9
0.33
Magnesium
6.5
—
0.29
Graphite–epoxy composite
6.0
—
—
Acrylic thermoplastic
0.4
—
0.4
1 Room temperature.
104
80
60
40
20
Alternating stress apptitude, ksi
0
105
106
Cycles to failure
2024-T4 aluminum
Magnesium
alloy
5 × 108
Fatigue strength S'5 × 108for 2024-T4
107
108
109
S'f for 1020
S'f for Ti 150a
S'f for T-1
T-1 steel
Ti 150a titanium
1020 steel
Selected S-N Curves

Selected Conversion Relationships
Quantity
Conversion
Force
1 lb  4.448 N
Length
1 in  25.4 mm
Area
1 in2  645.16 mm2
Volume
1 in3  16 387.2 mm3
Mass
1 slug  32.17 lb
1 kg  2.21 lb
1 kg  9.81 N
Pressure
1 psi  6895 Pa
1 Pa  1 N/m2
Stress
1 psi  6.895  103 MPa
1 ksi  6.895 MPa
Modulus of Elasticity
106 psi  6.895 GPa
Spring rate
1 lb/in  175.126 N/m
Velocity
1 in/sec  0.0254 m/sec
Acceleration
1 in/sec2  0.0254 m/sec2
Work, energy
1 in–lb  0.1138 N-m
Power
1 hp  745.7 W (watts)
Moment, torque
1 in–lb  0.1138 N-m
Stress intensity
1 ksi 
 1.10
Area moment of inertia
1 in4  4.162  107 m4
Mass moment of inertia
1 in–lb–sec2  0.1138 N-m-sec2
MPa1m
1in
A Truncated List of Standard SI Prefixes
Name
Symbol
Factor
giga
G
109
mega
M
106
kilo
k
103
centi
c
102
mili
m
103
micro
106
nano
n
109
m

Properties of Plane Cross Sections
Moment of Inertia I
Section Modulus
Distances c1 and c2
About Centroidal
Z  I/c About
Radius of Gyration, 
Shape
Area, A
to Outer Fibers
Axis 1-1
Axis 1-1
1. Rectangle
bd
2. Trapezoid
—
3. Triangle
4. Solid Circle
5. Hollow Circle
3ADo
2 + Di
2B
4
p(Do
4 - Di
4)
32Do
p(Do
4 - Di
4)
64
c = Do
2
p(Do
2 - Di
2)
4
D
4
pD3
32
pD4
64
c = D
2
pD2
4
Z2 = bd2
12
c2 = d
3
d
118
Z1 = bd2
24
bd3
36
c1 = 2d
3
bd
2
c2 =
2b + B
3(b + B) d
d
6(b + B)22(B2 + 4bB + b2)
(B2 + 4bB + b2)d3
36(b + B)
c1 =
b + 2B
3(b + B) d
(B + b)d
2
d
112
bd2
6
bd3
12
c1 = c2 = d
c2
r = 1I/A
1
1
1
b
b
d
c1
c2
1
1
b
d
c1
c2
1 d
D
c1
c2
Do
Di

