ACTA UNIVERSITATIS UPSALIENSIS  
Uppsala Studies in History of Ideas 
46 
  
 

 
 
 

 
 
JACOB ORRJE 
Mechanicus 
Performing an early modern persona 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Dissertation presented at Uppsala University to be publicly examined in Geijersalen, Engelska 
parken, Thunbergsvägen 3P, Uppsala, Wednesday, 3 June 2015 at 10:15 for the degree of Doctor 
of Philosophy. The examination will be conducted in Swedish. Faculty examiner: Professor 
Thomas Kaiserfeld (Lund University, Department of Arts and Cultural Sciences).  
 
Abstract 
Orrje, J. 2015. Mechanicus. Performing an Early Modern Persona. Uppsala Studies in History 
of Ideas 46. 233 pp. Uppsala: Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis. ISBN 978-91-554-9246-5. 
 
This thesis studies mechanics as a means of making men, rather than machines. Drawing on 
Swedish sources from 1700–50, it approaches mechanics as an exercise of a virtuous subject, 
known to his contemporaries as the “mechanicus”. The mechanicus was a persona, consisting of 
expectations of the performance of mechanics that were part of the social fabric of the early 
modern Swedish state. The aim of this thesis is to understand how mechanical practitioners 
performed in relation to this persona, and how these expectations in turn were changed by actors’ 
performances. 
   By studying the mechanicus, I take an interest in historical ways of conceiving of mechanics. 
Previous research on early modern mechanics has tended to relate it to modern phenomena, such 
as engineers, technology and industrialism, and mechanical practitioners have been considered as 
agents of change, who brought traditional societies into modernity. Avoiding such long narra-
tives, this thesis presents an alternative history. By following mechanical practitioners, who staged 
themselves as relevant to an early modern state, I seek to understand how mechanics was pre-
sented and justified in a pre-industrial society. 
   The thesis is comprised of four studies. First, I discuss how mature mechanical practitioners 
imagined the exercise of mechanics to make a boy into a mechanicus. These exercises would nur-
ture an ideal man, encompassing a range of the expected virtues of a male subject. Second, I 
study mechanics and geometry at the Swedish Bureau of Mines between 1700 and 1750. I show 
how, from having initially been associated with the building of machines and subterranean con-
structions, such knowledge formed the basis of a community of mathematical men of metals. 
Third, I analyse the letters exchanged between the mechanical practitioner Christopher Polham-
mar and the Swedish king Karl XII, showing how royal patronage of mechanics shaped both 
men. Finally, I follow the mechanical practitioner Anders Gabriel Duhre, who first succeeded 
and then failed to present himself as a virtuous mechanicus to the parliament of the Swedish consti-
tutional monarchy of the 1720s and 1730s. Taken together, these studies show how men imag-
ined, succeeded and failed life as a mechanicus in early modern Sweden. 
 
Keywords: mechanics, performance, virtue, persona, mathematics, self fashioning, education,  
masculinity, age, oeconomy, cameralism, Sweden, eighteenth century, intergenerational relation-
ships 
 
Jacob Orrje, Department of History of Science and Ideas, Box 629, Uppsala University, SE-751 26 Uppsala, 
Sweden. 
 
© Jacob Orrje 2015 
 
ISSN 1653-5197 
ISBN 978-91-554-9246-5 
urn:nbn:se:uu:diva-251337 (http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:uu:diva-251337) 
 
Printed in Sweden by Kph Trycksaksbolaget AB, 2015 
 
 

 
 
 
 
To Lisa and Rasmus 

 
 

 
Contents 
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................ 9	  
1. The subject of early modern mechanics .............................................................. 11	  
Methodological considerations and delimitations ............................................ 12	  
A social epistemology of early modern mechanics ........................................... 25	  
Sources and translations ....................................................................................... 36	  
Chapter outline ....................................................................................................... 37	  
2. Mechanics – a passage into manhood ................................................................. 39	  
Age, manhood and the pious subject ................................................................. 42	  
Imagined intergenerational relationships ........................................................... 47	  
Mathematical concord ........................................................................................... 51	  
Crafts and the manliness of hard work .............................................................. 69	  
Conclusions. The expected transgressions of useful manhood ..................... 77	  
3. A geometric community takes shape ................................................................... 80	  
The mining sciences .............................................................................................. 83	  
Auscultation. The Bureau of Mines as a place of education ........................... 85	  
Applications to auscultate as self-presentation and identification ................. 88	  
Mathematical sciences of the state ...................................................................... 97	  
Becoming a Bureau official ................................................................................ 108	  
Conclusions. The mathematics of a balanced state ........................................ 121	  
4. Mechanical correspondence. Relational performances of the monarch and 
the mechanicus .......................................................................................................... 124	  
The monarch perceived ...................................................................................... 126	  
The mechanici, the monarch and the secretary of state ................................ 134	  
The death of a monarch – reinventing the mechanicus ................................ 155	  
Conclusions. Interrelated personas ................................................................... 156	  
5. A mechanicus on the kneeler. Duhre’s balancing act of vice and virtue ..... 158	  
Becoming a good mechanicus ........................................................................... 160	  
Duhre’s proposal of mathematical–œconomical redemption ...................... 165	  
The publications as performance in the parliament of 1723 ........................ 170	  
The Laboratorium as performance in the parliament of 1726–7 .................... 173	  
Dirty stories of the bad mechanicus ................................................................. 177	  
Violent stories of the bad mechanicus ............................................................. 181	  

 
Cows and order in the King’s Meadow ............................................................ 188	  
A morally ambiguous mechanicus in the parliament of 1731 ....................... 191	  
Epilogue. Œconomical dreams of a bad mechanicus .................................... 193	  
Conclusions. Integrating the good and the bad mechanicus ........................ 196	  
6. Conclusion. Performing the mechanicus .......................................................... 199	  
The mechanicus of the Swedish state ............................................................... 200	  
Relational performances ..................................................................................... 203	  
Taking the “modern” out of the early modern ............................................... 205	  
Glossary ...................................................................................................................... 209	  
List of illustrations .................................................................................................... 210	  
Bibliography ............................................................................................................... 211	  
Index of names .......................................................................................................... 231	  
 

 
9
Acknowledgements 
Writing a thesis is not only about making a book, but also about creating a 
researcher.  Beyond requiring diligent work, this process of becoming in-
volves the accumulation of an ever-growing debt to a number of helpful 
friends and colleagues. I am immensely grateful to all of you! 
 
First and foremost, I would like to express my deep gratitude to my 
supervisors. My main supervisor Otto Sibum, who encouraged me to ex-
plore the history of science already when supervising my Master’s thesis, has 
over the years generously shared his knowledge in many stimulating discus-
sions. I am likewise grateful to my co-supervisor Hjalmar Fors for revealing 
to me how the knowledge making of the early modern Swedish state can be 
surprisingly magical. A sincere thanks to both of you, for your encourage-
ment, support and wise comments, as well as for your critical questions. 
 
In addition, I am thankful to those of you who have read and comment-
ed on this thesis at various stages. I am especially grateful to Jens Eriksson, 
who has read practically every text I have written and provided me with 
encouraging support all these years, from his desk just next to mine. Thank 
you also, Andre Wakefield, for your invaluable help before, during and after 
my Final seminar. I am, furthermore, indebted to all of you who have pro-
vided helpful suggestions, comments, criticism and proof reading in the 
final stages of making this thesis: Annika Berg, Annelie Drakman, Petter 
Hellström, Lisa Hellman, Klara Goedecke, Måns Jansson, My Klockar 
Linder, Pia Levin, Anders Lundgren, Frans Lundgren, Emma Nygren,  
Mathias Persson, Andreas Rydberg, Göran Rydén, Kristiina Savin, David 
Thorsén, Linnea Tillema, Petter Tistedt, Per Widén, Sven Widmalm, and 
Annika Windahl Pontén. A particular thanks goes to Chris Haffenden who 
has edited my English here in the acknowledgements as well as on the back 
cover, in my introduction and in the abstract. 
 
I wish to thank my colleagues at the Department of History of Science 
and Ideas as well as all the other helpful researchers at the English Park 
Campus in Uppsala. Thanks also to everyone at the Department of History 
and Philosophy of Science at Cambridge during the academic year of 2010–
11, and especially Simon Schaffer, for your help and comments. 
 
My gratitude also goes to the administrative staff at the Department in 
Uppsala, especially Ulla-Britt Jansson, who has gone out of her way to help 
me with practical matters. Likewise, thanks to the librarians at Uppsala Uni-

 
10 
versity Library and the staff at the National Archives in Stockholm, who 
have brought me scores of heavy old folios. 
 
A final thanks goes to my beloved Lisa Swedén for always being there, 
not only as a sharp-eyed editor but also as the person who has shown me 
how to write a thesis without becoming too much of a researcher. 
 
* * * 
 
A number of foundations have provided economic support for this thesis. 
My year at Cambridge was made possible by Byzantinska stipendiestiftelsen at 
Uppsala University and Helge Ax:son Johnsons stiftelse. Additionally, my final 
year of writing up this thesis has been financed through generous contribu-
tions from Göransson-Sandvikens stipendium at Gästrike-Hälsinge nation in 
Uppsala. 

 
 
11 
1. The subject of early modern mechanics 
In 1727, the young mathematician Johan Mört published a mathematical 
textbook, translated from Latin and adapted for the youth of the Swedish 
state. Mört’s preface explained that mathematics was not as “fruitless or 
breadless” as some claimed it to be. Not only was it a means of disciplining 
reason and imagination, it also provided “deep and respectful thoughts of 
GOD and his hidden wisdom”. For Mört, mathematics was useful because 
it led young minds away from “ignorance”. Mathematical education stimu-
lated “sound and pure thoughts” and made students into “useful members 
of the public”.1 
 
To early modern Europeans, mathematics denoted a broad range of 
activities. The term did not only refer to “pure mathematics”, such as arith-
metic and geometry: it also included arts that in some way depended on 
numbers and figures (e.g., optics, fortification and geodesy), called “practical 
mathematics”. This thesis is concerned with one form of practical mathe-
matics in particular: mechanics. Most histories of early modern mechanics 
have discussed it as a way of building useful machines and understanding 
nature. Both these aspects of mechanics have been linked to long narratives 
of the rise of a scientific worldview, modern technology and industrialism. 
Mört, however, seems to imply a third, less explored, aspect of early modern 
mechanics, which is not so clearly part of these long narratives. He under-
stood it as a means of crafting useful and virtuous subjects aligned to a spe-
cific social and religious order. Mört was not alone in seeing mechanics as 
an exercise of virtue. On the contrary, early modern authors repeatedly dis-
cussed mechanics as a useful exercise that fostered a virtuous and pious 
subject. To his contemporaries, this man was known as the “mechanicus”. 
 
The mechanicus is an evasive and ephemeral object of study: it consists 
of the expectations that came to being in the encounter between practition-
ers of mechanics and their contemporaries. As such, it was an ever-changing 
set of ideals and norms, which were both the prerequisite and result of me-
chanical work. The cases presented in this book draw on Swedish sources. 
                                                   
1 “frucht- eller bröd-lös”; “diupa och wördsamma tanckar om GUD och hans fördolda Wjshet”; 
“okunnogheten”; “sunda och rena tanckar”; “nyttiga lemmar uti det allmänna samhäldet”; Johann 
Friedrich Weidler and Johan Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig eller anledning til geometrien och 
trigonometrien (Stockholm, 1727), preface. The Latin original was Johann Friedrich Weidler: Institu-
tiones mathematicae decem et sex pvrae mixtaeque matheseos disciplinas complexae (Wittenberg, 1718). 

 
 12 
In a sense, this makes it a cultural history of the mechanicus in Sweden. 
However, I would argue that my conclusions are broader than the geo-
graphical delimitation and that similar processes were enacted throughout 
early modern Europe. The mechanicus can be found in narratives of the 
lives and work of men who practised mechanics; it was forged through rela-
tionships between mechanically interested men; and, as we will see, it was 
related to the political order of the early modern Swedish state. I thus study 
the mechanicus from a number of perspectives, using several methodologies 
and categories of sources. I examine textbooks and speeches filled with 
imagined coming-of-age narratives of mechanics; letters in which young 
men presented themselves to the state administration as competent in 
mathematics and mechanics; correspondence where practitioners of me-
chanics crafted themselves in relation to the sovereign; and protocols from 
the Swedish parliament and rural courts that discuss matters involving me-
chanics and mathematics. Through these heterogeneous sources, I study the 
relationships between actors – in the Latin sense of “doers” – and the audi-
ences who interpreted their actions. I thus take an interest not only in what 
has been written about mechanics, but also for whom it was written and for 
what reasons. 
 
I examine the processes by which men formed themselves in relation to 
the audiences’ and actors’ expectations that constituted the mechanicus, and 
how these expectations were changed by performances of mechanics. These 
“mechanical practitioners” (i.e., actors who were, or were trying to be, re-
cognised as knowledgeable in this field) should not be seen as agents of 
change in opposition to an early modern order, but as men working to meet 
the expectations of their contemporaries. Therefore, the mechanicus should 
be related to the social and natural orders of his time, as well as to religion, 
politics and epistemologies (i.e., frameworks of making and categorising 
knowledge). I thus examine how mechanical exercises shaped and made 
early modern men, asking questions such as: How was the mechanicus a 
part of the early modern Swedish state? How did men present themselves as 
trustworthy and valuable subjects through mathematics and crafts? How did 
they in turn shape the expectations of who a mechanicus was? How can we 
understand mechanical practitioners’ successes, and failures, to meet the 
expectations of contemporary audiences? 
Methodological considerations and delimitations 
This thesis shifts the perspective on early modern mechanics in two ways. 
The first shift is a methodological one, from long narratives to a synchronic 
history. The study examines historical actors’ expectations of mechanics 
during the first half of the eighteenth century. As such, it diverges from 

 
 
13 
studies that analyse early modern mechanics in order to construct long nar-
ratives of the making of modern phenomena such as industrialism, profes-
sional engineers or modern technocratic states. In order to study eighteenth-
century mechanics as aligned with its time, I make a methodological pledge 
of abstinence from such long narratives and from stabilising actors’ catego-
ries by using analytical terms (i.e., modern terms that were alien to the his-
torical actors themselves). The second shift is a geographical one, from Eng-
land, which has often been staged as the source of modern industrialism, to 
the poor Northern-European state of Sweden. Chronologically, my cases 
range from the beginning of the 1700s to the mid century, a period during 
which Sweden underwent drastic governmental changes. From having been 
an absolutist state, in the 1720s it became a constitutional monarchy. The 
Swedish case thus highlights how expectations of mechanical practitioners 
were tied to shifting early modern political orders. Furthermore, these 
methodological and geographical shifts are interrelated: a study of the 
mechanicus in the Swedish state facilitates telling histories of early modern 
mechanics other than those of industrialisation or the rise of modern sci-
ence. 
 
Over the twentieth century, the British industrial revolution became 
enrolled in liberal ideology and historiography, which described early mod-
ern mechanical practitioners as agents of change. They thus came to be 
interpreted as “entrepreneurial individuals operating in the private sphere, as 
opposed to the sphere of the state, who generated rational and useful 
knowledge.”2 The industrial revolution, and with it the interpretation of the 
historical role of mechanical practitioners, became “embedded within de-
bates over competing systems of political economy, primarily liberal democ-
racy (free trade) versus socialism (state regulation).”3 This liberal narrative 
still shapes influential scholars’ interpretations of the relationship between 
eighteenth-century knowledge and the industrial revolution. For example, 
Joel Mokyr has argued for a position that attributes Western industrial de-
velopment to both individual inventors and culture. For him, “technological 
                                                   
2 William J. Ashworth: “The British industrial revolution and the ideological revolution. Science, 
neoliberalism and history”, History of science 52:2 (2014), 182; see also William J. Ashworth: “The 
ghost of Rostow. Science, culture and the British industrial revolution”, History of science 46:3 
(2008), 249–74. For a discussion of the role of such narratives in recent history of science, see 
Andre Wakefield: “Butterfield’s nightmare. The history of science as Disney history”, History and 
technology 30:3 (2014), 232–51. Wakefield provided me with the manuscript of this article, which 
helped me sharpen the methodological arguments of this thesis. 
3 Ashworth: “The British industrial revolution and the ideological revolution”, 178. Compare also 
to nineteenth-century heroic conceptions of invention, discussed in Christine MacLeod: “Con-
cepts of invention and the patent controversy in Victorian Britain”, in Robert Fox (ed): Technologi-
cal change. Methods and themes in the history of technology (Amsterdam, 1996), 150–3. See also Christine 
MacLeod and Alessandro Nuvolari: “The ingenious crowd”. A critical prosopography of British inventors, 
1650–1850 [working paper] (Eindhoven, 2005); Christine MacLeod: Heroes of invention. Technology, 
liberalism and British identity, 1750–1914 (Cambridge, 2007); David Edgerton: The shock of the old. 
Technology and global history since 1900 (New York, 2007), x. 

 
 14 
change involves an attack by an individual on a constraint that everyone else 
takes as given.”4 Mokyr sees the historical application to rational production 
of useful mechanical knowledge, found in small subcultures of knowledgea-
ble men, as a key explanation of modern industrialism. In his view, small 
groups of mechanical practitioners were the cornerstones of an industrial 
enlightenment. In his account, this small subculture of rational men brought 
about the affluence of the post nineteenth-century Western world.5 Similar-
ly, Margaret C. Jacob has recently argued that “knowledge of the physical 
universe gave entrepreneurs a singular advantage”. By participating in con-
temporary “scientific culture”, such actors could approach mechanical pro-
duction in ways previously deemed “irrelevant to homo economicus as classical-
ly formulated.”6 
 
Mokyr and Jacob both see mechanical practitioners as acting unexpect-
edly in relation to contemporary culture. Here, I present an alternative nar-
rative, where the self-presentations of mechanical practitioners are seen 
neither as opposing, nor as transgressing, contemporary audiences or cul-
tures. Instead, I study these presentations as made in relation to the shifting 
and complex expectations of early modern audiences. By taking this ap-
proach, I highlight the heterogeneous roles of early modern mechanics, and 
especially such roles that diverge from the assumption that mechanics 
should be studied as a new form of invention that emanated from England. 
In his recent The limits of matter (2015), Hjalmar Fors has criticised such uni-
directional models, which proceed from an often “unconscious, centrist 
historiographical assumption: that eighteenth-century invention proceeded 
from England.” Instead, his study balances “the substantial literature on the 
mechanical and technical aspects of early modern mining.”7 This study 
draws on Fors’ critique of centralist assumptions. However, I also argue that 
early modern mechanics does not have to be studied as a form of “technol-
ogy” or “innovation”. Instead, an interest in multiple and diverging mean-
ings of mechanics motivates this study of the mechanicus in the early mod-
ern Swedish state. There, a mechanicus was expected to be someone very 
different from the entrepreneurial individual, or innovator, who Mokyr and 
Jacob idolise as the maker of a modern order of production. 
                                                   
4 Joel Mokyr: The lever of riches. Technological creativity and economic progress (New York, 1990), 9. 
5 Joel Mokyr: The gifts of Athena. Historical origins of the knowledge economy (Princeton NJ, 2005), 52–3. 
6 Margaret C. Jacob: The first knowledge economy. Human capital and the European economy, 1750–1850 
(Cambridge, 2014), 221. Andre Wakefield has forcefully, and convincingly, criticised Jacob and 
Mokyr, showing how their histories draw on “Cold War modernization theory”, in Wakefield: 
“Butterfield’s nightmare”, 239–44. 
7 Hjalmar Fors: The limits of matter. Chemistry, mining, and Enlightenment (Chicago, 2015), 153, see 
also 9. During my work I have had access to Fors’ study in manuscript form, which has been 
especially helpful in framing Chapter 3. 

 
 
15 
Early modern mechanics as performance 
Thus far, I have established that the focus of this thesis is an object of study 
called the “mechanicus”. I have also made a pledge of abstinence, not from 
all methodology but from approaches that understand the mechanicus in 
relation to long narratives. The alternative to such an approach is hardly, as 
it were, a method of no method. In order to understand the expectations of 
a mechanicus, I use a theoretical approach with which it is possible to see 
the performances by which historical actors attributed him meaning. 
 
The mechanicus was a persona. As pointed out by H. Otto Sibum and 
Lorraine Daston, a persona can be understood as a “social species”: a way 
of being and knowing, found in between the individual and the collective. 
As such, personas are “not individuals, nor are they simply stereotypes or 
social roles.”8 A persona is a mask, but not in the modern sense of some-
thing that distances an individual from his or her essential identity. Instead, 
it is a mask that genuinely transforms the individual who puts it on. Conse-
quently, personas created “possibilities of being in the human world, 
schooling the mind, body and soul in distinctive and indelible ways.”9 Like 
other personas, the mechanicus was not a role that a mechanical practitioner 
could simply step into, while leaving their “true self” intact: it transcended 
the individual. I see the mechanicus as a set of expectations that provided a 
framework of meaning to mechanical practitioners – a framework that ena-
bled and disabled them from taking certain actions. It was an ever-changing 
assemblage of demands and expectations, which gave meaning to actors’ 
performances as well as audiences’ reactions, and which transformed the 
mechanical practitioners who performed in relation to it. 
 
Residing in between the individual and the collective, the expectations 
that constituted the mechanicus inhabited both a structural and a relational 
level. On the one hand, on a structural level these expectations were part of 
the fabric of the social and political order of the Swedish state and of early 
modern categories of knowledge making. As such, the mechanicus was an 
expression of an early modern “social epistemology”: it was a means of 
                                                   
8 Lorraine Daston and Otto Sibum: “Introduction. Scientific personae and their histories”, Science 
in context 16:1 (2003), 3. 
9 Quotation from ibid., 4. On the concept of persona in an early modern context, see also Conal 
Condren, Stephen Gaukroger and Ian Hunter: “Introduction”, in Conal Condren, Stephen 
Gaukroger, and Ian Hunter (eds): The philosopher in early modern Europe. The nature of a contested 
identity (Cambridge, 2006), 1–16; Stephen Gaukroger: “The persona of the natural philosopher”, 
in Condren, Gaukroger, and Hunter (eds): The philosopher in early modern Europe, 17–34. On the 
holding of an early modern office as a persona, see Conal Condren: “The persona of the philoso-
pher and the rhetorics of office in early modern Europe”, in Condren, Gaukroger, and 
Hunter (eds): The philosopher in early modern Europe, 66–89. Sorona Corneanu discusses a persona as 
“an exemplary identity wrought by intellectual, moral, and even corporeal disciplines, one that 
represented an office (sometimes a noninstitutionalized one) in specific cultural spaces”; Sorana 
Corneanu: Regimens of the mind. Boyle, Locke, and the early modern cultura animi tradition (Chicago, 
2011), 7. 

 
 16 
categorising various forms of knowledge making, which was inseparable 
from questions of political power, identity or relationships between social 
groups.10 On the other hand, the mechanicus was enacted, shaped and rein-
terpreted in actors’ relational performances. By studying such performances, it is 
possible to see mechanical practitioners as being shaped in relation to politi-
cal power as well as to contemporary audiences. The performances that I 
have studied were relational in two senses. First, they were always made in 
relation to an audience. Second, they were enacted in long-term transforma-
tive relationships. As such, mechanics was a means of weaving together and 
transforming early modern men through relations of difference and similari-
ty. These differences and similarities were manifested through a number of 
social distinctions such as gender, age and social status. 
 
Although I see these relationships as permeated by, and as expressions 
of, contemporary social epistemology, I do not argue that mechanical practi-
tioners were following any form of static script. There was always interpre-
tative flexibility in their performances and there always existed means for 
them to relate tactically, in Michel de Certeau’s meaning of the term, to con-
temporary expectations. Thus, mechanical practitioners not only adapted to 
the mechanicus: they also appropriated, stretched and reinvented this per-
sona. These tactical performances were made up of “heterogeneous ele-
ments”, pieced together in a seizing of the moment.11 The elements of me-
chanical performances consisted of a number of techniques. In his Les tech-
niques du corps (1934), Marcel Mauss defines techniques as “the ways in which 
men [and women], society by society, in a traditional fashion, know how to 
use their bodies.” Mauss points out that techniques are part of the social 
world of the communities that we live in. The acts of an individual are 
formed “by all his education, by all of the society which he is part of, in the 
space that he occupies.” Mauss thus argues that as much authority and social 
tradition are involved when transmitting bodily actions as when mediating 
language.12 Therefore, human beings constantly create, break and reaffirm 
                                                   
10 Ken Alder: Engineering the revolution. Arms and enlightenment in France 1763–1815 (Princeton NJ, 
1997), 56. With this term I do not denote the field of philosophy discussing principal questions 
of the relationship between knowledge and “the social”. See for example Frederick F. Schmitt: 
Socializing epistemology. The social dimensions of knowledge (Lanham MD, 1994).  
11 Michel de Certeau defines the actor performing tactically as someone who is “always on the 
watch for opportunities that must be seized ‘on the wing.’ Whatever it wins, it does not keep.”; 
Michel de Certeau: The practice of everyday life (Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1984), xix. 
12 “les façons dont les hommes, société par société, d'une façon traditionnelle, savent se servir de 
leur 
corps.”; 
Marcel 
Mauss: 
Les 
techniques 
du 
corps 
(Chicoutimi, 
2002 
[1934])  
<http://classiques.uqac.ca/classiques/mauss_marcel/socio_et_anthropo/6_Techniques_corps/ 
techniques_corps.pdf> [accessed 27 April 2012], 5. “par toute son éducation, par toute la société 
dont il fait partie, à la place qu'il y occupe.”; ibid., 10. 
 
Similarly, Liliane Hilaire-Pérez has argued that “skills become embedded within specific 
communities because of their needs and constraints, their habits and symbols, and their territo-
ries.” She points out that “‘techniques’ are answers to specific needs and expectations. Their 
applications are not universal; they belong to a world of diversity, contingency, and heterogenei-

 
 
17 
social affiliations through the techniques by which they engage with and 
exist in the world. 
 
I approach a wide range of techniques carried out by mechanical practi-
tioners: for example, socialising, writing, talking, crafting, drawing and calcu-
lating. All these techniques were enabling but also disabling, they opened up 
new possibilities for engaging with social groups and the world, while they 
also restricted other ways of acting. Mechanical practitioners obviously en-
gaged with techniques considered directly related to the making of mechani-
cal knowledge, especially crafts and mathematics (interpreted in the broad 
early modern sense). However, they also routinely performed a wider range 
of techniques, such as writing and drawing, by which they reflected upon 
mechanics and presented it to contemporary audiences. I do not see these 
two categories of techniques as essentially different from each other. In-
stead, I see all of them as means of performing mechanics. The techniques 
constituted what Sibum has termed a “gestural knowledge”. In other words, 
they constituted a form of knowledge that was “united with the actor’s per-
formance of work” and changed “according to the specific kinds of perfor-
mance”.13 
 
But then what do I mean by performances of mechanics? A starting point 
for this thesis is the simple observation that, when historical actors engaged 
with mechanics, they also made themselves in the eyes of their contempo-
raries. Mechanical techniques were thus not only a means of making 
knowledge and building machines, but also, to borrow a term from Judith 
Butler, identificatory practices. That is, the mechanicus was “in no way a stable 
identity or locus of agency from which various acts proceed; rather, it is an 
identity tenuously constituted in time – an identity instituted through a styl-
ized repetition of acts.” Mechanical performances were transformative, and the 
mechanicus was “instituted through the stylization of the body and, hence, 
must be understood as [involving] bodily gestures, movements, and enact-
ment of various kinds”.14 Thus, I see performances of mechanics as means 
                                                                                                                        
ty.” Also, the spaces through which these techniques were circulated “were not neutral or passive; 
instead, they always adapted and translated the techniques they conveyed or received.” Liliane 
Hilaire-Pérez: “Dissemination of technical knowledge in the Middle Ages and the early modern 
era. New approaches and methodological issues”, Technology and culture 47:3 (2006), 537. 
13 H. Otto Sibum: “Reworking the mechanical value of heat. Instruments of precision and ges-
tures of accuracy in early Victorian England”, Studies in history and philosophy of science. Part A 26:1 
(1995), 76 note 8; H. Otto Sibum: “Les gestes de la mesure, Joule, les pratiques de la brasserie et 
la science”, Annales HSS July–October, 1998; H. Otto Sibum: “Experiencing experiment. Gestur-
al knowledge and scientific change in early 19th-century Victorian culture”, Thought & culture 10 
(2011), 38–55. See also Simon Schaffer: “Experimenters’ techniques, dyers’ hands, and the elec-
tric planetarium”, Isis 88:3 (1997), 458. 
14 Judith Butler: “Performative acts and gender constitution. An essay in phenomenology and 
feminist theory”, in Henry Bial (ed): The performance studies reader 2nd edition (London & New 
York, 2007), 187. On presentation and performance of social attributes, see also Erving 
Goffman: The presentation of self in everyday life (London, 1990), 81, and passim. How knowledge 
making is related to the making of the scientist or the artisan through repetitious bodily acts has 

 
 18 
of knowing, acting and living in the world. These performances placed mor-
al demands on the audience, which obliged them to treat the actor in the 
manner that a mechanicus had a right to expect.15 Again, these demands are 
meaningful both as part of an early modern social epistemology and in rela-
tion to a particular audience and a specific situation. 
 
By studying early modern mechanics as performances, made for con-
temporary audiences, I delineate the historical processes that ascribed mean-
ing to mechanical practitioners. The question of who the mechanicus was is 
thus not something that can be defined in this introduction: it is a question 
that must be answered in relation to the specific institutions and relation-
ships through which the mechanicus was made, remade and unmade. 
Actors’ categories 
The term “mechanicus”, or “mechanici” in the plural, was routinely used in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to signify men who were deemed 
skilled in mechanics. Certain early modern Swedes were also identified as an 
ingenieur.16 However, the term ingenieur seems to have been used less often 
than the term “mechanicus”. Generally, whereas a mechanicus was a man 
defined by his able performance of mechanics, an ingenieur was someone 
with a specific position in the state. It might seem convenient to equate the 
term ingenieur with the modern “engineer”. However, when we approach 
techniques of the past, our modern understanding of terms such as “engi-
neers”, “invention” or “technology” can be problematic. To study a term 
such as the “mechanicus”, which is less easy to associate with modern cate-
gories, and which historical actors themselves understood as defined by 
men’s performances, is a way to avoid these problems. This history of the 
                                                                                                                        
been discussed by Sibum: “Les gestes de la mesure, Joule, les pratiques de la brasserie et la  
science”; Pamela H. Smith: The body of the artisan. Art and experience in the scientific revolution (Chicago, 
2004), 18–20. The topic has also been treated by the texts in Christopher Lawrence and Steven 
Shapin (eds): Science incarnate. Historical embodiments of natural knowledge (Chicago, 1998); See especial-
ly: Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin: “Introduction. The body of knowledge”, in Law-
rence and Shapin (eds): Science incarnate, 1–19; Andrew Warwick: “Exercising the student body. 
Mathematics and athleticism in Victorian Cambridge”, in Lawrence and Shapin (eds): Science 
incarnate, 288–323. 
15 For a discussion of the moral demands of performances, see Goffman: The presentation of self in 
everyday life, 24. 
16 For example, in 1692 the Captain engineer [Capitein Ingenieur] in the fortification Otto Barthold 
Scholl published a treatise on geometry in Swedish; Barthold Otto Schmoll: Kort anledning till 
geometrien, hwar effter officerarne wid Hans Kongl. May:tz infanterie här i Swerige till mathesin och fortification 
(Stockholm, 1692). Also, in the early eighteenth century Petrus Tillæus was the city engineer 
[Stads Ingenieur] of Stockholm as seen on his detailed map over Stockholm: Petrus Tillaeus: “Gen-
eral charta öfwer Stockholm med malmarne åhr 1733” (Stockholm, 1733). Svante Lindqvist has 
described the “mechanicus” as a “universal title”, in relation to the term “ingenieur” which in the 
early eighteenth century “was used principally as a title of officers in the Fortification Corps”; 
Svante Lindqvist: Technology on trial. The introduction of steam power technology into Sweden, 1715–1736 
(Uppsala, 1984), 15. 

 
 
19 
mechanicus is thus not a history of the rise of a profession, or of the mod-
ern engineer. It is the history of men who made themselves in relation to 
contemporary expectations. 
 
A number of historians of technology have argued for the importance 
of being sensitive to historical actors’ own categories. For example, they 
have pointed out the problems in defining engineers or mechanical practi-
tioners as inventors, because this equates mechanical work with the act of 
invention.17 Scholars of early modern mechanics have highlighted similar 
issues. For example, Jim Bennett has pointed out how the historical under-
standing of early modern mechanics has been crippled by twentieth-century 
historians’ tendency to reduce the complexity of this field to the two mod-
ern categories of science and technology. The introduction of these analyti-
cal concepts has made historians see a divide between a mechanistic natural 
philosophy and mechanical and mathematical practitioners, which was not 
obvious to historical actors. As a consequence, historians have established 
artisans and scholars as two categories a priori and have identified historical 
actors, or sometimes specific parts of an actor’s work, as belonging to one 
of the two.18 Such studies, which analytically categorise historical phenome-
na as either science or technology, tend to generate questions of influences 
and consequences ripe with teleology: did modern science originate in the 
world of craftsmen, or was modern technology the result of a rationalisation 
and mathematisation of artisanal knowledge? In historical studies of periods 
prior to the use of these modern concepts, science and technology tend to 
encourage questions about origins, and thus to make historians blind to 
processes other than those that gave rise to these opposing terms them-
selves. Sometimes, such use even compels historians to write histories in 
which these terms are static and a-historical, and in which the performances 
of historical actors are interpreted as made in relation to these categories, as 
they are understood today. Either way, by using such distinctions, we end 
up with questions as to how early modern mechanics made the industrial 
world. These are questions that early eighteenth-century actors themselves 
                                                   
17 This point has recently been made in David Edgerton: “Innovation, technology, or history. 
What is the historiography of technology about?”, Technology and culture 51:3 (2010), 683. See also 
Eric Schatzberg: “Technik comes to America. Changing meanings of technology before 1930”, 
Technology and culture 47:3 (2006), 486, 512; Ruth Oldenziel: Making technology masculine. Men, women, 
and modern machines in America, 1870–1945 (Amsterdam, 1999), 14, 46. Christine MacLeod has 
made similar arguments about the interpretation of historical patent systems. See Christine Mac-
Leod: Inventing the industrial revolution. The English patent system, 1660–1800 (Cambridge, 1988), 5, 
158–81. For a critical discussion of the view of engineers as inventors, see Edgerton: The shock of 
the old, xv. Also, Andre Wakefield makes a similar call for what he calls a history “that looks 
forward instead of back”; Andre Wakefield: The disordered police state. German cameralism as science and 
practice (Chicago, 2009), 23; Andre Wakefield: “Leibniz and the wind machines”, Osiris 25:1 
(2010), 172–3, 188. 
18 Jim Bennett: “The mechanics’ philosophy and the mechanical philosophy”, History of science 24 
(1986), 6. 

 
 20 
obviously knew very little about, and which can hardly be said to have 
shaped their own understanding of their actions. 
 
A similar point is made by the authors in The mindful hand (2007), a col-
lection of studies with a common aim of understanding material and 
knowledge production as “a single, hybrid affair in which the work of the 
head and of the hand formed a complex whole.” These are not studies of 
“the relationship between science and technology, or of the relationship 
between theory and application.”19 Moreover, they refute essentialist distinc-
tions of theory’s superiority over practice, because it is to conjure forth an 
opposition between “on one hand the idealising method whereby philoso-
phers mechanised the world-picture and, on the other, an applied set of 
practices whereby mechanics improved their techniques”.20 Instead, they 
treat early modern mathematics, including mechanics, as an amalgam of 
what we today might call science and technology.21 In their view, the “exam-
ination of nature was just as likely to involve and contribute to material pro-
duction as invention was to the production of knowledge.”22 Similarly, a 
number of recent studies have approached mechanical practitioners as go-
betweens – that is, as actors who translated and mediated between contem-
porary cultures of craftsmen and natural philosophers.23 
 
My thesis takes many cues from all these studies that question how his-
torians of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have conceptualised his-
torical mechanical work. It is important to recognise that boundaries that 
today might appear settled – such as those between science and technology, 
or theory and practice – may have been drawn differently, been more fluid, 
or even been non-existent to historical actors. Such categories, and the rela-
tionships between them, should not be seen as preceding actors’ perfor-
mances, but as products of them. Therefore, this thesis sets out neither to 
reduce the field of mechanics to modern categories such as science and 
technology, nor to show that mechanics was an amalgam of what today are 
categorised by these terms. Instead, the boundaries between, for example, 
theory and practice (to the actors known as theoria and praxis) were constant-
                                                   
19 Lissa Roberts, Simon Schaffer, and Peter Dear (eds): The mindful hand. Inquiry and invention from 
the late Renaissance to early industrialisation (Amsterdam & Bristol, 2007), x. 
20 Lissa Roberts: “Introduction. Workshops of the hand and mind”, in Roberts, Schaffer, and 
Dear (eds): The mindful hand, 6. 
21 Roberts, Schaffer and Dear (eds): The mindful hand, xix. 
22 Ibid., x. 
23 Lissa Roberts: “Full steam ahead. Entrepreneurial engineers as go-betweens during the late 
eighteenth century”, in Simon Schaffer et al. (eds): The brokered world. Go-betweens and global intelli-
gence, 1770–1820 (Sagamore Beach MA, 2009), 193–238; Lissa Roberts: “Geographies of steam. 
Mapping the entrepreneurial activities of steam engineers in France during the second half of the 
eighteenth century”, History and technology 27:4 (2011), 420; Chandra Mukerji: Territorial ambitions 
and the gardens of Versailles (Cambridge, 1997); Chandra Mukerji: Impossible engineering. Technology and 
territoriality on the Canal du Midi (Princeton NJ, 2009). 

 
 
21 
ly redrawn by actors who struggled to perform in relation to the expecta-
tions of contemporary audiences. 
From long narratives to synchronic history 
By the late twentieth century, historians of science and technology aban-
doned writing simple chronicles and linear determinist models of the rela-
tionship between knowledge, technology and affluence. Instead, in the wake 
of the new sociology of science of the 1970s – interested in scientific prac-
tice as a part of society – the focus of historians of science has shifted to 
science as a social and collective process. This shift has fundamentally en-
riched our understanding of science as constituted by social, material and 
historical practices.24 Working in this mode of historical inquiry, an increas-
ing number of studies from the 1980s onwards have re-examined the role of 
early modern mechanics, machines and mechanical practitioners. They have 
shown how such actors were part of a history of values, products, objects, 
techniques and procedures, which together gave legitimacy to new objects 
according to contemporary expectations.25 
 
Among these works on eighteenth-century mechanics, two stand out as 
especially relevant to my study: Ken Alder’s Engineering the revolution (1997) 
and Svante Lindqvist’s Technology on trial (1984). Alder studies an “engineer-
ing technological life” in France during the ancien régime and under the  
                                                   
24 Notable examples of this shift are Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer: Leviathan and the air-pump. 
Hobbes, Boyle, and the experimental life (Princeton NJ, 1985); Bruno Latour: The pasteurization of France 
(Cambridge MA, 1988). These works were focusing on issues similar to those of works in the 
sociology of science from the 1970s, promoted by on the one hand David Bloor and on the other 
hand Harry Collins, see for example David Bloor: “Wittgenstein and Mannheim on the sociology 
of mathematics”, Studies in history and philosophy of science. Part A 4:2 (1973), 173–91; H. M. Collins: 
“The seven sexes. A study in the sociology of a phenomenon, or the replication of experiments 
in physics”, Sociology 9:2 (1975), 205–24. 
 
In the 1980s, a number of sociologists of science proposed the usefulness of not establishing 
differences between science and technology a priori. See for example Wiebe Bijker and Trevor 
Pinch: “The social construction of facts and artifacts. Or how the sociology of science and the 
sociology of technology might benefit each other”, in Wiebe Bijker, Thomas Hughes, and Trevor 
Pinch (eds): The social construction of technological systems. New directions in the sociology and history of tech-
nology (Cambridge MA, 1987), 17–50; Bruno Latour: Science in action. How to follow scientists and 
engineers through society (Cambridge MA, 1987). 
25 Many studies analyse the historical and social specificities of early modern engineers and inven-
tors, both in a synchronic and diachronic context. Noteworthy examples are: Lindqvist: Technology 
on trial; MacLeod: Inventing the industrial revolution; Larry R. Stewart: Rise of public science. Rhetoric, 
technology and natural philosophy in Newtonian Britain, 1660–1750 (Cambridge, 1992); Antoine Picon: 
French architects and engineers in the Age of Enlightenment (New York, 1992); Hélène Vérin: La gloire des 
ingénieurs. L’intelligence technique du XVIe au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1993); Alder: Engineering the revolution; 
Liliane Hilaire-Pérez: L’invention technique au siècle des Lumières (Paris, 2000), 25, 36–9; Margaret C. 
Jacob and Larry Stewart: Practical matter. Newton’s science in the service of industry and empire, 1687–1851 
(Cambridge MA, 2004); Jean-François Gauvin: Habits of knowledge. Artisans, savants and mechanical 
devices in seventeenth-century French natural philosophy (Cambridge MA, 2008); MacLeod: Heroes of 
invention. 

 
 22 
government of the French revolution. This technological life, “a coherent 
and ideological world which gives purpose and meaning to a set of material 
objects”, was a French absolutist context that was in some ways similar to 
the Swedish one studied here. Alder shows how, in eighteenth-century 
France, mechanics was not an activity of entrepreneurial individuals, but 
instead one of civil servants submitted to the state.26 As such, his study high-
lights the different roles of mechanical practitioners in various early modern 
European states, and emphasises that we should not see France or Sweden 
through the models constructed by researchers who have, predominantly, 
studied British sources. 
 
Svante Lindqvist’s Technology on trial is an early and important Swedish 
study, which shows the importance of being sensitive to the social and ma-
terial organisation of eighteenth-century science. As part of the develop-
ments in the history of science from the 1980s, it adjusts the traditional 
narrative of mechanics in the eighteenth-century Swedish state. Lindqvist 
argues that the (failed) introduction of English “steam engine technology” 
can only be understood by examining social and material differences be-
tween England and Sweden. Technology on trial is the most in-depth study of 
Swedish eighteenth-century mechanics to date, and provides important his-
torical understanding of the work of mechanical practitioners. It shows how 
the introduction of modern mechanical production was neither a linear pro-
cess nor brought about by exceptional individuals. Lindqvist writes an 
eighteenth-century history of technology that disentangles the study of 
technology from hagiographies of genius inventors, and which is highly 
sensitive to the material and social aspects of eighteenth-century institu-
tions.27 
                                                   
26 Alder: Engineering the revolution, xii. 
27 Lindqvist: Technology on trial. In addition to Lindqvist, Mikael Hård connects Polhem’s theories 
to contemporary philosophies, such as Cartesianism, which he in turn links to Polhem’s mechan-
ical practice, Mikael Hård: “Mechanica och mathesis. Några tankar kring Christopher Polhems 
fysikaliska och vetenskapsteoretiska föreställningar”, Lychnos (1986), 55–69. Per Dahl’s work on 
the Swedish seventeenth-century “technological education” of Olof Rudbeck and his technical 
enterprises is another study taking historical specificity seriously, Per Dahl: Svensk ingenjörskonst 
under stormaktstiden. Olof Rudbecks tekniska undervisning och praktiska verksamhet (Uppsala, 1995). Also, 
David Dunér has recently analysed the thinking of Polhem and Swedenborg in ways inspired by 
cognitive science, and he sees the intellectual work of these mechanical practitioners as formed 
by their time, see David Dunér: Världsmaskinen. Emanuel Swedenborgs naturfilosofi (Lund, 2004); this 
book is also published in English as David Dunér: The natural philosophy of Emanuel Swedenborg. A 
study in the conceptual metaphors of the mechanistic world-view (Dordrecht, 2013); David Dunér: Tanke-
maskinen. Polhems huvudvärk och andra studier i tänkandets historia (Nora, 2012). 
 
The use of eighteenth-century inventors to form a Swedish national narrative has been 
discussed by Ingmarie Danielsson Malmros: Det var en gång ett land. Berättelsen om svenskhet i historie-
läroböcker och elevers föreställningsvärldar (Lund, 2012), 140–4. Such a narrative can perhaps most 
clearly be seen in Samuel E. Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, Christopher 
Polhem. Minnesskrift ufgifven av Svenska teknologföreningen (Stockholm, 1911); translated into English 
as Samuel E. Bring; William A. Johnson (tran.): Christopher Polhem. The father of Swedish technology 
(Hartford CT, 1963). In contrast to recent scholarly work on Swedish eighteenth-century me-

 
 
23 
 
These earlier works provide important starting points for my study of 
the mechanicus in the early modern Swedish state. Still, they also exhibit a 
methodological ambivalence, typical of late twentieth-century studies.28 Ian 
Hacking has discussed the double nature of such studies, in a review of the 
second edition of Simon Schaffer and Steven Shapin’s Leviathan and the air-
pump (1985). There, Hacking argues that despite “its vigorous profession of 
anti-anachronism,” the book is “thoroughly whig history.” The term “whig-
gism” should not, as it usually is, be seen as pejorative. As Hacking points 
out, perhaps these studies need to be whiggish, “because there is no way of 
unthinking the experimental style of reasoning that came into being.”29 This 
tension between anti-anachronism and whiggism is illustrative of the history 
of science and technology from the late twentieth century. Generally, the 
historically sensitive studies from this time are motivated not primarily by a 
wish to understand the meaning that actors ascribed to early modern 
knowledge, but by an interest in discovering the origins of modern phe-
nomena. Consequently, they examine the rise of scientific objectivity and 
public science, modern ways of disciplining perception and the establish-
ment of the organisational structures of modern science. 
 
Similarly, while Alder and Lindqvist are highly sensitive to historical 
contexts and phenomena, their ultimate aim is to understand processes such 
as industrialisation and the rise of technology. Alder writes a history that 
places eighteenth-century engineers in a long narrative, which is made pos-
sible by a number of analytical interventions. He sees his historical actors as 
representatives of an ahistoric category of men: as “a subspecies of Homo 
faber, engineers are engaged in one of the most quintessential human activi-
ties.” Engineers are then related to the process of industrialisation, or, as 
Alder puts it, “engineers have come to play a dominant role in the pattern 
of Western industrialization.”30 By placing eighteenth-century engineers in 
this long narrative, Alder aims to show how “modern technological life is a 
political creation, and [how] we can read in its artifacts the history of the 
struggles and negotiations which gave it birth.”31 Similarly, Lindqvist ulti-
mately aims to understand the conditions that give birth to specific  
                                                                                                                        
chanics, more popular works have not fundamentally challenged this historiography. See for 
example: Michael Lindgren and Per Sörbom: Christopher Polhem 1661–1751. “The Swedish Daedalus” 
(Stockholm, 1985); Michael Lindgren: Christopher Polhems testamente. Berättelsen om ingenjören, entrepre-
nören och pedagogen som ville förändra Sverige (Stockholm, 2011). 
28 On whiggism and late twentieth-century history of science, see Wakefield: “Butterfield’s 
nightmare”, 237–9. 
29 Ian Hacking: “Artificial phenomena. Essay review of Leviathan and the air pump”, The British 
journal for the history of science 24:02 (1991), 238. For a more thorough discussion of whiggism in the 
history of science, as well as a discussion of what separates whiggish and triumphalist narratives, 
see Hasok Chang: “We have never been whiggish (about phlogiston)”, Centaurus 51:4 (2009), 
239–64. 
30 Alder: Engineering the revolution, 11. 
31 Alder: Engineering the revolution, xii. 

 
 24 
technology. Using “the huge bronze cylinder of the Dannemora engine” he 
aims to find “an image of early eighteenth-century Sweden.”32 
 
Also, Lindqvist aims to understand the “transfer of technology” to new 
places. He follows what he sees as a unidirectional technology transfer from 
England to Sweden, in order to understand why technology could, or could 
not, move from there to a new place of adoption.33 The image reflected in 
the bronze cylinder thus, in many respects, becomes a comparison with 
England, and ultimately with modernity. In Technology on trial, the steam en-
gine becomes more than a material artifact: implicitly, it is also a metaphor 
for a modern industrialism, based on fossil fuels. Consequently, Lindqvist’s 
study aims to understand why eighteenth-century England was industrial-
ised, and why Sweden, at the same time, was not. 
 
Shapin  has defended the wish to understand the present as a legitimate 
aim of historical studies. Such accounts can show what “we think led on – 
never directly or simply, to be sure – to certain features of the present in 
which, for certain purposes, we happen to be interested”. On a principle 
level, I agree that there “is nothing at all wrong about telling such stories”.34 
Historians must choose, and justify, how and why they interact with, and 
interpret, historical phenomena. Such choices are never analytically innocent 
and they have consequences, of which one must be aware: Which histories 
do they have us tell, and which do they make us blind to? What are the con-
sequences of aiming to do two things at once: of wishing to understand 
both the historical specificity of historical phenomena and the role of these 
phenomena in long narratives? While it is obvious that such long narratives 
can inform us of processes forming the present, a double-headed method-
ology requires historians not only to study actors’ performances in relation 
to contemporary expectations, but also in relation to the expectations of 
posterity. 
 
Whereas I share the interest in historical specificity of Alder and Lind-
qvist I believe that it is possible to say more about early modern under-
standings of mechanical practitioners by avoiding the long narratives, of 
which the historical actors were unaware. Although it is certainly possible to 
write a history of mechanics that either takes the long-term effects of me-
chanics or actors’ own understanding into account, one cannot fully commit 
to both these aims at once. To study the mechanicus, as it was performed 
and understood by historical actors, is a conscious methodological choice, 
which enables me to focus on the issues at hand while ignoring others. In 
other words, I study mechanical performances in relation to the expecta-
tions of contemporary audiences, and not in relation to posterity. By making 
this choice, I consciously turn a blind eye to the role of early modern me-
                                                   
32 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 13–14. 
33 Ibid., 11–12. 
34 Steven Shapin: The scientific revolution (Chicago, 1996), 7. 

 
 
25 
chanics in long narratives, in order to see actors’ own understanding of 
events in a clearer light. Therefore, this study will say less about long-term 
historical change, and more about the meaning given to the mechanicus at a 
specific time and place. Daniel Roche has identified the wish to understand 
”how change became possible in a world that saw itself as stable, change-
less” as a central problem in eighteenth-century studies.35 In this thesis, 
however, I am more interested in how mechanical practice, today a part of 
several narratives of historical change, was justified by historical actors be-
cause it carried the promise of maintaining, or ever perfecting, the status 
quo. 
A social epistemology of early modern mechanics 
Then how did early moderns understand mechanics and the mechanicus? In 
early modern Europe mechanics was not only considered an art of machine 
building, but also “a means of understanding larger social forces, or abstract 
entities at play in the world.”36 Machines were not only a means of material 
affluence, but also provided a coherent and orderly structure by which the 
order of nature as well as a social order could be understood in relation to 
human artifice. This structure was entrenched in specific language commu-
nities, and formed networks of metaphors that asserted “meaningful similar-
ities” between machines and a range of other phenomena. When studying 
these networks, it is important to perceive “the flexibility of all terms in a 
metaphorical identification.”37 An important starting point for this thesis is 
the observation that the mechanicus, like the machinery he built, was a 
meaningful part of various political orders. Therefore, mechanical perfor-
mances could inspire early modern audiences to dream of an affluent and 
orderly future, and some sovereigns even loosened their purse strings for 
those who managed to meet their expectations of useful mechanical work.38 
 
The political meanings of mechanics, and consequently of a mechanicus, 
were not uniform in early modern Europe. Instead, these political connota-
tions varied along with the structure of the states in which mechanics was 
performed. In the absolutist states of the European continent, authors put 
an emphasis on the hierarchical structure of mechanical apparatus. There, 
                                                   
35 Daniel Roche: France in the Enlightenment (Cambridge MA, 1998), 6. 
36 Jonathan Sawday: Engines of the imagination. Renaissance culture and the rise of the machine (London, 
2007), 54. 
37 Peter Dear: Discipline & experience. The mathematical way in the scientific revolution (Chicago, 1995), 
151–3, quotes from page 151 and 152. In his use of a network model of metaphor, Dear follows 
the model proposed by Barry Barnes: “On the conventional character of knowledge and cogni-
tion”, Philosophy of the social sciences 11:3 (1981), 303–33. 
38 Jonathan Sawday: Engines of the imagination, 101. See also Wakefield: “Leibniz and the wind 
machines”. 

 
 26 
clock-metaphors became a means of imagining a rationally ordered society, 
in which each subject performed faithfully and where power emanated from 
a single sovereign. In the constitutional state of early eighteenth-century 
Britain, on the other hand, self-regulating mechanisms legitimated a political 
system of checks and balances. There, the point that no machinery could 
function without supervision and repairs became an argument against an 
autocratic social order.39 There was thus interpretative flexibility in machines 
and in the mechanicus, and early modern audiences expected mechanical 
performances to correspond to other means of conceiving both nature and 
society. In other words, mechanical performances became relevant to early 
modern audiences when they corresponded with, for example, organic con-
ceptions of society as a body, patriarchal metaphors of the state as a house 
or a family, or theocratic means of understanding the state through analogy 
to the order of God’s creation or the church as the body of Christ. 
 
Mechanical practitioners and philosophers presented audiences with 
interpretations of nature as made up of infinitely small moving and interact-
ing cogs and springs, not unlike the clocks and machines constructed by a 
mechanicus. This mechanical world was presented as in balance, in ways 
that corresponded to classical views of nature. In mechanical physico-
theology, God was interpreted as the divine artificer and overseer, an ingen-
ious being whose mechanical creations were infinitely more complex than 
those of any human mechanicus, and who guaranteed the running of his 
contraption.40 Also the small world of the human body could be interpreted 
in mechanical terms. Iatromechanics made the body intelligible as a me-
chanical assemblage of related structures. Because the body was given me-
chanical properties, society – traditionally seen as an organic “body politic” 
– in turn could be interpreted as a machine–body consisting of subjects 
who, like cogs, worked together for a coherent whole.41 
                                                   
39 Otto Mayr: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in early modern Europe (Baltimore, 1986), com-
pare 122–36 and 139–47. 
40 On mechanical metaphors and clock metaphors in the so-called scientific revolution, see  
Carolyn Merchant: The death of nature. Women, ecology, and the scientific revolution (San Francisco, 1980), 
99–126; Mayr: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in early modern Europe, 54–101; Shapin: The 
scientific revolution, 30–46; Dear: The intelligibility of nature, 15–38. For a discussion of mechanical 
metaphors in a Swedish context, see Dunér: Världsmaskinen; Dunér: The natural philosophy of Eman-
uel Swedenborg; See also Dunér: Tankemaskinen. 
41 On iatromechanics in the writings of William Harvey and René Descartes, see Thomas Fuchs: 
The mechanization of the heart. Harvey and Descartes (Rochester, N.Y, 2001), 115–96; See also Thomas 
Wright: William Harvey. A life in circulation (Oxford, 2012), 207. For a discussion of the relationship 
between natural and scientific order in seventeenth-century Europe, see Shapin and Schaffer: 
Leviathan and the air-pump; Peter Dear: “Mysteries of state, mysteries of nature. Authority, 
knowledge and expertise in the 17th Century”, in Sheila Jasanoff (ed): States of knowledge. The co-
production of science and social order (London, 2004), 206–24. On mechanics as a means of making 
society intelligible, see Mayr: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in early modern Europe, 102–21; 
Simon Schaffer: “Enlightened Automata”, in William Clark, Jan Golinski, and Simon Schaf-
fer (eds): The sciences in enlightened Europe (Chicago, 1999), 126–65. For the use of mechanical met-
aphors in the Swedish political community, see Pasi Ihalainen: “New visions for the future. Bodi-

 
 
27 
 
We are thus presented with a number of powerful mixed metaphors: of 
a social machine–body, of God as a creator of the perfect artifice of nature, 
and of machines as bodies and social orders crafted in matter. Put different-
ly: mechanics and machinery mediated between understandings of change 
and order in both nature and society. By describing human bodies, societies 
and nature as products of mechanical work, these phenomena could all be 
understood through each other, because they were all objects of human or 
divine agency.42 By means of these mixed metaphors, mechanical frame-
works of understanding became integrated into other ways of interpreting 
the world (be they organic, patriarchal or theocratic). In early modern Swe-
den, these layers of interpretations formed a complex stack that could be 
used to legitimise a hierarchical society.43 The mechanicus was a man who 
could convincingly present these mechanical visions of bringing order to the 
world. Whether he built machines, presented plans for educating young men 
in their image, or dreamt up ways to perfect the hierarchies of the early 
modern state, he was relevant to his contemporaries in the ways he could 
relate his mechanics to audiences’ expectations. 
Making trusted and virtuous men 
Early moderns trusted the dreams of mechanici because these dreams were 
embedded in other contemporary networks of meaning. When mechanical 
practitioners performed in ways that were relevant to their time, they at-
tained resources and authority to carry out their visions. Consequently, is-
sues of trust and authority are at the heart of this thesis. Over the past dec-
ades, historians of science have taken an interest in early modern practices 
of asserting authority to define what was true, good and useful. These stud-
ies, which have approached knowledge making as a part of various early 
modern European cultures and states, provide a number of differing 
frameworks of trust and authority of relevance to this study of the mechani-
cus of the early modern Swedish state. 
                                                                                                                        
ly and mechanical conceptions of the political community in eighteenth-century Sweden”, in Petri 
Karonen (ed): Hopes and fears for the future in early modern Sweden, 1500–1800 (Helsinki, 2009), 315–
40; Dunér: Tankemaskinen, 274. 
42 The concept of mediating machines were introduced by Norton Wise in his “Mediating ma-
chines”, Science in context 2:1 (1988), 77–113. Though this term, Wise highlights both conceptual 
mediation, between “a network of concepts from political economy and a similar network in 
natural philosophy” and methodological mediation, where machines mediate between “the truth of 
theoretical knowledge in its utility and the utility of practical knowledge in its truth.”; ibid., 77. I 
use this term in both these senses. Early modern machines were both a means of mediating 
between a social and natural order, as well as a means of mediating between seventeenth- and 
eighteenth epistemological concepts. 
43 Merchant has made a similar point, arguing that ”The organic and mechanical philosophies of 
nature cannot, therefore, be viewed as strict dichotomies”, Merchant: The death of nature, 103. 

 
 28 
 
In A social history of truth (1994), Shapin examines “the great civility”, an 
elite culture in seventeenth-century England in which credibility was identi-
fied in the social status of individual actors. According to Shapin, “the moral 
economy of premodern society located truth within the practical perfor-
mances of everyday social order.” By contrast, “the modern condition per-
mits no such effective resort to familiarity and personal virtue in deciding 
upon the truth or falsity of knowledge-claims.”44 The gentleman was the 
quintessential truth-teller of early modern England and actors who were 
trusted invoked a notion of gentility. Because he was seen as free by virtue 
of his economic independence, the gentleman was identified as a truth-teller 
in contrast to those who “labored under constraint.”45 The recognition that 
the establishing of a specific form of knowledge also required the cultivation 
of a certain kind of knower and his findings, forms an important basis for 
this thesis. However, when studying the mechanicus of the early modern 
Swedish state, it is important to be sensitive to the specific cultural connota-
tions given to mechanical work in this part of Northern Europe. In particu-
lar, it is necessary to recognise that few subjects of the Swedish realm had 
the financial resources of an English gentleman. In contrast to England, 
where trust was accredited to free-acting gentlemen, one finds in Sweden a 
system of authority, of a poor absolutist state, where submission and hard 
work were crucial for identification as a trustworthy man. 
 
When discussing what was true and useful, one should thus be wary of 
providing too broad explanations of how actors established authority. Prac-
tices of trust and authority were part of specific cultures that varied over 
both time and place.46 Several studies have shown alternative social frame-
works of trust contemporary to “the great civility” of seventeenth-century 
England. For example, Jay Smith has pointed out how by accepting “Ha-
bermas’s dichotomy between the state and the public sphere of private per-
sons,” many studies of the French ancien régime ignore how this absolute 
monarchy was “responsible for creating and gradually transforming an ab-
stract public space.”47 Whereas Shapin focuses on how English gentlemen 
                                                   
44 Steven Shapin: A social history of truth. Civility and science in seventeenth-century England (Chicago, 
1994), quotes from pages 36 and 410–11; see also Steven Shapin: “The invisible technician”, 
American scientist 77:6 (1989), 562; Jan Golinski: “The care of the self and the masculine birth of 
science”, History of science 40 (2002), 125–45. 
45 Shapin: A social history of truth, 43. 
46 Peter Dear has made a similar call for historical specificity. He argues that the relationship 
between knowledge makers and the state is not a given. Such a relationship depends on which 
form of knowledge we study, and which state. Dear proposes that early modern authoritative 
knowledge could recast “the product of scientific activity as another kind of order, not social but 
natural”; Dear: “Mysteries of state, mysteries of nature”, 206. 
47 Jay M. Smith: The culture of merit. Nobility, royal service, and the making of absolute monarchy in France, 
1600–1789 (Ann Arbor, 1996), 267. Compare to Shapin’s account of the English Royal Society in 
A social history of truth, 120. Though a royal society obviously was related to the English state, it was 
not an integrated part of the state administration. In comparison, the organisation of the French 
l’Académie de science, for example, was closer linked to the government than its English counter-

 
 
29 
gained trust by acting in a society of equals, Smith shows a French culture in 
which trust was given to actors working within the state apparatus.48 The 
role of the state in early modern Sweden bears more similarities to France 
than to Britain. Because of their relative poverty and the general scarcity of 
resources, Swedish mechanical practitioners could not attain independence 
through private fortunes.49 However, one should not equate the early mod-
ern Swedish state with the French ancien régime. The war-ridden early  
eighteenth-century Swedish absolutism had but a fraction of the economic 
resources of the French state, and, if we wish to understand the role of me-
chanical practitioners in early modern Sweden, it is important to see their 
relational performances, enacted in the state, as more than means to an end, 
or ways to gain material benefits. 
 
Such relationships to powerful actors in the state were central to early 
modern men of science, as shown in Mario Biagioli’s analysis of the court of 
the Medici. Compared with Shapin, who describes the Royal Society as a 
collective structure of relative peers, Biagioli describes the self-fashioning of 
Galileo in a court structured as a pyramid of patrons and clients.50 By fash-
ioning himself in relation to the anticipations of patrons, Galileo Galilei 
could act within this structure of patronage in order to further his own ca-
reer, increase his status and legitimise his knowledge claims.51 These asym-
metric relationships carry many similarities to the ones that I am studying. 
However, whereas Biagioli primarily studies the strategic nature of these 
relationships, as a means of making knowledge in an early modern court 
culture, I am interested in how these relationships formed the mechanical 
practitioners themselves. 
 
A number of recent studies have shown how early modern natural phi-
losophy and mathematics were not only perceived as means of making 
                                                                                                                        
part. See for example: Daniel Roche: La France des Lumières (Paris, 1993), 461; see also Charles 
Coulston Gillispie: Science and polity in France at the end of the old regime (Princeton NJ, 1980), 79–81. 
48 Of course, the systems of trust in England and France should not be seen as complete oppo-
sites. Being seen as affiliated with the state and public interest was pivotal to the entrepreneurs 
and experimental philosophers of the English constitutional monarchy, e.g. in Stewart: Rise of 
public science, 16. 
49 For a discussion of early modern economy and trust in Sweden, see Klas Nyberg: “‘Jag exister-
ar endast genom att äga kredit’. Tillit, kreditvärdighet och finansiella nätverk i 1700-talets och det 
tidiga 1800-talets Stockholm”, in Mats Berglund (ed): Sakta vi gå genom stan. Stadshistoriska studier 
tillägnade Lars Nilsson den 31/5 2005 (Stockholm, 2005), 184–211. 
50 Mario Biagioli: Galileo, courtier. The practice of science in the culture of absolutism (Chicago, 1993), see 
esp. 4–5, 25–30. See also Mario Biagioli: “The social status of Italian mathematicians, 1450–
1600”, History of Science 27:1 (1989), 41–95. In his use of the concept of “self-fashioning”, Biagioli 
follows studies of early modern history and literature. See for example Stephen Greenblatt: Re-
naissance self-fashioning. From More to Shakespeare (Chicago, 2005 [1980]). But while Greenblath 
focuses on the relationship between the expressions of cultural codes in literary works, Biagioli 
sees self-fashioning as an act in relation to a social structure of clients and patrons. For a similar 
study of structures of patrons and clients in a Swedish context, see Hjalmar Fors: Mutual favours. 
The social and scientific practice of eighteenth-century Swedish chemistry (Uppsala, 2003). 
51 Biagioli: Galileo, courtier, 99. 

 
 30 
knowledge, but also as an exercise that transforms the knowing subject. 
Sorana Corneanu has shown how the works of Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle 
and John Locke related to a longer early modern tradition of cultura and 
medicina animi, to which the philosophical study of nature became a regimen 
of the mind. She argues that what would later be known as “objectivity”, in 
the seventeenth century, would be “understood as virtuous dispositions 
acquired by disciplines meant to transform the ‘temper’ of the philosophers’ 
minds.” As such, the goal of natural inquiry was not solely to make 
knowledge, but also to exercise the mind of the inquirer; beyond offering a 
route to understanding nature, natural philosophy was further a means to 
craft oneself into a virtuous subject. Thus, Corneanu shows that the possi-
bilities that early modern actors saw in experimental philosophy were not 
necessarily the same as those that modern historians ascribe to these activi-
ties.52 Similarly, Matthew L. Jones has shown how René Descartes, Blaise 
Pascal and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz viewed mathematics, and especially 
geometry, as a spiritual exercise that could “help one live the good life.”53 
Like these authors, I want to understand early modern mechanics and 
mathematics as self-forming exercises. However, my main focus is not how 
famous philosophers or mathematicians discussed mechanics, or other 
forms of mathematics, as spiritual exercises. Instead, I am interested in how 
men shaped themselves into useful and virtuous subjects by performing 
early modern mechanics in relation to each other. 
 
To seventeenth- and eighteenth-century audiences, the terms “useful-
ness” and “virtue” carried different connotations from the ones they do 
today. In early modern economic discourse, the concepts of virtue and use-
fulness were intertwined, so that the one could not be without the other. A 
useful man acted in the interest of the publicum (i.e., of the state or the sov-
ereign) as a contributing yet subordinated member of the state. Such a use-
ful man was also a virtuous man, defined by a set of virtues such as dili-
gence and concord. Virtue and usefulness were not only states of mind but 
also part of actors’ performances.54 As such, they should both be seen as 
relational concepts. Audiences identified virtue and usefulness in an actor’s 
performance, and actors aligned their performances with what they antici-
pated the audience’s expectations of a virtuous and useful man to be. No 
man was born virtuous: the ability to act virtuously and usefully needed to 
                                                   
52 Corneanu: Regimens of the mind, 10–11. Stephen Gaukrouger has made similar arguments about 
Bacon’s philosophy in Francis Bacon and the transformation of early-modern philosophy (Cambridge, 
2001); Gaukroger: “The persona of the natural philosopher”. 
53 Matthew L. Jones: The good life in the scientific revolution. Descartes, Pascal, Leibniz, and the cultivation of 
virtue (Chicago, 2006), 2. 
54 Leif Runefelt: Hushållningens dygder. Affektlära, hushållningslära och ekonomiskt tänkande under svensk 
stormaktstid (Stockholm, 2001), 88–9; Leif Runefelt: Dygden som välståndets grund. Dygd, nytta och 
egennytta i frihetstidens ekonomiska tänkande (Stockholm, 2005), 9. 

 
 
31 
be cultivated.55 A virtuous and useful man was a man who inhabited a spe-
cific position in relation to his contemporaries, and the process of claiming 
this position can be seen as a form of enculturation.56 As seen, for example, 
in the quote from Mört at the beginning of this chapter, many early modern 
pedagogical works presented mathematics as an exercise though which such 
a virtuous and useful subject could be made.57 By studying the mechanicus, 
it is possible to understand this educational process, involving the perfor-
mances of mechanical techniques, which shaped men according to the for-
mal and informal norms of the early modern Swedish state. 
The cameral mechanicus of the Swedish state 
This thesis consists of four chapters, each of which presents a new context 
for understanding the mechanicus and mechanics as self-forming exercises. 
What holds these cases together is the way they all examine how mechanics 
was a means of becoming a subjugated member of the political order in 
early modern Sweden. So, what were these frameworks of trust and authori-
ty, of which the mechanicus was a part? 
 
In the Swedish empire of the seventeenth and during the two first dec-
ades of the eighteenth centuries, the absolute monarch – who answered only 
to God – guaranteed the operation of the political order. During this period, 
Sweden was a major regional power in the Baltic Sea. After the end of the 
Great Northern War in 1721, Sweden had lost most of its eastern posses-
sions, except for Finland. In the aftermath of the war, Sweden underwent 
drastic governmental changes, and in the 1720s it became a constitutional 
monarchy with a strong parliament. However, there was much continuity 
between absolutist and constitutional government: the estates of the parlia-
ment can be said to have replaced the former absolutist monarch, and to 
have established a “sovereignty of the Estates.”58 Also, the state administra-
                                                   
55 Leif Runefelt has pointed out how to early modern authors, virtue was supposed to be inter-
nalised through continuous exercise; Runefelt: Hushållningens dygder, 88. 
56 I approach education not as separated from the making of knowledge, but as a necessary and 
integrated part of it. See Harry M. Collins: “Learning through enculturation”, in Angus Gellatly, 
Don Rogers, and John A. Sloboda (eds): Cognition and social worlds (Oxford, 1989), 205–15; Harry 
M. Collins: Changing order. Replication and induction in scientific practice (Chicago, 1992), 159–160. 
57 Similar views of mathematics, as a virtuous exercise, can be seen in other parts of Europe. For 
example, as shown by Kelly J. Whitmer, in the orphanage in Halle, mathematical sciences were 
considered “technologies of discernment” and mathematical exercises would teach children to 
reconcile opposing positions; Kelly J. Whitmer: “Eclecticism and the technologies of discernment 
in pietist pedagogy”, Journal of the history of ideas 70:4 (2009), 545–67; Kelly J. Whitmer: The Halle 
Orphanage as scientific community. Observation, eclecticism and pietism in the early enlightenment (Chicago, 
2015). Whitmer has kindly provided me with parts of the manuscript of this recent publication, 
which has been helpful in understanding the role of Halle eclecticism for the Swedish mechani-
cus. 
58 Michael Roberts: The Age of Liberty. Sweden 1719–1772 (Cambridge, 1986), 62. 

 
 32 
tion, or the state apparatus, that had developed during the Swedish imperial 
experience, remained and grew during the 1700s. 
 
The core provinces of early modern Sweden lay along the shores of 
Lake Mälaren, by the West coast of the Baltic Sea. Stockholm, the capital of 
the realm, contained The Royal Palace as well as the state administration. 
The administration, carrying out the will of the sovereign, whether it was a 
monarch or the estates, was formed around what historical actors recog-
nised as the norms and practices of “cameralism”. These cameral norms and 
practices had a long history, ranging back to 1495 when the Holy Roman 
Emperor Maximilian I (1459–1519) had gathered his main administrative 
servants under a Kammerkollegium. The term derives from the Latin camera, 
denoting an institution of the court subjugated directly to the sovereign. By 
the seventeenth century, most German states and the states in Scandinavia 
had a fiscal chamber [Kammer], which managed the affairs of the sovereign.59 
Soon the state chamber of the Swedish empire developed into a number of 
specialised administrative bureaus [kollegier], focused on providing resources 
for the realm through, for example, mining, commerce and war.60 
 
The concept of œconomy was central to early modern cameralism. It was a 
framework of economics – shaped by a mechanistic view of the world as 
well as the Greek concept of the household – according to which art, the 
study of nature and the financial matters of the state were intertwined in 
                                                   
59 Wakefield: The disordered police state, 16–17. Pascale Laborier: “Les sciences camérales, prolé-
gomènes à toute bureaucratie future ou parades pour gibiers de potence?”, in Pascale Laborier et 
al. (eds): Les sciences camérales. Activités pratiques et histoire des dispositifs publics (Paris, 2011), 13. On the 
relation between the Swedish state administration and the sovereign, see Bo Lindberg: Den antika 
skevheten. Politiska ord och begrepp i det tidig-moderna Sverige (Stockholm, 2006), 12. 
 
Following Andre Wakefield, in the ensuing text I use the adjective ”German” to denote 
states that are part of the Holy German Empire. As Wakefield points out, the sentence ”the 
states of the Holy Roman Empire” is a mouthful, and while these lands should not be identified 
as identical to present day Germany, historical actors of these states often identified themselves 
as ”German”. This was also usually how migrants from these states in the Swedish Empire were 
identified, as well as translations of books in the German language. Compare to Wakefield: The 
disordered police state, 20–1. 
60 David Gaunt: Utbildning till statens tjänst. En kollektivbiografi av stormaktstidens hovrättsauskultanter 
(Uppsala, 1975), 31–71; Maria Cavallin: I kungens och folkets tjänst. Synen på den svenske ämbetsmannen 
1750–1780 (Gothenburg, 2003), 83–93; Fors: The limits of matter, 46–7. Compare to the broader 
European picture in Laborier: “Les sciences camérales, prolégomènes à toute bureaucratie future 
ou parades pour gibiers de potence?”, 13. 
 
Following Hjalmar Fors, I translate kollegium into “bureau”; Fors: The limits of matter, 14–15. 
Some works on the Swedish administration of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries have 
discussed these administrative bodies as “boards”, e.g. Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 95. To talk of 
these bodies as boards highlights “the organisational collegial structure at the top level”, where all 
matters were discussed and decided by a board. Others have made a more literal translation, and 
translated kollegium into “college”, e.g. Fabian Persson: Servants of fortune. The Swedish court between 
1598 and 1721 (Lund, 1999), iii–v. As pointed out by Fors, this was also a common translation in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. By discussing these parts of the state administration as 
bureaus, it is possible to understand them as larger administrative bodies and highlight the inte-
grated nature of their administrative, knowledge making and educational efforts; Fors: The limits of 
matter, 14–15. 

 
 
33 
ways that differed from the more narrowly defined economics of today.61 
Twentieth-century historians generally integrated œconomy into histories of 
the rise of the modern state, or declared it the ancestor of twentieth-century 
disciplines such as economy, sociology, political science or public admin-
istration.62 As in the case of mechanics, in order to establish such relation-
ships, the past has been interpreted through modern economic concepts 
and controversies. A number of more recent studies have instead shown 
how cameralism and œconomy were parts of historical political orders. The 
cameralists of the German and Scandinavian states worked in this intersec-
tion between knowledge of nature and political economy. The hands and 
eyes of the monarch, they oversaw the production and trade of the realm. 
As part of this endeavour, they both aimed to make the state intelligible to 
the sovereign, and to legitimise the sovereign’s authority in the eyes of the 
inhabitants of the realm.63 Andre Wakefield has discussed these cameralists 
                                                   
61 Marc Raeff: “The well-ordered police state and the development of modernity in seventeenth- 
and eighteenth-century Europe. An attempt at a comparative approach”, The American historical 
review 80:5 (1975), 1229. On German cameralism, see ibid.; Wakefield: The disordered police state, 
esp. 1–25. On French political economy, see Laborier: “Les sciences camérales, prolégomènes à 
toute bureaucratie future ou parades pour gibiers de potence?”. On cameralism in Sweden, see 
Stellan Dahlgren: “Karl XI:s envälde - kameralistisk absolutism?”, Makt & vardag (Stockholm, 
1993), 115–32; Mårten Snickare: Enväldets riter. Kungliga fester och ceremonier i gestaltning av Nicodemus 
Tessin den yngre (Stockholm, 1999), 24. In England, a public science partly separated from state 
matters developed from the late seventeenth century. However, also there practical mechanics 
was intimately linked to state affairs as well as to providence. See Stewart: Rise of public science. For 
a general overview of cameralism and mercantilism in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Eu-
rope, see Lars Magnusson: Mercantilism. The shaping of an economic language (London, 1994), 174–203. 
The interconnections of œconomy and natural philosophy in early modern Europe are explored 
in the collection by Margaret Schabas and Neil De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton 
(Durham NC, 2004). For an overview, see Margaret Schabas and Neil De Marchi: “Introduc-
tion”, in Schabas and De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton, 1–13. For a discussion of the 
relationship between œconomy and natural history in Sweden, and especially in the works of 
Linnaeus, see Lisbet Rausing: “Underwriting the oeconomy. Linnaeus on nature and mind”, in 
Schabas and De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton, 173–203. The most in-depth history 
of the connections between natural philosophy, œconomy and mechanics in eighteenth-century 
Scandinavia can be found in Dan Christensen’s study of technology and culture in Denmark–
Norway 1750–1850, Det moderne projekt. Teknik & kultur i Danmark-Norge 1750–(1814)–1850 
(Copenhagen, 1996). 
62 Wakefield: The disordered police state, 5. The role of order and reform in Northern-European 
economic discourse, and the relationship between œconomy as a field of knowledge and adminis-
trative practice has been discussed by a number of scholars on German Cameralism. See for 
example Keith Tribe: “Cameralism and the science of government”, The journal of modern history 
56:2 (1984), 263–84; Keith Tribe: Governing economy. The reformation of German economic discourse, 
1750–1840 (Cambridge, 1988); Wakefield: The disordered police state. 
63 Alix Cooper: “‘The possibilities of the land’. The inventory of ‘natural riches’ in the early mod-
ern German territories”, in Schabas and De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton, 131. 
Wakefield has pointed out a prevalent but unhappy habit in the historiography of German cam-
eralism of separating “cameralists of the book” from “cameralists of the bureau”; Andre Wake-
field: “Books, bureaus, and the historiography of cameralism”, European journal of law and economics 
19:3 (2005), 311. Hjalmar Fors has shown the importance of cameralism for understanding the 
epistemological position of mining officials in the early modern Swedish state; see Fors: The limits 
of matter, 101–3. 

 
 34 
as “the alchemists of Enlightenment.” They promised to find new sources 
of affluence in everyday places: “in local fields, forests, mines and manufac-
tories.”64 Inquiries into art and nature were a standard ingredient in their 
recipe for domestic wealth. In the cameralists’ line of work, matters of na-
ture and œconomy were separated by “very permeable boundaries”.65 Con-
sequently, the bureaus housed men skilled not only in œconomy, but also in, 
for example, chemistry and natural history. Also, and central to this thesis, 
many of these cameralists took an interest in mathematics. 
 
The ways in which knowledge of nature and state utility intersected in 
early modern Sweden has been examined by a number of historians, most 
recently by Fors.66 However, already nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
scholars have pointed out how, in the eighteenth century, natural history, 
chemistry and mathematics (including mechanics) were seen as means, first 
of supporting the military endeavours of the Swedish empire and then of 
restoring the dwindling empire to its former power.67 The ideology behind 
this mixed natural inquiry and economy has often been discussed as “uti-
lism”, a term used in Swedish eighteenth-century historiography that lacks a 
good English counterpart. Generally, in Swedish historical research, this 
term has come to designate cameral ideologies similar to those found in 
contemporary German states.68 While nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
historians primarily focused on the role of useful knowledge in the universi-
ties and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences [Kungliga vetenskapsakade-
mien], more recently scholars have focused on the role of the state bureaus 
and the military as sites of knowledge production.69 These scholars have also 
                                                   
64 Wakefield: “Books, bureaus, and the historiography of cameralism”, 319. 
65 Citation from Schabas and De Marchi: “Introduction”, 9. On cameralism and natural history as 
a means of finding wealth in the quotidian and local in eighteenth-century Germany and Scandi-
navia, see Cooper: “The possibilities of the land”, 134; Alix Cooper: Inventing the indigenous. Local 
knowledge and natural history in early modern Europe (Cambridge, 2007), 22, 99. On Cameralism and 
natural philosophy in the Baltic realms, see Lisbet Rausing: “Daedalus Hyperboreus. Baltic natu-
ral history and mineralogy in the Enlightenment”, in Clark, Golinski, and Schaffer (eds): The 
sciences in enlightened Europe, 397–8. See also Lisbet Rausing: Linnaeus. Nature and nation (Cambridge 
MA, 1999), 3–6. 
66 Fors: The limits of matter. 
67 Claes Annerstedt: Upsala universitets historia 3 vols. (Uppsala, 1908); Bengt Hildebrand: Kungl. 
Svenska Vetenskapsakademien. Förhistoria, grundläggning och första organisation vol. 1 (Stockholm, 1939); 
Sten Lindroth: Kungl. Svenska vetenskapsakademiens historia 1739–1818. 1:1, Tiden intill Wargentins död 
(1783) (Stockholm, 1967); Sten Lindroth: Svensk lärdomshistoria. Frihetstiden (Stockholm, 1997 
[1978]). 
68 For a discussion of the translation of this term, see Fors: Mutual favours, 22. As pointed out by 
Runefelt, “utilism” is a concept invented by modern historians who have applied it to the eight-
eenth-century as part of a long narrative of the de-moralisation of the economy. See Runefelt: 
Dygden som välståndets grund, 14. In this thesis, this term only appears in relation to the work of 
previous historians. 
69 For a general picture of the relationship between natural knowledge and the state bureaucracy, 
see Sven Widmalm: “Instituting science in Sweden”, in Roy Porter and Mikuláš Teich (eds): The 
scientific revolution in national context (Cambridge, 1992), 240–62; Arne Hessenbruch: “The spread of 
precision measurement in Scandinavia 1660–1800”, in Kostas Gavroglu (ed): The sciences in the 

 
 
35 
recognised that the Baltic region should be studied as a unit, and have relat-
ed this national historiography to the role of useful knowledge in the bu-
reaus of German states.70 
 
Together, all these studies have shown how natural philosophy and 
mathematics were integrated parts of the early modern Swedish state, and 
that actors who carried out these activities were generally civil servants. 
However, these studies have not examined the expectations that contempo-
rary audiences had of these civil servants, and how they in turn made them-
selves as they made knowledge. By approaching mechanics as performances 
by which men made themselves into subjects of the state, I want to under-
stand mathematics and mechanics not only as tools of the state but also as 
exercises by which civil servants were made. 
 
The cameralists and mechanical practitioners should thus not be ap-
proached as two separate groups: a large part of the œconomical writers in 
the Swedish eighteenth-century state were also mechanical projectors and 
vice versa. All the actors of the first half of the 1700s that I study in this 
thesis inhabited this position: they presented cameral treatises in which me-
chanics was the vehicle for imagining a future orderly society and they de-
signed machines motivated by œconomical arguments. If cameralists were 
the alchemists of enlightenment, it seems as if mechanics and mathematics 
were key ingredients in their brew. For these mechanist–cameralist authors, 
a mechanistically conceived state became an argument for the usefulness of 
machines, and the power of machines became the foundation of a mecha-
nistic vision of social order. Their recipe was hardly a new one: the promises 
                                                                                                                        
European periphery during the Enlightenment (Dordrecht, 1999), 179–224. On the roles of mathemati-
cal sciences and astronomy in early modern Swedish state, especially in regards to mapmaking, 
see Sven Widmalm: Mellan kartan och verkligheten. Geodesi och kartläggning, 1695–1860 (Uppsala, 
1990). On mechanics in the Bureau of Mines [Bergskollegium], see Lindqvist: Technology on trial. On 
mechanics in the seventeenth-century state, see Dahl: Svensk ingenjörskonst under stormaktstiden. 
Natural history and œconomy has been discussed by Rausing: Linnaeus; Hanna Hodacs and Ken-
neth Nyberg: Naturalhistoria på resande fot. Om att forska, undervisa och göra karriär i 1700-talets Sverige 
(Stockholm, 2007). The role of chemistry in the Swedish Bureau of Mines is discussed in Fors: 
Mutual favours; Hjalmar Fors: “Kemi, paracelsism och mekanisk filosofi. Bergskollegium och 
Uppsala cirka 1680–1770”, Lychnos (2007), 165–98; Anders Lundgren: “Gruvor och kemi under 
1700-talet i Sverige. Nytta och vetenskap”, Lychnos (2008), 13. Thomas Kaiserfeld has used the 
case of saltpetre boiling as a case for analysing the role of scientific knowledge in the Swedish 
military state of the 1700s; Thomas Kaiserfeld: Krigets salt. Salpetersjudning som politik och vetenskap i 
den svenska skattemilitära staten under frihetstid och gustaviansk tid (Lund, 2009). On the rise and decline 
of useful natural knowledge in eighteenth-century Swedish state, see Karin Johannisson: “Natur-
vetenskap på reträtt. En diskussion om naturvetenskapens status under svenskt 1700-tal”, Lychnos 
(1979), 107–54. 
70 Lisbeth Rausing has argued that “Baltic Enlightened science” should be seen as a “Germano-
Scandinavian one”, Rausing: “Daedalus Hyperboreus”, 389; Similarly, Hjalmar Fors has discussed 
the role of German immigrants in Swedish mining, and the German-Swedish area as a unit in 
Fors: The limits of matter, 103–9, 153. For the view of Sweden as a country of learning among 
eighteenth-century German scholars, see Mathias Persson: Det nära främmande. Svensk lärdom och 
politik i en tysk tidning 1753–1792 (Uppsala, 2009), 76–146. 

 
 36 
made by mechanici were “related to a much older belief in the fabricator of 
machines as a magician or sorcerer of some kind, capable of creating me-
chanical life.”71 However, although this was an old mix, it was still related to 
vivid dreams of the future. Through this powerful tincture – of intertwined 
œconomy, mechanics and virtue ethics – the mechanicus promised order 
and prosperity to a state obsessed with its own stability. 
 
Few historical studies have focused on why eighteenth-century Europe-
an societies, in which the dreams of mechanical projectors were so seldom 
realised, repeatedly trusted in these projectors’ promises and rewarded their 
performance financially and symbolically.72 Instead, histories of eighteenth-
century mechanics have generally followed long narratives and been less 
interested in historical inconsistencies than in explaining the rise of certain 
modern phenomena. Whereas the successful good mechanicus in these 
studies becomes an agent of change, pivotal in introducing modern modes 
of mechanical production, the failed bad mechanicus at most becomes a 
futile dreamer and an irrelevant visionary. In the coming chapters, I inte-
grate these two characters by focusing on early modern mechanics as a pro-
cess of self-formation. It is the relational performances that made and un-
made these men, and the promise that they carried to audiences in the early 
modern Swedish state, which form the heart of this thesis. 
Sources and translations 
In the following chapters, I approach the mechanicus using different cate-
gories of sources and by complementing the methodology presented here 
with additional theoretical perspectives. Therefore, each chapter begins with 
a more detailed discussion of the sources it is based on, as well as its theo-
retical approach. The overwhelming majority of the sources are written in 
Swedish (some are also written in Latin, German or French) and they are 
found in publications and archive documents, written by actors with diverse 
relationships to the early modern Swedish state. Because published English 
translations only exist for a few of these source documents, the translations 
used in this book are generally my own; when this is not the case, I indicate 
it in a footnote. Accompanying my own translations, I provide the original 
Swedish quotations in the footnotes.73 In the few cases when translations 
have already been published, I do not provide the original citations. 
                                                   
71 Sawday: Engines of the imagination, 191. See also J. Peter Zetterberg: “The mistaking of ‘the 
mathematicks’ for magic in Tudor and Stuart England”, The sixteenth century journal 11:1 (1980), 
83–97. 
72 Some recent studies have started to take these questions seriously. See for example Sawday: 
Engines of the imagination; Wakefield: “Leibniz and the wind machines”. 
73 In the original quotes, I have aimed to preserve the original historical spelling, changing only 
archaic typography (by, for example, consistently changing dashes into commas). When quoting 

 
 
37 
 
Swedish has changed radically over the past centuries, compared with 
relatively more conservative languages such as English or French. To make 
eighteenth-century Swedish intelligible to modern native readers is thus an 
act of translation in itself. To translate eighteenth-century Swedish into 
modern English further complicates this process. By preserving the original 
quotes in my footnotes, I want to make this complex process of translation 
transparent. In some cases – when the original Swedish wording is of vital 
consequence for the interpretation, and for translations of central concepts 
– I put the original wording in brackets after the translation. Moreover, a 
glossary of frequently reoccurring terms can be found at the end of this 
book. 
 
Some terms are more complicated to translate than others. The actors 
did not discuss mechanics in terms of technology, or in any equivalent 
terms, and thus it is relatively easy to abstain from using this term. How-
ever, the use of words translatable into “science” is a somewhat more com-
plicated matter. Eighteenth-century Swedes regularly referred to mathemat-
ics and other fields of knowledge as wettenskaper or wetenskaper. These terms 
are roughly translatable to the Latin scientia, denoting both certain systematic 
knowledge and the fields of knowledge from which it derived. Depending 
on the context in which the term was used, I translate wettenskap as either 
“knowledge” or, when the term implies a field of systematic knowledge 
making, as “science”. Thus, when I use the term “science”, this should not 
be identified as equivalent to modern science, but instead as comparable to 
scientia. 
Chapter outline 
Mechanical practitioners can be found in numerous parts of the early mod-
ern Swedish state apparatus and the cases I present here are not, nor do I 
want them to be, a complete description of early modern mechanics. In-
stead, they are means of studying how mechanical practitioners made them-
selves into subjects of the political order of their time. They all ask ques-
tions of how mechanics was a self-forming exercise, and how it was a means 
of performing both submission and superiority in the civil service. Each 
chapter thus focuses on sources that illuminate these relationships. Rather 
than seeking a single institutional or geographical home for the mechanicus, 
I delineate his location in an eighteenth-century culture of superiority and 
submission. It would be possible to study other aspects of the mechanicus – 
for example, how mechanics was performed when actors travelled between 
                                                                                                                        
works printed in German type, I represent sections printed in Antiqua for emphasis by using 
italics. I have generally been restrictive with adding italics for emphasis in my quotes. Hence, 
italics in quotes are from the original, unless stated otherwise. 

 
 38 
states, or the expectations of, and demands on, mechanical performances in 
the military endeavours of the Swedish state. However, this is not my focus 
here, which is reflected in my choice of cases. 
 
This thesis has a thematic structure and is divided into four chapters, in 
addition to this introduction and the conclusion. Each of these four chap-
ters studies the mechanicus through encounters between specific actors and 
audiences. The chapters gradually progress from the general to the specific. 
The chapter succeeding this introduction discusses mechanical coming-of-
age narratives, as imagined by mature mechanical practitioners. It argues 
that mechanics was presented as a rite of passage – consisting of crafts and 
mathematics – through which a mechanically apt boy became a mechanicus 
with the virtues expected of a manly subject of a religious and political or-
der. Then, in Chapter 3, I narrow the scope to a community of civil serv-
ants, in the Swedish Bureau of Mines [Bergskollegium], formed around math-
ematics and mechanics. Here I argue that in the Bureau, over the first half 
of the 1700s, mathematics developed from being the concern of a small 
group of mining mechanics to being a technique by which young men could 
become part of a community that saw the world in geometric and mechani-
cal terms. In this chapter, I thus show how mathematical and mechanical 
exercise carried a symbolic role in a specific community of civil servants. In 
Chapter 4, I study the role of mechanics, mathematics and œconomy in the 
correspondence of the mechanicus Christopher Polhammar and the abso-
lute king Karl XII as well as of men in their vicinity. Through this corre-
spondence, I discuss how two early modern personas – the monarch and 
the mechanicus – were performed in relation to each other. Finally, I pre-
sent a case study of a single actor – the today virtually unknown mechanical 
practitioner Anders Gabriel Duhre – who first succeeded and then failed to 
present himself as a virtuous mechanicus to the parliament of the Swedish 
constitutional monarchy of the 1720s and 1730s. This case ties together 
many of the themes of the previous chapters, and analyses how a mechani-
cal practitioner could succeed, and fail, in performing as a virtuous 
mechanicus in relation to various audiences in the state. 

 
 
39 
2. Mechanics – a passage into manhood 
In this chapter, imagination takes centre stage. Specifically, it focuses on 
how mechanics was imagined as a rite of passage. In prefaces, speeches and 
texts on education one finds reoccurring coming-of-age narratives, which 
revolved around boys’ performances of mechanics in relation to older expe-
rienced men. Such texts imagined the life of a mechanicus to be a via media 
of a useful man, a middle ground in between a number of other personas: of 
the man of Latin, the pure mathematician and of the craftsman, to name but 
a few. These narratives are the objects of study of this chapter, and my aim 
is to understand how they were both expressions and constitutive of the 
mechanicus. Or in other words: how these narratives followed and formu-
lated expectations on how to enter a form of useful manhood by perform-
ing mechanical techniques such as mathematics and crafts. 
 
In 1716 the mechanical practitioner, Christopher Polhem (known as 
Polhammar until his ennoblement in December the same year), published a 
short treatise for the education of boys and young men in mathematics with 
the somewhat impervious title of The second foundation of wisdom. For the glory of 
youth, the usefulness of manhood and the pleasure of old age. In a short introduction, 
the author justified the book’s title: he explained that manhood was about 
maturity, and mathematics and mechanics were means of becoming mature. 
Because the young by nature tended primarily to reflect on things that gave 
them “glory and honour, instead of long-term usefulness”, it would not hurt 
to “spice up the latter with the former, in the book itself as well as its 
name”. In this way, boys would be guided into “the usefulness of man-
hood”, and would learn things that could earn them their daily bread. 
Polhem also wished that his book would give pleasure to the old who took 
delight in “teaching and educating their child in everything related to their 
lawful work and well-being”. For him, mathematics was one of two pillars 
of a virtuous and useful life, the other being language.1 
 
Thirty-two years later, Lars Laurel – a philosopher and librarian at the 
University of Lund – commemorated the late mechanicus Mårten Triewald 
in the newly established Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In his speech, 
                                                   
1 “beröm och heder, än nytta i lengden”; “så wel i sielfwa wercket som nambnet bekryddar thet 
samma til hog af thet ena”; “Mandoms nytta”; “lära och underwisa sin barn i alt hwad som til 
theras lofliga näring och welferd lender”; Christopher Polhem: Wishetens andra grundwahl til ungdoms 
prydnad mandoms nytto och ålderdoms nöje; lempadt för ungdomen efter theras tiltagande åhr, uti dagliga lexor 
fördelt (Uppsala, 1716), “En liten Förklaring öfwer Titlen”, unpaginated. 

 
 
40 
Laurel went off at a short historical tangent about how mechanics had re-
cently become a manly activity: “When our great king Karl XII lived, who 
never rested from battles or military accomplishments [kämpedater],” he ar-
gued, “we saw how the able young were mostly inclined to only weapons 
and armour.” Everything else, “though not less useful,” was considered 
“not to be manly practices [karle-forer]”. Instead, according to Laurel, such 
techniques were considered the “crafts of weaklings and women.” 2 But, 
Laurel contrasted: 
Under the government of our current beloved king, the conditions are 
again reversed. Alongside weapons, scholarly arts and handicrafts have 
come in fashion, so that there is almost no one who does not engage with 
them in some way. Thus, one may say that these peacetime deeds have 
never carried the honour and glory among us that they now claim.3 
 
While Polhem and Laurel both discussed mathematics and mechanics in 
relation to manhood and manliness, they did so from two different perspec-
tives. Whereas Polhem treated manhood as the part of life between youth 
and old age, and mechanics as a means of maturity, Laurel argued that me-
chanics had become a way to express a set of attributes that distinguished 
manly subjects from women, children and effeminate men. In eighteenth-
century Sweden, the term “manhood” carried both these connotations; 
manhood was an age in which esteemed manly qualities could be identified, 
as well as the qualities that identified someone as having reached this age. 
The two earlier examples can thus be seen as two variations on a common 
narrative, in which mechanical and mathematical education was related to 
the coming of age of a useful man. 
 
In this chapter, I study how mechanical practitioners imagined the com-
ing of age of such a useful man through mechanical exercise using two 
complementary sources. The first category – where we can place Polhem’s 
preface – consists of fourteen prefaces, and introductions, of textbooks on 
mathematics and mechanics, written in Swedish and published roughly be-
tween 1700 and 1750. Borrowing from Gerard Genette such texts, together 
with book titles, can be seen as the “peritext” of a book (as in “periphery”), 
which frames its content. As such, introductions and prefaces are generally 
thresholds of interpretation. Thus, coming-of-age narratives of mechanics 
found in prefaces are especially interesting for understanding the meanings 
ascribed to a mechanicus, because they have been put in a textual space that 
                                                   
2 “När vår uti strid och Kämpedater sig aldrig hvilande store Konung Kung CARL den XII lefde”; 
“såge vi den raske ungdomens hog mäst stå til vapen och brynja allena”; “ehuru icke mindre 
nödigt”; “ej vara Karle-forer”; “veklingars och qvinne-slögder.”; Lars Laurel: Åminnelse-tal öfver 
capitaine mechanichus vid fortificationen … Mårten Trievald, hållet på store riddar-hus salen, den 23 decemb. 
1747 (Stockholm, 1748), 5. 
3 “Under vår nu hulde Konungs regering är det åter så omvändt, at jämte vapen boklige konster 
och handslögder vunnet det tycke, at ingen nästan är, som icke på något sätt sig dermed inblan-
dar, så at man väl kann säga, at desse fredsbragder aldrig varet hos os i den heder och ära, som de 
nu kommet til.”; ibid. 

 
 
41 
aims to establish a shared understanding between author and reader.4 I sup-
plement these prefaces with fourteen other, more general educational, texts 
that also discuss mathematics. The second category consists of fourteen 
commemorative speeches from the Swedish Academy of Sciences – such as 
the one by Laurel – that contain narratives of coming of age in which me-
chanics and mathematics feature. These texts are from the mid 1700s, and 
they look back at and reminisce about boyhoods in the first half of the cen-
tury. 
 
The two categories provide complementary narratives of mechanics and 
maturity: one looking forward, expressing an mature man’s gaze on boys 
and their path in life, and one looking backwards, in which men turn their 
eyes back onto themselves in trying to understand the product of the boys 
they once had been. These narratives of boys, childhood and manhood – 
prevalent in eighteenth-century texts on mechanics and mathematics – have 
attracted little attention from historians. Instead, as discussed in the previ-
ous chapter, such sources have been used to understand early modern tech-
nology. Likewise, autobiographies and commemorative speeches of me-
chanical practitioners have been read as descriptive sources for biographies 
of exceptional individuals.5 Thus, by approaching these texts as narratives of 
manhood and ageing, I wish to highlight a completely different aspect of 
mechanics in early eighteenth-century Sweden – that is, mechanics as an 
exercise imagined to shape boys into a certain form of man, defined in rela-
tion to a political order. 
 
In the following section, after a brief discussion of the meanings as-
cribed to manhood and the ways in which it structured the early modern 
Swedish state, I turn to the sources where mechanical practitioners dis-
cussed the signs of a mechanically apt boy and where they imagined ideal 
relationships between apt boys and experienced men such as themselves. 
Then, in the next two sections, I analyse the role of mathematics and crafts 
in these relationships and in the imagined coming of age of a mechanicus – 
in other words, how a range of authors imagined that performance of these 
two sets of techniques fostered a boy into a specific form of manhood. 
                                                   
4 Gerard Genette: Paratexts. Thresholds of interpretation (Cambridge, 1997), 4–5. 
5 See e.g. Samuel Bring, who described Christopher Polhem as a ”pioneer [banbrytare]” who aimed 
to ”create a Swedish industry” (in original: ”skapa en svensk industri”); Bring: “Bidrag till Chris-
topher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, 107. This narrative is still prevalent in popular discourse on 
eighteenth-century mechanical practitioners. For example, Michael Lindgren has described how 
“Polhem in many respects was a pioneer” (in original: “Christopher Polhem var i många 
avseenden en föregångare”); Lindgren: Christopher Polhems testamente, 281. 
 
Even more striking, a recent exhibition about Polhem at The National Museum of Science 
and Technology in Stockholm carried the illustrative title “Polhem – Back to the Future”; Na-
tional Museum of Science and Technology, Stockholm: “Christopher Polhem. Tillbaka till fram-
tiden” <http://www.tekniskamuseet.se/1/2604.html> [accessed 27 March 2015]. 

 
 
42 
Age, manhood and the pious subject 
What meanings were ascribed to a boy’s passage into manhood in the  
eighteenth century? I approach manhood as a distinction of gender, and I 
see gender as both relational and organisational – in other words, as some-
thing that inhabits social structures, relationships and the imagination.6 A 
number of scholars of the past decades have shown how male gender iden-
tity was (and is) performed in relation to women as well as to other men.7 In  
eighteenth-century Europe, performances of manhood were bounded by a 
variety of intersecting distinctions: not only of gender but also of social 
status and of age. As pointed out by Anthony Fletcher: “if we are to see 
something of what being a man meant in past societies, we need to loosen 
the hold of modern concepts of gender”, while we remain sensitive to the 
fact that “gender was often cross-cut with other differentials of status.”8 In 
the eighteenth century, manhood was a mandate of authority in relation to 
women, children and men of lower social status, as well as a constant and 
stable age in-between disorderly youth and degenerative old age.9 For a boy 
to enter manhood, he needed to be raised and educated according to his 
social status. While mothers were in charge of the education of younger 
children, fathers and tutors were supposed to chaperone older boys into 
manhood. These older men were to guide and exercise fatherly authority 
over the younger boy; by performing a variety of manly activities together, 
the older man should encourage esteemed attributes in his son or student.10 
Manhood as pious submission 
In a patriarchy such as early modern Sweden, this fatherly role had implica-
tions that extended beyond the relationship between man and boy. As ar-
gued by Michael Roper and John Tosh, the study of patriarchy “provides a 
way of integrating the individual and structural dimensions of male domi-
nance.” Following Max Weber, they see patriarchy as various systems of 
organisational domination structured around the concept of “father-rule”, 
instead of as a general structure of power.11 In this Weberian sense, early 
                                                   
6 For a similar methodological approach, see Michael Roper and John Tosh (eds): Manful asser-
tions. Masculinities in Britain since 1800 (London, 1991), 11.  
7 See for example Raewyn Connell: Masculinities (Cambridge, 2005), 37; Philip Carter: Men and the 
emergence of polite society. Britain 1660–1800 (Harlow, 2001), 5. See also Michael Roper and John 
Tosh: “Introduction”, in Roper and Tosh (eds): Manful assertions, 4. 
8 Anthony Fletcher: Gender, sex and subordination in England 1500–1800 (New Haven, 1995), 89. 
9 On manhood and age in the eighteenth-century, see Alexandra Shepard: Meanings of manhood in 
early modern England (Oxford, 2003), 21. 
10 Anthony Fletcher: Growing up in England. The experience of childhood, 1600–1914 (New Haven, 
2008), 129, 144. See also John Tosh: “What should historians do with masculinity? Reflections on 
nineteenth-century Britain”, History workshop 38 (1994), 181. 
11 Roper and Tosh (eds): “Introduction”, 9–10. For a discussion of Weber on patriarchy as the 
organisational domination of father-rule, see Malcolm Waters: “Patriarchy and viriarchy. An 

 
 
43 
modern Sweden was profoundly patriarchal. The absolute monarchy of late 
seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century Sweden was legitimated by Lu-
theran theocratic ideology that merged the power of God, of the king and 
of fathers.12 God, who had created the world, was its lawful sovereign and, 
as such, he had delegated his power according to an order where fathers 
ruled over the women, servants and children of their house [hushåll]. As 
mankind multiplied, the divine Lord had aggregated some of this fatherly 
power in the monarch, who would guarantee an orderly society under his 
rule.13 In this theocratic order, loyal subjects were identified through a hier-
archy of virtues. In spite of being strongly associated with the male norm, 
the same hierarchy governed the expected performance of all subjects, 
woman or man. Still, the relative importance of the virtues, and how these 
virtues were supposed to be performed, differed according to social distinc-
tions such as gender, social status and age.14 
 
At the top of this hierarchy of virtues was pietas, or piety. The modern 
concept of piety, with its mainly religious connotations, does not fully cap-
ture the meaning of pietas in seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century Eu-
rope. At this time, piety denoted the expected performance of a loyal sub-
ject in a state where religion and politics were intertwined. Besides  
                                                                                                                        
exploration and reconstruction of concepts of masculine domination”, Sociology 23:2 (1989), 195–
6; William Clark: Academic charisma and the origins of the research university (Chicago, 2006), 9. 
12 For a discussion of the similar French absolutism, see Gauvin: Habits of knowledge, 168–9. 
Gauvin points out how “Religious morality and complete obedience to a father figure – family 
patriarch, king, God – became effective means of enforcing a measure of civil order. Mind and 
body were no longer private property of beings in ancien régime France. Individuals became 
social bodies, inseperable from the royal and religious authorities of the kingdom.”; ibid. The 
same holds true for Sweden during its absolutist regime, Lindberg: Den antika skevheten, 98. For a 
general discussion of gender as “a primary way of signifying relationships of power”; see Joan W. 
Scott: “Gender. A useful category of historical analysis”, The American historical review 91:5 (1986), 
1069. 
13 Nils Ekedahl: Det svenska Israel. Myt och retorik i Haquin Spegels predikokonst (Uppsala, 1999), 84–5; 
Snickare: Enväldets riter, 23–5; Kekke Stadin: Stånd och genus i stormaktstidens Sverige (Lund, 2004), 
16–21. Compare to the account of manhood and the patriarch in the Holy Roman Empire of the 
same time in Lyndal Roper: Oedipus and the Devil. Witchcraft, sexuality and religion in early modern 
Europe (London, 1994), 46. The constitutional monarchy post 1720 did not make any significant 
break with this Lutheran ideology. (On the patriarchal order of Swedish Lutheran orthodoxy 
post-1720, see Carola Nordbäck: Samvetets röst. Om mötet mellan luthersk ortodoxi och konservativ pietism 
i 1720-talets Sverige (Umeå, 2004), 399. While the monarch was stripped of his direct relationship 
with the Lord, the emerging concept of citizenship was still ordered around fatherly authority 
ordained by God, which was distributed through society along intersecting lines of social distinc-
tion. See Jonas Nordin: Frihetstidens monarki. Konungamakt och offentlighet i 1700-talets Sverige (Stock-
holm, 2009), 83–7; Karin Sennefelt: Politikens hjärta. Medborgarskap, manlighet och plats i frihetstidens 
Stockholm (Stockholm, 2011), 278. 
14 Kekke Stadin: “Att vara god eller att göra sin plikt? Dygd och genus i 1600-talets Sverige”, in 
Janne Backlund (ed): Historiska etyder (Uppsala, 1997), 228–30; Åsa Karlsson: “En man i statens 
tjänst. Den politiska elitens manlighetsideal under det karolinska enväldet 1680–1718”, in Anne 
Marie Berggren (ed): Manligt och omanligt i ett historiskt perspektiv (Uppsala, 1999), 116; Stefan Rimm: 
Vältalighet och mannafostran. Retorikutbildningen i svenska skolor och gymnasier 1724–1807 (Uppsala, 
2011), 42–3. 

 
 
44 
encompassing submission to God, the performance of piety involved the 
fulfilment of duties to one’s parents and the fatherland: it was the merging 
of religiosity with fidelity to the state and to one’s superiors. These two 
parts of a pious performance were prerequisites for each other: a good 
Christian was an obedient subject and an obedient subject was also submis-
sive to God and to the church. As pointed out by Carola Nordbäck, at this 
time Lutheranism and Swedish patriotism were a unit. A trusted patriot was 
a pious man, who diligently worked for the public good and who realised 
that this involved maintaining the hegemonic position that the Lutheran 
church held in the realm. Men who failed to perform in the interest of the 
public were “monstra moralia” (i.e., “immoral freaks”).15 Piety thus summa-
rised the expectations of how a submissive subject was supposed to act 
according to their position in the theocratic order.16 In this order, an act of 
pious submission gave authority and credibility to both the submissive and 
superior part of a relationship; hence, authority was not a zero-sum game.17 
As shown by Kristiina Savin, in a world governed by the will of God there 
existed a correspondence between the universe and human action. Success 
could be explained by the fact that the divine Lord loved virtue.18 In such a 
world, the proposition that pious submission enabled a man to act was not 
only a social, but also an ontological fact. These conflicting demands of 
authority and submission meant that discussions and performances of pious 
manhood were anything but homogeneous. Instead, the claims of mandate 
inherent in manhood – that distinguished useful men from monstra moralia – 
were anxiety-ridden performances. These performances placed a subject in a 
patriarchal hierarchy of submission and superiority, a place that constantly 
needed to be checked, maintained and reconsolidated.19 
The useful knowledge of a theocratic state 
The patriarchal order also permeated early modern knowledge production. 
During the Swedish absolute monarchy of the seventeenth and early  
eighteenth centuries, scholars were subject to a religious as well as a political 
orthodoxy according to which the autocracy, as well as the Lutheran teach-
                                                   
15 Nordbäck: Samvetets röst, 134–6, quotes from page 136. 
16 Kurt Johannesson: “Om furstars och aristokraters dygder. Reflexioner kring Johannes 
Schefferus Memorabilia”, in Sten Åke Nilsson and Margareta Ramsay (eds): 1600-talets ansikte 
(Nyhamnsläge, 1997), 316; Snickare: Enväldets riter, 24; Janne Lindqvist: Dygdens förvandlingar. 
Begreppet dygd i tillfällestryck till handelsmän före 1770 (Uppsala, 2002), 59–60. 
17 Karin Sennefelt has made a similar point, that, in mid-eighteenth-century Sweden, submission 
hardly eliminated the ability to act politically; Sennefelt: Politikens hjärta, 280–1.  
18 Kristiina Savin: Fortunas klädnader. Lycka, olycka och risk i det tidigmoderna Sverige (Lund, 2011), 50–
1. 
19 Compare to the performance of English gentlemanliness, discussed in Michèle Cohen: “‘Man-
ners’ make the man. Politeness, chivalry, and the construction of masculinity, 1750–1830”, Journal 
of British studies 44:2 (2005), 315. 

 
 
45 
ings, were above criticism by decree. This order continued into the constitu-
tional monarchy of the eighteenth century, when an academic dissertation 
was not allowed to contradict Lutheran orthodoxy, good morals or the form 
of the government.20 In the early eighteenth century, Lutheran orthodoxy 
defined itself in relation to radical forms of pietism, which came to Sweden 
in the forms of heretics and heretic works primarily originating in the Ger-
man states. But the relationships between pietism and Lutheran orthodoxy 
was not straightforward. Whereas the church officially saw radical pietism as 
a threat, the educational and utilitarian aspects of pietism were seen favour-
ably by many civil servants and clergymen, especially such who had studied 
and travelled abroad.21 In the Swedish universities of the first decades of the 
eighteenth century, the eclecticism of pietist scholars from Halle – such as 
Johann Franz Buddeaus (1667–1729) and Christian Thomasius (1655–1728) 
– became an important tool for clergymen and university professors who 
wished to reconcile conservative pietism with Lutheran orthodoxy. 
 
The clergyman and philosophy professor of Lund University, Andreas 
Rydelius (1671–1738), was central to the process of reconciliation.22 Philo-
sophically, Rydelius was strongly shaped by Cartesianism, and he was also a 
prominent figure in the Swedish Lutheran church (in 1734 he became Bish-
op of Lund). Still, in his work Necessary exercises of reason (1718–20), he dis-
played a tolerant position towards conservative pietism and his work also 
showed an affiliation with the Halle eclectics.23 Rydelius’ book was encour-
aged by the current king Karl XII, and can be seen as an authoritative text 
on the social epistemology of the theocracy. As such, it shows how power-
ful audiences in the Swedish state imagined knowledge to weave together 
the minds and bodies of knowers in the theocratic order. Also, it was used 
and referred to as an authoritative text up until the mid 1700s.24 Rydelius 
                                                   
20 Claes Annerstedt: Upsala universitets historia. D. 2, 1655–1718, 2, Universitetets organisation och 
verksamhet (Uppsala, 1909), 131. 
21 Nordbäck: Samvetets röst, 403.  
22 Tore Frängsmyr: Wolffianismens genombrott i Uppsala. Frihetstida universitetsfilosofi till 1700-talets mitt 
(Uppsala, 1972), 42–3. 
23 Jonathan Israel has presented Rydelius as “an admirerer of Buddeus as well as Descartes and 
Andala,” who waged war on “Wolffians, Lockeans, and Spinozisits alike until his death in 1738”; 
Jonathan I. Israel: Radical enlightenment. Philosophy and the making of modernity 1650–1750 (Oxford, 
2001), 560, 561. Israel also presents Rydelius as a persiting defender the “Cartesian ascendency in 
Sweden-Finland” of the early eighteenth century; ibid., 561. Still, in his Necessary exercises Rydelius 
comes forth as much less of a dogmatic, especially when presenting mathematical and physical 
literature. The case for Rydelius as an ecclectic is also made by Sven Wermlund: Sensus internus och 
sensus intimus. Studier i Andreas Rydelius filosofi (Stockholm, 1944), 279–84; Karl Gustaf Almquist: 
Andreas Rydelius’ etiska åskådning (Lund, 1955), 187. Similarly, Teddy Brunius has described Ryde-
lius as a mediator between Decartianism and Lockean empiricism, Teddy Brunius: Andreas Rydeli-
us och hans filosofi (Lund, 1958), 12. 
24 References to Rydelius can for example be found in Weidler and Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig 
genstig, preface; Gustav Ruder: Anledning til snille-walet, eller Ungdomens snille-gåfwors och naturliga 
böjelsers bepröfwande, wal och anförande, til the wetenskaper, konster, ämbeten och syslor, med hwilka hwar och 
en kan wäl och beqwämligen tjena Gudi och fädernes landet (Stockholm, 1737), 114–23; Eric Eklund: 

 
 
46 
defined useful knowledge as having three results: it improved the will of the 
knower, it led to worldly improvement and it extended the glory of God. Of 
the three, he considered the glory of God to be the ultimate end. However, 
the most useful knowledge was that which led to “the improvement of the 
mind of its possessor”, because such knowledge was what eventually would 
honour God the most.25 In other words, useful knowledge was what made 
the knower a pious part of a patriarchal order. Useful experience and skill 
were not external to the man who possessed them. Instead, useful 
knowledge reflected back upon and shaped the knowing subject into a man 
who worked for the glory of God and his fatherland; a useful man was thus 
a pious man.26 
 
In his study of the coronation ceremony of Queen Ulrika Eleanora in 
1680, Mårten Snickare analyses a staging of the early modern theocracy in 
the form of a mons pietatis – a mountain of piety. In this monument, work 
and useful knowledge intersected. The theme of the monument was the 
process of going from childhood into adult life and becoming a pious sub-
ject. The mountain of piety was shaped like a pyramid. It alluded to the 
architecture of antiquity, while it, at the same time, was a geometric allegory 
of a stable society.27 At its right-hand side sat the boys of the orphanage, to 
the left sat the girls, and at the top rested a woman, personifying piety. Un-
der the boys stood four girls, personifying expected virtues of a manly sub-
ject: theoria (carrying a folded paper and a pair of compasses pointed up-
wards), praxis (with a plummet and a pair of compasses pointed down-
wards), diligence (holding a clock) and concord (carrying three hearts bound 
together).28 Interestingly, on the mountain of piety, all male virtues except 
concord were symbolised by what at the time would have been considered 
mathematical instruments: plummets, compasses and clocks. Also, the epis-
temic categories of theoria and praxis were placed together with more ex-
pected virtues of an early modern subject. While theoria and praxis might not 
commonly have been presented as expected virtues of a subject, their place 
on the mountain of piety again shows how early modern knowledge was 
inherently moral and that education was useful in relation to the virtuous 
                                                                                                                        
Upfostrings-läran, som wisar sätt och medel til ungdomens rätta skiötsel och underwisning (Stockholm, 1746), 
251. See also Frängsmyr: Wolffianismens genombrott i Uppsala, 40–2. 
25 “ägarens förbättring til sitt Sinne”; Andreas Rydelius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar för all slags studerande 
ungdom, som wil hafwa sunda tankar, och fälla ett billigt omdöme om de högste och wichtigste ting i wärlden, 
hwilket i naturlig måtta bör wara deras yppersta ändamål, ehwad för stånds wahl de hälst willja giöra vol. 1 
(Linköping, 1718), unpaginated, § 5. 
26 Rydelius view of the practical and useful could thus also be related to the medicina-cultura 
animi, as discussed in Corneanu: Regimens of the mind, 58. 
27 On the Tessin’s use of antique, and especially Roman, architectural ideals, see Snickare: En-
väldets riter, 183–4. 
28 Ibid., 51–4; Mårten Snickare: “Shaping the ritual space. Nicodemus Tessin the younger and 
Swedish royal ceremonies”, in Allan Ellenius (ed): Baroque dreams. Art and vision in Sweden in the era 
of greatness (Uppsala, 2003), 134–5.  

 
 
47 
subject it fostered.29 But then what kind of virtues were they? At a time 
when natural and moral concerns were separated by very permeable bound-
aries, theoria and praxis can be said to have been both moral and epistemic vir-
tues. That is, they were both codes of a pious subject, and of performing as 
a trustworthy maker of knowledge about art and nature.30 In the following, I 
will argue that in early eighteenth-century Sweden, a boy’s passage into 
manhood involved the acquisition of a specific set of virtues, especially con-
cord, diligence, theoria, and praxis. A manly subject was to exhibit both au-
thority and pious submission, and he should be both productive and order-
ly. The coming-of-age narratives of mechanics, discussed in the following 
section, imagined one way into such pious manhood. At the heart of these 
narratives were the patriarchal relationships of a theocratic state, in the form 
of intergenerational relationships formed through mutual mechanical inter-
ests. 
Imagined intergenerational relationships 
It seems as if mechanical practitioners were obsessed with the issue of how 
best to craft boys into their own manly image. They repeatedly wrote texts 
in which they imagined how their guidance would lead young boys into 
useful manhood. In speeches, they verbalised their expectations of younger 
generations, discussed how best to observe mechanical potential in a child 
and contemplated how to lead a boy into a mechanical way of life. In an 
address to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1750, the instrument 
maker Daniel Ekström argued that when mechanically apt boys were 
“nursed from the age of ten or fifteen, they gain far greater skill, than those 
who start at a later age”. Still, it was difficult to identify aptitude in boys that 
young. The best bet, according to Ekström, was to search for boys who 
themselves, through “their own natural impulse”, exhibited the possession 
of “some reflection, enterprise, diligence and precision in small crafts”. Ac-
cording to Ekström, such boys were not interested in socialising with boys 
of their own age. Instead, they wished “to be alone or in the company of 
older people.” For him, mechanical aptitude was expressed through a bond 
that reached across generations. As Ekström saw it, the starting point of a 
                                                   
29 For a discussion of the most common virtues discussed in early modern Swedish sermons, see 
Stadin: “Att vara god eller att göra sin plikt?”, 229. The relationship between virtue and 
knowledge-making in early modern Europe has been discussed by a number of historians of 
science. See for example Shapin: A social history of truth, 68, 410–11; Jones: The good life in the scientific 
revolution, 8–9; Corneanu: Regimens of the mind, 10–11, 34–7. For more longe durée studies of virtue 
in natural inquiery, see Lorraine Daston and Peter Gailson: Objectivity (New York, 2007). 
30 The term epistemic virtues has been proposed by Lorraine Daston and Peter Galison to desig-
nate “historically specific ways of investigating and picturing nature”; Daston and Gailson: Objec-
tivity, 28. On the relation between moral and natural concerns in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, see Schabas and De Marchi: “Introduction”, 9. 

 
 
48 
mechanical way of life was a reciprocal act of identification: the young boy 
would recognise the mature man from whom he could learn the mechanical 
techniques to which he was inclined, and the man would recognise the 
child’s potential. Ekström imagined that such a boy, undisturbed by the 
distractions offered by children his own age, would respect and learn from a 
skilful older man, and that the two would interact using the mechanical 
techniques that they both loved.31 
The identification of aptitude 
Boys’ practice of mathematics and crafts – the two major sets of techniques 
that constituted performance of mechanics – were common topics in com-
memorative speeches of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences of the 
mid-eighteenth century. The Academy’s speeches often ascribed the promi-
nence of former members to the fact that their aptitude had been identified 
early on by their elders. Anders Johan von Höpken described how for the 
young Anders Celsius mathematics had been a child’s game. “Already in 
childhood, he amused himself with geometric figures,” a game that “at his age 
meant much and early revealed his inclination and aptitude.”32 Similarly, 
Olof von Dalin recounted how as a boy Pehr Elvius (the younger) was 
“slow in learning Greek, because neither reason nor imagination found 
pleasure in a mere matter of memory.” Instead, he had expressed an interest 
in drawing. After having drawn the royal castle of Drottningholm “better 
than one could have expected from his age,” his way of life was set out for 
him: “everyone pointed him to mathematics”.33 It was the duty of older men 
to identify and lead mechanically inclined boys into manhood. Commemo-
                                                   
31 “upammade ifrån 10 à 15 års åldren, vinna de långt större färdighet, än de, som börja vid sena-
re ålder”; “egen naturs drift”; “någon eftertanka, tiltagsne, flitige och granlaga uti små slögder”; 
“deras hog och böjelse”; “äro häldre ensamne eller uti de äldres sälskap.”; Daniel Ekström: Tal, 
om järn-förädlingens nytta och vårdande (Stockholm, 1750), 24. 
32 “Redan i barndomen roade hans sig med Geometriske figurer,”; “för hans år mycket betydde och 
förrådde tidigt des hug och snille.”; Anders Johan von Höpken: Åminnelse-tal öfver astronomiæ 
professoren Anders Celsius efter kongl. vetenskaps academiens befalning hållit i stora riddarhus-salen d. 27 
novemb. 1745. (Stockholm, 1745), 7. 
33 “trög, at lära Græska [sic]; ty hvarken omdöme eller inbillnings-gåfva funno i en blott minnes-
sak sit fulla nöje.”; “fullkomligare, än man väntat af hans år,”; “dömdes han af alla til Mathema-
tiquen”; Olof von Dalin: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. vetenskaps academiens medlem och secreterare, herr Pehr 
Elvius (Stockholm, 1750), 4. Similar narratives, of how aptitude had been identified already in 
childhood, can be seen in a number of commemorative speeches. See e.g., Herman Diedrich 
Spöring: Johannis Moræi … äre-minne, i auditorio illustri på riddarehuset efter kongl. wetenskaps academiens 
befallning uprättadt (Stockholm, 1743), 13–14; Samuel Klingenstierna: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. vet-
ensk. academiens framledne ledamot, commerce-rådet Christopher Polhem, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens 
vägnar hållit i stora riddarhus-salen (Stockholm, 1753), 3–4; Pehr Wilhelm Wargentin: Åminnelse-tal 
öfver kongl. observatoren och kongl. vetenskaps academiens ledamot, herr Olof Hiorter, efter kongl. vetenskaps 
academiens befallning, hållit i stora riddarhus-salen d. 18 april, 1751 (Stockholm, 1751), 6–9; Jacob Hen-
rik Mörk: Åminnelse-tal öfver slotts-byggmästaren och kongl. vetenskaps academiens ledamot, herr Claes Elian-
der, hållit den 27 februarii, 1756 (Stockholm, 1756), 7, 9–10. 

 
 
49 
rating Daniel Ekström, Pehr Wargentin pointed out how apt boys were 
often born who “easily learn, what others must acquire through much edu-
cation and effort,” but that “such noble seeds seldom become ripe fruit: 
however fertile, they nonetheless always require some early tending, or at 
least guidance and opportunity to develop their gifts.”34 
 
In another commemorative speech, given by Jacob Hendrik Mörk on 
the clergyman Nils Brelin, the central theme was this act of identifying a 
boy’s aptitude. Mörk recommended each and every person to examine 
“what he by nature is meant as well as called for.” Nature was an “artful 
mother, who makes it so that among many thousands of faces, one is sel-
dom similar to the other in all aspects”. In the same way, “during the crea-
tion of such a distinctive body”, she “instilled quite different dispositions.” 
She gave them “distinctive bodily benefits, and also diverse shares of the 
powers of the mind.” Mörk warned that when we “choose the wrong path 
in life, the public will miss much benefit”. Brelin had been such a man who 
had trod the wrong path. He had possessed “living imagination, a fortunate 
ability of invention, a lucid reflection and a profound reason,” and Mörk 
pointed out that by using these powers of mind Brelin had “gone far in the 
clerical estate, so that he has been honoured with the doctor’s hat.” Still, 
Mörk dared to propose that Brelin would have been a better mathematician 
than clergyman. Brelin should have been given “a sufficient mathematical 
foundation” at an early age and an “insight into the mechanical laws of mo-
tion”. Also, when young he should have “exercised the most prominent 
craft techniques [handlag]”. Had Brelin received such an education, his in-
ventions could have competed with “the quickest minds of Europe”. Then, 
Brelin would have made notable contributions to “our private as well as 
public economy”.35 
                                                   
34 “lätt fatta, hvad andre genom mycken undervisning och möda måste inhämta,”; “sådana ädla 
frön komma sällan til mogen frukt: ehuru bördiga, fordra de likväl altid någon ans i början, eller 
åtminstone anledning och tilfälle at utvikla sina gåfvor.”; Pehr Wilhelm Wargentin: Åminnelse-tal 
öfver kongl. vetensk. academiens framledne ledamot, directeuren och mathematiska instrument-makaren, herr 
Daniel Ekström, hållit för kongl. vetenskaps academien, den 14 junii år 1758 (Stockholm, 1758), 4–5. 
35 “hvartil han af Naturen är ämnad och likasom kallad.”; “konstrika Modren, som gör, at ibland 
så många tusende ansigten sällan et är det andra til alla delar likt”; “under en så åtskillig kropps 
skapnad nedlagt rätt så olika lynnen.”; “åtskilligt kroppens förmoner, och äfven så olika låtter af 
sinnes gåfvor.”; Jacob Henrik Mörk: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne theologie doctoren och kyrko-herden i 
Bolstad i Carlstads stift, herr Nils Brelin, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens vägnar, hållit uti stora riddare-hus 
salen (Stockholm, 1754), 2. “misstage oss i valet af lefnads-vägar, saknar det allmänna mycket til 
sin förmon”; ibid., 3. “en lefvande inbillnings kraft, en lyckelig upfinnings-gåfva, en redig eft-
ertanka och et djupsinnigt förstånd,”; “bragt sig i Kyrko-ståndet så högt, at han blifvit med Doc-
tors-hatten hedrad.”; “en tilräckelig Mathematisk underbyggnad”; “insigt i de Mechaniska rörelses 
lagar”; “inöfning i de förnämsta handa-lag”; “Europas qvickaste hufvuden”; “vår så allmänna 
som enskyldta hushållning”; ibid., 5. 

 
 
50 
Love of mechanics 
Mechanical practitioners considered it up to them to guide apt boys on to 
the right path in life. Laurel presented the intergenerational relationships 
between experienced men and apt boys as filled with love, but this love 
could also be a problem if unchecked. Therefore, the self-love of boys 
needed to be contained. For the young, he warned, “it was difficult to know 
oneself”. Gifted boys often believed that they “already possess [the 
knowledge], which they show good promise in,” a premature opinion that 
they often received from careless tutors. According to Laurel, the act of 
identifying an apt young subject produced a form of “love” that permeated 
intergenerational relationships between boys and experienced men. By bind-
ing boys and men together, such love could make “old age insufficiently 
careful” and it could compel tutors “prematurely to give such beloved stu-
dents too much”. Thus, too warm feelings could lead to flattery and be det-
rimental to the boys’ development: many apt boys had even “been ruined in 
this way.”36 
 
Laurel contrasted these misled boys to Triewald, the object of his 
speech, who as a child had displayed love for his elders and his fatherland as 
well as a deep knowledge of himself. In spite of his love for his father – 
presented as a “Tubalcain of our time” in reference to the biblical metal-
worker – Triewald had broken their natural patriarchal relationship by 
choosing not to take up his craft.37 The young Triewald, Laurel suggested, 
had not left his father out of “a premature opinion of himself” or out of 
“contempt,” but as an effect of the “natural gift and inclination, which the 
divine Lord has given him in order to be useful to his fatherland in an even 
more beneficial way.”38 For Laurel, intergenerational relationships between 
boys and men were built on a love that came from a mutual recognition. 
However, both parties needed to keep their emotions in check and to main-
tain the asymmetrical relationship that the difference in age prescribed. The 
young man’s self-love should not mislead him to believe that he was his 
tutor’s peer, and the tutor’s love for the young man should not lead him to 
the same false conclusion. Instead, the boy should submit to experienced 
mature age, while it was the duty of the older and experienced man to iden-
tify those boys who had the aptitude and inclination necessary for them to 
                                                   
36 “Det ät [sic] svårt att känna sig själv”; “redan besitja det, hvarom de gifva en god 
förhoppning,” “kärlek”; “ej nog försigtig ålderdom”; “i förtid tilägnar sådane käre ämnen 
förmycket”; “blefvet så fördärfvade.”; Laurel: Åminnelse-tal öfver […] Mårten Trievald, 7. The com-
memorative speeches contain many concrete examples of intergenerational love and affection. 
See e.g. Spöring: Johannis Moræi äre-minne, 14; Wargentin: Åminnelse-tal öfver […] Olof Hiorter, 12; 
Axel Fredrik Cronstedt: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne directeuren och kongl. vetensk. acad. ledamot Henric 
Theoph. Scheffer, på kongl. vetensk. acad. vägnar, hållit i stora riddarehus-salen, den 17. september 1760 
(Stockholm, 1760), 9. 
37 “en vår tids Tubalkain”; Laurel: Åminnelse-tal öfver […] Mårten Trievald, 3. 
38 “otidig tanka om sig sjelf”; “förakt,”; “den naturliga gåfva och drift, som den Högste honom 
gifvet til at på et ännu fördelaktigare vis vara Fäderneslandet nyttig.”; ibid., 5. 

 
 
51 
prosper, and then to lead them into useful manhood for the benefit of their 
fatherland. 
 
Such balanced love was the prerequisite of the mutual acts of identifica-
tion on which these intergenerational relationships were imagined to rely. A 
mature mechanical practitioner, who wished to educate the young, should 
thus know the signs by which he could identify aptitude. Polhem recom-
mended that children should be allowed to “run about in the house, and to 
potter about with all chores together with both parents and servants.” Such 
bodily work would make the children “steady, diligent, quick and busy”, but 
would also provide occasions for children’s aptitude to be identified. 
Polhem also considered the performance of crafts a sign by which aptitude 
could be identified: “if then they seem to take pleasure in carving and craft-
ing, that is a sign of a future mechanicus.”39 Likewise, according to Ekström, 
apt boys did not quickly tire of performing crafts. Their “inventiveness [fint-
lighet]” was revealed to the experienced observer through “the changes they 
wish to make [to the craft techniques]”; also, their “handiness [händighet]” 
and “imagination [inbillnings-gåfva]” were shown by “the likeness [of their 
results] to what they have decided to make.” Besides crafts, Ekström imag-
ined that mechanically inclined boys took an interest in mathematical arts. 
They liked “drawing, counting, geometry and to observe moving ma-
chines”.40 
 
It was not sufficient for a boy to show an interest in mathematics and 
crafts in order to be identified as a mechanicus: the passage from boy to 
mechanicus was also imagined to require a continuous exercise of these 
techniques. In their narratives, authors linked such exercise to the acquisi-
tion of virtues that defined a good manly subject: to diligence and concord 
as well as to the epistemic virtues of theoria and praxis. By analysing narra-
tives where mathematics and crafts were part of the making of a useful man, 
it is possible to understand how early modern authors imagined these tech-
niques as self-forming exercises carried out in intergenerational relationships 
between boys and men. 
Mathematical concord 
So far, I have presented the role of manhood and maturity in the formation 
of manly subjects of the early modern Swedish state. There, certain virtues – 
                                                   
39 “löpa omkring i huset och stöka i alla syslor tillika med föräldrar och Tienstefolck.”; “stadige, 
idoge, trefne och sysselsamme”; “Om då lusten skönjes hos dem, at tälja och slögda, så är det et 
tecken til en tilkommande Mechanicus.”; Christopher Polhem: “Tankar om mekaniken”, Kungliga 
vetenskapsakademins handlingar 1 (1740), 195. 
40 “de ändringar, de deruppå vilja hafva”; “yppar sig i likheten emot det de sjelfve sätta sig före.”; 
“Rita, räkna, geometrie och at åskåda rörliga verk”; Ekström: Tal, om järn-förädlingens nytta och 
vårdande, 24. 

 
 
52 
such as diligence, concord, theoria and praxis – defined a manly subject, and 
mechanics and other practical mathematical arts were presented as parts of a 
process of maturity. In speeches and prefaces, one finds narratives of me-
chanics as a passage to manhood and of intergenerational relationships that 
formed both teachers and students. The authors of these texts imagined 
themselves pious men, who could hand down useful manhood to apt boys. 
In these coming-of-age narratives, the integrated exercise of mathematics 
and crafts was a central means of shaping a useful subject. Thus, the follow-
ing sections analyse these self-forming exercises more closely. First, I exam-
ine mathematics as an exercise of fostering the reason and imagination re-
quired of a useful man. 
 
When mature mathematicians discussed mathematics as a path to man-
hood, they often did so in relation to the classical curriculum of schools and 
academies. They presented mathematics as a means of education that was 
an alternative, or at least complementary, to Latin. Authors on mathematics 
warned that careless teachers in schools and academies – dominated by a 
classical curriculum – often failed to identify the potential of mechanically 
apt boys and consequently turned them away from their institutions. For 
example, Ekström argued that because these boys often lacked an “inclina-
tion for languages” they were frequently excluded from the schools and 
universities with a classical education taught in written and oral Latin.41 At 
the same time, these authors clearly imagined mathematics and Latin to 
have similar roles in a boy’s education. By understanding how mathematics 
was related to Latin, we can understand how, and why, mathematics was 
presented as an alternative or a replacement of a classical curriculum. 
 
As pointed out by Walter Ong, because of its base in totally male com-
munities, from medieval times onwards “Learned Latin” became a “sex-
linked” language, “written and spoken only by males, learned outside the 
home in a tribal setting which was in effect a male puberty rite”. Emerging 
from this rite of passage, which also involved studies in, for example, rheto-
ric and logic, was a scholarly man welcome in universities, in the corre-
spondence of an international “republic of letters” and in the clerical es-
tate.42 Fletcher’s observation that Latin in England 1600–1800 became 
“firmly installed as the male elite’s secret language, […] that could be dis-
played as a mark of learning, of superiority, of class and gender difference,” 
also holds true for the Sweden of this time.43 Bo Lindberg has argued that 
                                                   
41 “lust för språk”; ibid. 
42 Walter J. Ong: Orality and literacy. The technologizing of the word (London, 1991), 113. On the role 
of Latin in the Swedish schools, see Wilhelm Sjöstrand: Pedagogikens historia vol. 3:1 (Lund, 1958), 
136; Rimm: Vältalighet och mannafostran, 83. 
43 Fletcher: Gender, sex and subordination in England 1500–1800, 302. On Latin as an initiation into 
scholarly culture in eighteenth-century Sweden, see Rimm: Vältalighet och mannafostran, 244–6. For 
a discussion of classical education, and especially rhetoric, as power generating see Ann Öhrberg: 
Samtalets retorik. Belevade kulturer och offentlig kommunikation i svenskt 1700-tal (Höör, 2014), 30–6. 

 
 
53 
Latin and Swedish existed side by side in the ruling elite of eighteenth-
century Sweden and that they can be seen as two parallel codes. One can 
roughly say that whereas Latin permeated the universities, the work of the 
civil service in Stockholm was mainly exercised in Swedish and its officials 
sought to cultivate the Swedish language, in order to put it on a par with 
Latin as well as other European languages.44 Of course, the universities and 
the state were not separate from each other: most men of the state had been 
educated and formed in academia and as a consequence the bureaus in 
Stockholm had expectations of what such an education should entail. Like 
the cameralists of the German states, who strived to make universities – e.g., 
in Halle and Göttingen – into factories for educating civil servants, the cam-
eralists in Stockholm imagined turning the universities of the realm into 
institutions that produced men for public positions – in the military or the 
civil administration – and who were well versed in juridical matters, rhetoric, 
œconomy, natural history and mathematics.45 
 
Over the century, the curriculum of the schools was reformed slightly, 
to include a broadly defined natural history.46 This constant attempt at re-
form was perhaps most clear in the policies in relation to the university in 
Uppsala, the largest university of the realm. In the seventeenth and  
eighteenth centuries, the bureaus in Stockholm pushed this traditionally 
clerically dominated institution in the direction of a practical œconomical 
academy.47 At the same time, a number of mathematical works in Swedish 
appeared. At the end of the seventeenth century, most textbooks on math-
ematics were written in Latin. In the 1700s this situation slowly changed. 
The choice of language of these works was not arbitrary: there existed peda-
gogical motives for publishing in Swedish instead of Latin. In the preface to 
his Swedish translation of Euclid’s Elementa (1744), Mårten Strömer argued 
that the young would not encounter useful knowledge “by the right time, as 
long as it is hidden from them in foreign languages”.48 Strömer was not 
                                                   
44 Lindberg: Den antika skevheten, 26. 
45 On Swedish academia and state bureaucracy, see Gaunt: Utbildning till statens tjänst, esp. 31. The 
relationship between the bureaus and the universities was similar in many contemporary German 
states, see Clark: Academic charisma and the origins of the research university, 13. 
46 Sjöstrand: Pedagogikens historia vol. 3:1, 139–40, 147–50; Rimm: Vältalighet och mannafostran, 83–4. 
47 Wilhelm Sjöstrand: Pedagogikens historia vol. 2 (Lund, 1958), 232; Fors: The limits of matter, 84. For 
studies on knowledge making in the Swedish state administration, see the references in note 69 
page 35. One expression of this conflict was the Cartesian controversies in Uppsala of the late 
seventeenth century, where Aristotelian and Cartesian theses were pitted against each other; Claes 
Annerstedt: Upsala universitets historia. D. 2, 1655–1718, 1, Universitetets öden (Uppsala, 1908), 91–
101; Annerstedt: Upsala universitets historia. D. 2, 1655–1718, 2, Universitetets organisation och verksam-
het, 310–13. 
48 “i rättan tid dertil, så länge den uti främmande språk för dem är undangiömd.”; Euklides and 
Mårten Strömer (tran.): Euclidis Elementa eller grundeliga inledning til geometrien, til riksens ungdoms tienst 
på swenska språket utgifwen (Uppsala, 1744), preface. Besides Euclidis Elementa, several textbooks 
discussed the importance of translating mathematical works into Swedish. See e.g., Anders Ga-
briel Duhre: Första delen af en grundad geometria, bewijst uti de föreläsningar, som äro håldne på swänska 

 
 
54 
alone in advocating early mathematical studies, nor was he the only one 
portraying Latin as an obstacle for teaching mathematics to boys. These 
arguments can be seen repeatedly in prefaces to mathematical textbooks.49 
 
These prefaces did not present the relation between mathematics and 
Latin as one of simple opposites: instead, it was a relationship of difference 
and similarity. On the one hand, mathematics was presented as a competing, 
and superior, alternative to a classical education. In early modern Europe, 
mathematical studies were a manly rite of passage, and an exercise that fos-
tered a gentle, honest and manageable subject.50 Therefore, to translate 
mathematical works from Latin into Swedish was to facilitate the making of 
a mathematical man, serving the state. Like in the France of this time, in 
Sweden mechanics and mathematics were not only methods of knowledge 
making but also instruments of authority aimed at “fashioning a new ideal 
Man, one that could serve adequately both the state and scientia”.51 In this 
vein, the surveyor Eric Agner commenced his Swedish textbook Arithmetica 
fractionum (1710) with a poem from “the book to the reader” that presented 
mathematics as important “if you want to be a man”. By the diligent study 
of fractions, Agner unassumingly poetised, “You become sensible, for oth-
ers wise | and rightly reap glory as a prize.”52 If mathematically apt boys 
studied Latin and Greek before they approached mathematics, they would 
learn mathematics much later than if they could study it directly in their 
mother tongue. Consequently, their becoming a mature mathematical man 
of the state would require more time. Also, to untangle mathematics from 
Latin was a means of controlling boys’ intergenerational relationships. If a 
mathematically apt boy studied Latin at a formative age, he risked being 
lured away from the mathematical life he was suitable for, to instead end up 
a scholar or a clergyman. 
 
On the other hand, the texts presented mathematical exercises as in 
many ways similar to the language studies described by Ong: as a rite of 
passage that gave access to an all-male language. Mathematics, like Latin, 
                                                                                                                        
språket uppå kongl. fortifications contoiret i Stockholm (Stockholm, 1721), preface, unpaginated, last 
page; Fredrik Palmqvist: Inledning til algebra. Första delen (Stockholm, 1748), 6. 
49 In his translation of Johann Freidrich Weidler’s discussed in the previous chapter, Johan Mört 
argued that it was important to introduce mathematics to boys early in life. Weidler and Mört 
(tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig, preface. Similarly, Anders Celsius proposed that mathematical 
studies should be commenced “already in the early years” (in original: “i de unga åren”) in Anders 
Celsius: Arithmetica eller Räkne-konst, grundeligen demonstrerad af Anders Celsius (Uppsala, 1727), pref-
ace. A similar argument can also be found in Jacob Faggot’s introduction to Pehr Elvius’ transla-
tion of Clairaut’s Elements de géometrie; Alexis Claude Clairaut and Pehr Elvius (tran.): Inledning til 
geometrien. Af herr Clairaut (Stockholm, 1744), “Läsare!”, unpaginated. 
50 John Lewis Heilbron: Geometry civilized. History, culture, and technique (Oxford, 2000), 23–4. 
51 Gauvin: Habits of knowledge, 128. Compare to Pamela H. Smith’s discussion of the identity of 
“the new philosopher” in Smith: The body of the artisan, 19–20. 
52 “Boken til Läsaren,”; “om tu wilt blij Man,”; “Så blir tu klook, för androm wijs / Och bär af 
snällom låf och prijs,”; Eric Agner: Arithmetica fractionum. Thet är: räkne-konst vthi brutne-tahl (Stock-
holm, 1710).  

 
 
55 
was a symbolic system separated from everyday life that carried connota-
tions of exactitude and truth.53 For authors of Swedish mathematical text-
books of the early eighteenth century, mathematics provided a new way of 
seeing. This view is similar to the one expressed by eclectic scholars in Hal-
le. There, as shown by Kelly J. Whitmer, the visual aspects of mathematics 
made it considered a suitable exercise in learning to discern the world in a 
new way, and mathematics was considered a technique of discernment. 
Through mathematical exercises, students were believed to learn how to 
conciliate and judge between opposing philosophical positions.54 Thus, al-
though mathematical textbooks presented mathematics and Latin as alterna-
tive routes to manhood, these two rites of passages were not simple oppo-
sites in a struggle between modernity and antiquity. Instead, the classical 
education established a pattern, which the mathematical both adopted and 
criticised. 
 
Like Latin, mathematics, and especially geometry, was interwoven with 
the political and religious order of early modern Europe. Because God was 
benevolent, he had provided means for the human soul to discern his prov-
idential design, and mathematics was one such means. For seventeenth-
century Lutheran natural philosophers, a mechanically and geometrically 
conceived universe, with a passively contrived nature, became an argument 
for the radical sovereignty of God. According to Rydelius, mathematics 
gave opportunity for “deep and respectful thoughts about God and his hid-
den wisdom, which variably shows itself in the three principles of the great 
world: numbers, measurements and weights”.55 Through mathematics, and 
                                                   
53 On Latin as a means of establishing objectivity, see Ong: Orality and literacy. The technologizing of 
the word, 113–14. Dunér has also argued that the use of mathematics also excluded unwanted 
participants from natural philosophical discussion, see Dunér: Världsmaskinen, 85. 
54 Whitmer: “Eclecticism and the technologies of discernment in pietist pedagogy”; 567; 
Whitmer: The Halle Orphanage as Scientific Community. 
55 “diupa och wördsamma tankar om GUD och hans fördolda wijshet, som föränderligen lyser 
uti de tre stora wärldens grundstycken, Tal, Mått och Wicht”; Rydelius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar 
vol. 1, § 12. Mört repeated Rydelius’ discussion about God and mathematics verbatim in his 
preface to Weidler and Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig. For Swedish eighteenth-century 
mathematical accounts of God’s creation, see for example Christopher Polhem: “[Att Gud 
alzmächtig ähr hela naturens uphof…]”, in Axel Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade 
skrifter vol. 3 (Uppsala & Stockholm, 1952), 304–15; Anders Wahlström: Ethica mathematica. Heller 
mathematisk sedelära (Västerås, 1742). The relationship between early modern Lutheran theology 
and geometry has been analysed in Peter Barker and Bernard R. Goldstein: “Theological founda-
tions of Kepler’s astronomy”, Osiris 16 (2001), 101–2; See also Richard S. Westfall: “The rise of 
science and the decline of orthodox Christianity. A study of Kepler, Descartes, and Newton”, in 
David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. Numbers (eds): God and nature. Historical essays on the encounter 
between Christianity and science (Berkeley, 1986), 221–3. For a discussion of mechanism and Luther-
anism, see Gary B. Deason: “Reformation theology and the mechanistic conception of nature”, 
in Lindberg and Numbers (eds): God and nature, 170. Jones has discussed early modern geometry 
as a spiritual exercise, ultimately leading to a good life; see Jones: The good life in the scientific revolu-
tion, 15–53. For a discussion of this role of mathematics in a Swedish context, see Dunér: Tanke-
maskinen, 45–7. This argument, about mathematics as a religious exercise, of reason and consent, 

 
 
56 
again especially geometry, it was possible to perceive these hidden truths 
and relationships in nature. Thus, whereas Latin provided means of partici-
pating in theological discourse, mathematics was imagined as a way to inter-
pret God’s creation, or the book of nature. In the Swedish Lutheran theoc-
racy – where the state was imagined to mirror the rational order of God’s 
creation – authors could consequently plausibly argue that mathematics was 
a way to align oneself to a political order.56 Mathematical studies would 
teach a boy to see nature and society as God and the sovereign intended 
them to be seen, and as such they were exercises that fostered a pious man. 
Mathematics was thus an exercise of pious discernment, by which a boy 
would learn to consent to his superiors and to align himself with the theo-
cratic order. 
An exercise of discernment 
In the preface to his compilation of Anders Gabriel Duhre’s  mathematical 
lectures from 1718, Georg Brandt discussed mathematics as an exercise of 
reason using a metaphor of bodily practice. If carried out diligently, mathe-
matical studies strengthened the reason and formed the mind of a boy: 
your reason is increasingly sharpened and improved by a diligent practice 
[of mathematics], so that you become much more skilled in work, which 
requires reason and thoughtfulness, than someone who has not [practised 
it]. This is not unlike the fact that he, who has trained his body though all 
sorts of exercise and practice, is much more agile and stronger than some-
one else who is equally gifted by nature but who has not improved this gift 
through good exercise.57 
 
Celsius made a similar argument in the preface to his Arithmetica (1727) 
– a textbook that was widely used in Swedish schools and academies until 
the mid 1700s.58 Because mathematics was an orderly form of knowledge, 
mathematical exercise would let boys “arrange their thoughts according to 
                                                                                                                        
is also made in Sverker Lundin: Skolans matematik. En kritisk analys av den svenska skolmatematikens 
förhistoria, uppkomst och utveckling (Uppsala, 2008), 139. 
56 Making this connection between mathematics and an authoritarian political order explicit, the 
English philosopher Thomas Hobbes’ argued that the power of his Leviathan, the ideal absolute 
monarch, was analogous to the force of geometric inferences. See Shapin and Schaffer: Leviathan 
and the air-pump, 153. 
57 “ens förstånd genom flitig öfning der utinnan blifwer alt mer och mer skiärpat och förmerat, så 
at man til alla sådana syslor, som fordra förstånd och eftertanka, warder mycket skickeligare än en 
annan som eij sökt sitt förstånd med dylika eftertänksamma och wichtige saker at upbruka; äfwen 
som den hwilken har öfwat sin kropp uti allehanda exercitier och öfningar, är mycket wigare och 
starkare än en annan af lijka naturens förmåner som försummat dem igenom goda öfningar at 
föröka.”; Georg Brandt: En grundelig anledning til mathesin universalem och algebram, efter herr And. Gabr. 
Duhres håldne prælectioner sammanskrifwen (Stockholm, 1718), preface. 
58 Illustratively, in 1750 Fredric Palmqvist discussed Celsius’ Arithmetics as a ”masterwork” (in 
original:”mästarstycke”), and as ”rather useful for those who wish to study mathematics” (in 
original: in original: ”ganska tjenlig för dem, som antingen tänka at öfwa sig i mathematiken”); 
Fredrik Palmqvist: Underwisning i räkne-konsten (Stockholm, 1750), preface. 

 
 
57 
an order of reason”. By mathematical exercise, “students would be trained 
from childhood to extend their powers of reasoning”. Such boys would 
grow up “not to accept anything without proper foundation and cause, and 
to acquire a taste and to find pleasure in demonstrations.” As an effect, stu-
dents of mathematics would mature into men who could serve their father-
land by acquiring “a skilled reason” by which they could make solid and 
indisputable proofs. Through mathematical studies, boys could enter a 
realm of absolute certainty, where they could make truths that both they and 
others were obliged to accept.59 
 
But how was a boy to enter this realm? Celsius pointed out that: 
a correct logica, or theory of reason, might provide rules and maxims; but 
even if you know these, it does not follow that you immediately possess a 
habitus or skill to separate the certain from the uncertain; that you are 
sharp in your judgement; have the patience to consider the case minutely 
and acutely; that you are cunning in finding hidden truths, etcetera. There-
fore, this skill should be acquired though a continuous training and prac-
tice of the rules provided by theories of reason.60 
 
The anonymous dialogue Conversation between a man and a woman about the 
usefulness of geometry for young students (1743), likely written by Celsius, explicitly 
discussed the role of mathematics in the education of a boy.61 The protago-
nist of the short text visits a friend during a voyage, and has the opportunity 
to discuss the usefulness of mathematical education with the friend’s wife. 
The friend’s son is soon to leave for university, and the responsibility for his 
education is soon to be transferred from his mother and father to a tutor. 
By presenting the wife’s position in relation to her son’s education, it pre-
sents mathematical education as not just an all-male affair. At least as char-
acters in fictional narratives, female subjects of the early modern Swedish 
                                                   
59 “ställa sina tankar efter en förnuftig ordning”; “Studerande blefwe från barndomen öfwade at 
utwidga sina förstånds krafter”; “intet antaga något utan grund och raison, samt finna en smak och 
nöje i demonstrationer.”; “en färdighet i förståndet”; Celsius: Arithmetica, preface. Similar arguments 
of mathematics as an exercise of reason can also be found in Christian Gustafsson Roman: Wäl-
mente tanckar om barna upfostring. I anseende till deras studier och lefnad (Västerås, 1743), 43; Euklides 
and Strömer (tran.): Euclidis Elementa eller Grundeliga inledning til geometrien, till läsaren. For a discuss-
ion of mathematics in eighteenth-century Sweden as a realm of certainty, see Dunér: Tanke-
maskinen, 45. 
60 “en rätt Logica eller Förnufts-Lära föreskrifwer wäl reglor och maximes; men oansedt man dem 
har sig bekanta, så följer dock intet deraf, at man strax äger en habitus eller färdighet, at skilja det 
wissa från det owissa, det tydeliga från det otydeliga: at man är skarpsinnig at fälla sitt omdöme: 
har tålamod at saken noga och diupsinnigt öfwerwäga: är slug at upfinna fördolda sanningar, och 
så widare. Bör altså denna färdigheten förskaffas af en stadig öfning och practicerande af de reglor, 
som FörnuftsLäran gifwer wid handen”; Celsius: Arithmetica, preface. 
61 Gunnar Brobergs identifies the author as Anders Celsius in “Then gifte Philosophen eller en 
man som blyges att wara gift”, in Annales Academiæ regiæ scientiarum Upsaliensis:s. Kongl. Vetenskaps-
samhällets i Uppsala Årsbok 26 (1985–86), 83. The similar arguments about mathematical exercises 
found in the dialogue and in Celsius’ Arithmetica support this assumption. For a discussion about 
the role of anonymity in this dialogue, see Elisabeth Mansén: ”Samtal emellan en Herre och en 
Fru år 1743” in Emma Hagström Molin and Andreas Hellerstedt (eds): Lärda samtal. En festskrift 
till Erland Sellberg (Lund, 2014, 158–161. 

 
 
58 
state related to mathematical education.62 When describing mathematical 
studies to the woman, the protagonist urged her to imagine how dancing 
was learnt: 
I cannot deny, that logics shows us some manners, by which one should 
think and argue. But thereby one is not given the actual skill to use these 
rules. Imagine, my lady, that the dancing master, who visits your little 
daughter, would sit down next to her when he comes, and start to explain 
in detail how a minuet should be danced: how many steps one should take 
forwards and backwards, how the figure should be made into a Z, and in 
addition to this description present everything accurately in a drawing on 
paper. Do you think, my lady, that after your daughter had learnt all that 
he had said by heart, and had carefully studied the figure, that she would 
be able to rise and dance a minuet?63 
 
When the woman did not think so, the protagonist pointed out the simi-
larities between mathematics and a bodily exercise such as dancing: 
Your son may learn from logics about all the devices, which one should 
use to reason; but nonetheless, he would at many occasions never be able 
to remember these rules. Instead, most of the time he would make false 
conclusions, take the wrong position, and confusedly relate one thing with 
another. Therefore, your son should practise making the right conclusions, 
and diligently train the ways of thinking that logic prescribes.64 
                                                   
62 The role of the woman in this dialogue, as a voice of reason in relation to her man, is similar to 
the role of women in a number of similar mathematical dialogues written by Polhem. See for 
example: Christopher Polhem: Samtal emellan en swär-moder och son-hustru, om allehanda hus-hålds 
förrättningar (Stockholm, 1745); Christopher Polhem: “Samtahl emällan fröken Theoria och by-
ggmästar Practicus om sitt förehafvande”, in Henrik Sandblad (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade 
skrifter vol. 1 (Uppsala & Stockholm, 1947 [undated]), 277–307; Christopher Polhem: “Samtahl 
och discurs emellan theoria och praxis om mechaniska och physicalska saker huar igenom 
ungdomen, som der till har lust, kan lära något”, in Liljencrantz (ed): Polhems efterlämnade skrifter 
vol. 3, 427–45. In an autobiographical narrative found in a letter, the Swedish female poet Hed-
wig Charlotta Nordenflycht discussed her passage into womanhood, by her engagement with a 
mechanicus, in much similar ways to the narratives discussed here. Hedvig Charlotta Nor-
denflycht: “Autobiographical letter to H:r A.A. von Stiernman, 1745-08-17”, Skrifter (Stockholm, 
1996). 
63 “Jag kan intet neka, at ju Logican visar oss vissa maner, hvarefter man bör tänka och argumen-
tera; men derigenom får man ändå intet en färdighet at bruka dessa reglor i sielfva värket. Inbilla 
Er, min Fru, at Dansmästaren, som går til er lilla Dotter, skulle, när han kommer, sätta sig brede 
vid henne, och begynna närligt på at tala om, huru en menuet bör dansas: huru många steg man 
bör gå fram och tilbakars; huru figuren bör giöras som et Z; ja, förutan denna beskrifningen 
föreställa altsammans helt accurat uti en ritning på papperet. Tror ni väl, Min Fru, sedan Er 
Dotter, väl lärdt utan til alt det han sagt, och noga beskådat figuren, at hon då skulle kunna stiga 
op och dansa en menuet.”; Anonymous: Samtal emellan en herre och en fru, om geometriens nytta för unga 
studerande (Stockholm, 1743), 11. 
64 “kan Er Son af Logican få lära at tala om alla de grep, som man bör bruka at raisonera; men 
lika fult torde han vid monga tilfällen aldrig komma ihog dessa reglor; utan giöra som oftast 
falska slutsatser: taga saken på galen fot, och invekla det ena med det andra i största confusion. 
Derföre bör Er Son väl öfva sig at sluta rätt, och flitigt practicera de tankesätt, som Logican 
föreskrifver”; ibid., 12. 

 
 
59 
Like Brandt, the protagonist of this dialogue saw mathematics as an exer-
cise, which moulded the mathematician into a man with certain habits. He 
contrasted this mathematical exercise to Aristotelian logic, another realm of 
certainty, but one that he considered to be just a set of rules that would not 
shape the mind of the student. By studying mathematics the son would: 
“pick up a habit, to make reasonable conclusions about everything.” The 
woman would “then, with pleasure, see him return from academia like a 
new human being.”65 His choice of likening mathematics to dancing was 
hardly gratuitous: in the Swedish universities of the time dancing masters 
regularly taught young noblemen the correct bodily posture and movements 
that would identify them as belonging to the higher strata of society.66 
 
Other writers considered mathematics to be linked to imagination rather 
than reason. Following classical traditions, in his Necessary exercises of reason 
Rydelius delineated four faculties of the mind [sinnesgåvor]: “the first is 
reason, the other imagination […], the third memory and the fourth the 
will.”67 Imagination was not only “a mistress of all crafts and arts, that are 
executed with the limbs of the body”, it also had much to say in the scholar-
ly sciences, and especially so in mathematics.68 Rydelius made a distinction 
between two forms of imagination: “imaginatio lucens”, enlightened imagina-
tion, and “imaginatio ardens”, burning imagination. Imaginatio lucens, Rydelius 
argued, was “cold, and […] thus remains in all its operations within the 
realm of the brain without ever having contact with the heart.” Imaginatio 
ardens, on the other hand, played “with such images, which by their nature 
touches the heart”.69 To clarify his point, Rydelius provided an example that 
also showed how the mechanicus was to relate to emotions in his work: 
For example: When a mechanicus pictures, with his vivid imagination, all the 
parts that are necessary in a machine, […] – their shape, order and connec-
tions, and the movement, which their construction, and other natural cir-
cumstances must effect – such imagines can never by themselves awaken 
any emotions. But if he thinks of the glory or profit, which can be gained  
 
 
                                                   
65 “en habitude, at sluta förnuftigt om all ting.”; “med nöje se honom komma hem ifrån Acade-
mien såsom en ny menniskia.”; ibid., 13. 
66 Gustaf Moberg: Från exercitier till modern idrott (Uppsala, 1950), 345–46; Dahl: Svensk ingenjör-
skonst under stormaktstiden, 129–30. 
67 “den första är förnuftet, den andra Inbilnings-Gåfwan […], den tredie Minnet, och den fierde 
Willian.”; Rydelius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar vol. 1, § 8. 
68 “en Mästarinna för alla Handwärk och Konster, som drifwas med kroppsens lemmar,”; ibid., 
preface. 
69 “kalsinnig, och […] därför stanna med hela sitt spel innom hiärna-kretzen, utan at hafwa mäd 
hiärtat något at beställa.”; “mäd sådana bilder, som af sin natur äro hiärtrörande”, Andreas Ryde-
lius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar vol. 4 (Linköping, 1720), 42. 

 
 
60 
 
Figure 1. The frontispiece of Anders Celsius’ Arithmetica. The engraving was signed as 
invented and made [inven. et fecit] by J[an] Klopper, the teacher of drawing at Uppsala, 
and sculpted [Sc.] by Carl Meurman, auscultator in the Bureau of Mines. (Photo: Uppsa-
la University Library) 

 
 
61 
from [the machine], or at least the positive improvement of his 
knowledge, then the object of his mind is not just a verum, but a bonum, 
which directly corresponds to the heart.70 
 
In contrast to the mechanicus, Rydelius pointed out how the poet used 
imaginatio ardens when picturing “love, enmity […], sickness, pain and an-
guish, or even death itself”. Such objects of the mind communicated directly 
with the heart. According to Rydelius, the same man seldom possessed both 
cerebral and heartfelt imagination: “generally, the more profound and in-
ventive a mathematicus, the slower a poet. The more artful a poet, the fewer 
suggestions in mathesis”. A man’s imagination also changed as he matured. 
Whereas imaginatio ardens was stronger among the young, as he entered man-
hood imaginatio lucens gained the upper hand.71 In a mature man, imagination 
was thus not governed by basic impulses, but by reason, and mathematics 
was a means of fostering such an enlightened imagination. 
 
Looking past which parts of a boy’s mind were trained by mathematical 
practice – reason or imagination – all these authors saw mathematics as a 
technique of discernment that allowed a man to see and reconcile opposing 
positions. In the Swedish translation of Julius Bernhard von Rohr’s work on 
how to live as a public servant (1728) Nils Rosén (1706–73), who had stud-
ied mathematics with Celsius in Uppsala in 1727, summarised this view. He 
defined reason as the ability “to see the connections between all sorts of 
truths”, and argued that nothing trained it as well as pure mathematics. A 
mathematically trained man was unmatched in connecting separated truths 
“because he is a quicker thinker, knows better how to connect reasons, 
without jumping to conclusions, and is nonetheless of a greater penetra-
tion”.72 
 
The frontispiece of Celsius’ Arithmetica similarly presented mathematics 
as a technique of discernment; there, mathematics was portrayed as a moth-
er, surrounded by boys depicted as puttos who diligently studied together 
(see Figure 1). Thus, like in the anonymous dialogue, women were given an 
allegorical role as nurturing mothers, overseeing the mathematical education 
                                                   
70 “Til exempel: När en mechanicus föreställer sig, medelst sin starka imagination, alla de delar, som 
äro nödige til en machine, […] deras skapnad, ordning, sammanhang, och dän rörelse, som af deras 
sammanfogning, och fler naturliga omständigheter förorsakas måste, kunna dässe imagines af sig 
siälfwa aldrig hos honom uppwäckia någon sinnes rörelse. Men om han täncker på ära häller 
winst, som där igenom kunna förwärfwas, häller åtminstone på sin wettenskaps lyckeliga 
förkofring, så blifwer då intet längre ett blott verum, utan bonum, hans fägnesamma objectum, som 
straxt corresponderar mäd hiärtat.”; ibid., 42–3. 
71 “Älskog, owänskap […] siukdomb, pijna och ångest, ja själfwa döden”; ibid., 43. “Gemenligen 
ju diupsinnigare och nyhittigare Mathematicus, ju trögare Poet. Ju förslagnare Poet, ju fattigare på 
förslag i mathesi.”; ibid., 44. For a through, albeit internalist, discussion of imaginatio ardens and 
lucens in Rydelius, see Wermlund: Sensus internus och sensus intimus, 19–24. 
72 “see in i allehanda sanningars sammanhang”; Julius Bernhard von Rohr: Inledning til klokheten at 
lefwa, eller Underrättelse om, huru en menniskia, genom en förnuftig sitt lefwernes inrättning, kan bli timmeligen 
lycksalig (Stockholm, 1728), 37–8. “ty han är i eftertänckiande hurtigare, wet bättre at samman-
binda skiälen, utan at giöra något språng, och är jämwäl af större penetration”; ibid., 41–2. 

 
 
62 
of boys. A banner lay wrapped around her legs with the words “oculis retectis” 
(i.e., “with uncovered eyes”). To the left was a picture frame filled with 
mathematical symbols and to the right, in the background, was Gustavi-
anum, at the time the university building in Uppsala where Celsius was pro-
fessor. In the lap of mathematics lay a boy, one eye covered by a piece of 
cloth. Mathematics caringly removed the cloth from his eye; soon he would 
be able to join the other boys who by the feet of mathematics read a book 
(perhaps Celsius’ own Arithmetica). The symbolism was clear: mathematics 
was a caring mother, who raised boys from youthful blindness into percep-
tive manhood. In his preface, Celsius explicitly described this process: 
“Now that mathesis, as it were, has removed the inherent cover over the eyes 
of our reason, then one can see the truth more easily with uncovered 
eyes.”73 With the inherent cover removed, the boy would mature into a man 
with a penetrating gaze, and who could connect separated truths of the di-
vine order. 
A path to concord or confused indolence? 
In his Arithmetica Celsius proposed that, because mathematics was “arranged 
in such a solid order,” its diligent study produced a well-ordered mind in the 
student; it would “dampen” the inclination that “the young generally have 
for such things, which only touch and please their external senses”. And just 
as mathematics would make the student’s mind well ordered, mathematics 
also made him behave orderly towards his peers. If boys studied mathemat-
ics at a young age, “less controversy would arise among scholars; fewer sug-
gestions would be done against the truth, [and] one would hear fewer men 
who based their arguments on authority, without themselves considering 
whether it is true or false”. In the preface of the Arithmetica, and in many 
other similar prefaces from the time period, mathematics was not just imag-
ined to be related to making knowledge, but also to be a technique of con-
sent and a basis for a harmonious community of knowledge makers. By 
studying mathematics, a boy would thus learn to see the world in a new way. 
Such studies would discipline his reason and imagination, so that he would 
be governed neither by external appearances nor by his own youthful vanity 
or pursuit of glory. Also, he would learn to see connections between dispar-
ate truths, and accept true statements by others without entering into un-
necessary conflict. Ideally, mathematics was not only a way to see nature in 
a new light: it was also a way to relate differently to one’s fellow men. The 
student of mathematics would not only become reasonable or imaginative, 
                                                   
73 “När nu således Mathesis hade lika såsom borttagit det medfödda täckelset för wåra förstånds 
ögon, så kunde man sedan wara beqwämligare at med uptäkta ögon se sanningen”; Celsius: 
Arithmetica, unpaginated preface. 

 
 
63 
he would also acquire the virtue of concord.74 As discussed earlier, mathe-
matics and mechanics were Rydelius’ chief examples of exercises that fos-
tered a manly enlightened imagination, aligned with the rational theocratic 
order. He defined mathematical and mechanical creativity as requiring a 
certain kind of imaginative man, whose creativity was rational rather than 
emotional. By studying mathematics, a boy could learn to see past glory and 
private profit. Consequently, he could also become a pious subject, submit-
ted not only to his own reason, but also to his sovereign and ultimately to 
the divine Lord.75 
 
The Conversation between a man and a woman discussed mathematics as an 
exercise of concord in more detail. When the woman of the narrative admit-
ted that she was “afraid […] that my Son will become stubborn from [math-
ematical studies], and [that he] will want to do everything as he himself 
pleases when he thinks he has reasons for it”, the protagonist calmed her: 
“the more he reads Euclid,  the more he will understand to respect his rea-
sonable mother; and the more he will accept her rational views.”76 Mathe-
matics was an exercise of reason, and therefore also a means for a boy to 
discipline his own mind to submit to his reasonable superiors as well as to 
acquire authority to discipline others. By exercising his reason and his imag-
ination, a boy would become a man who acted in the interest of the state 
and for the glory of God. But not all mathematics was an exercise of dis-
cernment and concord. Even if a boy started his mathematical studies at the 
appropriate young age, he also needed to study mathematics correctly. 
While the dialogue presented mathematics as a technique for virtuous per-
formances, it also presented its negative side. The woman of the dialogue 
presented the two sides of mathematics: 
I wish to have you as arbiter between my husband and me. We are always 
arguing over our son’s tutor. I believe that he is a good-natured man, but 
                                                   
74 “en så grundelig ordning förestält”; “dämpas”; “de unga gemenligen hafwa til sådana saker, 
som allenast röra och beweka deras utwärtes sinnen”; “intet så många stridigheter ibland de Lärda 
skulle upkomma: intet så många ogrundade inkast giöras emot sanningen: intet höras så många 
beropa sig allenast på auctoritet, utan at tänka sielfwa efter, om det är sant eller osant”; ibid., pref-
ace. Compare to Mört’s argument discussed in the previous chapter, in Weidler and Mört (tran.): 
En klar och tydelig genstig, preface. Similar arguments for mathematics as an exercise of virtue can 
also be found in publications by Anders Gabriel Duhre. For a discussion of these, see Chapter 5. 
These arguments can also be found in the works of early modern philosophers, such as for ex-
ample René Descartes, Blaise Pascal and Gottfried Leibniz, that considered mathematics and 
natural philosophy to be “powerful tools for living a good and virtuous life”; Jones: The good life in 
the scientific revolution, 1–3, quote from page 1. Sverker Lundin has also discussed Celsius’s view of 
mathematics as an exercise of reason and virtue in Lundin: Skolans matematik, 155–7. 
75 More than twenty years later, in 1746, Eric Eklund referencing Rydelius echoed these views, 
and argued that tutors in mathematics should take note of boy with a strong imagination,” 
Eklund: Upfostrings-läran, 251. 
76 “rädder, sade Frun, at min Son blir härigenom envis, och vil giöra alt efer sit hufvud, när han 
tycker sig hafva raisoner dertil”; ”ju mera han läser Euclides, ju mera förstår han at vörda en så 
raisonable Mor; och ju mera skal han finna sig uti hennes förnuftiga förestälningar.”; Anony-
mous: Samtal emellan en herre och en fru, 14. 

 
 
64 
my husband says that he informs our child of a bunch of unnecessary 
things. As our son is meant to become a priest, he says, it is futile to tor-
ment him with triangles and circles and other fads and fancies, which [my 
husband] calls novelties [nyheter].77 
The protagonist first agreed: “Your husband is right that triangles and cir-
cles hardly will help your son eventually to deliver a sermon or to sing 
mass,” but he continued, “Geometry should be studied because it provides 
the habit of reasoning clearly.”78 The woman accepted this argument, but 
she explained that her husband was of the opposite opinion. He believed 
that: 
such figures and lines, if anything, make people confused, and [he] exem-
plifies this by a certain mathematicus, whom I also thought was somewhat 
strange. However, I do not believe that mathematics was the cause of this. 
Instead, [this man] had stayed too much indoors by himself, reflecting up-
on his figures, which had made him unaccustomed to the company of 
others.79 
 
The dialogue expressed two opposing opinions of mathematics as an 
educational practice. On the one hand, the protagonist gave voice to the 
belief that mathematics could raise a boy into a diligent man, aligned with a 
rational social and natural order. On the other hand, the husband argued 
that not only was mathematics of no use to most boys, it might even make 
them into confused men who failed to meet the demands of everyday life. 
What was at issue in these texts was the relationship between mathematics, 
the virtue of diligence and the epistemic virtues of theoria and praxis. As seen 
earlier, many authors presented mathematics using the metaphor of bodily 
exercise and they placed mathematics in the realm of praxis, as opposed to 
logic that was pure theoria; they all imagined mathematics as hard work, ra-
ther than a simple mind game. In a Lutheran state, where diligence was a 
manly virtue, this way of discussing mathematics may not be that surprising: 
to discuss mathematics in relation to praxis was yet another way to present it 
as useful work that would foster a virtuous man. The dialogue thus sought 
to convince the reader that mathematics encompassed theoria as well as prax-
is, and that it was an exercise not only of concord but also of diligence. 
                                                   
77 “Min Herre! sade hon, jag vil taga Er til Domare emellan mig och min man. Vi ha alltid en 
dispute om Præceptoren för vår gosse. Jag tycker, det är en beskedlig karl nog; men min Man 
säger, at han informerar vårt barn i en hop med onödiga saker. Efter vi ämnat vår son at bli prest, 
så säger han, at det är fåfängt, at plåga honom med trianglar och cirklar, samt annat griller-
väsende, som han kallar nyheter”; ibid., 3. 
78 “tycker Er man rätt nog, at trianglar och circlar litet hielpa Er son med tiden at giöra en predi-
kan och siunga en Mässa”; “men derföre bör Geometrien läsas, at man kan bli van at raisonera 
redigt”; ibid., 4. 
79 “sådana figurer och linier giöra folket snarare förvirrade, och drar til exempel en viss Mathe-
maticus, som jag tyckte ock var något underlig; men jag menar, at intet mathematiquen varit dertil 
orsaken, utan at han suttit för mycket inne i enslighet och speculerat på sina figurer; hvarutaf han 
blifvit ovan at umgås med annat folk.”; ibid. 

 
 
65 
 
For many authors, mathematics was dangerously close to the realm of 
theoria and to speculation far removed from everyday application.80 If un-
checked, a boy who only studied pure mathematics, and who studied the 
wrong kind of mathematics, would become anything but a mature manly 
subject. Rosén’s translation of Rohr warned that a reasonable and practical 
man should not “focus for too long on the numbers or the lines.” Instead, 
he should “acquire from mathematics only its accurate way of learning, 
which you can later can, and should, apply on other sciences [wetenskaper]”. 
One should not attempt to become too proficient in pure mathematics, as 
“a purus putus mathematicus is often unskilled in the functions of everyday 
life.”81 Similarly, Duhre gave voice to critics who questioned whether it was 
possible to combine serious mathematical studies with other exercises, be-
cause mathematicians are “unskilled in everything which does not comply 
with their theorems”, and because mathematics “is so extensive that anyone 
who wants to make considerable progress, will need a whole lifetime”.82 
 
In Aristotelian science, theoria was a set of certain systematic knowledge, 
in contrast to praxis that refused to be defined by a solid deductive system. 
But in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century discussions of theoria and praxis 
the role of the two grew more complex. By the seventeenth century, attacks 
on Aristotelian epistemology had overturned the relationships between the-
se terms. The new meaning of this dichotomy, established by the anti-
scholastic humanist rhetoric of the Renaissance, can be found in the educa-
tional reformer Petrus Ramus. For Ramus, education should focus on praxis 
and usus (that is, use) rather than theoria and doctrina (rules and precepts). 
Praxis was related to the natural world and by consequence productive.83 At 
the same time, theoria was a guarantor of stability: the rules and precepts of 
theological and philosophical systems were means of integrating the natural 
and social order. Thus, unsurprisingly, advocates of useful knowledge – 
knowledge that fostered productive and good subjects – generally imagined 
such knowledge to integrate these two epistemic virtues. For example,  
                                                   
80 This scepticism of pure mathematical theory was not new to the eighteenth century. Ingemars-
dotter has pointed out that Ramus was “sceptical of the utility of pure mathematical theory”; 
Jenny Ingemarsdotter: Ramism, rhetoric and reform. An intellectual biography of Johan Skytte (1577–1645) 
(Uppsala, 2011), 35. Similarly, Gaukroger has discussed how in the the sixteenth and early seven-
teenth centuries the usefulness of mathematics was a disputed question, Gaukroger: Francis Bacon 
and the transformation of early-modern philosophy, 20–7. 
81 “uppehåll tig icke alt förlänge med talen och linierne”; “utan lär ur Mathesi allenast deras accurata 
läre-sätt, som tu sedan i andre wetenskaper bör och kan applicera.”; Rohr: Inledning til klokheten at 
lefwa, 38. “en purus putus Mathematicus är ofta helt oskickelig til menniskliga lefwernets 
förrättningar.”; ibid. 
82 “oskicklighet til alla andra syslor, hwilka intet komma öfwerens med deras satser”; Anders 
Gabriel Duhre: Förklaring öfwer des tilförende uthgifne Wälmente tanckar angående huru han tillika med sin 
broder är sinnad at utan almenna bestas betungande uppå deras egit äfwentyr uprätta ett laboratorium mathemati-
co-oeconomicum (Stockholm, 1722), 10. “Dess utan är denna wetskap så widlyftig, at den som der uti 
wil komma något wida, behöfwer der til sin hela lifstid”; ibid., 11. 
83 Smith: The body of the artisan, 17–20; Ingemarsdotter: Ramism, rhetoric and reform, 32–3. 

 
 
66 
Rydelius considered theoria and praxis to be stages in a process of maturity: 
whereas a boy could learn useful knowledge from reading the theoretical 
principles found in books, a man should learn such knowledge from the 
everyday praxis of carrying out his office.84 
 
Lindqvist has pointed out that the aim of the mathematical and mechan-
ical practitioners of eighteenth-century Sweden was more complex than the 
“the common historical generalization […] that they tried to ‘unite theory 
and practice’.”85 However, the unification of theoria and praxis was a reoccur-
ring theme when mechanical practitioners presented their work to contem-
porary audiences in the German and Scandinavian states. In order to under-
stand the interrelated roles of these two concepts, we must be sensitive to 
the meanings that historical actors ascribed to them. To early modern ac-
tors, the reoccurring theme of bridging these categories carried an implicit 
promise of conjuring forth an orderly and pious state. Given the place of 
mechanics in early modern epistemologies, mechanical practitioners had a 
number of possibilities to argue that their art was suitable for the education 
of virtuous and useful subjects. As argued by Bennett, by the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, mechanics came to be characterised as a type of prac-
tical mathematics. Such practical mathematical knowledge (including, be-
sides mechanics, optics, fortification and navigation, for example) bound 
together pure mathematics (i.e., geometry and arithmetic) and crafts. A long 
European tradition defined such practical mathematics as involving both 
mind and hands: they were mediating sciences (scientiae media) that bridged 
knowledge of nature (physica) and mathematical knowledge. As a form of 
practical mathematics, mechanics designated on the one hand “manual” as 
well as “practical” activities, the design and construction of machines, and 
on the other a doctrine about the natural world; mechanica was both identi-
fied in the work of craftsmen and studied in universities as a part of natural 
philosophy and natural theology.86 
 
Because of the intermediary position of mechanics in early modern epis-
temology, mechanical practitioners could thus convincingly argue that me-
chanics was a conciliatory exercise that fostered concord in a boy and, at the 
same time, that it involved hard work that cultivated diligence. In short, they 
could argue that correctly taught mechanics fostered the full range of virtues 
of a good manly subject. In his Anleitung zu nützlichen Wissenschaften (1700) – 
a well-known introduction of useful sciences for boys and young men – the 
                                                   
84 Rydelius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar vol. 1, § 6. 
85 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 67. 
86 Bennett: “The mechanics’ philosophy and the mechanical philosophy”; Jim Bennett: “The 
mechanical arts”, in Katharine Park and Lorraine Daston (eds): The Cambridge history of science 
vol. 3: early modern science (Cambridge, 2008), 163; Ingemarsdotter: Ramism, rhetoric and reform, 
168. On the Aristotelian roots of the concepts of scientiae media, see Walter Roy Laird: “Robert 
Grosseteste on the subalternate sciences”; Traditio 43 (1987), 147; Jeremiah Hackett: “Roger 
Bacon on scientia experimentalis”, in Jeremiah Hackett (ed): Roger Bacon and the sciences. Commemo-
rative essays (Leiden, 1997), 286. 

 
 
67 
German mathematician Ehrenfried Walter von Tschirnhaus discussed this 
issue explicitly. Tschirnhaus rhetorically proposed praxis and theoria as two 
routes to learning useful practical mathematics, but argued that neither of 
these paths alone was sufficient. Only a via media, that “almost always joined 
praxis with theoria” would let young boys acquire useful knowledge from a 
young age.87 By presenting practical mathematics as a via media, Tschirnhaus 
not only performed a classificatory exercise, he also claimed a social space 
for mechanics. His classifications served a didactic end: they were means of 
marking out the route to a certain form of useful manhood.88 When early 
moderns imagined a mechanicus, they saw him as treading this via media, 
leading to the life of a useful and pious man. In this vein, Polhem in 1740 
argued that three parts “belong to a competent mechanicus, namely: first, a 
natural ability to invent something new; second, an aptitude and inclination 
for theory; and third, a practical handiness”.89 
 
Wrongly approached, however, mathematics would neither be a path to 
concord nor diligence. Instead, it would be an exercise of vice and confu-
sion. Duhre presented some examples of such dishonest mathematicians: 
Consider how lewd fellows are recognised as great algebraists by many peo-
ple, because they have calculated some examples, which they have collected 
from strange arithmetic books, in order to amuse the guests of inns and 
taverns and thus to earn something with which to buy a stoup of beer.90 
 
Duhre considered it just as problematic to practise mathematics in the 
wrong crowd: “Many lewd comrades are greeted as great geometricians, be-
cause they have taught simple journeymen how to add some geometric 
tricks to their work.”91 These were all examples of how, wrongfully execut-
                                                   
87 “da fast immer praxis mit der Theoria conjungiret wird,”; Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhausen: 
Gründliche Anleitung zu nützlichen Wissenschafften absonderlich zu der Mathesi und Physica. Wie sie anitzo 
von den Gelehrtesten abgehandelt werden (Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1700), 15. Tschirnhaus was Rydelius’ 
recommended reading for Swedish students, and he pointed out that his little book was available 
and easy to buy for a Swedish student. Andreas Rydelius: Nödige förnufftz öfningar vol. 3 (Linkö-
ping, 1719), 11. For a general discussion of Tschirnhaus’ pedagogical method, see C. A. Van 
Peursen: “E. W. von Tschirnhaus and the ars inveniendi”, Journal of the history of ideas 54:3 (1993), 
esp. 398. 
88 Alan Gabbey: “Between ars and philosophia naturalis. Reflections on the historiography of 
early modern mechanics”, in J. V. Field and Frank A. J. L. James (eds): Renaissance and revolution. 
Humanists, scholars, craftsmen, and natural philosophers in early modern Europe (Cambridge, 1993), 137. 
Stephen Gaukroger has pointed out how such classifications were often made to a didactical end, 
Gaukroger: Francis Bacon and the transformation of early-modern philosophy, 18. 
89 “höra en god Mechanicus til, nemligen I:o En gåfwa af naturen at kunna finna på något nytt. II:o 
Hug och lust til theorien och III:o Et snält handalag i practiquen”; Polhem: “Tankar om mekani-
ken”, 193. 
90 “för ögonen ställa, huruledes liderliga foglar af många warda ansedda för stora Algebrister, 
derföre at de uträknat några exempel, som de tagit utur konstiga räken böcker, på det de der med 
på kiälrar och krogar skulle kunna roa giästerna, och således förtiena något at kiöpa sig et stop öhl 
före.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 11. 
91 “warda sådana liderliga sällar af mången helsade för stora Geometræ, derföre de hafwa under-
wisat enfaldiga handtwärcks gesäller, huru de böra lempa några gemoteriska [sic] handgrep til sina 
syslor”; ibid. 

 
 
68 
ed, mathematical studies would fail to teach a boy manly virtues. They also 
show that mathematics was not necessarily seen as useful knowledge and 
that the role of the mathematical practitioner was morally ambiguous. As 
pointed out by Katherine Hill, in the seventeenth century the role of the 
mathematical practitioner was under negotiation. Was mathematical authori-
ty defined by knowledge of arithmetic and geometry, or by the use of in-
struments and the practical mathematical arts?92 In the prefaces, there was a 
similar negotiation: was mathematics a diligent exercise of consent and dis-
cernment, or was it just a means of theoretical confusion and false promis-
es? In eighteenth-century mathematical works, a bad mathematical practi-
tioner was identified primarily through two traits. First, he practised math-
ematics for personal gain and not to reconcile opposing positions and serve 
the publicum. Second, he used mathematics as a collection of useless tricks 
and examples in order to avoid real work. That is, he failed to encompass 
the virtues of concord and diligence. 
 
For a boy to become a useful subject from mathematical practice, he 
should instead perform it in line with these manly virtues. The boundary 
between good and bad mathematics was drawn between techniques that 
contemporary audiences perceived as useful and useless. But to identify this 
boundary was harder than one would guess, and actors drew it differently. 
Also, even seemingly useless forms of mathematics might be diamonds in 
the rough. The woman of the anonymous dialogue stated that she had 
“heard how geometric people ponder things, that never provide any utili-
ty.”93 The protagonist replied: 
That may be true, my lady, […] but that hurts no one. Let some people 
use their brain to find one truth after another in all sorts of figures. There 
might come a time, when all these ponderings become very useful. Our 
great mechanicus Polhem has in our time shown the application of a 
bunch of curved lines to bridges and machines among other things.94  
 
Convinced by this argument, the woman answered that one could may-
be liken “these truths, that are still fruitless, to some of our beautiful flowers 
[…]; perhaps some Doctor Linnaeus may come along and show what they 
are good for.”95 In this dialogue, this kind of mathematics – whose curved 
lines were made useful just as beautiful flowers were put to use by an œco-
nomically minded natural historian – carried meanings other than pure 
                                                   
92 Katherine Hill: “‘Juglers or schollers?’. Negotiating the role of a mathematical practitioner”, 
The British journal for the history of science 31:03 (1998), 253–74. 
93 “Jag har dock hördt, sade Frun, at det här Geometriska folket grubla på saker, som de aldrig 
veta nogon nytta af.”; Anonymous: Samtal emellan en herre och en fru, 9. 
94 “Nog är det vist, min Fru! svarade jag; men det skadar intet. Låt man nogon bry sin hierna 
dermed, at utleta den ena sanningen efter den andra uti allehanda figurer. Det kan väl komma en 
tid, då dessa griller blifva mycket nyttiga. Vår stora Mechanicus POLHEM har i vår tid nog vist 
prof af en hop med krokuga liners application til broar och konstbygnader, med mera.”; ibid. 
95 “dessa ännu fruktlösa sanningar vid en del af våra skiöna blommor, […] det kommer väl nogon 
Doct. LINÆUS, som visar, hvad de duga til.”; ibid., 9–10. 

 
 
69 
mathematical speculation. Similarly to the works by Duhre and Rosén, it 
thus expressed an anxiety over the socio-epistemic status of mathematics. 
To pick up an analogy from the dialogue, virtuous mathematics was like 
dancing in several senses. Not only did it require diligent exercise, but the 
performance of mathematics also demanded that practitioners constantly 
mind their steps. Only when performed in the rhythm of the theocratic 
order would mathematics excel. On the one hand, mathematics was an ex-
ercise of reason and concord. On the other hand, it was a treacherous land-
scape where a boy could get lost among useless curves. Only boys who 
joined the virtues of concord, diligence, theoria and praxis in their perfor-
mance of mathematics would enter useful and virtuous manhood. Authors, 
such as Celsius and Brandt, argued that such performances were possible 
because the pure mathematical arts of geometry and arithmetic were more 
akin to bodily exercise than a rote following of rules. Others maintained that 
boys who combined the study of geometry and arithmetic with everyday 
work followed a safer route to manhood. One such safer path was the via 
media of the mechanicus. When older men imagined how a boy was to be-
come a mechanicus by following this route, they envisioned this exercise to 
consist of the integrated exercise of mathematics and crafts. 
Crafts and the manliness of hard work 
Pure mathematics always risked being morally suspicious, due to its conno-
tations of speculation. Therefore, the narratives of experienced mechanical 
practitioners imagined mechanics to embody mathematics in an able body 
fostered by the exercise of crafts. But similar to how mathematical educa-
tion was a complicated and morally ambiguous dance, the integration of 
crafts and mathematics was not a completely straightforward business. Be-
cause crafts were primarily associated with craftsmen, mechanical practi-
tioners’ reflections on crafts were ripe with anxieties of being misidentified. 
Interestingly, their concerns were similarly related to the ambiguous nature 
of mathematics, discussed earlier. How could mechanically inclined boys 
learn crafts without becoming entangled in subordinate relationships with 
craftsmen, and without being led on to a life other than that of the 
mechanicus? As in the case of mathematics, these concerns revolved around 
the role of the virtues of diligence, concord, theoria and praxis in the exercise 
of crafts. 
 
In early modern Scandinavia, crafts were often categorised as slögd. The 
word stemmed from the ancient Swedish word slöghð that meant slyness, 
cunning or artfulness. In eighteenth-century Swedish, the word developed 
into – on the one hand – slug, keeping these connotations of cunning, and – 
on the other hand – slögd, which mainly denoted arts and handicrafts as well 

 
 
70 
as industry.96 The way slögd and slug were etymologically linked thus trans-
lates well into the English “crafts” and “crafty”, respectively. Crafts was not 
a homogeneous concept. It consisted of diverse identificatory practices of 
knowledge and material production with different class and gender connota-
tions.97 
 
Fletcher has pointed out that in early modern England, men were con-
cerned with “whether their boys would acquire the secure manhood” de-
manded of a mature man, and boys’ physical bodies were considered to be 
“vulnerable to the pressures of a blurred gender system.” By engaging in 
unsuitable activities, boys could become effeminate, a term referring to 
“unmanly weakness, softness, delicacy and self-indulgence.”98 Similar con-
cerns can be seen in the Lutheran culture of eighteenth-century Sweden, 
where hard work was central to the performance of manhood and the ac-
quisition of a manly body.99 In his Characters. Or portraits of persons from 1754, 
Abraham Sahlstedt spelled out this ideology of work in full. He explained 
that because “men commonly possess greater strength than women”, a man 
who “shies away from work, who does not stand any toil or discomfort, and 
who attends to the attractiveness of his body, is called effeminate [qwinlig]” 
and could also be called a “weakling.” Sahlstedt pointed out that “he who by 
nature has a weak body and delicate limbs is excused, if he cannot bear hard 
work.” Such a man could not be called “effeminate,” because “he adjusts his 
behaviour and his work to what his nature endures and what is respectable 
for his sex.” But for those who “possess manly strength,” weakness came 
from bad upbringing. According to Sahlstedt, effeminate men were “the 
most unfit members of a society.”100 To carry out hard bodily work accord-
ing to one’s ability was essential for a man who wished to participate as a 
useful and fit member of the state. 
                                                   
96 “Slöjd”, SAOB <http://g3.spraakdata.gu.se/saob/> [accessed 4 April 2015]. 
97 Albert Wiberg discussed these sets of techniques as “manlig slöjd” and “kvinnoslöjd”, Albert 
Wiberg: Till skolslöjdens förhistoria. Några utvecklingslinjer i svensk arbetspedagogik intill 1877. Tiden intill 
1861 vol. 1 (Stockholm, 1939), 7. 
98 Fletcher: Gender, sex and subordination in England 1500–1800, 87. Steven Shapin has argued that 
there existed notions of “manly nobility of manual work” among the men in the Royal Society of 
early modern England. As pointed out by Shapin, Robert Boyle presented “physical labor as a 
Protestant antidote to dangerous idleness”; Shapin: A social history of truth, 190. 
99 As shown by Kekke Stadin, in the sermons of the clergy state diligence was the most common-
ly mentioned virtue in relation to men, Stadin: “Att vara god eller att göra sin plikt?”, 230. Also, 
Andreas Marklund has identified ”industriousness” as a ”fundamental component” in the peasant 
masculinity in eighteenth-century Sweden, Andreas Marklund: In the shadows of his house. Masculinity 
& marriage in Sweden, c. 1760 to the 1830s (Florence, 2002), 135. 
100 “i allmänhet at tala, det männer äga störe styrka, än qwinnor”; Theofrastos and Abraham 
Magni Sahlstedt: Caracterer, eller Sede-bilder af människor (Stockholm, 1754), 85. “en man, som un-
dandrager sig arbete: som icke tål wid någon möda eller obeqwämlighet, och är sorgfällig om sin 
kropps behaglighet, blifwer kallad qwinlig”; “en Wekling.”; “Den som af naturen fått en swag 
kropp och späda lemmar, är at ursäkta, om han ej kan uthärda något drygt arbete.”; “qwinlig,”; 
“han tillika lämpar sit upförande och sina göromål efter hwad dess natur kan tåla, och dess kön 
anstår.”; “äger manlig styrka,”; “de odugligaste människor i et Samhälle.”; ibid., 85–7. 

 
 
71 
 
Crafts were considered educational for children of both the noble and 
the poor, and for women as well as for men. Still, these groups should not 
engage with crafts in the same way. Different persons – of separate strata of 
society, or of different gender – should work differently. The question was 
not whether or not a person should perform bodily work, but what exercises 
were fit for him or her. Manual work was an expression of the earlier dis-
cussed virtues of a good subject. Consequently, to craft objects was to form 
oneself in relation to one’s contemporaries. By the manner in which they 
engaged with manual work, the subjects in eighteenth-century Sweden ex-
pressed their social belonging: as poor or rich; childish or mature; manly, 
feminine or effeminate. In the earlier quotes from Sahlstedt, we see how 
hard work was linked to manliness. For boys, hard work was a manly per-
formance of diligence that would eventually distinguish them from women 
and effeminate men. 
An exercise of diligence 
The commemorative speeches of the Royal Academy of Sciences repeatedly 
discussed crafts and bodily exercise. There, bodily exercise was not only 
seen as a way to strengthen the body: it was also expressed as a means to 
make the mind diligent. Carl Fredrik Mennander described how Gabriel 
Lauræus, later Professor of Theology at Åbo, practised mechanical arts as a 
boy. At a young age, he had “with pleasure attentively visited the work-
shops. There, he sharpened his reason, and at home he imitated the tech-
niques that he had seen being used.” Soon, Mennander continued, “he was 
an artisan in more than one [art]; not a common one but one who could 
improve the arts through ingenious and useful inventions.”101 In another 
commemorative speech at the Swedish Academy of Sciences, in 1768, 
Strömer related a story of how Samuel Enander and Samuel Klingenstierna, 
when children, used “to carry bricks in a wheelbarrow: that they eventually 
increased the load, and finally became so accomplished, that the roughest 
farmhand could not nudge the barrow, which they easily pulled.” This activ-
ity was not only taken as a tale of how Klingenstierna  attained a manly 
strength at a young age, but also as “an evidence of endurance.” Like 
Lauræus, Strömer imagined how such exercises that “strengthened the 
body” did not only “contribute to good health”: they could “also improve 
                                                   
101 “besökte verkstäderna med nöje och upmärksamhet. Han skärpte der sit förstånd, och efter-
apade hemma de handalag han sett brukas.”; “Innan kårt var han i flera än en konst mästare, icke 
någon vanlig, utan sådan, som kunde förbättra konsterna genom sinrika och nyttiga upfinnelser.”; 
Carl Fredrik Mennander: Åminnelse-tal öfver theol. doct. dom-probsten och theol. professor primarius vid 
kongl. academien i Åbo, herr Gabriel Lauræus, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens vägnar, hållit den 19 december 
1755 (Stockholm, 1756), 11. 

 
 
72 
the rational powers, which always suffer when the body becomes soft and 
weak through indolence and sedentariness”.102 
 
As pointed out earlier, in the coming-of-age narratives of mechanics, 
bodily exercises in general and crafts in particular were instrumental in mak-
ing a boy into a mechanicus. For Polhem,  crafts with masculine connota-
tions, such as “carpentry, turning, [and] crafting”, were better bodily exer-
cises for a boy than games such as “playing, hitting balls, [and] throwing 
bowls”. Although games could improve the circulation of the blood, they 
had no further utility. Crafts, on the other hand, were bodily exercises that 
exercised the body while also fostering a useful subject.103 The exercise of 
crafts not only established a good working relationship between mind and 
body, but also aligned a boy with the political order. Similar to how the au-
thors in the previous section considered mathematics to be useful, because 
it was a means of making a virtuous practitioner, Polhem thus considered 
crafts to foster a boy into a pious and useful man. In a boy’s exercise of 
crafts, the regime of the individual body harmonised with the demands of 
political order.104 
 
Interestingly, when mechanical and mathematical practitioners argued 
for the usefulness of crafts, they gave them connotations similar to those 
given to pure mathematics by, for example, Brandt and Celsius:  they were 
diligent exercises that improved the practitioner. As such, they formed the 
mind and body of a boy to correspond to the ideals of useful manhood. 
Still, crafts were not necessarily a virtuous exercise: like mathematics, they 
also had connotations of rote repetition and uselessness. If a boy were to 
learn how to perform crafts like a useful man, these older men imagined, he 
needed to distinguish himself from the common craftsmen. 
How to learn crafts without becoming a craftsman 
Men were not a homogeneous group, and men as a whole were hardly sup-
posed to engage with hard work in the same way. In works on mathematical 
and mechanical didactics, negotiations on how a mechanically apt boy 
                                                   
102 “föra tegelstenar uti en Skott-kärra: at de småningom ökat lasten, samt sluteligen kommit så 
vida, at den grofvaste bonde-dräng ej kunde få den lastade kärran af stället, som de med lätthet 
drogo.”; “Et prof af ståndaktighet”; “som stärkte kroppen”; “bidrager til en god hälsa”; “utan 
äfven hjälper förstånds-krafterna, som altid lida, när kroppen genom maklighet och stilla sittande 
blifver veklig och svag.”; Mårten Strömer: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. maj:ts troman, stats-secreteraren … 
Samuel Klingenstjerna, på k. vetensk. academiens vägnar hållit, den 27 jul. 1768 (Stockholm, 1768), 6. 
103 “snicka [sic], swarfwa, slögda”; “spela, slå boll, kasta klot”; Polhem: “Tankar om mekaniken”, 
195. 
104 Andrew Warwick has pointed how, over the first half of the nineteenth century, students of 
”mixed mathematics” started to integrate bodily exercices such as taking walks into their daily 
routine as a technique to cope with a high academic work load, see Warwick: “Exercising the 
student body”; Andrew Warwick: Masters of theory. Cambridge and the rise of mathematical physics (Chi-
cago, 2003), 191–200. It seems as if bodily exercise, in the form of crafts, held similar connota-
tions of diligence and order among Swedish early eighteenth-century pratical mathematicians. 

 
 
73 
should relate to bodily work – and especially crafts – were a reoccurring 
theme. In his textbook on arithmetic, Brandt pointed out how many viewed 
mechanics “as merely an art of craftsmen”.105 To engage with crafts risked 
reinforcing these views and such exercises also risked making a boy a 
craftsman. But, as pointed out by Duhre, young students of mechanics and 
mathematics should “not learn crafts to become craftsmen”.106 With this 
seemingly paradoxical statement, Duhre more or less summarised the role 
of crafts in the education of a mechanically apt boy. According to these 
authors, the mechanicus was related, but still distinct, from mere craftsmen. 
 
When learning crafts, boys who aimed to become mechanici were not 
expected to only practise them alone but also to visit workshops of crafts-
men in order to learn the more difficult techniques. Such techniques could 
be “planing [or] attaching parts by a right angle using a ruler or a set 
square,” techniques that could only be acquired by interacting with crafts-
men in their own environment. In the craftsman’s workshop, young stu-
dents of mechanics could learn how to use these “theoretical instruments” 
of the craftsmen, whose uses were difficult to figure out on one’s own.107 
But to learn crafts in craftsmen’s workshops was not a straightforward af-
fair. In order to learn a craft from a master craftsman, a boy commonly 
needed to become his apprentice and thus enter into a position subordinat-
ed to him. To enter into such a relationship with a craftsman required of a 
young boy a dedication to make himself in the craftsman’s image. There-
fore, authors such as Polhem and Duhre imagined that it would be impossi-
ble to study crafts in order to become something other than a craftsman.108 
While they expected a mechanicus to be superior to a craftsman, they con-
sidered it impossible to foster and maintain such a superior role in spaces 
controlled by master craftsmen. To Polhem,  such a relationship would be 
unacceptable for craftsmen and mechanically apt boys alike: 
No carpenter or master builder, who has been trained by craftsmen, can 
stand to have any disciples subordinated to him other than those similar to 
how he himself once was. Such apprentices [of craftsmen] are not always 
                                                   
105 “för en blott handtwärkare konst”; Brandt: Mathesin universalem, preface. 
106 “icke böra lära handtwärcken til den endan, at de skola blifwa handtwärckare”; Anders Gabriel 
Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, angående huru han tillika med min broder är sinnad, at utan almenna bestas 
betungande, uppå wårt egit äfwentyr uprätta et laboratorium mathematico-oeconomicum (Stockholm, 1722), 5. 
107 “hyfla och foga rät efter linial och winkel,”; “theoretiska instrumenter”; Polhem: “Tankar om 
mekaniken”, 195. See also Albert Wiberg: Christopher Polhem som slöjdpedagog (Gothenburg, 1938). 
108 The dilemma of mechanici of whether or not to enter such crafts spaces, can be seen as simi-
lar to how Andrian Johns describe how “the gentleman who entered the world of the Stationers 
was reducing himself to just one participant in a collective of crafts operatives”, and how “be-
coming an author meant losing one’s self”; Adrian Johns: “The ambivalence of authorship in 
early modern natural philosophy”, in Mario Biagioli and Peter Galison (eds): Scientific authorship. 
Credit and intellectual property in science (New York, 2003), 79. In Polhem’s case of young mechanical 
practitioners, however, what was at stake was not so much that they had a self to lose, as the fact 
that integration into a collective of craftsmen would set them on a way of life than would make 
them something else than a mechanicus. 

 
 
74 
of the quickest kind […], whereas [mechanics] requires the quickest stu-
dents there is.109 
 
A mechanically apt boy should paradoxically keep a distance from 
craftsmen while engaging with their techniques. Such a boy needed to avoid 
entering into a subordinate relationship with a master craftsman and there-
fore he should also avoid practising certain crafts. While the hard work of 
craftsmen was manly, Polhem also considered it to be signifying of a lack or 
reason: 
The method that craftsmen use to teach the young is suitable only for 
thick-headed idiots, who want to be treated like slaves until a lengthy 
training rather than reason has made them skilled in making a thing similar 
to others, without further thought of improvement.110 
 
Although a boy should be exposed to such hard work, it was to be gov-
erned by reason if it were to shape him into truly useful manhood. As dis-
cussed earlier, mathematics was one way of gaining such a power of reason. 
In a treatise on watermills, Elvius imagined that his mathematical method 
set him apart from craftsmen; mathematics allowed him to discern the 
unique designs that were needed in a certain context, and to invent the exact 
construction needed in a specific situation.111 Similarly, for Polhem, although 
“a craftsman and a Mechanicus do similar work; it is nevertheless made with a 
noticeable difference in time, quality and cost”. Because of his mathemati-
cally trained reason, a mechanicus was a captain of craftsmen: “Similar to 
how a crowd of Soldiers can accomplish little with their manliness without a 
sensible captain, the whole lot of craftsmen cannot make anything extraor-
dinary without a good mechanicus.”112 In the words of Duhre, it was: 
“through the application of mathematics to the acquired skill that the light of 
day [could] be brought forth, to the incredible utility of human kind.”113 
                                                   
109 “ingen hantvärkare eller byggmästare som lärt på hantvärkarevijs, tåhl andra läriungar under 
sig än han sielf varit och sådana icke altijd ähro af det quikaste slaget […] der likväll dena 
vettskapen fodrar dee aldra quikaste subjecta som fins”; Christopher Polhem: “Berättelse om 
Fahlu grufvas tillstånd”, in Henrik Sandblad (ed): Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 1, 39–40. 
110 “Den method som hantvärkrar bruka att lära ungdommen, tiänar allenast för tiocka dum-
hufvun som vill på trähldoms vijs vara hantterade till dess en långlig öfning mehr än förståndet 
giort dem skickeliga att förrätta en ting lijka, utan vijdare efftertanka till förbättring.”; Christopher 
Polhem: “Mechanica practica eller fundamental byggarekonst”, in Sandblad (ed): Christopher 
Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 1, 83. 
111 Pehr Elvius: Mathematisk tractat, om effecter af vatn-drifter, efter brukliga vatn-värks art och lag (Stock-
holm, 1742), 109. Compare to how in early modern England, mathematical practitioner defined 
himself in relation to craftsmen, as discussed by Stephen Johnston: “Mathematical practitioners 
and instruments in Elizabethan England”, Annals of science 48:4 (1991), 325. 
112 “en Handtwärkare och Mechanicus hafwa lika syslor; men det sker likwist med en så märkelig 
skilnad i tid, godhet och omkostning”; “Likasom en hop med Soldater kan föga ting med sin 
manlighet åstadkomma, utan en förståndig höfwitsman, så kan ock hela hantvärkshopen icke idka 
något synnerligit, utan en god mechanicus”; Polhem: “Tankar om mekaniken”, 193. 
113 “igenom Mathematiquens Application bifogad til förfarenheten kunna dagsliuset framdragas til 
menniskliga slächtets ännu otroliga gangn.”; ibid., 13–14. 

 
 
75 
 
Also, in order to distinguish himself from mere craftsmen, a mechanical-
ly apt boy should shun heavy crafts, to which reason was difficult to apply, 
such as “woodcutting and other crude woodworks”, and instead master 
finer carpentry techniques needed to build models. Interestingly, although 
hard work was a key part of the performance of manhood, in order to be-
come the superior of craftsmen the mechanicus should not work too hard. 
Making such a discriminatory choice, between heavier and finer techniques, 
would be impossible for an apprentice, argued Polhem. Therefore, the edu-
cation given by the guilds was not viable for a young man wishing to learn 
mechanics.114 In one of his autobiographical manuscripts, Polhem imagined 
how he himself had been marked by a complicated relationship to hard 
work. He reminisced that in 1688, when he was 27 years old, he had proved 
himself a mechanicus by repairing the astronomical clock of the Uppsala 
cathedral, a mechanical machine placed in the symbolic centre of the Swe-
dish Lutheran theocratic order. When performing this work, “nothing was 
more annoying, than the fact that I received little help with the heavy work 
in the church”. Instead, he had carried “all heavy pieces and rods” himself. 
When seeing his heavy work, the students in Uppsala had identified him, 
not as one of their peers but as “the Professor’s blacksmith”. Their opin-
ions, Polhem argued, had even forced him to change lodgings, to a location 
further from the university.115 In his autobiography, this narrative of hard 
work became not only a way for Polhem to reflect on the anxiety-ridden 
performances required of a mechanicus, but also a way to present himself as 
different from both craftsmen and the other students of the university. 
 
And so the texts discussing the education of a young mechanicus went 
back and forth. On the one hand, the boy mechanicus needed to engage in 
the practices of craftsmen and to enter their workshops; on the other hand, 
he should keep his distance from the spaces of craftsmen, and the rote work 
and hierarchical relationships of the guilds. In a study of the French Ency-
clopédie, William Sewell has made an observation of the authors’ relationship 
to crafts, which he described as “double-edged.” On the one hand, the en-
cyclopaedists wished to show how “mechanical arts” were “complex and 
subtle achievements of human intelligence”. On the other hand, they “be-
lieved that the mechanical arts as currently practiced – and the artisans who 
practiced them – were in need of considerable improvement.” For the  
                                                   
114 “hugga med bijhla och anat grofft timermansarbete”; Christopher Polhem: “Falu grufvas 
tillstånd”, 39–40, quote from 40. This role of the mechanicus can be seen as a close parallell to 
the developing identity of the chemist in the mid-eighteenth century. See Hjalmar Fors: “J. G. 
Wallerius and the laboratory of enlightenment”, in Hjalmar Fors, Enrico Baraldi, and Anders 
Houltz (eds): Taking place. The spatial contexts of science, technology and business (Sagamore Beach MA, 
2006), 20. 
115 “var ingen ting förtreteligare än det att iag vijd det grofva arbetet i kiörkan fick ringa hielp 
utan moste sielf bära alla grofva stycken och stenger”; “Professorens Smed”; Christopher 
Polhem: “Lefvernesbeskrifning”, Bengt Löw (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 4 
(Uppsala, 1954 [1733]), 392. 

 
 
76 
encyclopaedists, craftsmen were more akin to the product of mechanics – 
that is, machines or automata – than to creative innovators in their own 
right.116 Mechanical practitioners such as Duhre and Polhem had a similar 
relationship to craftsmen. On the one hand, they considered them to pos-
sess valuable knowledge that was the core of mechanical practice: 
knowledge that was indispensible for mechanically inclined boys. On the 
other hand, the craftsmen were radically different from the mechanicus and 
their teaching methods were unsuitable for mechanically apt boys. 
 
This hierarchy between craftsmen and the mechanicus created an educa-
tional problem: how could a young future mechanicus learn the same skills 
as craftsmen without becoming identified by his contemporaries as a 
craftsman himself? Polhem considered solitary practice combined with the 
reading of books written by older mechanici and mathematici to be a possi-
ble alternative to an apprenticeship within the guilds: “for quick ingenia – for 
whom slavery does not become – beautiful books and descriptions are more 
suitable”.117 Duhre agreed with Polhem that experienced mechanical practi-
tioners needed a way to communicate knowledge of mathematics and crafts 
to young boys in ways that guided them into useful manhood. His solution 
was a mathematical–œconomical educational institution, where young men 
would practise crafts integrated with mathematics. There, in a space ulti-
mately controlled by Duhre, craftsmen would hand down their techniques 
to mechanically apt boys. In the workshops of this school, a site where 
mathematical education and practice of crafts were combined, the risk of 
becoming identified as a craftsman by learning crafts would be eliminated 
because it would be separated from the guild system and because the 
craftsmen would be subjugated to Duhre, an experienced mechanical practi-
tioner.118 For writers on mechanical education, to maintain a distance from 
the world of craftsmen was a means of establishing an order where their 
work was superior to mere manual labour. 
                                                   
116 William H. Sewell: “Visions of labor. Illustrations of the mehcanical arts before, in, and after 
Diderot’s Encyclopedie”, in Steven L. Kaplan and Cynthia J. Koepp (eds): Work in France. Repre-
sentations, meaning, organization, and practice (Ithaca, 1986), 275. On this double-speak of the ency-
clopaedists, see also Cynthia J. Koepp: “The alphabetical order. Work in Diderot’s Ency-
clopédie”, in Kaplan and Koepp (eds): Work in France, 243; Lorraine Daston: “Enlightenment 
calculations”, Critical inquiry 21:1 (1994), 194. The reciprocal allegories between artisans and 
automata are also discussed in Schaffer: “Enlightened Automata”. 
117 “för quicka ingenia som mindre ähro bequema till trähldom, tiänar bättre vackra böcker och 
beskrivningar”; Polhem: “Mechanica practica”, 83. 
118 Duhre’s school is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5. 

 
 
77 
Conclusions. The expected transgressions of useful 
manhood 
In this chapter, we have found numerous narratives of the coming-of-age of 
a boy through exercises of mathematics and crafts. Given the mere number 
of reflections on the raising of mechanically apt boys, we can draw the con-
clusion that the man formed through these exercises hardly was an agent of 
change, acting unexpectedly in relation to his contemporaries. Instead, when 
older men imagined the coming of age of a mechanicus, they imagined a 
man defined by expected useful transgressions, continuously repeated and handed 
down from generation to generation. In these educational narratives, the 
exercises of mathematics and crafts complemented and improved one an-
other. On the one hand, mathematics would nurture the boy’s reason and 
imagination, so that he would not be stuck in the repetitive ways of crafts-
men. On the other hand, the techniques of craftsmen would prevent a boy 
from getting lost and confused in a mathematical landscape of ideal curves 
and figures. The pure mathematician and the craftsman were imagined to be 
opposed extremes. They were, however, also seen as surprisingly similar. 
Exercised correctly, mathematics and crafts fostered a diligent man who 
contributed to the theocratic order; exercised incorrectly, they produced a 
confused man who would not meet the expectations of a manly subject. 
The useful life of a mechanicus was expected to be a via media between these 
extremes, which encompassed the expected virtues of a manly subject of the 
early modern Swedish state. In other words, it was imagined as a path from 
boyhood to manhood marked out in between a number of other personas. 
 
The mechanicus was thus imagined to be both similar and different 
from craftsmen and pure mathematicians. He was expected to overcome 
each of their weaknesses, and to be useful to his state by mediating between 
their epistemologies and communities as well as by uniting reason and hard 
work. Sibum has shown how practitioners of physica experimentalis of the 
mid-eighteenth century inhabited a similar intermediary role. At this time, 
they were “seen as the ideal candidate to bridge theory and practice: the third 
man.” To be recognised as inhabiting this position both enabled and disa-
bled actors to perform in certain ways in relation to contemporary audienc-
es.119 As pointed out by Michel de Certeau, this third man “haunted enlight-
ened discourse […] and continues to do so today”. However, the role of the 
modern engineer or “technocrat” is not identical to the role imagined by 
eighteenth-century writers. de Certeau sees these modern categories as an 
effect of a nineteenth-century process that “on the one hand isolated artistic 
techniques from art itself and on the other ‘geometrized’ and mathematized 
                                                   
119 H. Otto Sibum: “Experimentalists in the Republic of Letters”, Science in Context 16:1–2 (2003), 
92. 

 
 
78 
these techniques.”120 In the narratives studied here, the relationship between 
mathematics and crafts is a more complicated matter. Although the process 
described by de Certeau might have been a result of the actions of mechani-
cal practitioners, to see mechanics as a conscious act of mathematising 
crafts would be to confuse what is the historical cause here, and what is the 
effect. Although the mechanicus, as a third man, was presented as residing 
in between more established socio-epistemic categories, he was at the same 
time expected to transcend such categories. When mechanical practitioners 
presented the mechanicus as a third man, they thus expected him to be re-
cognised as an ideal man. 
 
These narratives of a via media should therefore not be seen a neutral 
descriptions of who early modern mechanical practitioners were. Instead, 
they should be analysed as performances in relation to the expectations of 
certain audiences. The fact that these texts presented the mechanicus as a 
mediator should not be taken to imply that mechanical practitioners could 
move effortlessly between the world of craftsmen and mathematicians. 
They might have been able to, in certain cases, but that is not what is at 
stake here.121 What we can take from these narratives was that mechanics, as 
the combination of pure mathematics and crafts, was imagined by early 
moderns to reside in between a number of socio-epistemic categories. The 
coming-of-age narratives of the mechanically apt boy were stories of the 
making of men who contended perceived boundaries of scholars and 
craftsmen, in order to uphold the order in an early modern state. In other 
words: the mechanicus upheld and perfected the theocratic order by trans-
gressing socio-epistemic categories recognised, by relevant audiences, as 
detrimental to it. 
 
In early modern Sweden, permeated by patriarchal relationships, epis-
temic concepts such as theoria and praxis were part of an interconnected 
group of virtues, expected of a manly subject, which also included diligence 
and concord. When early modern authors imagined mechanics to be a path 
to manhood, it meant that they saw it as a means to acquire these virtues. In 
their narratives, older experienced mechanical practitioners imagined them-
selves to be motors driving a process of maturity that turned a boy into a 
mechanicus. Embracing this role in their publications, authors presented 
themselves as virtuous men and role models for potential students. They 
imagined themselves helping the public by recognising in a boy the seed of a 
man who was not yet there, and by making this boy in their own image. In 
their narratives, these authors claimed authority over boys’ minds and bod-
ies while they, at the same time, submitted and offered their services to the 
early modern state. These publications can thus themselves be seen as per-
                                                   
120 de Certeau: The practice of everyday life, 69. 
121 For a number of studies have pointed out the trangressive characteristics of mechanics and 
engineers. See page 20, note 23. 

 
 
79 
formances, or as the enactment of a range of tactics available to mathemati-
cal and mechanical practitioners, by which they, in relation to important 
audiences in the Swedish state, could make themselves into useful men. 
 
In the coming chapters, we will repeatedly see how mechanical practi-
tioners used similar tactics in order to shape themselves in relation to politi-
cal power. Two results of this first chapter will be central in framing these 
following studies. First: the mechanicus should be understood in relation to 
the expected virtues of an early modern subject. Second: historical audienc-
es expected mechanical performances to involve a well-defined set of trans-
gressions. In the following, we will study this interdependence of transgres-
sions and expectations in the relationships between mechanical practitioners 
and their audiences. 

 
 
80 
3. A geometric community takes shape 
Men in a state are like musical instruments in an orchestra: they produce 
more or less agreeable sounds, depending on whether they are handled in 
a good or bad way.1 
Mes pensées ou le qu’en dira-t-on, Laurent Angliviel de La Beaumelle (1752) 
quoted in Rikets nytta af välbelönte ämbetsmän, tänkande informatorer och utvalde 
studerande, Johan Niclas Zetherström (1765) 
 
In early modern Europe, there existed many ways for a man to make him-
self an instrument of the early modern state. As shown in the previous 
chapter, experienced mechanical practitioners imagined that, by performing 
in relationships of superiority and subordination, a mechanically apt boy 
would become a useful young man. Their imagination highlighted the inter-
generational aspect of learning mechanics, but it only provides one perspec-
tive on the mechanicus: that of experienced older men identifying boys with 
aptitude. From these narratives, it is hard to discern any institutional con-
texts of mathematics and mechanics. Also, the young man’s perspective is 
not found there. What followed after a boy had become a man? What was 
he supposed to do and where was he supposed to be, once he had acquired at 
least some of the skills expected of a mechanicus? Also, what dreams did 
young men weave in relation to these imagined narratives of their elders? 
 
This chapter focuses on young men who entered the Swedish civil ser-
vice during the first half of the eighteenth century. More specifically, it stud-
ies the applicants to the Bureau of Mines [Bergskollegium].2 The officials of 
the Bureau were responsible for overseeing two of the most important ac-
tivities of the realm (next to agriculture): the production of, and trade with, 
metals. During the eighteenth century, metal production saw a marked in-
crease, and it has been argued that this development can be attributed to the 
new rational methods put in place by cameralists, chemists and mechanical 
practitioners. I am less concerned with these changes. Instead, my main 
                                                   
1 “Les hommes sont dans un Etat ce que des Instrumens de Musique sont dans un Orchestre: ils 
rendent des sons plus ou moins agréables, suivant qu’ils sont bien ou mal touchés.”; Johan Niclas 
Zetherström: Rikets nytta af välbelönte ämbetsmän, tänkande informatorer och utvlade studerande (Stock-
holm, 1765). 
2 In the following I use Hjalmar Fors’ translation of Bergskollegium into the “Bureau of Mines” 
and I translate kollegium into “bureau”. For a longer discussion of this translation, see page 32, 
note 60. 

 
 81 
concern here is the norms and skills of the community of men in the Bu-
reau. Here, I argue that, during the first half of the eighteenth century, the 
Bureau developed into a community of trusted servants of the state, and 
that mathematics and mechanics gained a new and important role in this 
community. 
 
Young men, in their late teens or early twenties, applied to the Bureau 
once they had reached adolescence. This chapter thus starts off where the 
previous one finished: with young men who, by merit of their education, 
could credibly present themselves as useful members of the state. Whereas 
the preceding chapter examined imagined intergenerational relationships 
formed around the performance of mechanics, here I study how perfor-
mances of mathematics and mechanics were the basis of relationships in a 
community of men. I approach the Bureau as a community of practice, as 
brought forth by Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger. That is, I see it as a space 
for “situated learning” and to participate in its practices was to partake in a 
culture based on an “epistemological principle of learning”.3 My focus is on 
the reproduction of this community, through “legitimate peripheral partici-
pation”, and on the social process of learning, by which a young newcomer 
was enculturated into the community and by which the community was 
reproduced.4 Learning certain skills and norms was a way to align oneself to 
the Bureau’s culture of knowing about and living in the world, in other 
words: its social epistemology. By the mid 1700s, mathematics became a key 
part of these processes, which formed both the Bureau and its officials. 
 
Although the Bureau is the focus here, it is not my primary object of 
study. Instead, my interest is the performances of applicants and officials, 
and how such performances formed a community of men in the early mod-
ern Swedish state. The Bureau was one institution out of many, suitable for 
studying these relational performances. It was not the only state institution 
that was a community of mathematical and mechanical practice: mathemat-
ics and mechanics were also a part of the navy, artillery, fortification corps, 
Bureau of Commerce and Bureau of War. However, there are good reasons 
for focusing on the Bureau of Mines. Its archive contains an unprecedented 
wealth of sources that give insight into the expectations of the young men 
who shaped themselves together with the community they became a part of. 
Also, compared with the military, the applicants to the Bureau were a rela-
tively homogeneous group. This makes it easier to identify broader groups 
and trends among them than among other large groups of young men 
                                                   
3 Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger: Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation (Cambridge, 
2005), 98.  
4 Ibid., 29. On learning as enculturation, see also Collins: “Learning through enculturation”; 
Collins: Changing order, 159. Collins’ model of enculturation by and large corresponds to the mod-
el of Lave and Wenger. Most importantly, both see learning as a form of skill acquisition rather 
than as a communication of formal rules. Thus, in the text I use enculturation and “peripheral 
participation” interchangeably. 

 
 
82 
studying mathematics together (e.g., the volunteers in the fortification 
corps). Furthermore, in the Bureau one finds all the main actors of the fol-
lowing chapters: Christopher Polhammar, Emanuel Swedenborg and An-
ders Gabriel Duhre. Therefore, by understanding the learning situated there, 
one will also understand the making of these men, around whom the fol-
lowing chapters will revolve. The Bureau is therefore a good case for study-
ing relational performances of mathematics and mechanics, and how young 
men were moulded in relation to the state to the expectations that constitut-
ed the mechanicus. 
 
During the first half of the eighteenth century, numerous young men 
applied to auscultate (from the Latin verb auscultare, “to listen”) in the Bu-
reau. In other words, they wished to learn how to be mining officials, by 
participating in its work. Their letters of application are the main category of 
sources for the first section of this chapter. This material comprises 
262 applications made by 237 applicants, scattered over the 118 folios of the 
Bureau’s incoming communication from the years 1700–50. These applica-
tions constitute a previously unused source for understanding a broad group 
of men from the Swedish state. I read the applications as performances, by 
which the young men attempted to anticipate and adhere to the expecta-
tions of legitimate peripheral participants in the Bureau. I also read some of 
these letters against the protocols of the board (from 1700 to 1750, consist-
ing of 68 folios). When this is the case, I use the protocols to piece together 
a more two-sided picture of becoming a part of the Bureau. I also combine 
the applications for auscultation with other requests – for example, for trav-
elling, or for stipends.5 Using these sources, I aim to delineate how the Bu-
reau identified potential useful members, and correspondingly how young 
men presented themselves as such. What merits and characteristics did ap-
plicants include in their applications, and did they change between 1700 and 
1750? How did the letters conform to a certain category of useful and virtu-
ous civil servant? This section leads to the argument that, between 1700 and 
1750, mathematics – and especially geometry – became an important part of 
the identificatory practices of a large group of applicants. By 1750, it was 
not only considered relevant for future mining mechanici, but held im-
portant symbolic function in forming a coherent community of civil serv-
ants. 
 
In the second section, I turn to the accepted auscultators and the educa-
tion they received within the Bureau. This section studies the role of math-
ematics as an exercise of enculturation, using handwritten manuscripts in 
mathematics, mechanics and natural philosophy copied by the auscultators 
together with commemorative speeches made by the Bureau’s officials. 
                                                   
5 The applications and protocols can be found in “Incoming correspondence to the Bureau of 
Mines”, 1700–50, E4/105–223, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA; “Protocols of the Bureau of Mines”, 
A1/38–106, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 

 
 83 
Through these sources, I continue to explore the community the ausculta-
tors were enculturated into, how this enculturation came about, and the 
meanings mathematics – especially geometry and mechanics – had in the 
establishment of the Bureau’s community of civil servants. 
The mining sciences 
Mining was of great importance for the early modern Swedish economy. 
Consequently, during this period, the Swedish state took an increasing inter-
est in metal production. In the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centu-
ries, Swedish mining was administered by the fiscal chamber, and the min-
ing administration was not a formally regulated governmental body. From 
the 1630s, however, the government took measures to improve the supervi-
sion of the mines. In 1637, Queen Christina founded a general mining 
board [generalbergsamt] that inspected mining and smelting. The statutes stat-
ed that its officials should diligently police the mines of the crown and that 
the board should recruit competent men who could replace dismissed or 
deceased officials. Furthermore, these statutes imposed some expectations 
on the mining officials: they were not allowed to own parts in mines, they 
should be satisfied with the salary given to them as civil servants, and they 
were not allowed to travel between mines “for private gain”.6 The general 
mining board soon consolidated its place in the state. As early as 1649, it 
attained the status of an administrative bureau. From this point on, the 
council was not merely a board of experienced men, but a Bureau of Mines.7 
 
By the early eighteenth century, the Bureau had become a well-
established institution, where the policing of metal making was interwoven 
in bureaucratic practice aiming at revenue for the state. There, administra-
tive sciences, such as jurisprudence and œconomy, coexisted with other 
knowledge geared towards metal production, which the officials called min-
ing sciences [bergssciencer or bergswettenskaper].8 These sciences were not only a 
way to categorise the activities of the Bureau’s officials as a form of 
                                                   
6 “för privat nytta”; The statutes are quoted in Jan-Olof Hedström: -igenom gode ordningar och flitigt 
upseende-. Bergsstaten 375 år (Uppsala, 2012), 13–16, quote from 15. 
7 On the importance of the Swedish metal production, see Göran Rydén: “Skill and technical 
change in the Swedish iron industry, 1750–1860”, Technology and culture 39:3 (1998), 383; For an 
analysis and overview of the development of Swedish metal making regions, see Anders Florén 
and Göran Rydén: Arbete, hushåll och region. Tankar om industrialiseringsprocesser och den svenska järnhan-
teringen (Uppsala, 1992), 98–102, 124–8. For an overview of the early Bureau of Mines, see Lind-
qvist: Technology on trial, 95–6; Mirkka Lappalainen: “Släkt och stånd i Bergskollegium före reduk-
tionstiden”, Historisk tidskrift för Finland 87:2 (2002), 140–72; Fors: “Kemi, paracelsism och 
mekanisk filosofi”, 172–3; Fors: The limits of matter, 46–7. 
8 Fors: The limits of matter, 7. Importantly, as pointed out by Fors, “the pursuit of science of phi-
losophy was never a primary concern of the Bureau as a whole”; ibid., 7 note 22. The mathemati-
cal community discussed in this chapter should thus be seen as synonymous with the while Bu-
reau. 

 
 
84 
knowledge making, but were also a means of status. In controversies con-
cerning their rank, the men of the Bureau repeatedly used their double 
competence – of juridical matters as well as of the so-called mining sciences 
– as an argument for why they could claim a higher status, compared with 
other servants of the state.9 
 
What constituted the mining sciences was historically contingent. Over 
time, they came to consist of, for example, mineralogy, chemistry and exper-
imental physics.10 As shown by Fors, in the late seventeenth century, Urban 
Hiärne introduced chemistry into the Bureau’s work in a Laboratorium Chymi-
cum.11 Similarly, from the 1690s, practical mechanics found a place in the 
Bureau. In 1697, Christopher Polhammar, with help from his main patron 
Fabian Wrede (the president of the State Office [Statskontoret] and the Bu-
reau of Accounts [Kammarkollegium]), managed to convince the king, 
Karl XI, to establish a Laboratorium Mechanicum under his command. This 
institution was formed on the model of Hiärne’s chemical counterpart.12 
Both facilities were established by royal command and were under direct 
personal control of their directors.13 In Polhammar’s Laboratorium, young 
men were to be educated in mechanics and mathematics. To encourage 
such apt young men, on 22 July 1699, two stipends in mechanics were es-
tablished in the Laboratorium.14 Fors has argued that the establishment of a 
mechanical laboratory was part of a shift in the Bureau from curious chemi-
cal knowledge to useful knowledge based on mechanics, and that the subse-
quent king, Karl XII, showed more interest in mechanical projects related to 
the Swedish war efforts than in transmutive chemistry. Polhammar’s labora-
tory can be seen as a manifestation of these changing priorities of the early 
eighteenth century, when mechanics replaced chemistry as the science fa-
voured by the state.15 However, by 1715, the activity in the Laboratorium 
Mechanicum dwindled. Lindqvist has argued that between 1715 and 1725 
“mechanical engineering was […] in poor shape” in the Bureau, while 
Polhammar was occupied with other issues brought about by a new person-
al relationship with Karl XII.16 Interestingly, it was now that explanations of 
nature based on geometry and mechanical philosophy took hold in the Bu-
                                                   
9 The Bureau of Mines to The Royal Majesty: “Concerning rank”, 1719-06-01, 8/19, Brev från 
kollegier m.fl. […] till Kongl maj; Bureau of Mines to The Royal Majesty: “Concerning rank”, 
1730-01-26, 8/22, Brev från kollegier m.fl. […] till Kongl maj. 
10 Widmalm: Mellan kartan och verkligheten, 60. 
11 Fors: The limits of matter, 48–52. 
12 Ibid., 82. 
13 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 99. 
14 Ibid., 97–8; On the stipends, see: Carl XII: “Decision on instating a stipendio mechanico”, 
1699-07-22, E 1/7/594, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
15 Fors: The limits of matter, 71. Urban Hiärne as a client of Karl XI, and as a “royal chemist”, see 
Fors: “Kemi, paracelsism och mekanisk filosofi”, 173–4. Still, as we will see in Chapter 4, the 
king’s perceived interest in mechanics was as much a result of his patronage of Polhem, as what 
motivated their relationship. 
16 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 99. For a detailed analysis of this relationship, see Chapter 4.  

 
 85 
reau and when chemistry was submitted to a geometric and mechanical 
framework. Thus, from the 1720s, a new form of mechanical and geometric 
chemistry started to gain a place in the Bureau.17 
 
A young man entering the Bureau in 1750 entered a community where 
mathematics carried connotations different from those it had held at the 
turn of the century. When the place of mathematics in the mining sciences 
shifted, the officials did not only start to perceive nature in a new way – the 
men in the Bureau also came to relate differently to each other. Instead of 
being intimately linked to mining mechanics, machine building and Christo-
pher Polhammar, by the 1720s, mathematics became established as a foun-
dation of the Bureau’s community of officials, their work and their 
knowledge of mining. At this time, mathematics also became central in the 
forming of a large group of young aspiring officials into civil servants who 
based their exercise of public power on a mathematical foundation. 
Auscultation. The Bureau of Mines as a place of education 
The Bureau, like all other communities, did not reproduce effortlessly. As 
pointed out in the previous chapter, in spite of the attempts by the civil 
administration to reform academia, Swedish universities kept their strong 
ties to the church well into the eighteenth century. In order to satiate the 
demand for specialised state officials, the bureaus instead developed an aus-
cultatory system.18 The auscultatory system of the Bureau of Mines – like 
those of the other bureaus in Stockholm and of the juridical system –  
developed in the second half of the seventeenth century. Auscultation – in 
its basic form the right to listen in to the meetings of the board, but general-
ly also involving participation in the Bureau’s work – could be seen as a 
form of legitimate peripheral participation. It was a process of learning-by-
doing, by which the auscultators developed into officials and the Bureau 
reproduced itself. During the seventeenth century, the small scale of the 
Bureau’s educational efforts, and the personal relationships between stu-
dents and teachers, resembled not only the imagined intergenerational rela-
tionships discussed in the previous chapter, but also the master–apprentice 
relationships found in guilds. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, 
this would change, because the Bureau’s system of auscultation would grow 
dramatically.19 
                                                   
17 Fors: The limits of matter, 90–2. 
18 Gaunt: Utbildning till statens tjänst, 31. 
19 Auscultation was a system of learning through participation in various forms of work, and thus 
it resembles the apprentice systems of the guilds. These similarities have been discussed by Fors: 
The limits of matter, 95. For a discussion of early modern mining education in a European context, 
see Donata Brianta: “Education and training in the mining industry, 1750–1860. European mod-
els and the Italian case”, Annals of science 57:3 (2000), 267–300; For a discussion of how mining 

 
 
86 
 
From the early 1650s, the Bureau had two auscultators, who were con-
sidered high officials: in the list of officials in the Bureau they were named 
after the members of the board, and before all other minor civil servants. By 
a royal decree on 4 May 1673, these first two auscultators reformed into 
extraordinary and salaried assessors with a right to speak on the board.20 In 
1686, Karl XI reinstated two auscultator positions. These auscultators 
would, however, come to differ from those of the mid seventeenth century. 
In a letter of 1691, from the Bureau to the king, the board argued that the 
auscultators should be considered holders of stipends. The board stated that 
the auscultators were supposed to be young men who wished to learn min-
ing, and if they were given permanent positions it would hinder the neces-
sary flow of new men into the Bureau.21 As pointed out earlier, in 1699 the 
Bureau established two additional stipends, linked to Christopher Polham-
mar and his Laboratorium Mechanicum, that were explicitly geared towards 
mechanics.22 
 
When the Bureau made the salaried positions of auscultator into sti-
pends, they also uncoupled auscultation from financial compensation. The 
stipends became considered a beneficium given to the most worthy of young 
men, but the Bureau also came to accept an increasing number of ausculta-
tors who did not receive any form of monetary compensation. By the turn 
of the century, auscultation was thus a two-tier system consisting of a small 
number of promising men with stipends (beneficium ascultandi) and another 
group of unpaid auscultators (venia auscultandi). In a short history of the aus-
cultatory system written at mid-century, the official Daniel Tilas told of how 
the group of venia auscultandi had grown as time had gone by. In Tilas’ view, 
this group of unpaid young men might even have been too large at times.23 
 
Whereas the number of auscultators remained relatively small through-
out the seventeenth century, by the 1690s the system started to expand. 
Although the number of holders of stipends doubled in 1699, it was the 
establishment of a second tier of auscultators that accounted for the main 
expansion of the Bureau’s educational system. From 1670 to 1689, the Bu-
reau only accepted 10 auscultators in total into its ranks; in the decade of the 
1690s alone, it accepted 27. The period of the Great Nordic War in the early 
eighteenth century saw a small decline in the enrolment of auscultators. Still, 
during the first two decades of the eighteenth century (1700–19), 
                                                                                                                        
education in Sweden differed from that of other European states, and especially Britain, see ibid., 
280–1. On the similarities between Leve and Wenger’s concept of legitimate peripheral participa-
tion and apprenticeship, see; Lave and Wenger: Situated learning, 29–34. 
20 Johan Axel Almquist: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857. Administrativa och biografiska 
anteckningar (Stockholm, 1909), 16–17. 
21 The Bureau of Mines to Carl XI: “On stipends to the auscultators”, 1691-06-16, vol. 7, Kolle-
giers m.fl, […] skrivelser till Kungl Maj:t, RA. 
22 Carl XII: “Decision on instating a stipendio mechanico”. 
23 Daniel Tilas: “Om nuvarande Bergskollegium, dess historia, organisation, verksamhet m.m.”; 
D6/14/225–305, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA, 270. 

 
 87 
37 auscultators were accepted into the Bureau. By the end of the war, the 
number of auscultators had grown rapidly, with 35 accepted in the 1720s, 
82 in the 1730s and 88 in the 1740s. Consequently, the educational structure 
of auscultation hardly remained unchanged over this time period.24 
 
Lindqvist has studied the officials of the Bureau over the brief period of 
1715–25 and has sketched the “average [Bureau] of Mines official in the 
eighteenth century” using biographical details of assessors from 1720–1815. 
The average career of an assessor began with studies “at Uppsala University 
until he was 20 years old”; then he applied to be an auscultator and after 
being accepted he travelled abroad.25 Similarly, Fors has argued that auscul-
tators could look forward to “rather good career prospects,” since “the fifty 
assessors who were appointed to the Bureau’s governing board during the 
years 1708–94, all but three had begun their career at the Bureau as ausculta-
tors.”26 But of course, just because most assessors had been auscultators, it 
does not follow that most auscultators became assessors. Also, it is not evi-
dent that the career of an assessor was the career of an average official. To 
become an assessor was the high point of a very successful career, and as-
sessors are thus not necessarily representative of a broader set of officials or 
auscultators. By focusing on the young men approaching the Bureau, we get 
a better understanding of the expectations of the broad group of ausculta-
tors than if we sketch the career of assessors in retrospect. Through these 
applications we can see how contemporaries saw the boundaries to partici-
pation within the bureaucratic community, and how these boundaries 
changed over time. 
 
Unsurprisingly, neither of the two tiers of auscultation was open to  
everyone. In the early 1720s, only about half the applicants were accepted 
into the Bureau.27 In order to be seen as a legitimate peripheral participant, 
the would-be auscultator had to present himself in a written letter. There he 
stated his reasons for applying, listed his merits and often also included 
letters of recommendation. As the auscultatory system grew, the Bureau saw 
                                                   
24 Almquist: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857, 116–17. These numbers show that 
Lindqvist’s brief study from 1715–25, indicating that on average “three or four Auscultators were 
admitted each year”, is not representative for the rest of the eighteenth century or for the 1600s; 
Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 101. Furthermore, it shows that the scale of the Bureau’s educational 
system changed drastically from the mid-seventeenth to the mid-eighteenth century. 
25 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 101. Of course, being an average, the picture Lindqvist sketches 
ignores many of the ways the ideal official changed over the eighteenth century. But furthermore, 
by focusing on the assessors what Lindqvist displays is hardly an average man, but one route out 
of many. Of course, the majority of auscultators did not continue to become assessors. 
26 Fors: The limits of matter, 84. 
27 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 101. Because the Bureau of Mines never compiled a list of appli-
cants that were not accepted, it is difficult to assess the proportion of accepted auscultators in a 
longer time period. But judging from the Bureau’s protocols, it seems as if the relative number of 
dismissed applicants was exceptionally high during the time period that Lindqvist studies. This is 
unsurprising, as the economy of the Swedish state was devastated during the last years of the 
Great Northern War and the first years after the peace. 

 
 
88 
an influx of such applications. The applications were structured relatively 
homogeneously, which could be interpreted as the applicants being aware 
of, and anticipating, certain requirements from the Bureau. All applications 
can be seen as having been written with the explicit purpose of being ac-
cepted into the Bureau. Consequently, the applications are an interesting 
genre of self-fashioning. Using the applications, we can follow how the rules 
for legitimate peripheral participation changed over the first half of the 
eighteenth century, and how these rules shaped the applicants and their 
applications even before they were accepted.28 
 
The applications pose a methodological challenge: individually each 
application tells us about the dreams, aspirations and merits of early  
eighteenth-century men hoping to enter public service. However, in order 
to study the dialectic process through which the officials were enculturated 
into, and simultaneously changed, the Bureau, we must go from these indi-
vidual texts to an aggregate level. How then do we go from individual self-
presentations to historically contingent personas found in between the indi-
vidual and the collective? In order to understand the content of the letters at 
this intermediate level, I have coded a number of tropes found in the vari-
ous texts (see Figures 1 and 2) and compiled them by decade. These tropes 
are not simple keywords, but rather specific topics that I have identified as 
prevalent in the letters. By studying the trends in this dataset, and by relating 
the whole set to individual texts, we can delineate changes and continuities 
in the self-presentations over the studied time period. This aggregate level is 
thus not an end in itself, but a means to grasp the demands the applicants 
anticipated from the community, and in relation to which they acted. 
Applications to auscultate as self-presentation and 
identification 
In the light of the discussion in Chapter 2 on the relationship between the 
state administration in Stockholm and the university in Uppsala, one might 
assume that the purpose of the system of auscultation was to sidestep uni-
versities, which resisted radical changes. While this explanation is partly 
correct, matters were somewhat more complicated and cannot simply be 
understood as a power struggle between two separate entities. In the appli-
cants’ recommendations from academia, one can see how the Bureau and 
Uppsala University were tied together over the first half of the eighteenth 
                                                   
28 The numbers and the analysis in this section, unless otherwise stated, are based on my analysis 
of the applications found in the incoming letters of the archive of the Bureau of Mines from 
1700–50 (RA, Bergskollegiums arkiv, E4/159–223). 

 
 89 
century.29 In the first decade of the 1700s, only 20 % of the applications 
mentioned academic merits. But already in 1710, it became more or less the 
norm for applicants to mention their university education (74 %). With a 
dip in the 1720s (43 %), just after the Great Northern War, the figure then 
stabilised to around 75 % in the 1730s and 1740s (see Figure 2 and 3).30 
Simultaneously, Uppsala University established itself as the major university 
for educating future auscultators. From the 1700s to 1750 – when an official 
mining exam was introduced in Uppsala – the percentage of applicants 
mentioning studies in Uppsala rose from 20 % to 67 %. Thus, as the num-
ber of auscultators grew rapidly, the number mentioning academic studies 
increased and the number explicitly mentioning Uppsala rose about as much 
(while the absolute numbers from the other two universities in Sweden only 
increased marginally). One conclusion from this increase in numbers would 
be that the establishment of a civil mining exam in Uppsala in 1750 was 
recognition of the fact that the university had already developed into a semi-
official school for future mining officials by the 1730s and 1740s.31 
 
In anticipation of the demands of an academic background, it was 
common for auscultators to acquire a basic academic training, preferably in 
Uppsala, before applying. For the applicants, an academic degree was not 
only proof of a social background necessary for serving the state, it also 
gave witness to basic experience and competence, seen as the basis for the 
Bureau’s work. The only applicant over the whole period who explicitly 
discussed his lack of academic experience was Per Fahlander (1719–96), 
who applied in 1750. At a time when academic studies were about to be-
come an official requirement, Fahlander made excuses for his lack of such 
credentials. He argued that his mathematical inventions were as good evi-
dence of mathematical competence as a university degree: 
                                                   
29 For example, Fors has pointed out how professors in Uppsala used contacts in the Bureau as a 
resource for paronage. The connections between Uppsala and the Bureau have been discussed in 
Fors: “Kemi, paracelsism och mekanisk filosofi”, esp 189; Fors: Mutual favours, 46–9; Fors: The 
limits of matter, 84. This process, by which professors and bureau officials were tied together, can 
be understand using the concept of “patronage couples” by Hodacs and Nyberg: Naturalhistoria 
på resande fot, 125. 
30 In comparison, only thirteen mention Lund and three Åbo, at the time the two smaller univer-
sities in the Swedish realm. The number of auscultators who mention the smaller universities is 
more or less constant over the studied time period. Lindqvist is thus correct in his statement that 
the typical official of the Bureau of Mines between 1720–1815 had studied in Uppsala; Lindqvist: 
Technology on trial, 101. However, it should be added that this tendency was reinforced over the 
first half of the eighteenth century. This finding also corresponds to the view of Swedish civil 
sevants, as discussed in Cavallin: I kungens och folkets tjänst, 159–163. 
31 Almquist: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857, 46. 

 
 
90 
Figure 2. Proportions of various topics mentioned in the applications to the Bureau of 
Mines between 1720 and 1750 
 
 
Figure 3. Table of topics in auscultation applications 1700–50, grouped by decade; rela-
tive (and absolute) values 
 
Occurrences(of(topics(in(applications(to(auscultate(1720–50
1700s
1710s
1720s
1730s
1740s
1720–50
Topics(in(applications
Total(number(of(applications 15
19
61
76
88
244
Mathematics 0%3(0)
21%3(4)
11%3(7)
25%3(19)
20%3(18)
18%3(44)
Physics 0%3(0)
16%3(3)
10%3(6)
9%3(7)
6%3(5)
7%3(18)
Assaying 20%3(3)
26%3(5)
26%3(16)
12%3(9)
17%3(15)
16%3(40)
Mechanics 7%3(1)
21%3(4)
3%3(2)
11%3(8)
3%3(3)
5%3(13)
The3law 7%3(1)
16%3(3)
20%3(12)
8%3(6)
8%3(7)
10%3(25)
Mentions3father/parents 13%3(2)
21%3(4)
15%3(9)
9%3(7)
8%3(7)
9%3(23)
Serve3the3patria 13%3(2)
47%3(9)
31%3(19)
32%3(24)
26%3(23)
27%3(66)
Serve3the3king 13%3(2)
42%3(8)
13%3(8)
5%3(4)
1%3(1)
5%3(13)
Uppsala3University 20%3(3)
37%3(7)
26%3(16)
49%3(37)
67%3(59)
46%3(112)
Åbo3University 0%3(0)
0%3(0)
2%3(1)
3%3(2)
0%3(0)
1%3(3)
Lund3University 0%3(0)
0%3(0)
5%3(3)
7%3(5)
6%3(5)
5%3(13)
Interest3[lust] 40%3(6)
47%3(9)
23%3(14)
28%3(22)
30%3(28)
26%3(64)
Studies3in3academy 20%3(3)
74%3(14)
43%3(26)
75%3(57)
78%3(70)
63%3(153)
Sciences3related3to3mining 13%3(2)
26%3(5)
21%3(13)
28%3(21)
34%3(30)
26%3(64)
Combinations(of(topics
Mathematics3+3physics 0%3(0)
11%3(2)
8%3(5)
8%3(6)
6%3(5)
Mathematics3+3mechanics 0%3(0)
21%3(4)
2%3(1)
8%3(6)
2%3(1)
Assaying3+3mathematics 0%3(0)
0%3(0)
2%3(1)
3%3(2)
5%3(3)
Assaying3+3mechanics 0%3(0)
0%3(0)
0%3(0)
1%3(1)
0%3(0)
Assaying3+3physics 0%3(0)
0%3(0)
2%3(1)
0%3(0)
1%3(1)
0%#
10%#
20%#
30%#
40%#
50%#
60%#
70%#
80%#
1700s#(N=15)#
1710s#(N=19)#
1720s#(N=61)#
1730s#(N=76)#
1740s#(N=88)#
Studies#in#academy#
Uppsala#University#
Serve#the#patria#
MathemaDcs#
Assaying#
Serve#the#king#

 
 91 
I humbly presume that the displays of competence in mathematical 
knowledge, which I have already provided during my period of service, 
should be considered sufficient evidence of the experience I have therein, as 
if I had undergone an academic examination.32 
 
The applicants generally described their academic education as a means 
to an end. Often this end was to gain useful skills, which could be used 
within the mining sciences and production. Peter Westerberg, who applied 
in 1725, described how he had “established a foundation in studies and useful 
knowledge at the academy in Uppsala, and now is ready to seek further in-
struction on what could eventually make him serviceable in carrying out 
some public position”.33 Likewise, the applicant Carl Leijell in 1735 ex-
pressed how he “because of a particular interest in mining, as a part of his 
academic studies had endeavoured to acquire knowledge of physics and math-
ematics”.34 By presenting their academic merits, the applicants expressed their 
suitability for a public role as well as their aptitude for certain recognised 
forms of knowledge promoted by the Bureau. 
 
In the applications, auscultation was commonly referred to as a way of 
learning, and thus consequently also as a process of enculturation. The ap-
plicants described participation in the Bureau as a means to learn more 
about the mining sciences, while simultaneously becoming a patriotic part of 
the state. In 1725, Jonas Schnack wrote that he wished to auscultate in order 
to “make [himself] so much more competent and skilled in [mining]”. Gus-
tav Littmarck (1719–84), in 1737, wished to auscultate in order to “have the 
opportunity to continue to acquire what is needed, to in time make myself 
skilled and worthy of […] advancement.”35 These descriptions of the Bureau 
as a place of learning went hand in hand with proclamations of the Bureau 
as a benefactor of useful knowledge. Among many others, Johan Camitz in 
                                                   
32 “de prof som iag redan under min tienste tijd afgifwit på insickt utij mathematiske wettenskaper 
förmodar iag i all ödmiukhet läre kunna anses för tillräckeliga bewijs, om then erfarenhet iag der 
utinnan ger, som om iag hade undergåt academisk examen”; Per Fahlander: “Application to auscul-
tate”, 1750-11-12, E4/223/171, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. The applicants to the Bureau gener-
ally did not mark the date of writing their letters. However, the officials in the Bureau noted the 
date of receiving them. Here, and in the following, I refer to the letters to the Bureau using this 
date. 
33 “wid Academien i Upsala lagt någon grund uti Studier och nödiga wettenskaper, och nu mera är 
sinnad at söka widare underrättelse om det som i framtiden kan göra mig tienlig till någon publique 
tiensts förträdande”; Peter Westerberg: “Application to auscultate”, 1725-02-16, E4/156/187, 
Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
34 “under en besynnerlig och [sic] lust till Bergswäsendet ibland andra Academiska Studier sökt 
inhämta the wettenskaper, som höra til Physiquen och Mathematiquen”; Carl Leijell: “Application to 
auscultate”, 1735-12-20, E4/178/110, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
35 “så mycket mera uti dessa saker må göra mig habil och skickelig”, Jonas Schnack: “Application 
to auscultate”, 1725-10-26, E4/156/189, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. “hafwa tillfälle at kunna 
widare inhämta hwad som fordras, at med tiden giöra mig skickelig och wärdig till Eders Excel-
lences samt Kongl. May:ts och Riksens Höglofl. Bärgz Collegii nåd och höggunstige befordran.”; 
Gustav Littmarck: “Application to auscultate”, 1737-03-21, E4/184/223, Bergskollegiums arkiv, 
RA. 

 
 
92 
1741 pointed out that the Bureau held a “highly praised affection for the 
education of young people in honourable and useful knowledge”.36 Similar 
descriptions of the Bureau as a benefactor of useful knowledge related to 
mining can be found in many of the applications from that time. 
 
Still, the knowledge that applicants referred to by writing of “useful 
knowledge” shifted over the studied period. As seen in Figure 3, already at 
the turn of the century, applicants commonly mentioned their competence 
in the art of assaying (20 %). By the 1720s, many applicants also mentioned 
a legal education (20 %).37 Likewise, from the 1710s, it was common for 
applicants to mention having studied mathematics. Examples of useful 
fields of knowledge for an applicant can be found in “A short report on 
how a young man, who wish to seek work in the mining industry, should 
spend his time.” This handwritten document, written or copied by an aus-
cultator of the Bureau, described one perspective on the ideal education of a 
mining official. Up to the age of 15 he should study “Studia humaniora” (i.e., 
a classical education consisting of e.g. grammar, rhetoric and poetry). Then, 
after matriculating at a university, he should devote himself to studies relat-
ed to mining: “geometry, physics, mechanics and hydrostatics.” At the same 
time, he should study “the law and the process” and he should “practise 
drawing.” At the age of 19 or 20, he should apply to auscultate in the Bu-
reau.38 To present one’s grasp of such knowledge was to present one’s apti-
tude for the mining sciences. 
Emotion, kinship and childhood 
Another common way of arguing for acceptance into the Bureau’s commu-
nity was to describe an emotional connection to mining and the mining 
sciences. Many applicants said that an inclination for mining had guided 
their studies and exercises from a young age. These applicants discussed 
mining in ways similar to the narratives of how a mechanicus was defined 
through the boy that he had once been, discussed in the previous chapter. 
In the same way, descriptions of an interest in mining, dating back to child-
hood, reflected well on the young man who applied. Anders Barchaus, who 
applied in 1729, stated that it had “always been my greatest desire to learn 
the knowledge of mining”. Similarly, in 1735, Lars Fredric Bonde wrote of 
                                                   
36 “Kongl. Collegii högtbepriseliga ömhet för ungdommens förkåfring uti anständiga och nyttige 
wettenskaper”; Johan Camitz: “Application to auscultate”, 1741-11-03, E4/196/273, Bergskolle-
giums arkiv, RA. 
37 The applicants mentioning the law and assaying can be divided into two more or less distinct 
groups. Only one applicant in the 1720s, Christian Georg Danckwardt (1701–63), mentioned 
both assaying and the law in his application. 
38 “Studia humaniora”; “Geometrien, Physiquen, Mechaniquen och Hydrostatiquen.”; “lagen och Processen”; 
“Öfwa sig i Ritande.”; Lars Schultze: “Kort betänkande huru en yngling som tänker söka sin 
fortkomst vid bergsväsendet bör sin tid anlägga”, D 1433, UUB. For a discussion of the collec-
tion where this text is found, see below. 

 
 93 
how “ever since my earliest youth, I have carried an especial interest for 
mines”. Daniel Tilas instead described how he discovered his interest for 
mining during his time in Uppsala.39 Such expressions of enthusiasm and 
interest made the applications as well as the discussions of the mining sci-
ences into more than a mere list of competences or contacts: many appli-
cants evidently also anticipated the need to display their emotional connec-
tion to the Bureau. By presenting such a connection, applicants could show 
that they possessed, or aspired to, a certain diligent character, which defined 
a manly subject and a useful civil servant. 
 
Declarations of kinship and place of birth are two other reoccurring 
tropes in the applications. About one-tenth of the applicants explicitly re-
ferred to their father or to their parents. In a few cases, especially when the 
auscultator was very young, it was even the father who wrote the application 
for their son.40 Many applicants named old or even dead relatives. In 1723, 
Carl Urban Hiärne, the son of the previously mentioned Urban Hiärne, 
argued that, if he were accepted as an auscultator, it would make his father 
happy, who all his life had provided his service to the Bureau. Other appli-
cants, with a less prominent heritage, also referred to kinship. For example, 
in 1735, Per Strömmer Gyllenhök hoped that his late grandfather’s merits 
would also reflect well upon him. Peter Wallström pointed out, in 1743, 
how he, between university terms, had lived with his father, who was “the 
inspector of the ironworks of Axmar”.41 By discussing kinship, these men 
showed how they were part of family networks that traversed the Bureau as 
well as the Swedish metal production. 
 
Although the Bureau was dominated by a small number of families, 
declarations of kinship were less common than one might assume.42 Possi-
bly, surnames were a more discrete signifier of kinship than explicit refer-
ences. Nevertheless, kinship and place of birth interplayed in many applica-
tions: to present your family was also to present your origin. Many appli-
cants, who were born in Falun or in other mining districts, highlighted their 
                                                   
39 “altid min Högel:e åstundan warit att utij de till Bergwäsendet hörande wettenskaper mig evertu-
era, som jag och mig derom på det möjeligaste biflitat”; Anders Barchaus: “Application to auscul-
tate”, 1729-11-23, E4/163/758, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. “Alt ifrån min späda ungdom har iag 
haft till Bergswärk en särdeles lust”; Fredric Lars Bonde: “Application to auscultate”, 1735-10-13, 
E4/178/114, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA; Daniel Tilas: “Application to auscultate”, 1732-03-22, 
E4/178/1, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
40 The proportion of applicants discussing their parents was relatively constant 1700–50, but 
decreased slightly over time (see Figure 3). From 1720–50 five men applied on behalf of their 
sons: Nils Reuterhold (1737), Eric Sohlberg (1737), Nils Söderhjelm (1749), Christopher Risell 
(1742) and Samuel Troili (1745). 
41 “Inspectoren på Axmars Bruk”; Carl Urban Hiärne: “Application to auscultate”, 1723-01-23, 
E4/150/260, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA; Gyllenhök Per Strömmer: “Application to auscultate”, 
1735-02-28, E4/178/10, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA; Peter Wallström: “Application to auscul-
tate”, 1743-05-09, E4/205/32, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
42 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 218. Fors points out how family networks were central to the close 
links between the Bureau and Uppsala University, Fors: The limits of matter, 84. 

 
 
94 
geographical origin directly. They pointed out that they had been brought 
up in proximity to mining activities, where they had also acquired their early 
interest in mining. Discussions of kinship and places of birth were yet an-
other way of using one’s childhood to present oneself as a useful man.43 
Duhre expressed a similar view in a publication of his. He pointed out that 
the students with the most aptitude for the mining sciences were those 
“born in the mining districts, who from their childhood have had oppor-
tunity to see and to familiarise themselves with such work, which become 
and befit a man experienced in mining and smelting.”44 
 
These applications, written by young men from the mining districts, 
described a purposeful path. Being born in areas of relevance to the Bureau, 
they had gone to the universities with the explicit purpose of continuing on 
to the Bureau and to mining.45 Kinship, place of birth and inclination thus 
converged in exclamations of a professed interest in and aptitude for the 
mining sciences. Through such tropes, the applicant presented himself as 
having experience of and competence in mining, despite his young age. 
Declarations of kinship and origin were interpreted as proof of well-
established habits of diligence and hard work, brought about through good 
upbringing and socialisation in the circles of mining officials.46 Thus, the 
applications could be seen as mirroring the narratives studied in the previ-
ous chapter. In other words, the applicants anticipated the expectations of 
the Bureau by presenting their lives in accordance with the imagined  
coming-of-age narratives of their elders. 
                                                   
43 Similarly Mirkka Lappalainen has pointed out how, in the seventeenth century, the fact that the 
Bureau was permeated by certain noble families was not interpreted as contradicting the wish that 
it should be populated by competent men; Lappalainen: “Släkt och stånd i Bergskollegium före 
reduktionstiden”, 170–3. Compare also to Svante Norrhem: Uppkomlingarna. Kanslitjänstemännen i 
1600-talets Sverige och Europa (Umeå, 1993), 66–8. 
44 “anses för de skickligaste, at lära det som angår Bergwärcken, hwilka födde uti Bergslagerna 
ifrån Barndomen hafwa haft tilfälle at se och umgå med sådana sysslor, som en förfaren 
Bergsman pryda och anstå.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 25–6. A similar declaration of the place of birth 
for a man in the Bureau can be found in Anders Berch: Åminnelse-tal, öfver commerce-rådet Henric 
Kalmeter, efter kongl. vetensk. academiens befallning, hållit i stora riddarhus-salen den 13. martii, 1752 
(Stockholm, 1752), 6–7. 
 
“Bergsman”, which denotes specific men of early modern metal production, has not equiva-
lent in English; Fors: Mutual favours, 22–3; Fors: The limits of matter, 14–5. The term can roughly 
be translated into “a man working with mining and smelting”. 
45 29 out of 192 applications describe such an interest from a young age. 13 applicants describe 
their upbringing near mines as a way of becoming interested in and knowledgeable of mining 
sciences. 
46 Lappalainen has pointed out the lack of research on kinship networks and social frameworks 
of lower level officials of the Bureau. Lappalainen: “Släkt och stånd i Bergskollegium före reduk-
tionstiden”, 169. For a more detailed study on these matters, the applications to auscultate could 
be an important starting point. 

 
 95 
Application as submission 
The acts of pious submission, common in the narratives of the previous 
chapter, can also be found in the applications to the Bureau. There, appli-
cants presented themselves as inclined to study useful sciences out of patri-
otic sentiment and the Bureau was described as an institution where 
knowledge and learning were interwoven with diligent work for the good of 
the patria. In the applications, desire to learn the mining sciences was re-
peatedly tied to the process of becoming a servant of the publicum  (i.e., of 
the state or the sovereign). In eighteenth-century Sweden, to be a civil 
servant was to be a good citizen – a patriot – and this was the requirement 
that the applicants anticipated in their applications. As already pointed out 
in Chapter 1, the concepts of virtue and usefulness were interdependent at 
this time. To be a useful and virtuous subject was to be a pious man, and 
being a civil servant was one way to be recognised as such.47 Because they 
were submitted to the state, the acts of men who embraced the civil culture 
of the bureaus were generally interpreted as free of private interest. As long 
as these men met the obligations of a man of the state – a publicus – possibil-
ities of state support for projects, as well as opportunities for stipends and 
paid positions, opened up for them. On the other hand, as we will see in the 
coming chapters, when the performance of selflessness failed, the conse-
quences could be severe. 
 
According the linen manufacturer Samuel Crispin Ulff, in a proposal for 
governmental support for his manufactory sent to parliament in 1729, the 
opposite of a public servant was the man who served no one: 
Such people, who only serve themselves and no one else, are the burden, 
weight and trouble of the public. They have severed themselves from the 
burghly state of the republic, not unlike those, who worship themselves, 
and who believe in their own skill, power and ability. The just punishment 
of these men is that in coming distress and misfortune they should be left 
alone, and should never enjoy any of the good found under the wings and 
protection of the publicum.48 
For Ulff,  the publicum was a superior but caring patriarch and he accredited 
trust to actors who were integrated into a system of superiority and 
subordination and who were therefore sheltered by the wings of state 
                                                   
47 On virtue, manhood and piety, see page 42–47. On virtue and manliness, see also Rimm: 
Vältalighet och mannafostran, 42. For an analysis of the concept of passions, usefulness and virtue in 
Swedish eighteenth-century economic literature, see Runefelt: Dygden som välståndets grund, 9. 
48 “Slikt Folck, som tiena sig allena och ingen annan, äro det Allmännas Last, Tynga och Beswär, 
de der sielfwa afstympat sig ifrån det Borgerliga Wäsendet i Republiquen, ey olykt dem, som dyrcka 
sig sielf, och tro på sin egen Skickelighet Mackt och Förmåga. Sådane, är deras egit Straff 
rättmätigt i påkommande Nöder och Olyckor, at de böra lemnas sig sielfwa och aldrig niuta något 
godt under Publici Skygd och Wingar”; Samuel Crispin Ulff: En liten doch utförlig grundritning och 
handledning, til de metall- och linne-manufacturier, som nu inrättas i Hälsinge-land, at drifwas på åtskilligt nytt 
arbetz sätt, särdeles af landetz egne producter; hwilka under twenne societeter komma at sortera, såsom deras 
ägare och förläggare: blifwandes här ock något förestält om manufacturerne i gemen (Stockholm, 1729), 23. 

 
 
96 
power.49 In the applications, we find these tropes of the ideal civil servant as 
a selfless patriot expressed by a large number of young men. It was com-
mon for applicants to use tropes of patriotism or the public good from the 
1710s onward. Hence, the applications adhere to the “utilist” ideals of sci-
ence that Sven Widmalm has found in the late Age of Liberty, but already 
existed in the late Caroline era.50 Also, from the 1710s to the 1740s, the 
applications that expressed a wish to serve the king dropped from 42 % to 
1 %. These numbers reflect the changing power structures in Swedish socie-
ty after the fall of absolutism and the rise of a strong parliament in the 
1720s. This period saw changes in who or what the publicum constituted.51 
 
The applicant’s inclination to mining, his background within academia 
and in mining districts, as well as his wish to serve his fatherland by working 
in the Bureau of Mines, together formed a patriotic narrative of submission. 
One of the clearest examples can be found in Samuel Buschenfelt (the 
younger)’s application from 1725: 
I subserviently and humbly trust in the high favour and tendency that his 
lordship [i.e., the president of the Bureau] and the highly praised Bureau of 
Mines always choose to show those, who after academic studies, and after ac-
quiring knowledge in mining, take the greatest pains to make themselves 
skilled in the service and use of their fatherland. Thus, I venture to request 
and implore of your lordship and the highly praised royal Bureau that [you] 
graciously would accept me as an auscultator.52 
 
By studying the applications, we can thus observe patterns and devel-
opments in how auscultators presented themselves to the Bureau, in antici-
pation of the Bureau’s criteria for identifying an apt young man. One could 
state that the route to legitimate peripheral participation in the Bureau of 
Mines was through the presentation of previous participation in relevant 
communities of practice, as well as the demonstration of skills and 
knowledge acquired there. The universities, especially Uppsala, were im-
portant references at the turn of the century, and had further increased their 
importance by the 1750s. During the study’s time period, one can delineate 
a process of homogenisation of the applicant’s background: especially in 
respects to the number of applicants who had conducted academic studies. 
                                                   
49 Karin Sennefelt has also identified this connection between patriotism and the dismissal of 
private gain. See Politikens hjärta, 239–40. 
50 Widmalm: Mellan kartan och verkligheten, 18. 
51 Interestingly, in the first ten years of the century few applicants mentioned either serving the 
king of the patria. It seems as if the ideal of the civil service as a way of serving the king or the 
patria did not become widespread among applicants until some years into the eighteenth century. 
52 “I underdån ödmiuk förtröstan af den höga gunst och benägenhet Eders Grefl. Excellence och 
det Höglofl. Kongl. Bergz Collegium städze behagat wisa dem, som efter anlagde studier wid Acad-
emien, samt inhämtad kundskap i Bergssaker och handteringar, jämwäl på det högsta sig winlägga 
at till fäderneslandets tienst och nytta skickelige sinnat, fördristar iag för Eders Grefl. Excell. och 
det Höglofl Kongl. Kongl. [sic] Collegium jag underdån ödmiukast bedia och bönfalla, at af Eders 
Greflige Excell, och det Höglofl. Kongl. Collegio för Auscultant nådgunstigt blifwa antigen.”; Samu-
el Buschenfelt: “Application to auscultate”, 1725-11-08, E4/154/868, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 

 
 97 
But even at the end of the period, an academic degree was not the only way 
into the Bureau. Mentioning how one had lived in the mining districts dur-
ing childhood or had visited them on one’s travels was an additional way of 
presenting oneself as a participant in a relevant community of practice. Also, 
by discussing kinship, applicants could display connections to relevant net-
works and communities. In their applications, young men presented their 
life narrative in a way that corresponded to the same ideal childhood of a 
useful man, found in speeches and prefaces to textbooks. If we take the 
self-presentations of the auscultators as a sign of what skills were demanded 
by the Bureau, it seems as if by the 1730s it was important to present a pro-
ficiency in the mathematical sciences alongside experience of assaying and 
juridical matters. A young man who demonstrated aptitude for these skills 
was generally identified as a legitimate peripheral participant in the Bureau’s 
community of men. Such a man became accepted into the group of unpaid 
venia auscultandi, or, if he was lucky, even as one of the paid beneficium as-
cultandi. 
Mathematical sciences of the state 
Among historians of science, the Bureau of Mines has primarily been dis-
cussed as a place of chemistry.53 Still, in the applications from the first half 
the eighteenth century, few aspiring auscultators discussed chemistry explic-
itly. Instead, the craft of assaying was a reoccurring topic. At the beginning 
of the eighteenth century, chemistry was not a unified science. Instead, it 
consisted of various crafts, among them assaying. The lack of applicants 
discussing chemistry in their applications thus supports the claim that chem-
istry developed as an “art” from the 1720s to 1740s and a “systematic sci-
ence” from the mid 1700s to the end of the century.54 In comparison, in the 
applications of this time, mathematics was repeatedly used in a broad sense, 
as a unifying concept encompassing geometry, arithmetic but also so-called 
“practical mathematics”. Although uncommon during the first decade, from 
1700 to 1750, on average 18 % of the applicants mentioned mathematics, 
roughly comparable to the 16 % who mentioned assaying. While the roles 
of assaying and chemistry are clearly important in an enterprise that exam-
ines ores and metals to ascertain a high and consistent quality, mathematics 
and geometry are possibly less self-explanatory parts of such an institution. 
                                                   
53 See Fors: Mutual favours; Lundgren: “Gruvor och kemi under 1700-talet i Sverige. Nytta och 
vetenskap”; Fors: The limits of matter. Also, as already discussed, Svante Lindqvist has discussed the 
Bureau as a place of mechanical knowledge making in his Technology on trial, esp. 95–107. 
54 Lissa Roberts: “Filling the space of possibilities. Eighteenth-century chemistry’s transition from 
art to science”, Science in context 6:02 (1993), 512, 548–9; Fors: “J. G. Wallerius and the laboratory 
of enlightenment”, 17. 

 
 
98 
What role did the mathematical sciences have in the Bureau between 1700 
and 1750? 
 
As pointed out earlier, the Bureau was not the only part of the Swedish 
state where the mathematical sciences were practised. From the seventeenth 
century, it is possible to discern a social framework for the practice of 
mathematics in several institutions of the Swedish state.55 Mathematical 
textbooks in the Swedish vernacular were generally produced in connection 
with the institutions of the civil administration and the military in Stock-
holm, and in these books we consequently find arguments for the use of 
mathematics in the civil service.56 In 1614, Aegidius Matthiæ Aurelius pre-
sented the role of mathematics in the training of a civil servant. In his 
Arithmetica (first published in 1614, but printed in new editions well into the 
eighteenth century), Aurelius connected mathematics to good government. 
He argued that “no politie or any government, land or realm, town or village, 
not even the most simple hamlet, exists in the world, which does not need 
this art”. Those who had “learnt this art, are much more comfortable, useful 
and skilled in all matters of the state, than those who are inexperienced in 
this art”. Aurelius argued using classical examples: in classical Egypt, no one 
had taken up an office [Ämbete] “with less than that he first had practised 
and carried out [arithmetic] and other mathematical arts.”57 
                                                   
55 An important role of mathematics was in geodesy and map making. See Widmalm: Mellan 
kartan och verkligheten. 
 
Larry Stewart describes English public science as an activity of improvement for the public 
good with wide implications within a rising bourgeois public sphere separated from the state; 
Stewart: Rise of public science, 38–40. See also Jan Golinski: Science as public culture. Chemistry and 
Enlightenment in Britain, 1760–1820 (Cambridge, 1992), 4–8. For a discussion on eighteenth-
century European technology as public culture which belonged “to political economy, to the 
sciences of organization and action”, see Liliane Hilaire-Pérez: “Technology as a public culture in 
the eighteenth century. The artisan’s legacy”, History of science 45 (2007), 135 and passim. One way 
of understanding these sciences of public power is Pierre Bourdieu’s concept of “la science de 
l’état” (i.e., “une science anonyme et pratique de l’administration et des fins et des moyens de 
l’État”); Pierre Bourdieu, Olivier Christin and Pierre-Etienne Will: “Sur la science de l’État”, Actes 
de la recherche en sciences sociales 133:1 (2000), 5. 
56 Also, Sten Lindroth points out how a majority of members of the Swedish Royal Academy of 
Sciences during 1739–45 were civil servants at different levels within the Swedish state; Lindroth: 
Kungl. Svenska vetenskapsakademiens historia 1739–1818 1:1, 28. 
57 “ingen Politie eller någhot Regemente, Land eller Rijke, Stadh eller Byy, Ja, icke thet ringaste Torp 
i Werldenne finnes, thet thenne konst icke behöfwer”; “the som medh thenne konst begåfwadhe 
äro, warda til alle Polisiske sakar myket beqwemligare, brukeligare och skickeligare, än the som 
uthi thenne konst äre oförfarne”; “medh mindre han sigh tilförende uthi thenne och ander Mat-
hematische konster öfwat och brukat hadhe.”; Aegidius Matthiæ Aurelius: Arithmetica eller een kort och 
eenfaldigh räknebook, uthi heele och brutne taal. Medh lustige och sköne exempel, them eenfaldighom som til 
thenne konst lust och behagh hafwe (Uppsala, 1614), preface. On the biography of this early author of 
Swedish mathematical books, see B Boethius: “Aegidius Matthie Upsaliensis Aurelius”, SBL 2 
(Stockholm, 1920), 451. A similar argument was made in the early eighteenth century, in Eric 
Agner: Geodæsia Suecana eller Örtuga delo-bok (Stockholm, 1730), preface. 

 
 99 
Figure 4. The frontispiece of Fredrik Palmqvist’s Introduction to algebra (1748). The text 
reads “In the service of the fatherland.” Framed by a laurel are five mathematical works 
in Swedish, many of them discussed in the previous chapter. Besides Palmqvist’s Intro-
duction to algebra itself, the books were Celsius’ Arithmetica (1727), Elvis’s  treatise on 
waterwheels Mathematiskt tractat om effecter af vatn-drifter (1742), Strömer’s translation of 
Euclid’s Elementa (1744), and Palmqvist’s own treatise on The solidity and strength of bodies 
(1744). (Photo: Uppsala University Library) 

 
 
100
 
During the seventeenth century, when the administration was less ex-
tensive and the auscultatory system was fledgling, books such as Aurelius’ 
were relatively rare, but in the early eighteenth century there was a marked 
increase in the publication of mathematical textbooks, as discussed in the 
previous chapter.58 The frontispiece of Fredrik Palmqvist’s Introduction to 
algebra (1748) explicitly presented Swedish mathematical textbooks as patri-
otic works by placing a number of such books in a laurel under the celebra-
tory text “in the service of the fatherland” (see Figure 4). By the mid-
eighteenth century, vernacular mathematics would become a form of 
knowledge integrated with the state that would identify a man as a virtuous 
civil servant. 
Mathematics as mechanics (1700–20) 
As the number of vernacular publications increased, the roles of mathemat-
ics and mechanics changed in the Bureau of Mines. In an extractum protocolli 
of 28 November 1715, issued to all auscultators of the Bureau, the board 
argued that an auscultator was required to show that he had studied mining 
and smelting [bergsväsendet] and that he knew how to apply his acquired 
knowledge. Already at this time, the board stressed that “mathesis” was an 
important basis for a future official.59 Correspondingly, between 1710 and 
1750, it was relatively common to mention mathematics in one’s application 
to the Bureau (see Figure 2 and 3). But what was meant by mathesis changed 
from the early to mid-eighteenth century: the group who mentioned math-
ematics in their applications expanded, as mathematics became a more 
prominent part of the mining sciences. 
 
In the first two decades of the century, mathematics and mechanics 
were mostly discussed by applicants who aimed for the mechanical stipends 
of the Laboratorium mechanicum. The only applicant in the first decade who 
mentioned mechanics, Göran Wallerius, also explicitly mentioned Christo-
pher Polhammar and the stipendium mechanicum. All the four applicants men-
tioning mathematics in the 1710s also mentioned mechanics. Three of them 
(Grave and Tilaeus, and Duhre) explicitly mentioned having studied with 
Polhammar, and three (Geisler, Grave and Duhre) applied for the stipend in 
mechanics at some stage. In the applications of the early 1700s, mathematics 
was thus almost exclusively associated with mining mechanics, and the dis-
                                                   
58 Like Aurelius’ arithmetica, most books from the seventeenth century published for men of the 
civil service and the military were geared towards explicit uses, such as Peder Nilsson Raam’s 
book on the geometrical measurements of fields from 1670 and the ”Captein Ingenieur” 
Berthold Otto Smoll’s introduction to geometry for officers of the fortification corps from 1692. 
Peder Nilsson Raam: Then swenske åkermätningen, eller Ortuga deelo book, item een lijten tractat, om staaff 
och råå, och thes beskaffenheet (Strengnäs, 1670); Schmoll: Kort anledning till geometrien, hwar effter office-
rarne wid Hans Kongl. May. 
59 “Protocol of the Bureau of Mines”, 1715-11-28, A1/53/1817–24, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA, 
1819. For a more detailed discussion of this protocol, see page 110–11. 

 
 101
cussions of mathematics can be delimited to a clearly delineated subgroup 
of auscultators.60 
 
These applicants’ relationships with Polhammar is unsurprising, given 
his role at that time as the final authority on identifying mechanical compe-
tence in the Bureau. His authority meant that it was difficult for young men 
to assert their mechanical and mathematical skill without his support. Gen-
erally, a close and personal relationship with him was required to receive 
one of the mechanical stipends; in practice, it seems that what Polhammar 
considered to be the surest sign of mechanical competence was that you 
were his son, or at least one of his most valued students. In 1708, Magnus 
Lundström and a Mr Rangelius had applied for a mechanical stipend. In his 
response to the Bureau, Polhammar argued that he did not know what 
Lundström knew of theoria or praxis. As for Rangelius, Polhammar did not 
know anything of his studies in mechanics, but he knew that he was a skilled 
draughtsman. Therefore, he recommended Rangelius instead of Lundström.  
But, he continued, he especially recommended his son Christopher 
Polhammar the younger, who was on a European tour, and who, at the 
time, was staying in Leipzig. According to his father, Polhammar the young-
er was well versed in mechanics. The Bureau accepted Polhammar the el-
der’s suggestion, and decided that his son should receive the stipend when 
he returned home and could present evidence of his mechanical skill, in the 
form of drawings and actual machines.61 
 
Similarly, in 1715, when Duhre and Georg Rudin applied for the sti-
pend, Polhammar instead recommended his younger son Gabriel.  He con-
sidered Duhre to be competent in “mathesi pura” but argued that he was too 
old to learn the “mechanical praxis”. Thus, again we see how distinctions of 
age were central to the perceived ability to learn mechanics. Instead, 
Polhammar argued, Duhre would “provide his Majesty a much greater ser-
vice, if he were used as a teacher for the young [at the naval base] in Karls-
krona in the things that belong to navigation.” The board agreed that one of 
the stipends should be given to Gabriel Polhammar, but sidestepped the 
opinions of Polhammar Senior in the case of Duhre. Although Polhammar 
Senior obviously gave a negative review of Duhre’s mechanical skill, the 
                                                   
60 Göran Wallerius: “Application to auscultate”, 1705-03-21, E4/116/206, Bergskollegiums arkiv, 
RA; Johan Tobias Geisler: “Application to auscultate”, 1711-11-23, E4/129/518, Bergskollegi-
ums arkiv, RA; Sebastian Grave: “Application to auscultate”, 1712-11-24, E4/131/388, Bergskol-
legiums arkiv, RA; Petrus Tillaeus: “Application to auscultate”, 1712-12-20, E4/132/2, Bergskol-
legiums arkiv, RA; Anders Gabriel Duhre: “Application to auscultate”, 1715-09-26, E4/137/113, 
Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. See also Figure 2 and 3. 
61 “Protocol of the Bureau of Mines”, 1708-02-12, A1/46/130–42, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
Because Christopher Polhammar Junior died in Leipzig later that year, he never received the 
stipend. After Polhammar’s son died, Magnus Lundström applied for the stipend again. See 
Magnus Lundström: “Application for stipendium mechanicum”, 1708-12-02, E4/123/1004, 
Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. Lundström did not receive the stipend at this time either. Instead, it 
was given to Harald Lybecker in 1709, see Almquist: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857, 
113. 

 
 
102
board responded as if he had been in favour of him. They wished to give 
Duhre the other mechanical stipend because of “the good recommendation 
from [Polhammar] […] that he has put down an uncommon diligence in 
mathesis”. The Bureau proposed that Polhammar should try to find Duhre a 
position in Karlskrona himself, and decided that they would give Duhre the 
stipend should he fail.62 
Mathematics as the basis of a community (1720–50) 
During the first two decades of the eighteenth century, the mathematics and 
mechanics of the Bureau were more or less a Polhammar family business. 
But the admittance of Duhre, against Polhammar’s recommendation, could 
be seen as indicating that his authority was diminishing by the late 1710s. 
This is also the time when the number of applicants who mentioned math-
ematics grew. Gabriel Polhammar and Anders Gabriel Duhre kept their 
stipends into the 1730s. Consequently, in the 1720s, none of the growing 
number of applicants who mentioned mathematics applied for the stipendium 
mechanicum. Furthermore, in contrast to the applications of the first decades, 
none of these latter ones mentioned Christopher Polhammar. Lindqvist has 
pointed out that, by the 1720s, men such as Urban Hiärne and Christopher 
Polhammar were representatives of a past era, when men had been able to 
rise in the bureaucracy through royal command instead of through the 
“normal channels”. At that time, having been a client of the former absolute 
monarch hindered rather than facilitated advancement.63 To present a rela-
tionship with Polhammar was therefore not desirable at this time and the 
applicants of the 1720s must have presented mathematical skill for other 
reasons than to show their affiliation with him. 
 
Also, by the 1730s, the strong correlation between mentions of mechan-
ics and mathematics disappeared. In this decade, 19 (25 %) of the 76 appli-
cants mentioned having studied mathematics and these studies’ importance 
to mining work. Only six mentioned mechanics, and only one, Samuel 
Sohlberg,  received the stipendium mechanicum. At this time, there was there-
fore a large group of young men who presented mathematical skill to the 
Bureau, but who did not necessarily associate this skill with mining mechan-
ics. In the 1740s, 18 out of 88 applicants mentioned mathematics in their 
application, but only three mentioned mechanics. These applicants of the 
1730s and 1740s did not necessarily just see mathematical exercise as a way 
to become a mining mechanicus. Instead, they discussed mathematics as 
                                                   
62 “mathesis pura”; “mechaniska praxin”; “Protocol of the Bureau of Mines”, 1716-04-23, 
A1/54/399–406, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA, 400. “han skulle Kunna giöra Hans May:t en fast 
större tienst, om han blefwe brukad för en Läremästare för ungdommen i Carlscrona uti de saker, 
som til navigationen höra.”; ibid., 400–401. “det goda loford och witnesbörd, af H. Assessoren och 
Directeuren är wordet lemnadt, at han uti Mathesin nu ogemen stor flit anlagt”; ibid., 404. 
63 Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 99. 

 
 103
relevant to the whole business of the Bureau. These young men recognised 
the Bureau as a community where the learning of mathematics was part of 
the process of becoming a full participant. The applicants, including Sohl-
berg in 1731, described how they had studied things “that facilitate mining, 
and the adherent mathematical and mechanical sciences.” Similarly, in 1748, 
Gustaf Bierchenius wrote of how he, because of his interest in and inclina-
tion for mining, “especially had had endeavoured to learn Mathesis and Phys-
ics.”64 This function of mathematics post-Polhammar could be seen as a 
foundation of a shared social epistemology: it was a means of establishing a 
social framework based on a common way of seeing and thinking about the 
world. 
 
This new role of mathematics is also found in the prefaces to two math-
ematical textbooks, written by auscultators of the Bureau in the late 1710s. 
In A Fundamental Guide to Mathesis Universalem and Algebra (1718), Brandt, 
accepted as an auscultator in 1715, argued to his superiors that mathematics 
was integral to the Bureau’s work. Brandt’s work, which was based on the 
lectures of his fellow auscultator Anders Gabriel Duhre, can be seen as an 
early forceful argument for the relevance of mathematics beyond mining 
mechanics. As argued by Fors, Brandt would later become the “grand old 
man” of the group of chemists who saw mechanical philosophy as a basis 
for their art.65 But, in Brandt’s preface, it is possible to discern an even wider 
role for mathematics: as a legitimate socio-epistemological foundation of all 
the Bureau’s activities that would unite the officials through a common 
framework of seeing and thinking.66 
 
Brandt’s publication was dedicated to the Bureau’s vice president, the 
mine councillors [Bergsråd] and the Bureau’s assessors. In his preface, Brandt 
firmly placed himself and his publication within the hierarchies of the Bu-
reau. Written in this context, Brandt’s book on algebra should not be con-
sidered a scholarly text. It was written in the vernacular instead of Latin, the 
royal printer in Stockholm (Johan Horrn) printed it rather than the printer 
in Uppsala, and it was meant for Brandt’s fellow civil servants, rather than 
for a European scholarly audience. It can thus be seen as an example of the 
tradition of mathematical textbooks in Swedish produced in the bureaus in 
Stockholm, discussed earlier. From the start, Brandt conformed to the style 
of writing expected of a Stockholm cameralist. He humbly pointed out that 
his book should not be seen as a work “of any perfection”. His only inten-
tion was to give his “gracious superior” a “simple specimen of the dili-
gence” that he had put into the mathematical sciences while being an  
                                                   
64 “som till BergzWärks, och de der til hörande Mathematiske och Mechaniske Wettenskaper tiäna.”; 
Samuel Sohlberg: “Application to auscultate”, 1731-05-25, E4/167/946, Bergskollegiums arkiv, 
RA. “i synnerhet winlagt mig om Mathesin och Physiquen.”; Gustaf Bierchenius: “Application to 
auscultate”, 1748-02-29, E4/217/42, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
65 Fors: The limits of matter, 95. 
66 On the relation between mathematics and chemistry in Brandt’s preface, see ibid., 91. 

 
 
104
auscultator. The mathematical sciences, he continued, were the foundation 
of “as many parts of the correct practice of mining, as of much other highly 
useful knowledge”.67 
 
Brandt’s preface put forth an epistemic framework in which mathemati-
cal knowledge, work and production were intertwined.68 An important aim 
of the preface was to establish mathematics as a foundation for several 
branches of the Bureau’s work. Through mathematics, mining could “be 
noticeably improved”.69 The preface argued that: 
What great service and usefulness that the Mathematical sciences provide 
for the mines is such a well-known matter, especially what concerns Me-
chanics, that there is no need to describe it further.70 
Thus, Brandt’s aim was not to link mathematics to mechanics, nor to con-
test that mathematics was relevant to this field. The connection between 
mathematics and mining mechanics had already been done by Polhammar 
and, according to Brandt, was self-evident for the Bureau’s officials. For 
Brandt, it was instead central to show that by applying mathematics to the 
experience of nature it was possible to establish physical facts. The prime 
example of such a practice, according to him, was “the splendid mathematical 
and philosophical works by the Englishman Newton, which clearly show how 
much in physics that can be discovered, using the help of mathematics.”71 
 
Anders Gabriel Duhre, discussed earlier and whose lectures Brandt’s 
publication was based on, was a mathematician with an interest in mechani-
cal inventions. Like the other officials of the Bureau, and following 
Polhammar, Duhre considered mathematics, and more specifically geome-
try, to be the foundation of mechanical work. But in 1722, when arguing for 
an educational institution for the teaching of œconomical sciences using 
mathematical principles, Duhre, similarly to Brandt, argued for a broader 
role for mathematics. He pointed out how “Chemical praxis and the han-
                                                   
67 “af någon fullkomlighet”; “min nådigste förman”; “ett ringa prof af den flijt”; “många delar till 
Bergwärks rätta handhafwande än andra högnödige kundskaper sig grunda”; Brandt: Mathesin 
universalem, dedication. 
68 Ibid., title page. Other works, discussing a similar role of mathematical and physical sciences in 
the Bureau are for example Duhre: Förklaring, 23–7; Ekström: Tal, om järn-förädlingens nytta och 
vårdande; Göran Wallerius: Tal emellan mathesin och physiquen om deras verkan och nytta uti bärgs-väsendet, 
förestäldt i kongl. svenska vetenskaps academien af Göran Vallerius vid præsidii afläggande den 21 jan. 1744 
(Stockholm, 1747); Isaac Johan Uhr: En brukspatrons egenskaper (Uppsala, 1750). 
69 “märkeligen befrämjas”; Brandt: Mathesin universalem, dedication. 
70 “Hwad stor tienst och gagn de Mathematiske wettenskaper tilfoga bergwärken, är hos oss i 
synnerhet hwad Mechaniquen widkommer en så bekant sak, at der om intet behöfwes wijdare 
förmåla”; ibid., preface. 
71 “den widt berömde Engels-Mannen Newtons förträffeliga Mathematiska och Philosophiska wärk, 
som klarligen wijsa huru mycket medelst mathematiquens tilhjelp, der sammastädes uti physiquens 
uptäcktes som tillförende warit omöyeligit innan application af Mathesi blef kunnig.”; ibid. 

 
 105
dling of metals”, would be “improved through the application of geometry.”72 
Whereas Polhem had been the director of the Laboratorium mechanicum in the 
Bureau, Duhre proposed that he should be the director of a Laboratorium 
mathematico-œconomicum, signalling that mathematics was the basis for all use-
ful œconomical knowledge. A Fundamental Guide might be seen as the joint 
product of the mathematically inclined men Brandt and Duhre, both in-
spired by Newtonian science and eclectic philosophy in their views on the 
role of mathematics in material and knowledge production. Duhre and 
Brandt presented the Bureau as a community that was (or at least should be) 
formed around a natural philosophy based on mathematical principles. This 
community should act according to common and predictable methods, 
knowledge and norms, based on mathematics. 
 
As seen from the protocols of the board from 1715, as well as from the 
applications to auscultate from the 1710s onward, Brandt’s linking of math-
ematics and mining in 1718 was hardly original. Still, what the unifying term 
of “mathematics” contained and how its contents were related to mining was 
not static. We could thus see the statements of Brandt and Duhre as argu-
ments for a specific epistemology that gave mathematics a new and promi-
nent position in the Bureau. What the two argued for in their publications 
was the reconfiguration of the category of the public man into one who 
based his work on an experimentalist framework underpinned by mathe-
matics and especially geometry. In the 1720s, out of the sixty-one young 
men who applied to the Bureau three mentioned mathematics, mechanics 
and physics in their application. One of these was Daniel Bergenstierna, who 
took private classes in mathematics from Duhre. In his application in 1723, 
Bergenstierna explicitly referenced Duhre as his teacher, and more or less 
repeated the arguments for geometry found in Duhre’s publication from the 
same year. He stated that he had studied the parts of mathematics, “namely 
geometry and algebra, which provide a good basis for physics and mechanics”. 
He had acquired such mathematical skills by having taken “advantage of Mr 
Anders Duhre’s faithful teaching with the aim, that I more easily can acquire 
the mining science”.73 By the 1740s, many applications were similar to Ber-
genstierna’s in that they linked mathesis to physica and to the mining sciences. 
                                                   
72 “Chymiska Praxi och Metallernas handterande […] böra befrämias igenom Geometriens Applica-
tion.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 26. For further discussion of Anders Gabriel Duhre and his educational 
institution, see Chapter 5. 
73 “nämligen Geometrien och Algebra, som gifwa anledning till en god grund uti Physiquen och 
Mechaniquen”; “deruthennan någon tid borrtåt nyttiat Hr Anders Duhres trogna underwisning till 
den ändan, att jag sedan destebättre Bergwärks kundskapen måtte kunna inhämta”; Daniel Ber-
genstierna: “Application to auscultate”, 1723-10-24, E4/151/307, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
The other applicants discussing mathematics were Samuel Buschenfelt the younger, the son of 
Christopher Polhammar’s travel companion (1725), and Samuel Schultze (1726). 

 
 
106
The mathematical man of metals 
Which demands did these young men anticipate, who discussed mathemat-
ics in their applications? The role of mathematics in the Bureau of the mid 
1700s can be found in the Uppsala dissertation The characteristics of an ironmas-
ter [brukspatron, literally “patron of a bruk”] written in 1750, which describes 
this mathematical man of metals. The thesis was presented by the ausculta-
tor of the Bureau, Isaac Johan Uhr, under the praeses Anders Berch, the pro-
fessor of œconomy in Uppsala. In his dissertation, Uhr discussed what 
character, knowledge and skills an owner and director of an ironworks 
should possess, and argued for the importance of mathematics and physics 
in the making of such a man. Although the ironmasters were not the same 
men as the civil servants within the Bureau (however, many auscultators 
came from families of ironmasters and many auscultators eventually became 
ironmasters), it is clear that Uhr’s beliefs as to the knowledge and skills an 
ironmaster should possess reflected the norms of the community that he 
was becoming part of. As such, his discussion on the role of mathematics in 
becoming a man of mining and smelting is informative of the norms for the 
role of mathematics in the Bureau of the 1730s.74 
 
Uhr began his work with the common metaphor of society as a body 
consisting of diverse parts. As a part of this body politic, the role of the 
ironwork’s owner, much like that of civil servants, was to act in the interest 
of the whole of the state. Because the ironmaster was an important member 
of the social body, it was vital that he was knowledgeable in his trade and 
that he constantly strived to perfect it. According to Uhr, it was because of 
the ironmaster’s desire for continuous improvement, in the interest of the 
state, that metal making and mathematics merged. Such practices of im-
provement not only improved his ironworks: they were also exercises by 
which he bettered himself. Like the writers discussed in the previous chap-
ter, Uhr presented mathematics as part of a process of becoming; he explic-
itly pointed out that natural knowledge, good quality metal and virtuous 
men were created in parallel: 
Thus, when [the ironmaster] examines ores, and wishes to perfect the 
knowledge about them, he also examines and perfects himself to quite a 
useful member of society, and himself becomes both the worker in, and 
the product of, his workshop.75 
                                                   
74 Uhr: En brukspatrons egenskaper. It is generally difficult to know if an eighteenth-century academ-
ic dissertations was written by the professor, the præses or the respondendt. However, according 
to Sven-Eric Liedman, because of how the style of this dissertation diverged from the others 
under Berch, it is likely that Uhr wrote it himself; Sven-Eric Liedman: Den synliga handen. Anders 
Berch och ekonomiämnena vid 1700-talets svenska universitet (Stockholm, 1986), 119. 
75 “Således, då han pröfvar Malmer och vill upbruka kunskapen om dem, pröfvar och upbrukar 
han sig sjelf til en ganska nyttig lem uti Samhället, och blifver sjelf både verkande och verkstad uti 
sin verkstad.”; Uhr: En brukspatrons egenskaper, 25. 

 
 107
 
Such examination of nature, which made an ironmaster into someone 
other than a commoner working with mining and smelting [bergsman från 
allmogen], was based on mathematical and physical principles. Using the 
common trope of the difference between simple craftsmen and the 
mechanicus, Uhr argued that common men, who only had the bodily skills 
required for menial labour, were merely able to carry out “what cultivated 
minds had conceived.”76 However, men whose minds had been cultivated 
by the mathematical sciences had an obligation to “to cultivate their natural 
senses to advance the public good”.77 The ironmaster, like the mechanicus, 
was defined by his cultivated and imaginative mind that could invent new 
things. Such men should have as their objective to “perfect their knowledge 
of the subject [of mining], and to constantly work to carry the arts to greater 
heights and perfection.”78 For Uhr, the repetitious practice of certain skills 
and gestures, which improved both knowledge and the knower, was what 
set the ironmaster apart from other men. He specified how “the skill of an 
ironmaster begins with knowledge in mathematics, physics and chemistry”.79 Fur-
thermore, an important part of mathematics was mechanics, which taught 
the ironmaster “the correct and suitable construction of buildings.”80 These 
skills identified an ironmaster as “a father, who gave birth to and nurtured 
as many useful members [of the state], as the number of young men he 
made into useful workers.”81 Thus, again, mathematics and mechanics were 
imagined to be part of a process of maturity, and a means of asserting fa-
therly authority. By engaging with practical mathematics, a man of mining 
and smelting would mature into a patriarch worthy of ruling other subjects 
of early modern Sweden. 
 
In Uhr’s narrative, mathematical and natural philosophy constituted a 
boundary between the ironmaster and other men found in metal produc-
tion. Likewise, by the 1730s, the officials of the Bureau identified them-
selves as socially and epistemically distinct by the manners in which they 
related mathematical and physical knowledge to their work. Mathematical 
skill came to carry connotations similar to those of a university degree, as 
seen, for example, in the quote from Fahlander’s application of 1750, dis-
cussed earlier (see page 89–91). Like a degree, mathematical proficiency was 
not only evidence of a set of skills, but also proved that you were a specific 
kind of man, who was separated from the common crowd and suited for 
work in the Bureau. As the auscultatory system grew, mathematics became 
                                                   
76 “som upbrukade snillen uptänkt”; ibid., 17. 
77 “at förädla sina naturliga sinne gåfvor til befrämjande af det almänna bästa”; ibid. 
78 “at göra sig sjelfva fullkomliga i saken, och ständigt arbeta på konstens upbringande til större 
högd och fullkomlighet.”; ibid. 
79 “Börjar altså en Bruks-Patrons skicklighet i kunskapen uti Mathematik, Physik och Chemie”; 
Ekström: Tal, om järn-förädlingens nytta och vårdande, 18–9. 
80 “bygnaders rätta och riktiga inrättning”; Uhr: En brukspatrons egenskaper, 19. 
81 “en Far, som födde och upfödde så många och nyttiga lemmar, som han gjorde sådane ynglin-
gar til gagneliga arbetare.”; ibid., 27. 

 
 
108
an important signifier by which the board could identify legitimate peripher-
al participants. In the applications to auscultate from the 1730s and 1740s, 
we can see the rise of a large group of young men who wished to adhere 
and align themselves to the persona of a mathematical civil servant in order 
to participate in the Bureau’s work. Mentioning mathematics in one’s appli-
cation thus held an important symbolic function, which by the 1730s was 
not only related to such activities as machine building or subterranean con-
struction work. 
Becoming a Bureau official 
The processes of self-formation and identification did not stop after the 
board had identified an apt auscultator. Quite the opposite: although auscul-
tators already conformed to anticipated demands in their applications, once 
accepted they were formed by a process of enculturation that ideally result-
ed in a permanent position as an official. Within a couple of days of admit-
tance, the auscultator made both an oral and a written oath. The oral oath 
was made in front of the board and registered in the protocol; the written 
oath was kept in the Bureau’s archive. In his history of the Bureau, Daniel 
Tilas attached a standard form for the auscultator’s oath. The auscultator 
should swear to work diligently and, with respect and reverence, he should 
carry out what his superiors wished him to do. He should also make a 
pledge to God not to share any of the matters discussed by the board with 
outsiders.82 The auscultators’ written oaths found in the archive follow this 
standard document to a large degree, and they were thus generally written in 
a standard form. The written oath was not a presentation of who the auscul-
tator was, but of what he would become; it was a promise that he would 
conform to the norms of the Bureau and that he would shape himself in the 
image of a virtuous and submissive civil servant. Therefore, it is only possi-
ble to discern some long-term trends in this otherwise homogeneous mate-
rial, such as the fact that by the 1710s the auscultators had stopped pledging 
their loyalty to the king and instead swore allegiance only to the patria.83 
 
In his commemorative speech over the former auscultator Lars Ben-
zelstierna, Olof Celsius described Benzelstierna’s acceptance as an ausculta-
tor as if “here, a new academy opened for this young man, in which he, 
from the most skilled masters, could learn the application of the theoretical 
knowledge that he had acquired in the previous [academy].”84 Others were 
                                                   
82 Daniel Tilas: “Om nuvarande Bergskollegium”, 269. 
83 “Auskultantmatrikel”, 1678-1815, D1/15, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. This development thus 
interestingly corresponds to the changed ways of discussing the publicum in the applications, as 
discussed earlier. 
84 “En ny Academie öpnades här för vår yngling, uti hvilken Han af de skickeligaste mästare fick 
lära tillämpningen af den Theoretiske kunskap, hvilken Han vid den förra hade inhämtat.”; Olof 

 
 109
more critical of the Bureau’s education. In a speech about Axel Fredrik 
Cronstedt, Sven Rinman described how “at first, our young man of mining 
and smelting must have been somewhat perplexed, when he was ordered to 
make a fair copy of the Bureau’s letters and judgements”. Cronstedt had 
wished to acquire new knowledge in the Bureau, but at first had not known 
how to learn anything from the tasks that were set before him.85 In his Cur-
riculum vitæ, Daniel Tilas was even more dismissive of his first time as an 
auscultator. During the autumn of 1732, he had stayed in Stockholm and 
had spent his time “more walking around in the streets, than doing anything 
really useful, because I, and all the other auscultators, lacked instruction and 
direction to useful work.” Only after having contacted his uncle and neigh-
bour in Stockholm – the vice-clerk of the Bureau, Erland Fredrich Hiärne – 
did Tilas’ luck improve. Hiärne advised him to diligently collect and copy 
travel reports, and to start gathering specimens for an ore and mineral cabi-
net.86 
 
The auscultators were not alone in having a negative view of ausculta-
tion: the satirists in Stockholm also picked up on the theme. For example, 
the weekly periodical The Swedish Argus described how young men became 
auscultators in order to live lives of drunkenness and debauchery: 
The kid enters the coffeehouse or the tavern, so self-important as if he 
wished to say: Hi, here I come! In there, the pipe, the cup, and the nip or 
the digestive are his exercises. One does not hear many wise words from 
his mouth. When I ask around, why he is left alone so carelessly? Some-
one answers: He is employed by a bureau. Then I don’t dare say a word. Eve-
ryday when his father leaves for his vocation, the boy goes out and does 
whatever he pleases. He is an auscultator; he wanders around, hears what 
happens in town and passes judgement, so that old people must be silent 
and feel ashamed. Is that not to spoil the young?87 
                                                                                                                        
Celsius: Åtminnelse-tal öfver lands-höfdingen, bärgs-rådet Lars Benzelstierna, hållit för Kongl. vetenskapsacad-
emien den 6 dec. 1758 (Stockholm, 1759), 14. Similarly, Anders Berch talked of the Bureau as a 
university [Hög-schola] in his speech over Henric Kalmeter; Berch: Åminnelse-tal öfver Henric Kal-
meter, 8. 
85 “I början blef väl vår unge Bergsman något förvirrad, då Honom förelades at renskrifva Kongl. 
Collegii Bref och Domar”; Sven Rinman: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne bergmästaren … Axel Fred. 
Cronstedt, på kongl. academiens vägnar, hållet i stora riddarhus-salen den 6. martii, 1766 (Stockholm, 1766), 
12. 
86 “mera at släntra gatorne omkring, än at giöra mig något verckeligt gagn, emedan manuduction 
och anvisning til nyttige arbeten feltes så väl mig som alle andre auscultanter.”; Daniel Tilas: 
Curriculum vitæ I–II, 1712–1757 samt fragment av dagbok september–oktober 1767, Holger Wichman 
(ed) (Stockholm, 1966 [1712–57]), 33. 
87 “Ungen komma in på Caffé-Huset eller Källaren, så dryg, som han wille säija: Hij här kommer 
jag! Der äro pipan, tassen, och supen eller afsättaren, hans öfningar. Icke många kloka ord får 
man der höra af hans munn. När jag frågar effter, hwi han släppes så handlöst? Swarar man: Han 
är engagerad i ett Collegio. Då törs jag icke säija ett ord. När Fadren går om dagen til sitt kall, så går 
Poiken ut och giör hwad han will, han är en Auscultant, han wandrar omkring och hörer hwad 
som passerar i Staden och fäller omdömen deröfwer, så at gammalt folck måste tiga och  

 
 
110
For its eighteenth-century readers, the strength of the satire must have lain 
in the contrast between its presentation of a young auscultator and the ex-
pected self-presentations of actual young men of the bureaus. According to 
the Argus, the auscultators were too young to work in the Bureau. They 
were not men, but boys, and therefore they could not be trusted to carry out 
their duties. Together with the auscultators’ own observations, this piece 
from the Argus reminds us that the meanings ascribed to auscultation, and 
the role of mathematics in this education, should be seen as meaningful in 
relation to the community of men of the Bureau. For actors outside the 
Bureau, or when the men of the Bureau presented themselves to other audi-
ences, auscultation could carry completely different meanings. 
 
While there are diverse accounts of how diligent the auscultators actually 
were, hard work and studies still constituted a norm, repeatedly expressed 
by both the board and the auscultators themselves. On 28 November 1715, 
the members of the board treated the applications of two young men: An-
ders Bratt and the already mentioned Georg Brandt. The board considered 
both men worthy of auscultation: they had produced a suitable submission, 
shown an understanding of assaying and the domestic metal production, 
and expressed an interest in travelling abroad to learn more. Having quickly 
accepted the two men, the board also decided to communicate to them, as 
well as the rest of the auscultators of the Bureau, what was expected of 
them “per Extractum protocolli”. In the protocol, which I mentioned briefly 
earlier, the board put forth what an auscultator should learn in order to ad-
vance in the Bureau. The board communicated that the Bureau’s positions 
were given according to the auscultators’ “personal capacity”, and no heed 
was to be taken of the amount of time he had served. Thus, the identifica-
tion of skill should not end with the application: auscultation itself was a 
forum for presenting oneself as a capable man and this was done through 
continuous diligent practice. In this way, the auscultator should make evi-
dent that he was “not only to be familiar with mathesis, he should also make 
himself informed in all the pieces that are necessary to know when mining”. 
He should know how to identify minerals, assay the quality of the ore and 
know how to mine it; he should know how to produce coal, and be knowl-
edgeable of the processes involved in producing metals. These skills could 
be acquired by visiting domestic mines and ironworks and then by learning 
more on a foreign tour. From these voyages the auscultator should write 
reports of what he saw and submit them to the archive.88 Thus, the Bureau 
was very clear in its expectations of accepted auscultators. 
                                                                                                                        
skiämmas. Är icke detta at skiämma bort ungdomen?”; Olof von Dalin: Then swänska Argus vol. 5 
(Stockholm, 1732), [6]. 
88 “personernes capacitet”; “bör icke allenast wara grundad uti Mathesi, utan ock på det nogaste 
giöra sig underrättad uti alla de stycken, som til Bergzwerkshandteringen äro nödige at weta”; 
“Protocol of the Bureau of Mines, 1715-11-28”, 1819. This protocol seems partly to contradict 
Almqvist, who argues that no special competence was required for admission until the mid-

 
 111
 
The already discussed “Short report” suggested similar ways to perform 
diligence within the Bureau. Once accepted, an auscultator should visit the 
Bureau’s archive, where he should access and transcribe documents related 
to the mining œconomy. He should also visit the assayer 1–2 hours every 
day, and when the clerk was away the auscultator should offer to write pro-
tocols. After 1–1.5 years, the auscultator should apply for a permit [promotor-
ial] to travel to the mining districts, where he could observe the mines and 
the smelting process. The “Short report” recommended a specific route of 
sites that the auscultator should visit, and gave examples of the various 
forms of useful knowledge that could be acquired at these locations. The 
places should be visited in a specific order, forming an itinerary in the area 
between the north shore of Lake Mälaren and the mining town of Falun. 
The auscultator should also read reports from previous officials who had 
travelled, both domestically and abroad. Ideally, in the end, the auscultator 
should apply for funds and permission to travel abroad, preferably to Han-
over, Saxony or Bohemia. By doing these things, and by showing “respect 
and obedience,” the young man was promised secure prospects in the min-
ing administration.89 
 
The everyday work of an auscultator thus involved numerous and di-
verse practices, ranging from domestic and foreign voyages to the copying 
of protocols found in the archive. In order to understand the whole process 
of becoming an official, one would therefore need to examine all these ways 
to become enculturated into the administrative community of practice. But 
here I have somewhat different focus: as stated earlier, I study the role of 
mathematics (in the early modern broad sense) in these processes, in order 
to understand the ways in which mathematical exercises formed an early 
modern subject. In order to understand mathematics as an exercise of self-
formation in the Bureau, and especially with regard to geometry and me-
chanics, one little-studied category of sources is more relevant than the oth-
ers: manuscripts on mathematics, mechanics and natural philosophy that the 
auscultators copied and from which they learnt to see the world in a new 
way. 
                                                                                                                        
eighteenth century, Almquist: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857, 46. Also, the protocol 
stated that a capable auscultator should be knowledgeable of the law, in order to be able to act as 
a judge and an experienced man of the metal production. On the role of foreign travels in the 
education of the Bureau officials, see Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 121–7; Göran Rydén: “The 
Enlightenment in practice. Swedish travellers and knowledge about the metal trades”, Sjut-
tonhundratal (2013), 64–9; Fors: The limits of matter, 8, 53–8. 
89 “Respect och lydno,”; Schultze: “Kort betänkande huru en yngling som tänker söka sin 
fortkomst vid bergsväsendet bör sin tid anlägga”, unpaginated. 

 
 
112
Transcription as enculturation 
The “Short report” repeatedly pointed out the importance of copying key 
texts found in the Bureau’s archive: auscultators should ask the “recording 
clerk” for access to the “mining ordinances, as well as other letters and reso-
lutions, which concern the mining œconomy of the realm”. These texts 
should be transcribed in full, or at least copied in extract.90 Because these 
texts were “numerous and extensive,” the young men should be “diligent in 
this endeavour, so that not too much work is wasted.”91 
 
In two separate collections of the library Carolina Rediviva at Uppsala lie 
two volumes filled with the products of the auscultators’ work. Brandt, en-
countered earlier, signed the first of these two collections and he most likely 
either copied down or authored these texts when he auscultated in the Bu-
reau. His collection contains texts on geometry and mechanics and their role 
in mining, as well as a treatise on mechanistic natural philosophy.92 The se-
cond collection of texts contains some of the same texts on geometry and 
mechanics found in Brandt’s manuscript, but lacks many others. This collec-
tion is most likely written in the hand of another auscultator: Lars 
Schultze.93 
 
In Schultze’s collection of manuscripts, one also finds the “Short re-
port”, discussed earlier. Thus it is likely that this report was a product of the 
very practice of copying that it prescribed.94 The possibility that neither 
Schultze nor Brandt was the originator of these works does not make them 
uninteresting. Quite the opposite: it is because the handwritten texts were 
copies that they are relevant to this study. Copying was a technique for cir-
                                                   
90 “actuarien”; “Bergz fårordningen, och andre till Bergs Oecononomien här i riket hörande bref och 
Resolutioner”, ibid. 
91 “många och wid löftiga,”; “wara så mycket flitig man på det intet, at för lång tid dertill må 
upgås.”; Schultze: “Kort betänkande huru en yngling som tänker söka sin fortkomst vid 
bergsväsendet bör sin tid anlägga”. 
92 The collection of Brandt’s handwritings contains, among others, the texts Georg Brandt: “Om 
geometrien”, A 28, 41–81, UUB; Georg Brandt: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller 
Mechaniken”, A 28, 245–302, UUB; Georg Brandt: “[On Philosophia naturali]”, A 28, 334–465, 
UUB; Georg Brandt: “Om perspektivkonsten”, A 28, 538–67, UUB. 
93 Sten Lindroth: Gruvbrytning och kopparhantering vid Stora Kopparberget intill 1800-talets början. 2, 
Kopparhanteringen (Uppsala, 1955), 16, note 8. I agree in Lindroth’s assertion that the handwriting 
of e.g. Schultze’s first application to auscultate, or his request for a dometic study tour, is the 
same as that found in this manuscript; see e.g., Lars Schultze: “Application to auscultate”, 1726-
11-22, E4/159/920, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA; Lars Schultze: “Request for domestic study 
tour”, 1729-02-12, E4/162/263, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. This second collection of texts 
contain Schultze: “Kort betänkande huru en yngling som tänker söka sin fortkomst vid 
bergsväsendet bör sin tid anlägga”; Lars Schultze: “Om geometrien”, C 1433, UUB; Lars 
Schultze: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”, D 1433, UUB. 
94 It has been suggested that Anton Swab could have authored the “report”, as Schultze copied 
other texts by him and because Swab’s education corresponds better to the career path that the 
guide suggests. Staffan Högberg: “Inledning”, Anton von Swabs berättelse om Avesta kronobruk 1723 
(Stockholm, 1983), 15. But as Schultze arguably copied texts by a number of authors, whose 
education better fit the career path suggested in the guide, it is hard to pinpoint an original author 
of this text. 

 
 113
culating educational texts among officials: by spending time in the archive, 
the auscultator could reproduce authoritative knowledge and take it with 
him when leaving Stockholm. Thus the archive functioned as a collective 
memory for the community, and also as a central node that coordinated the 
communication and actions of its officials. The “Short report” in Schultze’s 
collection pointed out that, although copying and excerpting texts was time-
consuming work that should be done effectively, it was worth the effort. 
The Bureau was a community of practice, and these copying practices were 
part of a process of becoming a full participant in this community. By tran-
scribing documents, an auscultator would internalise the norms that they 
expressed, in order to be enculturated into the Bureau and thus become an 
official. Also, handwritten texts held a value of exclusivity, compared with 
printed texts. Not everyone could copy such manuscripts: only those 
deemed worthy to be legitimate peripheral participants. Thus, possessing a 
library of your own handwritten texts, directly copied from the archive, was 
a sign of membership, as well as a way to possess a sample of the Bureau’s 
collective memory. 
 
The act of transcribing did not only reproduce the archive as new 
handwritten copies, but should also be seen as a means, as it were, to colo-
nise the auscultators’ minds with the methods and epistemologies of the 
Bureau.95 Although the handwritten texts were not the original works of the 
auscultators who wrote them, and thus do not necessarily say anything 
about the opinions of their authors, we can infer from them the processes 
of becoming a member, and adopting the views, of the community. By mak-
ing excerpts and transcriptions, auscultators did not only make copies of 
texts. This act of copying was also a means by which the auscultators made 
themselves into men who embraced a certain mathematical and mechanical 
way of seeing that was shared by the Bureau’s officials. Among the hand-
writings found in Brandt’s and Schultze’s collections, four texts are especial-
ly informative of the roles of mathematics, mechanics and mechanistic phi-
losophy as foundations of a community of men in the Bureau: first, “About 
geometry”, found in both collections; second, “On the art of perspective”, 
found only in Brandt’s collection and which discusses seeing and drawing 
using geometric principles; third, the compendiums “A short instruction to 
the art of operation [driftskonsten] or mechanics”, also found in both collec-
tions; and finally, a text on the “Knowledge of nature, or physics” found 
only in Brandt’s collection. Together, these texts express a social epistemol-
ogy of geometric perception and mechanical work. By studying them, we 
can understand the symbolic role of mathematics – in a broad sense – in 
forging a community of men in the Bureau of Mines after 1720. 
                                                   
95 Compare with Shapin’s discussion of the great civility as “granting the conditions in which 
others can colonize our minds and expecting the conditions which allow us to colonize theirs”; 
Shapin: A social history of truth, 36. 

 
 
114
Geometric perception 
The handwritings on geometry were placed first among the mathematical 
texts of both collections. They were a starting point and a basis for the oth-
er documents, which related to geometry as the foundation of their respec-
tive subject matter. This was also how the manuscript treated its subject 
matter: first it defined an ideal geometric point, and how it differed from a 
physical point in space, then straight and curved lines, and eventually sur-
faces and bodies. After the basics came some methods and problems to do 
with measuring and transforming geometric objects. The geometric point 
became a stable point of origin, from which the manuscript could continue 
with other definitions and methods of increasing complexity.96 “About ge-
ometry” explained that geometry meant “the measurement of the earth”, 
which was an unfortunate term because “she does not cover only the earth, 
but also all other magnitudes – consisting of lines, figures or bodies – in the 
universe.”97 Geometry was thus both a structuring principle inherent in nature 
and a method to perceive these natural structures. By copying this manu-
script, the auscultator would internalise a mathematical view of nature 
shared by the Bureau’s officials, and also learn mathematical methods suita-
ble for discerning this geometrically ordered world. 
 
The text “On perspective” discussed geometry as a framework of per-
ception more closely. Placed later in the collection, the auscultator would be 
likely to copy this text after he had studied and transcribed “On geometry”. 
The text explained how perspective drawing was a technique of viewing the 
world through “a window or another glass” while “keeping the eye still”. A 
perspective draughtsman would view the world from a clearly defined van-
tage point, from which one might see “a church, building etc.” Using “a 
brush or a pencil”, it was possible to “mark the points or lines, which show 
themselves there”. Although such drawing on glass only required “a sure 
eye, and skill”, it was still troublesome. Therefore, “architects, mechanici and 
painters use the camera obscura that, through a convex lens, represents on a paper 
everything that is outside.” In some cases, however, none of these methods 
were applicable. Then the auscultator needed to use “geometric instru-
ments”. It was therefore important for a perspective draughtsman to know 
“the rules, which mathesis provides”.98 Perspective drawing, as presented in 
                                                   
96 Thus, the structure of the text is similar to contemporary printed textbooks in geometry and 
arithmetic, published by members of the Bureau. See e.g., Brandt: Mathesin universalem; Duhre: 
Geometria; Weidler and Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig. 
97 “jordmätning”; “hon sträcker sig intet allenast till jorden, utan ock till alla andra magnitudines, 
bestående i linier, figurer el:r kroppar, uti hela universe.”; Brandt: “Om geometrien”, 41. 
98 “ett fönster eller annat glas”; “håller ögat stilla”; “någon kyrka, bygning etc.”; “en pensell eller 
penna”; “de Puncter och linier som der sig wisa”; Brandt: “Om perspektivkonsten”, 538. 
“ögnamåttet och handtaget”; “så betiena sig Architecter, Mechanici och måhlare af Camera obscura, 
som på ett papper igenom ett convext glaas, representerar alt hwad derutan före är.”; ibid., 539. 
“Geometriska instrumenter”; “de reglor, som Mathesis gifwer thertill wid handen”; ibid., 540. 

 
 115
the manuscript, was thus a technique of perceiving the geometric universe 
discussed in “On geometry”. 
 
None of these manuscripts contained advanced or original mathematics. 
For a university graduate, and hence for most auscultators, their geometric 
definitions should have been well known. But originality was not their pur-
pose; instead, these manuscripts presented the Bureau’s framework of per-
ception. Geometry established a way to perceive nature as simple parts – 
lines, figures and shapes – which could be easily described and communi-
cated between the members of the Bureau. As discussed in Chapter 2, in 
early modern Europe mathematics was commonly imagined to be a tech-
nique of discernment and consent. Through mathematical exercises, a 
young man would not only learn to see a hidden truth in God’s creation, he 
would also align himself to the theocratic order of the Swedish state. Also, 
as shown earlier, textbooks routinely presented mathematics as a patriotic 
form of knowledge, and as intimately linked to the state administration. In 
the handwritings by Schultze and Brandt,  these two roles of mathematics 
converged. For the officials, geometry became a foundation for various 
techniques of perception, which could be used to visualise mines (as done 
through the mathematical art of architecturam subterraneum) and to make sense 
of machinery or other objects (through mechanica). But, as discussed in 
Chapter 2, mathematics (and especially geometry) was also imagined to fos-
ter a perceptive man aligned with the political order. In the Bureau, this 
imagined role of mechanics became the foundation of a geometric commu-
nity of men. Similar to how a boy was imagined to attain a manly authority 
through mathematical exercise, from the 1720s, geometry became the basis 
for a male community of civil servants who policed the realm in the interest 
of the publicum. When the young auscultator sat down to copy the manu-
scripts on geometry, he also adopted some of the norms of this geometric 
community. 
The mechanical powers 
Whereas the texts on geometry and perspective drawing taught the ausculta-
tor to perceive a measurable world in a suspended state, the “Short intro-
duction to […] mechanics” unsurprisingly introduced the concepts of mo-
tion and power. Thus, after having transcribed the basis for perceiving the 
world geometrically, the auscultators turned to a framework of how to per-
ceive motion in this geometric universe, as well as how to manipulate its 
regular lines and figures. Both versions of the manuscript pointed out how, 
with geometry as a basis, one could now “continue with the fundamentals 
of mechanics.”99 
                                                   
99 “fortfara uti mechaniska Grund-Satserne.”; Brandt: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller 
Mechaniken”, 246; Schultze: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”. Where 

 
 
116
 
The introduction to mechanics commenced in equilibrium, before mov-
ing on to the “powers of mechanics”. Thus, the first section of both manu-
scripts began by discussing centro gravitatis, or the centre of weight of bodies, 
how the weight was identical on all sides of this centre, and how the centre 
of bodies in free fall followed a straight geometric line towards the centre of 
the earth.100 From copying down these basics of statics, the auscultators 
learnt that the world was a predictable place, and that matter followed cer-
tain prescribed geometric paths. Thus, for the men of the Bureau, even a 
world in motion was a predictable and uniform place that a mechanicus 
could manipulate through a clearly defined set of five mechanical powers 
(or potentia mechanicæ). Again, these mechanical powers were no novel inven-
tions of the Bureau. They are were first discussed in the classical works of 
Heron of Alexandria, and consisted of vectis (the lever), peritrochium (the 
wheel and axle), trochlea (the pulley), planum inclanatum (the inclined plane) – 
to which also cuneus (the wedge) belonged – and cochlea (the screw).101 In 
Brandt’s, but not Schultze’s, manuscript, the last three powers were illustrat-
ed by enumerated drawings in the margins. These drawings visualised the 
mechanical powers using geometric lines, figures and shapes, and some of 
them were drawn in a simple perspective (see Figure 5–7). 
 
This manuscript shows how the mechanics taught in the Bureau was 
based on a long classical tradition. However, by adopting this tradition men 
in the Bureau could claim a specific position in the state. Geometry and 
perspective drawing were ways for the men of the Bureau to visualise me-
chanical movement, and mechanics was a way for them to understand hu-
man intervention in a geometrically perceived nature. Similarly to how na-
ture was imagined to be balanced and geometrically intelligible, human in-
tervention through mechanical means was easy to identify and to classify. 
When transcribing the “Short introduction to […] mechanics”, an ausculta-
tor would come to understand mechanics to be a technique of bringing 
about ordered change, or a set of expected transgressions of a natural balance. 
However, in the early 1700s this classical geometric and mechanical  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                        
Brandt’s manuscript is paginated, Schultze’s is not. In the following notes, the pages thus refer to 
Brandt’s version. A noteworthy difference between the two is that Brandt’s manuscript states that 
the text on mechanics is based on “the writings of learned men as well as individual experience” 
(in original: “Af lärde mäns skrifter, så wähl some gen förfarenhet samman hämtad”, whereas 
Schultze’s does not; Brandt: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”, 246; 
Schultze: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”. 
100 “potentias mechanicas”; Brandt: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”, 247. 
101 Ibid., 263. According to the manuscript, in principle all powers were reducible to vectis. For a 
discussion on the classical mechanical powers, found originally in Heron’s Mechanics, see Sophie 
Roux and Walter Roy Laird: “Introduction”, in Walter Roy Laird and Sophie Roux (eds): Mechan-
ics and natural philosophy before the scientific revolution (Dordrecht, 2007), 4; Mark J. Schiefsky: “Theory 
and practice in Heron’s Mechanics”, in Roy Laird and Roux (eds): Mechanics and natural philosophy, 
16–17. 

 
 117
 
Figure 5, 6 & 7. Illus-
trations of mechanical 
powers, from the 
margins of Brandt’s 
handwritten 
manuscript (UUB 
A 28). From top to 
bottom: the pulley, the 
inclined plane (in the 
form of a wedge) and 
the screw (Photo: 
Uppsala University 
Library) 
 
 

 
 
118
knowledge came to be linked to a specific interpretation of nature, which 
would make mathematics even more potent as a foundation for a communi-
ty of men in the Bureau. 
“Put away all the prejudices of childhood” 
In the manuscript on “Philosophia naturali” (i.e., natural philosophy) from 
Brandt’s collection of handwritings, geometric perception and mechanical 
power converged in a mechanised and geometrised natural philosophy and a 
philosophy of mind. From studying this manuscript, it is possible to under-
stand the symbolic role of geometry and mechanics in the Bureau of the 
mid-eighteenth century. 
 
 The text started by laying down some requirements put on the would-
be natural philosopher (i.e., the young auscultator): 
He who wishes to make positive progress in philosophia naturali must first 
put away all the prejudices of childhood [præjudicia infantiæ], or the conclusions 
and opinions of the state of natural things that one has formed in one’s 
youth, because they are brought about by our deceitful senses, which nev-
er present a thing such as it is in itself, according to its correct attributes.102 
 
The study of natural philosophy was presented as yet another process of 
maturity, much like how the authors in the previous chapter discussed 
mathematics, crafts and mechanics. To put away your childish thoughts of 
the world – based on everyday experience – and to adopt the mathematical 
worldview shared by the officials was to continue the progress from adoles-
cence into manhood that ideally had begun with exercises of mathematics 
and crafts during one’s childhood (see Chapter 2). To adopt the perceptual 
framework of the community was also to take on a certain authoritative 
position shared by the men of the Bureau. The manuscript continued to 
establish how “we” viewed the world. In a modest tone, this “we” did not 
denote the officials of the Bureau such as they were, but what they had been 
before becoming participants in its community of men. “We” were un-
trained and young, and “our” minds were full of prejudices put there by 
undisciplined senses: 
We consider the Earth to be larger than the sun and the stars; the sun and 
the moon to be equally large; the stars to be pretty small, and to be fas-
tened like nails to the sky; that the sky revolves around the earth in 24 
hours; and that there is more matter in a leaden dice or in that of any other 
metal, than in a spring of air or of fire.103 
                                                   
102 “Den som will giöra lyckligt framsteg uti Philosophia naturali, måste först bordtlägga alla præjudi-
cia infantiæ, el:r de sluut och omdömen, som man i ungdomen fattadt om de naturlige tingens 
beskaffenheter, eftersom de äro förordsakade af wåra bedräglige sinnen, som aldrig föreställa oss 
ett ting, såsom det i sig sielft är till sina rätta egenskaper.”; ibid., 334. 
103 “Wij tycka att jorden är större än sool och stiernor, at sool och måne äro lika stora, at stier-
norna äro ganska små, och sitta som spikar på himla hwalfwet; At himmelen hwälfwer sig 

 
 119
 
In the manuscript, auscultation was a process of learning through encul-
turation that was also a process of maturity. The Bureau’s officials were 
disciplined and rational men, contrasted to imagined uninformed others 
who based their view of the world on everyday experience.104 It also implied 
that all men of the Bureau had gone through this process: from adolescent 
prejudice to a mature or manly way of viewing nature. This manly view of 
nature was an eclectic one, which balanced between Cartesianism, classical 
authorities and the empirical study of nature. The mature man of the Bureau 
was hence a man who could compare and conciliate such opposed philo-
sophical positions. The text pointed out that, although the old philosophers 
had weeded out many prejudices, it was “the new philosophy” that taught the 
men of the Bureau “not to trust in sensus, before it has been examined by 
ratio.” The manuscript referred to the principle of Cartesian doubt (“dubitatio 
cartesiana”) and the view that the senses should not be trusted too much – 
“non nimis sensibus fidendum est” – as important foundations for philosophical 
investigation.105 
 
In spite of its praises for Cartesian doubt, the manuscript’s philosophical 
method was not Cartesian through and through. Instead it proposed an 
eclectic philosophy of nature, mind and perception, which was heavily based 
on Cartesian mechanism but also reconciled a broader set of authorities.106 
As such, the manuscript is very similar to Rydelius’ work discussed in Chap-
ter 2. In the process of transcribing the manuscript on natural philosophy, 
the young auscultator would learn that he perceived and made nature intelli-
gible through three modes: purus intellectus, sensus and imaginatio. Purus intellec-
tus occurred when the soul thought in non-visual ways. Thus, through this 
rational perceptual mode the soul could “perceive the spirits, and their at-
tributes and characteristics”. Second, the manuscript described how “imagi-
nation occurs, when the soul applies itself to the brain, and there simulates 
figures and all sorts of things, which it then observes; as when one imagines 
a circle, triangle, machine etc.” Imagination was thus presented as a visual 
mode of thinking, a mode of discernment that joined perception and cogni-
tion and was brought about by the interaction of mind and body, or soul 
and brain. The manuscript described how these faculties were exercised and 
disciplined through geometry and mechanics. Thus, the manuscript pro-
                                                                                                                        
omkring jorden på 24 timmar; at det är mehr materia uti en tärning bly el:r annan metall, än som uti 
lika stort skråf af luft el:r eld”; ibid., 334–5. 
104 The manuscript thus dismisses the Aristotelian use of everyday experience as a basis for natu-
ral knowledge. For a further discussion of Aristotelian and experimentalist views of experience, 
see Dear: Discipline & experience, esp. 11–14, 228, 246.  
105 “nya Philosophien”; “ingen Lit på Sensus, för än ratio den har examinerat.”; Brandt: “[On Philoso-
phia naturali]”, 335. 
106 This philosophical method, based on mechanism and a geometrical method, bears many 
similarities to the “style of thought” of the circle around the Collegium Curiosorum discussed by 
David Dunér. See Dunér: The natural philosophy of Emanuel Swedenborg, 44–7; See also Fors: The 
limits of matter, 85. 

 
 
120
posed a framework for understanding and structuring perceptions, which 
also made the auscultators’ studies of geometry and mechanics meaningful. 
Mathematical exercises disciplined young men and developed their imaginatio 
to conform to that expected of the officials in the Bureau. Through this 
mathematically exercised imagination, the soul and the brain could represent 
“absent matter” (“materiale absens”). Consequently, disciplined imagination 
made creative but orderly innovation possible. Third, “sensations occur 
when something touches the senses externally”.107 
 
From this theory of the mind, the text continued to describe the world 
that was perceived through these modes of perception. The manuscript 
stated that nature was infinitely divisible, and filled with natural bodies, un-
derstood as “extended in length, width, and depth”.108 Bodies were divided 
by motion into particles so small that not all could be perceived by sensum 
organis.109 This world of small particles was in constant motion, and this mo-
tion was the source of all “diversity that is found in nature.”110 Thus, the 
quick motion of the water particles and the relative inactivity of the dirt 
particles explained the differences between dirt and water.111 This world, the 
manuscript suggested, was made intelligible through its similitude to ma-
chines: 
We therefore think of this world as great machine composed by inimitable 
art, of innumerable other lesser machines and artifice; like a clockwork is 
governed by its wheels and other properties, for which nothing more is 
needed [to understand it] than its rest, figure, position, motion and com-
position.112 
 
This “Philosophia naturali” could be described as a mechanical philoso-
phy, which explained everything “in terms of the size, shape, and motion of 
the parts that make it up, just as we explain the behavior of a machine.”113 
As pointed out by Daniel Garber, mechanical philosophy, which developed 
in Europe of the second half of the seventeenth century, should be distin-
guished from the knowledge of mechanics as such.114 The mechanics found 
in Heron, Aristotle, or in the “Short introduction to […] mechanics” of 
                                                   
107 “betrachtar siälen andarna, och deras attributa och egenskaper”, “Imagination skier då, när siälen 
applicerar sig till hiernan, och fingerar der figurer och allehanda ting, dem hon då betrachtar; såsom 
när man imaginerar sig en Cirkel, Triangel, Machin etc.”; Brandt: “[On Philosophia naturali]”, 338. 
“materiale absens”; “Sensationer skier när något rörer sinnena utwertes”; ibid., 339. 
108 “in longum, latum et prosundum extensa”; Brandt: “[On Philosophia naturali]”, 340. 
109 Ibid., 343–5. 
110 “motus är ordsaken till alla diversiteter, som i nature förmärkas.”; ibid., 345. 
111 Ibid., 357. 
112 “Wi ansee fördenskull denna werlden såsom en stor machine, med oförliknelig konst sam-
mansatt, af oräknelige andre smerre Machiner och Konststycken; lika som ett uhrwärk regeras af 
sina hiuhl och andre tillhörigheter hwartill intet annat behöfwes än desammas wihla, storlek, 
figur, ställning, rörelse, sammanhang”; ibid., 359. 
113 Daniel Garber: “Remarks on the pre-history of the mechanical philosophy”, in Sophie Roux 
(ed): The mechanization of natural philosophy (Dordrecht, 2013), 7. 
114 Ibid., 8–9. 

 
 121
Brandt and Schultze’s manuscripts was not a doctrine of nature and were 
thus not in conflict with Aristotelian natural philosophy. However, the 
manuscript on “Philosophia naturali” explicitly described geometry and me-
chanics as the basis of a mechanical philosophy of nature, which in turn was 
presented as the understanding of nature expected of a mature man of the 
Bureau.115 
 
In the manuscript, mechanics and geometry thus merged into an inter-
pretative structure by which the auscultators could imagine the world 
through the products of their own work. The machines found in the mines 
governed by the Bureau became mediators between everyday work, nature 
and the political order of the early modern state. For the officials of the 
Bureau, mathematics was an exercise that fostered men who could imagine 
what was not plainly visible, who could see through superficial surfaces to 
discern truths hidden in nature’s depth. What could be more suitable for 
officials in charge of policing the unearthing of minerals for the benefit of 
the state? Such mathematical men of metals imagined themselves capable of 
brining about change and uphold order in the body politic, as well as able to 
tame nature for the benefit of the publicum. By diligently transcribing manu-
scripts on geometry, mechanics and physics in the Bureau’s archive, a young 
man would be enculturated into this community, and would become a part 
of its geometric and mechanistic vision. 
Conclusions. The mathematics of a balanced state 
The Bureau of Mines was a community of diverse forms of knowledge: 
most importantly of assaying, law and mathematics in a broad sense. This 
chapter has studied the process of how, over the first half of the eighteenth 
century, a community formed around geometry and mechanics. By studying 
the auscultatory system of the Bureau of Mines, I have shown the various 
ways in which these forms of knowledge were a part of a community of 
mining cameralists, and how, by the mid 1700s, mathematics gained an im-
portant symbolic role for the Bureau’s officials. The Bureau was a context in 
which the imagined intergenerational relationships of mechanics and math-
ematics, discussed in Chapter 2, were institutionalised into a community of 
practice. Through a web of relational performances, carried out between 
older officials and younger auscultators, the Bureau reproduced and guaran-
teed its own permanence. From 1700 to 1750, the structure of this web 
changed, as did the role of mathematics and mechanics in the relational 
performances that constituted it. First, the Bureau’s system of auscultation 
expanded; the base of recruitment became more firmly delimited to  
                                                   
115 This manuscript thus also reinforces Fors’ point that Brandt was central in ”mechanizing” the 
chemistry of the Bureau; Fors: The limits of matter, 90–7. 

 
 
122
universities, and especially to Uppsala University. Second, the role of math-
ematics changed: from having been strongly linked to mining mechanics, 
primarily performed in relation to the mechanicus Christopher Polhammar, 
it gained a symbolic role as a common framework of perception. Mathemat-
ics became a way for officials to discern connections between natural phe-
nomena in a disciplined uniform way, as well as a means of maintaining 
controlled intervention in fragile, and ideally balanced, natural and political 
orders. Although mathematical textbooks described mathematics as a neces-
sary skill for public office as early as the late seventeenth century, by the 
1710s, the Bureau’s auscultators Georg Brandt and Anders Gabriel Duhre 
published works that forcefully presented geometry as a basis for all the 
Bureau’s work. These authors envisioned mathematical knowledge as the 
basis for not only mining mechanics but also for chemistry and the mining 
enterprise as a whole. 
 
In application letters from 1700 to 1750, young men conformed to, 
what they anticipated as, the historically contingent norms of the Bureau. 
They expressed a desire to work diligently as servants submitted to the pub-
lic will. As such, the applicants aligned themselves to the ideal of the virtu-
ous and public man of the civil service. Whereas the applicants kept pro-
fessing their submission to the patria throughout the whole time period, by 
the 1730s, direct references to servitude under the monarch had all but dis-
appeared.116 In the bureaus of the early modern Swedish state, where trust 
and subjugation were intimately linked, the position of a servant subjected 
to the state (i.e., a civil servant) was paradoxically a means to be identified as 
a free, trustworthy and mobile actor. The new symbolic role of mathemat-
ics, which developed in the Bureau from the early 1720s, can also be dis-
cerned in applications to auscultate. By the 1730s, a large minority of appli-
cants discussed their mathematical studies without explicitly seeking a career 
as a mining mechanic. These applicants presented themselves as potential 
legitimate participants in a community formed around mathematics. As seen 
in the auscultator Isaac Johan Uhr’s The Characteristics of an Ironmaster, in the 
Bureau of the mid 1700s, mathematics was imagined to be an exercise that 
formed a young man into someone superior to a commoner working with 
mining and smelting. This mature man of metals carried many similarities to 
the mechanicus, discussed in the previous chapter. By the ways in which he 
integrated mathematics into his work, he distinguished himself as different 
from, and superior to, other men. 
 
After having been accepted, the auscultators were enculturated into the 
mathematical community of the Bureau: they aligned their minds to its 
communal way of perceiving and imagining nature and social relationships. 
                                                   
116 In the next chapter, I will study this development in more detail, by narrowing in on the role 
of royal patronage in the work of a handful of mathematical and mechanical practitioners of the 
first decades of the eighteenth century. 

 
 123
This process of enculturation involved a number of exercises: listening in to 
the board, writing protocols, participating in the Bureau’s work and travel-
ling both domestically and abroad. The practice of transcribing texts was 
another way in which the auscultators could align their minds to the norms 
and practices of the Bureau. These texts included travel reports, mining 
ordinances and protocols, as well as educational hand-written manuscripts 
on a variety of subjects. In order to understand the symbolic role that math-
ematics gained in the Bureau by the 1730s, a handful of copied manuscripts 
concerning geometry and mechanics are especially illuminating. By copying 
these texts, an auscultator could internalise the geometric framework of 
perception. He would learn to see nature as geometric points, lines, shapes 
and figures; he would also understand how to intervene in a balanced nature 
through a definite number of mechanical powers; and he would come to see 
nature as both constantly in motion and as fundamentally balanced. These 
manuscripts presented the world using metaphors that involved the very 
machines found in the mines that the Bureau policed, and skills that were 
part of the Bureau’s everyday work. Thus, mechanics became a means by 
which the community could come to terms with the world through the ma-
terial artifacts in the mines that they policed. When copying these manu-
scripts, the auscultators would be enculturated into a community of men 
who saw themselves as carrying out continuous expected transgressions. 
Their work consisted of bringing about changes in the Swedish state, in 
order to perfect its theocratic order. The geometry and mechanics of the 
Bureau were thus mathematics of a balanced state. 
 
In this chapter, I have discussed performances of mechanics and math-
ematics that can be considered a system of relational performances, through 
which men shaped themselves into a coherent hierarchical community. By 
the mid-eighteenth century, relational performances of geometry and me-
chanics became an important basis for this community. Through these 
techniques, the men of the Bureau imagined that they perfected themselves 
into ideal servants of the publicum (i.e., to the king and later to the estates of 
the parliament). But mechanical practitioners did not only submit to the 
political power through the state administration. In the ensuing chapters, I 
turn to two cases connecting mechanics to early modern political order. The 
first case mainly unfolds during the period of Swedish absolutism of the late 
seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries; the other is mainly from the 
constitutional monarchy post-1720. In both these cases, my focus is on the 
direct relationship between mechanical practitioners and the ultimate politi-
cal power. The focus of these chapters is the relationship between the 
mechanicus and the shifting shapes of the publicum. 

 
 
124
4. Mechanical correspondence. Relational 
performances of the monarch and the 
mechanicus 
In 1722, the mechanicus Christopher Polhem wrote several letters to Erik 
Benzelius, the librarian at Uppsala University. In these letters, he comment-
ed on the political developments of his time: how the absolute monarch 
Karl XII had died in 1718 and how the parliament, consisting of representa-
tives of the four estates of the realm (nobility, clergy, burghers and peasants) 
de facto had seized power in Sweden and put an end to the royal autocracy. 
Polhem mourned how all love for himself, as well as “the love for mechani-
cal science, has fallen asleep together with the blessed king.”1 He explained: 
that I have not [made anything useful for the realm] after the death of the 
blessed king, is unsurprising. Simply consider what happens in a private 
household where the master and the children are put under the guardian-
ship of the servants. In opposite to how other nations put the mere theory 
of mathematical, mechanical and physical sciences in high esteem, here 
one now scorns both theory and practice.2 
 
In Polhem’s opinion, the new constitutional regime had disrupted the 
traditional patriarchal theocracy of which mechanics and mathematics were 
parts. In another letter to Benzelius,  written a month later, he returned to 
the subject. Reminiscing that they had corresponded for 12 years, he re-
marked that neither of them would have been able to predict the changes in 
the realm over the past decade: “at that time the realm existed for the sake 
of the king, not the king for the realm. […] Then the œconomy and culture of 
the realm lay severely ill, now basically at death’s door”.3 In a third letter the 
same autumn, he yet again returned to the subject of government: 
                                                   
1 “för Mechanska wettskaper wore tillijka med Salig Konungen afsomnad.”; Christopher Polhem: 
“Letter to Erik Benzelius, 1722-08-09”, in Axel Johan Carl Vilhelm Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher 
Polhems brev (Uppsala, 1941), 144. 
2 “att iag intet komit dertill effter Salig Konungenss död ähr intet så aldeless till förundra, när 
man allenast betrachtar huru det går till i ett privat huss huarest man sätter huss fadren och 
Barnen under tienst folkets förmy[n]derskap. I stellet andra Nationer gör stort æstime af blotta 
theorin af Mathematiska, Mechanska och Physicalsk[a] wettskaper, så gör man nu här ett föracht 
både af theori och practic,”; ibid., 145. 
3 “wijd den tijden war Rijket för kungen skull, nu kungen för Rijket skull. […] Då låg Riksenss 
æconomie [sic] och cultur illa siuk, nu reent för döden”; Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Erik 
Benzelius, 1722-09-02”, in Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher Polhems brev, 146. 

 
 
125
It heartens me to see that the Doctor trusts my ability to serve the father-
land using the simple knowledge I have acquired. But nonetheless, I deep-
ly regret that those who have this trust are few and far between. And be-
cause our government these days is such, that nothing is considered good 
that is not supported by the majority, my work will probably be valued 
even less.4 
 
As part of a heroic narrative of invention, biographers of Christopher 
Polhem from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries have generally de-
scribed him as a man ahead of his time.5 Historians who have discussed his 
ties with the monarch have generally done so ex post facto – that is, his con-
tacts with Karl XII have been interpreted as a sign of what was to come, 
rather than as formed by a contemporary regime of mechanical work.6 In 
relation to such a historiography, the statements in Polhem’s letters from 
1722 seem out of place. If he comes across in these letters as a man out of 
his time, it is as someone belonging to the past and not to the future. He 
had apparently not adapted to the new political conditions of the 1720s; he 
was a man defined by a regime that was no more. 
 
Polhem was 50 years old when Karl XII died. It is thus unsurprising that 
he was shaped by the absolutist regime in which he had lived the greater 
part of his life. Still, few biographers have described him as a man marked 
by Caroline absolutism.7 This is a striking fact because few Swedish mechan-
ical practitioners of the eighteenth century were more successful in fashion-
ing themselves in relation to the absolute monarchy. Even his surname, 
Polhem, was a product of this relationship with the king, who ennobled the 
mechanicus, formerly known as Polhammar, in December 1716.8 To make 
clear that Polhammar/Polhem was transformed by the relationships that I 
am studying, I will use the name Polhammar up until the point that he was 
ennobled, and Polhem afterwards. 
 
Although a number of studies have covered the role of eighteenth-
century royal patronage of mathematics and natural philosophy, few have 
focused on the aspect of reciprocal self-fashioning in these relationships.9 It 
                                                   
4 “Det fägnar mig myket att see H. H. Doct: goda tanka om min duglighet att kuna göra fäder-
nesslandet tienst af de ringa wettskaper iag inhemptad. men beklagar der jempte att de som hafva 
detta tycket lära wara myket tunt sådda. Och effter wårt regements wässende nu för tijden ähr 
sådan, att ingen ting hålless för godt som icke har den större delenss bijfall, så lärer mina 
förrättningar så myket mindre blifva ansedda,”; Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Erik Benzelius, 
1722-11-05”, in Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher Polhems brev, 160. 
5 For examples of such narratives, from the 1900s as well as from today, see page 41, note 5. 
6 For example, Bring describes the relationship between Polhem and the king as founded on their 
mutual visions for the future; Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, 57. 
7 Lindqvist has pointed out the importance of royal ties for Polhem’s career in the Bureau of 
Mines, in Lindqvist: Technology on trial, 99. 
8 Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, 49. 
9 For an in-depth study of patronage of mathematics and natural philosophy in absolutist re-
gimes, see Biagioli: Galileo, courtier. S. N. Eisenstadt and Louis Roniger has discussed patron–client 
relations as “models of structuring the flow of resources and of interpersonal interaction and 
exchanges in society”; “Patron–client relations as a model of structuring social exchange”, Com-

 
 
126
is this aspect of patronage that concerns me here. This chapter focuses on 
the letter correspondence between Christopher Polhammar (1661–1751), 
Emanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772), Karl XII (1682–1718) and the king’s 
secretary, Casten Feif (1662–1739). These four men were part of a complex 
web of patronage; over the first two decades of the 1700s, they established 
heterogeneous positions of authority by chiseling out highly interdependent 
identities. 
 
Early modern monarchs were staged as symbols of a specific social or-
der, in ceremonies, portraits and architecture. I argue that mechanics was 
another means of performing such royal symbolism. Mechanistic concep-
tions of the political order formed a structural framework in which the 
mechanicus and the monarch corresponded. In their letter correspondence, 
Polhammar and the king could act tactically in relation to this framework, 
and reciprocally mould each other into what was expected of a monarch or 
mechanicus. 
The monarch perceived 
Then who, or what, was the absolute monarch? First: absolutism was not as 
absolute as it has been made out to be. Early modern “absolute” monarchs 
ruled through collaboration with, and by balancing, socially powerful elites 
both at court and in the provinces.10 Similarly, over the past decades, several 
scholars – especially on the French absolute monarchy of Louis XIV – have 
examined the rites and social practices of absolutism. They have approached 
the absolute monarch as a symbol that was fabricated through representa-
tions in various media.11 From 1680, when Karl XI introduced absolutism in 
Sweden, similar symbolism of an imagined strong and centralised monarchy, 
modelled after a French example, also became common in Sweden.12 
                                                                                                                        
parative studies in society and history 22:1 (1980), 56. On the role of patron–client relationships in 
eighteenth-century Sweden, see Patrik Winton: Frihetstidens politiska praktik. Nätverk och offentlighet 
1746–1766 (Uppsala, 2006), 29–30. On patron–client relationships in eighteenth-century Swedish 
chemistry, see Fors: Mutual favours, 200–1. A common interest for these studies is patron–client 
relationships as a means of reciprocal favours from which the parties benefitted. However, they 
focus less on how the parties were fashioned through such hierarchical relationships. Karin 
Sennefelt has a perspective more similar to mine, when discussing how eighteenth-century men 
in Stockholm were transformed into equals or patron–clients through the transformative practice 
of alcohol drinking. She highlights how these men transformed each other through encounters 
where social hierarchies were pivotal; Sennefelt: Politikens hjärta, 150. 
10 For an overview of the research that has shown the collaborative aspects of absolutism, see 
William Beik: “The absolutism of Louis XIV as social collaboration”, Past & Present 188:1 (2005), 
195–7.  
11 Jean-Marie Apostolidès: Le roi-machine. Spectacle et politique au temps de Louis XIV (Paris, 1981); 
Peter Burke: The fabrication of Louis XIV (New Haven, 1992), 151–178.  
12 The self-fashioning of early modern Swedish monarchs has until recently been a neglected 
field. Older studies include Ragnar Josephson: “Karl XI och Karl XII som esteter”, Karolinska 
förbundets årsbok (1947), 7–67; Allan Ellenius: Karolinska bildidéer (Uppsala, 1966); Kurt Johannes-

 
 
127
 
The symbol of the king was, moreover, a symbol of the realm. From 
medieval times and into early modernity, English political theology em-
braced a theory of the king’s two bodies – a personal body of a specific man 
and a symbolic body that could not die: a body politic. Being made up of 
two bodies, the sovereign existed in between the individual and the collec-
tive. The parts of the monarch’s political body were the subjects of the 
realm, and the monarch thus embodied the relationships between sovereign 
and subjects in a hierarchical society. In other words, early modern mon-
archs were not just individuals in a line of succession. They also represented 
a continuous office, a symbol or a persona that corresponded to a specific 
social order. In a number of early modern royal ceremonies, this relation-
ship between the king’s two bodies was presented to the subjects of the 
realm. Ernst Hartwig Kantorowicz has identified the funeral ceremony as 
one such forum for staging this relationship, whereby one royal individual 
succeeded another, but the office remained constant.13 Moreover, Abby E. 
Zanger has shown how royal bodies were presented in French royal mar-
riage ceremonies. While both marriage and funeral ceremonies promoted 
the dynasty, the former did not promote the “absolute oneness” of the royal 
bodies. Instead, marriage “is always necessarily dialogical, even if there is a 
power struggle between single and dual perspectives within its symbolic 
field.” Hence, the relationships sealed in royal ceremonies did not only 
guarantee royal continuity in spite of mortality, but furthermore joined to-
gether members of royal families.14 Similarly, research on early modern 
courts has shown how monarchs were not singular: the courts were integral 
to the relationships between the monarchs and their European subjects. In a 
court, the king’s personal power – manifested through favours and patron-
age – emanated through chains of subjects at different degrees of closeness 
to the king.15 
                                                                                                                        
son: I polstjärnans tecken. Studier i svensk barock (Stockholm, 1968). Recently, a growing number of 
studies have appeared that examine portraits, ceremonies and architecture as performances and 
staging of monarchs. See for example: Snickare: Enväldets riter; Martin Olin: Det karolinska 
porträttet. Ideologi, ikonografi, identitet (Stockholm, 2000), 49–51; Snickare: “Shaping the ritual space”; 
Kekke Stadin: “The masculine image of a great power. Representations of Swedish imperial 
power c. 1630–1690”, Scandinavian Journal of History 30:1 (2005), 61–82; For a discussion of, and 
comparison between, the coronation ceremonies during the Swedish absolutism and constitu-
tional monarchy, see Nordin: Frihetstidens monarki, 59–83. 
13 Ernst Hartwig Kantorowicz: The king’s two bodies. A study in mediaeval political theology (Princeton 
NJ, 1957), 7–23. 
14 Abby E. Zanger: Scenes from the marriage of Louis XIV. Nuptial fictions and the making of absolutist 
power (Stanford CA, 1997), 8. 
15 For an overview of the research of the early modern European court, see Persson: Servants of 
fortune, 3–8. 

 
 
128
Presenting the royal gaze 
The monarch was staged through royal performances made for heterogene-
ous audiences throughout the realm and abroad. It was a symbol, which was 
not only perceived: an imagined power of perception was at the core of 
subjects’ understanding of the king. In principle, the king, as the head of the 
body politic, saw and understood every event in the social body. The mon-
arch’s gaze was thus a guarantee of order and correspondence between su-
periors and subordinates. 
 
Wakefield has discussed a letter from an otherwise unknown man 
named Gottlob Christian Happe to Friedrich II of Sachsen-Gotha, dated 7 
April 1717. In his letter, Happe described to the sovereign an architectural 
invention for fabricating a good social order. Happe imagined chambers in 
which the council of the realm would meet. A network of tunnels would 
connect the sovereign’s quarters to cabinets, or “loges”, adjacent to these 
chambers. From these loges, it would be possible for the sovereign to ob-
serve the work of his subjects, without their knowing whether he was there 
or not.16 Wakefield points out that there is “no evidence […], that Happe’s 
loge was ever built or that any prince even bothered to read his book.” It 
has “a whiff of desperation about it,” the product of an impoverished 
scholar seeking “patronage and preferment [by constructing] elaborate vi-
sions of control and order.”17 
 
Still, Happe’s invention is helpful in highlighting how subjects imagined 
sovereigns in eighteenth-century northern Europe. His work can be related 
to the tradition of renaissance “machine books”, filled with pictorial and 
literary descriptions of machines, through which mechanical practitioners 
presented their work to sovereigns and other patrons. As pointed out by 
Jonathan Sawday, such works did not always present workable machines.18 
Often the designs were fanciful, made to be read rather than used as designs 
for construction. Machine books came to inhabit “fantasy as much as reali-
ty.” Early modern mechanical practitioners were not only “responding to 
modern design criteria.” Their designs were also a “glimpse […] of a more 
idealized world” presented to a princely audience.19 Happe’s design was one 
such performance, which allowed the monarch to imagine himself as an all-
knowing perceiver. As such, it is an example of how inventions, imagined or 
real, could be a means of shaping and intertwining mechanical practitioners 
and sovereigns of early modern absolutist states. 
 
The sovereigns of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe were 
increasingly dependent on developing state bureaucracies. If the monarch 
were to be regarded a symbol of a body politic, the cameral administration 
                                                   
16 Wakefield: The disordered police state, 14. 
17 Ibid., 15. 
18 Sawday: Engines of the imagination, 83–6. 
19 Ibid., 97. 

 
 
129
was identified as its hands and eyes. In the early eighteenth century, camer-
alists, and cameral knowledge, were presented as ways of attaining fiscal 
means for the monarch and of developing the economy of the realm. As 
discussed in the preceding chapters, mathematics and mechanics were in-
herent parts of such cameralism, which provided a means of governing early 
modern states. Jay Smith has shown how nobles in the bureaucracy of abso-
lutist France, when discussing their merits in written text, “made frequent 
reference to the person of the king”. It was, Smith argues, in the light of the 
“sovereign’s gaze” that “the nobility’s unique qualities would inevitably be 
revealed and rewarded.”20 But this gaze required a government that consist-
ed of more than a king. A stable absolute monarchy needed a bureaucracy 
that could outlive an individual king, while serving as a manifestation of the 
monarch in his official capacity.21 Consequently, Louis XIV wished to re-
affirm his absolute power, and to circumscribe the power of the nobility, by 
making the traditional “personal modality of service” systematic. That is, he 
wanted the bureaucracy to act according to certain principles of merit, ra-
ther than through personal recommendations. Ironically, the ambitions of 
Louis XIV to make his position absolute also laid the groundwork for a 
culture of impersonal service increasingly autonomous of the king.22 
Mechanics of absolutism 
Common to these studies – both of ceremonial performances and of the 
monarch’s gaze – is the understanding that the sovereign was fashioned in 
relation to his subjects. As discussed in the introduction, by the late seven-
teenth century, mechanics could make such relationships intelligible when it 
was integrated with other means of conceptualising social relationships. The 
relations that constituted the social order were often conceptualised through 
mixed metaphors of machines and organic bodies. According to this line of 
thinking, society was a body, which was a machine. The machine in turn 
thus became a mediator between conceptions of bodies and society. 
 
In Continental Europe and Scandinavia, mechanics and geometry were 
linked to an authoritarian political order. The English mechanical philoso-
pher Thomas Hobbes saw parallels between the force behind geometrical 
inferences and the order ensured by an absolute power, a Leviathan.23 Simi-
larly, German cameral writers of the eighteenth century legitimated the 
                                                   
20 Smith: The culture of merit, 4–5; See also Alder: Engineering the revolution, 49. 
21 For a discussion of the relationship between the monarch and the state apparatus of early 
modern Sweden, see Lindberg: Den antika skevheten, 12. 
22 Smith: The culture of merit, 264. 
23 Marshall Missner: “Skepticism and Hobbes’s political philosophy”, Journal of the history of ideas 
44:3 (1983), 410–11; Shapin and Schaffer: Leviathan and the air-pump, 101–7, 153. Likewise, Sawday 
points out that for “Hobbes, life, whether it was the life of individuals or societies was essentially 
‘motion’, a mechanical phenomenon, which could be investigated with the clockmaker’s precision 
and skill”; Sawday: Engines of the imagination, 246. 

 
 
130
power of the sovereign through machines and mechanics. In 1736, 4 years 
before he claimed the throne of Prussia, King Friedrich II (1712–86) argued 
that a politician should act “as an able mechanic”. Like a mechanicus – who 
should not only be “content with examining the exterior of a clock” but of 
whom it was expected “that he opens it, that he examines the springs and 
wheels in it” – an able statesman should “know the permanent principles of 
the courts, the springs of the politics of each prince, the sources of all 
events.”24 Later in the eighteenth century, the German cameralist Johann 
Heinrich Gottlob von Justi (1717–71) described the sovereign as “the gov-
ernor of the machine of the body politic [Staatskörpers].”25 In the geometric 
and mechanical vision of authoritarian order, which merged organic and 
mechanistic metaphors, the king was the head of the social clockwork, as 
well as the mechanicus who guaranteed the movement of its parts. The 
products of mechanical work, and the dominion of mechanici over crafts-
men and nature alike, became a means of arguing for a centralist vision of 
society, the rule of God and the absolute monarch.26 In return, this concep-
tion of political order legitimated certain approaches to the construction of 
mechanical machinery, where ideal machines were perceived as autonomous 
and hierarchical. While mechanics made an authoritarian order intelligible 
and legitimate, this political order in return made mechanics meaningful.27 
 
A clear manifestation of this reciprocal yet asymmetrical bond was a 
representation of society in the form of an automaton, presented to  
Frederik IV of Denmark–Norway around 1700 (see Figure 8). The automa-
ton was a portable machine model that consisted of two parts: the left one 
representing the machines and men of mining, and the right one represent-
ing the governmental hierarchy of the same mining production. King Fred-
erik could make both sides of this automaton-society move by turning ap-
propriate knobs on the back of the machine. According to the vision em-
bodied in this piece of machinery, society was a mechanical body, and its 
subjects were wheels and springs. The mechanicus both constructed the 
model of a well-ordered society (being the gift giver) and was represented in 
the machine by his constructions (on the top left-hand side). Similarly, the  
 
 
                                                   
24 “Comme un habile mécanicien”; “ne se contenteroit pas de voir l’extérieur d’une montre”; “qu 
il l’ouvriroit, qu’il en examineroit les ressorts et les mobiles”; “un habile politique s’applique à 
connoître les principes permanens des cours, les ressorts de la politique de chaque prince, les 
sources des événements”; Friedrich II of Prussia: “Considérations sur l’état présent du corps 
politique de l’Europe”, Oeuvres posthumes de Frédric II, roi de Prusse vol. 6 (Berlin, 1788 [1736]), 4. 
25 “der Regierer von der Maschine des Staatskörpers.”; Johann Heinrich Gottlob von Justi: Der 
Grundriss einer guten Regierung in fünf Buchern (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1759), 329. On Justi’s machine 
state, see Wakefield: The disordered police state, 34. 
26 Raeff: “The well-ordered police state”, 1229–30; Mayr: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in 
early modern Europe, 115–21. 
27 Schaffer: “Enlightened Automata”, 136; Mayr: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in early 
modern Europe, 102–3, 115–21. 

131
Figure 8. The cameralist order of society represented in the form of a porta-
ble machine model, offered to King Frederik IV of Denmark and Norway 
around 1700. (Photo: Tor Aas Haug/Norsk Bergverksmuseum) 

 
 
132
monarch was both a part of the machine (residing at the top right-hand 
side) and guaranteed the order of the whole device by turning the knobs in 
the background (as the owner of the machine itself). In this second sense, 
the monarch inspected the machine with penetrating vision and controlled 
the circulation of its parts by turning the knobs.28 
 
Perhaps an even more concrete example of the role of mechanics in an 
absolutist order can be found in the correspondence of a more or less un-
known contemporary of Christopher Polhammar: Birger Elfwing (1679–
1747). In a plea for monetary help, on Christmas Eve 1716 Elfwing com-
posed a letter to Karl XII, in which he requested support for his various 
mechanical projects: 
I do not believe it possible to complete [these and other inventions] using 
private means. Instead, I most subserviently submit to the most under-
standable grace of Your Royal Majesty, who has cared for the progress of 
several other sciences through subsidies and promotions.29 
 
In his letter, Elfwing wished to present his “most subservient zeal for 
his Royal Majesty and the military service of our fatherland”. He could not 
afford to fund his work himself, and therefore asked for the Majesty’s help. 
Simultaneously, he presented himself to the king as someone with an inter-
est in useful arts and knowledge. Furthermore, he professed an emotional 
connection to the king. He wished that the “utility of [these inventions], 
with the help of God, would soon be of assistance to Your Royal Majesty”. 
He “considered it to be of my greatest happiness” to provide “that which is 
of agreeable use to my most gracious king.”30 
 
Elfwing attached to his letter an engraving that portrays a mechanicus 
showing an invention to a would-be patron (see Figure 9). The picture dis-
plays both a specific agricultural machine, a threshing-mill run by wind 
power, and the social relationships of which Elfwing imagined his mechani-
cal work to be a part. The engraving shows the inventor, spelled out as “B. 
Elfwing: inv”,  standing next to his patron. The inventor points towards the 
machine, while facing the patron for whose benefit he has made his inven-
tion. In the background, two women are working in the rural setting where 
 
                                                   
28 For a more detailed description of this machine model, see Christensen: Det moderne projekt, 74. 
Peter Dear has argued for the similarities between seventeenth-century kingship and scientific 
authority, in ways that underline my point, in Dear: “Mysteries of state, mysteries of nature”, 
214–20. 
29 “ser jag mig af egen förmögenhet sådant eij hinna utföra, utan allerunderdånigst hemställer 
Eders Kongl. May:ts högstbegripliga nåd, som om åthskillige andra Scientiers progress med 
understöd och befordran dragit försorg”; printed in Ernst E. Areen: “Birger Elfving. Hedemora 
gevärsfaktori och Furudals styckebruk”, Svenska vapenhistoriska sällskapets årsskrift 3 (1931), 70–1. 
30 “min underdånigste Zele för Eders Kongl. May:ts och Fäderneslandsens Krigs Tienst”; Areen: 
“Birger Elfving. Hedemora gevärsfaktori och Furudals styckebruk”, 68. “att nyttan der af, med 
Guds hielp, skall snart komma Eders Kongl. May:t till tienst”; “skattandes det för min högsta 
lycka”; “sådant, som wore min Allernådigaste Konung till behagelig nytta.”; ibid., 71. 

 
 
133
Figure 9. Engraving enclosed in a letter from Birger Elfwing to Karl XII. (Reproduced 
from Ernst E. Areen: “Birger Elfving”, 19)31 
the machine is supposed to be running. The engraving can be interpreted as 
an illustration of mechanics’ pretentions to relevance in wide parts of socie-
ty. It portrays an order in which machinery, mechanical knowledge and po-
litical power coexisted, while depicting how relationships of superiority and 
subordination mattered to early modern mechanics. 
 
The positioning of the actors by depth aligns with the power relation-
ships of the absolutist state: the king in the foreground, the mechanical 
practitioner right behind him, then the machine, and, finally, far in the 
background and framed by the machine as if part of it, the peasant women. 
In the horizontal plane, the mechanical practitioner is positioned as a trust-
ed mediator between the king, on the one hand, and a hierarchical order of 
production of workers and wooden cogwheels on the other. In turn, the 
machine is placed as a mediator between the women, working in the back-
ground, and the two men to the right. Elfwing’s letter and engraving hinted 
at royal patronage as something that involved more than the granting of 
economic aid to useful clients. Patronage also had a symbolical and identifi-
catory function: it was another forum where royal power could be staged. 
By enacting such relationships, monarchs and mechanici were intertwined 
and shaped each other in the eyes of their contemporaries. 
 
Thus, in early modern Europe, patron–client relationships between 
monarchs and mechanici were not only ways for clients to attain resources 
                                                   
31 Areen gives a reference to a letter in the collection “Diverse militära inventioner” in the Mili-
tary Archives of Sweden (Krigsarkivet); Ernst E. Areen: “Birger Elfving”, 68. However, this 
collection does not exist anymore in that archive, and the letter has not been found. Therefore, I 
reproduce the illustration from Areen’s article. 

 
 
134
for mechanical work. As machines and bodies mediated between orders of 
production, nature and society, relationships between monarchs and me-
chanical practitioners were given a range of connotations. For those who 
conceived society as a machine-body, the machine made the monarch’s 
absolute power and gaze intelligible. The social epistemology of early mod-
ern mechanics formed a structural framework that linked the work of the 
mechanicus to the monarch’s exercise of power. Therefore, through the 
staging of mechanical interest and patronage, the monarch could present 
himself as a powerful and perceptive sovereign to subjects who shared these 
mechanistic views. As the meaning of mechanics and royal power corre-
sponded structurally, letter correspondence between kings and mechanical 
practitioners provided tactics for both parties to fashion themselves in rela-
tion to what was expected of a monarch or a mechanicus. 
The mechanici, the monarch and the secretary of state 
Karl XII claimed the throne at the age of 15 and ruled the Swedish Empire 
around the Baltic Sea from 1697 until his death in 1718. Following his fa-
ther Karl XI, and inspired by Louis XIV, he fashioned himself in the image 
of an absolute monarch with God-given authority.32 From the onset of the 
eighteenth century, Sweden was engaged in the Great Northern War (1700–
21), in which Russia under Peter I challenged the Swedish supremacy 
around the Baltic Sea. In the early 1710s, Karl was in his late twenties, and 
had waged wars, in several European regions, for over a third of his life. 
The war effort had strained the resources of the Swedish fiscal military state 
to its limits, and after some initial success in the field the fortune of war had 
now definitively turned against the Swedes. 
 
Biographers have generally given little attention to Karl XII’s participa-
tion in the everyday administration of the realm.33 Living a great part of the 
1700s and 1710s abroad, leading his armies, the king was at times only in 
sporadic contact with the state apparatus at home. Still, along with the im-
age of Karl XII as a warrior king, biographers from the mid-eighteenth cen-
tury onwards discussed his apparent interest in, and patronage of, mathe-
                                                   
32 Gunnar Carlqvist: “Karl XII:s ungdom och första regeringsår”, in Samuel E. Bring (ed): Karl 
XII. Till 200-årsdagen av hans död (Stockholm, 1918), 75; Ragnhild M. Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden 
(London, 1968), 79–81; Snickare: Enväldets riter, 110. 
33 Åsa Karlsson: Den jämlike undersåten. Karl XII:s förmögenhetsbeskattning 1713 (Uppsala, 1994), 32. 
As pointed out by Karlson, the two most prominent biographers only briefly discuss the king’s 
participation in the internal affairs of the realm; Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden, 337–49; Sven 
Grauers: “Karl XII:s personlighet. Försök till analys”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok (1969), 24–25. 
Furthermore, both biographers refer to Feif when arguing that the king took an active interest in 
economic reform. 

 
 
135
matics.34 In the second edition of his biography from 1749, François Marie 
Arouet de Voltaire commented on the fact that “some persons have wanted 
to present this prince as a good mathematician”. Voltaire was not convinced 
of these accounts: he considered that “the evidence given for [the king’s] 
knowledge in mathematics is not very conclusive”.35 In the same vein, and 
in opposition to older celebratory histories of Karl XII as a philosopher 
monarch, more recent scholars have wished for a more nuanced interpreta-
tion of the sources celebrating the king’s mathematical skill. In this vein, 
David Dunér argues that there can be a difference between the private and 
the public views of a scientist. According to Dunér, letters between mathe-
maticians and monarchs were part of a political game distinct from “private 
opinions” of scientists and actual scientific practice.36 
 
Although such interpretations facilitate narratives of royal patronage 
that move beyond the literal celebratory level of older historiography and of 
the historical sources, they are nonetheless highly problematic. Attempts to 
find sources that provide actors’ true private opinions, isolated from a polit-
ical order, are futile and only generate guesses of essentialist qualities. Then 
how do we write a history of royal patronage of mechanics, which is critical 
of celebratory biographies, but which at the same time recognises that we 
cannot disentangle early modern mathematics from the political orders of 
which they were a part? In this chapter, I analyse presentations of the king 
and of mechanici as reflections of neither essential qualities nor a superficial 
façade. Instead, I see them as parts of integrated performances through 
which all parties were made and remade. Consequently, I care little about 
whether or not Karl XII was a competent mathematicus, or whether his 
clients were sincere in their presentations of each other or the king. Instead, 
                                                   
34 Already in the official biography sanctioned by the Swedish state and written by Jöran Anders-
son Nordberg in 1740, the king was presented as a competent mathematician; Jöran Andersson 
Nordberg: Konung Carl den XII:tes historia (Stockholm, 1740), 599–601. By the late nineteenth 
century, Karl Siljestrand described the king as in possession of great philosophical insights; Karl 
K:son Siljestrand: Karl XII såsom filosof (Linköping, 1891), 1. Among twentieth-century historians, 
Hatton mentions Polhem’s and Swedenborg’s favourable opinions of the king’s mathematical 
skill, without discussing these remarks further, Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden, 430. These descrip-
tions of the king as a mathematician can still be found in more popular biographical literature. 
For example Bengt Liljegren has described Karl XII as “the mathematician on the throne” (in 
original: “matematikern på tronen”); Bengt Liljegren: Karl XII i Lund. När Sverige styrdes från Skåne 
(Lund, 1999), 65. In a somewhat later biography he slightly adjusts this characterisation, stating 
that the king was “interested in numbers” (in original: “intresserad av siffror”) but that “he was 
not a mathematician” (in original: “någon matematiker var han inte”); Bengt Liljegren: Karl XII. 
En biografi (Lund, 2000), 317. 
35 “Quelques personnes ont voulu faire passer ce Prince pour un bon Mathématicien”; “la preuve 
que l’on donne de ses connaissances en Mathématique n’est pas bien concluante”; François Marie 
Arouet de Voltaire: Histoire de Charles XII, roi de Suède, divisée en huit livres, avec l’histoire de l’empire de 
Russie sous Pierre-le-Grand, en deux parties divisées par chapitres (Geneva, 1768), 382. 
36 “privata åsikt”; David Dunér: “Sextiofyra och åtta istället för tio. Karl XII, Swedenborg och 
konsten att räkna”, Scandia 67 (2001), 231; For a similar analysis, see Hans Helander: “Introduc-
tion”, in Emanuel Swedenborg: Festivus applausus in Caroli XII (Uppsala, 1985), 9–50. 

 
 
136
these presentations should be studied as parts of interlaced processes of 
becoming, through which all involved fashioned themselves in relation to 
the political order of an absolutist regime. 
 
Such entangled performances of mechanics and royal power can be seen 
in a substantial correspondence between Karl XII, his secretary Feif,  
Polhammar and a young Swedenborg.37 From the early 1710s, these four 
men were shaped by a chain of relational performances in letter form. They 
inhabited radically different positions in early eighteenth-century society. 
Apart from them all being men who were part of the theocratic absolutist 
order of the early modern Swedish state, they had little in common. Their 
relationships were based on strict hierarchies of age, social position and 
wealth. Even the relationships as such did not necessarily have equal im-
portance to all parties. Whereas Polhammar was fundamentally transformed 
through his relationship with the king, the same cannot be said, to the same 
degree, about Karl XII. Still, no party was left unaffected by these relation-
ships. They were both means of reciprocal favours and central in processes 
of self-formation, by which all involved parties were shaped in relation to, 
and grew dependent on, each other. 
Polhammar – Swedenborg. The groundwork of an 
intergenerational relationship 
The starting point of the correspondence studied here was the Collegium 
Curiosorum. The Collegium was a short-lived scientific society in Uppsala, 
founded in 1710 by a group of scholars who held meetings in 1710–11, 
while the university was closed because of a plague outbreak.38 Its initiator, 
Benzelius,  was part of a European “republic of letters” and corresponded 
with scholars such as Hans Sloane and Leibniz.39 Benzelius  and the Collegi-
um also corresponded with Polhammar on matters of mechanics, mathemat-
ics and natural philosophy, and discussed Polhammar’s letters at its meet-
ings.40 Emanuel Swedenborg was the younger brother-in-law of Benzelius. 
                                                   
37 Emanuel Swedberg changed his surname to Swedenborg in 1718, when he was ennobled as an 
honorary sign for his father’s work as a bishop. For the sake of consistency, I use his latter name 
continuously throughout the chapter. This might appear inconsistent when compared to the way 
I name Polhammar, but whereas there is an analytic point of discussing him as “Polhammar”—as 
the name Polhem was a result of the processes that I study—Swedenborg’s name change is not a 
result of the processes studied here. 
38 The Collegium is discussed in detail in Dunér: The natural philosophy of Emanuel Swedenborg, 41–7 
Hildebrand: Kungl. Svenska Vetenskapsakademien vol. 1, 81–135; see also Lindqvist: Technology on 
trial, 119–21 
39 For a general discussion of the scholarly republic of letters, see Dena Goodman: The republic of 
letters. A cultural history of the French Enlightenment (Ithaca, 1994), 1–11. On Swedish scholars’ rela-
tion to the republic, see Fors: Mutual favours, 8–9. 
40 On Christopher Polhem and the Collegium Curiosorum, see Axel Johan Carl Vilhelm Liljecrantz: 
“Polhem och grundandet av Sveriges första naturvetenskapliga samfund. Jämte andra anteck-
ningar rörande Collegium Curiosorum. I”, Lychnos (1939), 289–308; Axel Johan Carl Vilhelm 

 
 
137
11 years old, Swedenborg matriculated at Uppsala University and he stayed 
there for 10 years. After graduating, in the summer of 1709, he started plan-
ning a European tour to London, Paris and Leiden. At the same time, he 
started to discuss mathematics and Polhammar with his brother-in-law. 
 
On 13 July 1709, Swedenborg sent a letter to Benzelius about his tour, 
asking him for letters of recommendation to the librarian’s “acquaintances 
in England”. Swedenborg “thought it advisable to choose a subject early, 
which I might elaborate in course of time, and into which I might introduce 
much of what I should notice and read in foreign countries.” The subject he 
wished to pursue was mathematics, which he desired to “turn to some prac-
tical use, and also to perfect myself more in”.41 While awaiting his departure, 
Swedenborg compiled a work “of things discovered and to be discovered in mathe-
matics, or, what is nearly the same thing, the progress made in mathematics during 
the last one or two centuries.” This work would include “all branches of mathe-
matics”. To this compilation, Swedenborg wished to add the inventions of 
Polhammar, as an ornament of the whole work.42 
 
In March the following year, Swedenborg wrote to Benzelius again, stat-
ing that his greatest desire was “to obtain some information respecting the 
plan now being discussed here, of my staying with Polhammar. ”43 Sweden-
borg used his influential family network in order to be introduced to 
Polhammar and invited to stay with him on his estate of Stiernsund; after 
some bartering, Polhammar accepted Swedenborg’s proposal.44 Polham-
mar’s decision was not only a result of Swedenborg’s influential contacts: he 
was also convinced by Swedenborg’s presentations of mechanical skill. In a 
letter to Benzelius,  Polhammar professed that he was: 
extremely well pleased that he [Swedenborg] came here, […] and as we 
were pleased and satisfied with one another, his desire could be gratified 
without any difficulty; especially when I found him able to assist me in the 
mechanical undertaking which I have in hand, and in making the necessary 
experiments.45  
 
Polhammar portrayed Swedenborg as “a quick and intelligent person”.46 
Similarly, Swedenborg described Polhammar as “so great a man, one such as 
                                                                                                                        
Liljecrantz: “Polhem och grundandet av Sveriges första naturvetenskapliga samfund. Jämte andra 
anteckningar rörande Collegium Curiosorum. II”, Lychnos (1940), 21–54. 
41 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, 13 July 1709”, in Rudolf L. Tafel (ed): 
Documents concerning the life and character of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1 (London, 1875), 200. 
42 Ibid., 201. 
43 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, 6 March 1710”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 202. 
44 Dunér: Världsmaskinen, 56. 
45 Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, 16 July 1710”, in Tafel (ed): Documents vol. 1, 
205. 
46 Ibid. 

 
 
138
our country will never see again.”47 Their letters were filled with mutual 
praise, in a manner typical of the intergenerational relationships of mechan-
ics discussed in Chapter 2. Swedenborg recognised Polhammar’s seniority 
and mechanical excellence, and Polhammar pointed out young Sweden-
borg’s aptitude for mechanics. In spite of these positive comments, Swe-
denborg did not stay in Stiernsund to study for Polhammar. Instead, he set 
out on his European tour and did not return until 1714. From England, 
Swedenborg could present himself to his brother-in-law as even more 
aligned with what was expected of a mechanicus: he wrote of how he pos-
sessed an “immoderate desire […] for astronomy and mechanics”, and how he 
traversed spaces and epistemic divides of scholars and craftsmen, in order 
to “steal their trades, which some day will be of use to me.”48 Thus, from 
London, he presented himself to his brother-in-law in the ways expected of 
a future Swedish state official on a foreign study tour.49 
Polhammar – Feif. An active middleman in an asymmetric 
relationship 
It does not appear as though Swedenborg corresponded with Polhammar 
during his voyage. At home, Polhammar would instead initiate correspond-
ence with Karl XII, which would shape both him and, later on, the young 
Swedenborg.50  As discussed in the previous chapter, Polhammar was al-
ready established at this time as an important mechanicus with a personal 
Laboratorium Mechanicum (somewhat) integrated into the Bureau of Mines. 
However, in the 1710s, the mining administration came to matter less to 
him: instead, he established a new dominant position through direct royal 
contacts.51 Following an order of Karl XII in August 1711, Wrede had 
changed office and had become president of a newly reformed and now 
independent Bureau of Commerce. It has been argued that this change 
should be interpreted as a removal from office, as a result of Wrede’s oppo-
sition to the king’s war effort. Others have pointed to the fact that Wrede 
could still act as a royal council [kungligt råd] and that his successor in the 
States Office and the Bureau of Accounts, Nils Stromberg (1646–1723), 
                                                   
47 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, 13 October 1710”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 207. 
48 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, received 30 April, 1711.”, in Tafel (ed): 
Documents vol. 1, 211. Swedenborg wrote “immoderate desire” in English. 
49 On Swedenborg’s visit to London, see Simon Schaffer: “Swedenborg’s lunars”, Annals of science 
71:1 (2014), 4–11. On Swedish eighteenth-century study tours, see Hodacs and Nyberg: Natu-
ralhistoria på resande fot, 41–4; Fors has pointed out how the foreign travels of the eighteenth cen-
tury shaped the self-conception of state officials, see Fors: The limits of matter, 78. 
50 Fors has mentioned these letters of recommendation from the circle around Polhem to the 
king, but without making a closer analysis of their contents. See The limits of matter, 83. 
51 On Polhem and Wrede, see page 94. See also ibid., 82. 

 
 
139
inhabited a weak position and followed the decisions of the council.52 No 
matter the relative power of Wrede and Stromberg, in 1711, Polhammar 
established influence with the monarch that circumvented his old patron, 
Wrede.  
 
Polhammar’s relationship with Karl XII was channelled through the 
king’s right-hand man, Feif.  During the king’s residence in Bender in the 
Ottoman Empire (1709–13), Feif became secretary of state [statssekreterare] 
in the field office [fältkansli] there.53 On 5 October 1711, Benzelius and the 
members of the Collegium Curiosorum, by request of Polhammar himself, sent 
a letter of recommendation to Bender praising Polhammar. The explicit 
purpose of the letter was to present him as a mechanical practitioner who 
was useful to both the realm and the king. The letter described his aptitude 
as “that of a prodigy and one of the rarest in such sciences [scientiis] that is 
known in our country to this day”. The members of the Collegium wrote that 
they regretted how Polhammar’s work was suffering due to lack of funds 
during the economically difficult times. Especially, they regretted that 
Polhammar could only afford to work on theoria and lesser models, and not 
praxis, which required greater resources. In order to bridge this divide, royal 
support was essential. Accordingly, in the Collegium’s letter, we again find the 
tropes discussed in Chapter 2: of how a mechanicus was expected to unite 
the epistemic virtues of both theoria and praxis, and how their unification 
was a means to become a useful man committed to theocratic absolutism.54 
 
At about the same time, on 9 October, Polhammar himself sent Feif a 
letter. Obviously, Feif had not received, let alone answered, the Collegium’s 
letter in just 4 days’ time. Because of Karl XII’s residence in the Ottoman 
Empire, the correspondence of the absolute king and his subjects circulated 
between the northern and south-eastern edges of the European continent. 
The letters of the Collegium and of Polhammar should instead be seen as part 
of a joint effort to present the mechanical practitioner to Feif and the king.55 
                                                   
52 Ingegerd Hildebrand: “Falkenberg Af Sandemar, Gabriel”, SBL 15 (Stockholm, 1956), 226; 
Walter Ahlström: Arvid Horn och Karl XII 1710–1713 (Lund, 1959), 101. See also Karlsson: Den 
jämlike undersåten, 43–4. 
53 Bengt Hildebrand: “Casten Feif”, SBL 15 (Stockholm, 1956), 512; Karlsson: Den jämlike un-
dersåten, 35. 
54 “prodigieust af ett af the raraste, som uthi sådanna scientiis in til dagz i wårt fädernes land bekant 
warit”; Collegium Curiosorum to Casten Feif: “Copy of letter of recommendation for Polhammar”, 
1711-10-05, Codex Br. 31, Lindköpings stiftsbibliotek. This copy is thus a rare example of a 
preserved letter to Feif concerning Polhammar. See also Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems 
lefnadsteckning”, 45. 
55 Polhammar also sent another letter, concerning the stipendiaries in mechanics at the Bureau of 
Mines on 20 November. These two letters, like all other incoming correspondence to Feif during 
his time in Bender, are sadly lost. Still, Feif discusses the contents of Polhammar’s letters explicit-
ly in his answers, and also mentions the dates that Polhammar sent them. Thus, it is possible to 
deduct at least some of their contents. In Casten Feif: “Letter to Christopher Polhammar, 1712-
02-09”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok (1911), 238–42, Feif refers to the date of Polhammar’s first 
letter. He refers to the second letter in Casten Feif: “Letter to Christopher Polhammar, 1712-03-
21”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok (1911), 244–7. Both Feif’s letters are published in Samuel E. 

 
 
140
In many respects, Feif was the ideal recipient of these letters. As the secre-
tary of state, he was in charge of domestic affairs and acted as a mediator 
between the king and officials of the bureaus in Stockholm.56 A large num-
ber of Feif’s letters from this time are scattered throughout Swedish ar-
chives. Furthermore, during the nineteenth century, some were printed in 
published volumes. In his correspondence, Feif comes across as a man who 
was following the latest French and German discussions on cameralism and 
policing, and who was interested in matters of œconomy and useful 
knowledge.57 
 
Feif replied to Polhammar on 9 February. He wrote of how the king had 
read an essay on Polhammar’s mechanical inventions, presumably attached 
to one of his letters, “with such delight” that he had ordered Feif “to write”. 
The king had wanted Polhammar “to finish the machines and models men-
tioned in the essay as soon as possible”.58 Why did Feif present the king as 
interested in Polhammar’s mechanical work? For a number of historians, 
the king’s interest in Polhammar became a circular argument that proved 
both that Polhammar possessed mechanical genius and that Karl XII had a 
genuine interest in mathematics and an ability to identify aptitude for such 
arts.59 Even historians who have focused on Feif have seen him as a mere 
conduit. Not unlike how Polhammar has been interpreted, latter-day histo-
rians have construed Feif as a forbearer of mid-eighteenth-century Swedish 
“utilism”. For Bengt Hildebrand, Feif’s correspondence “forebodes the 
world of ideas of the Age of Liberty,” and he considers it striking “how 
modern they [the letters] seem to be for their time – they could just as well 
have been written around 1739” (i.e., the year that The Royal Swedish 
Academy of Sciences was founded). Still, somehow he combines this argu-
ment with an uncritical interpretation of Feif’s relationship with the king. 
For him, it was “beyond all doubt, that [Feif] in all his correspondence […] 
                                                                                                                        
Bring (ed): “Några bref från Casten Feif till Christopher Polhem”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok 
(1911), 233–56. 
56 Karlsson: Den jämlike undersåten, 36. 
57 Letters by Feif to Tessin are printed in Gustaf Andersson and Carl Gustaf von Brinkman (eds): 
Handlingar ur v. Brinkmanska archivet vol. 1, 133–246; letters to Polhem can be found in Feif: 
“Några bref från Casten Feif till Christopher Polhem”; his letters to Horn are found in M Bohn-
stedt: “Från Bendertiden. Casten Feifs brev till Arvid Horn 1710–1712”, Personhistorisk tidskrift, 
1921. Furthermore, unpublished letters to a wide number of recipients can be found in UUB, 
RA, KB and in the libraries of Lund University and of the Diocese of Lindköping. 
58 “med sådant behag”; “skrifwa”; “så snart som någonsin giörligit är, nu i förstonne skal förfär-
diga de på hos gående upsatz nämnde machiner och modeller”; Feif: “Letter to Polhammar, 
1712-02-09”. 
59 Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, 41, 46. Similarly, Torsten Althin 
writes that in 1713, “Karl XII had […] turned his attention to Polhem’s mechanical genius” (in 
original: “Karl XII hade […] fått sin uppmärksamhet riktad på Polhems mekaniska snille”); 
Torsten Althin: Christopher Polhem och Stjernsunds manufacturverk (Säter, 1950), 23. Also, in a more 
recent biographical article on Polhem, Michael Lindgren argues that Polhem and the king “found 
each other through a mutual technical interest.” (in original: “fann varandra i ett gemensamt 
tekniskt intresse”); Michael Lindgren: “Christopher Polhem”, SBL 29 (Stockholm, 1995–7), 338. 

 
 
141
to a large degree was the direct spokesman for the king, for Karl XII him-
self.”60 
 
More recently, Åsa Karlsson has corrected this image: Feif had a much 
more active role as a mediator between Polhammar and the king.61 More-
over, he was central in shaping Polhammar and the king into men with simi-
lar interests. Feif’s letters were not passive or neutral descriptions of the 
involved correspondents. The correspondence between all the men was a 
forum, in which they could reshape themselves through relational perfor-
mances. Feif’s presentations of the king’s interests can be seen as one such 
relational performance. By presenting Karl XII as interested in both 
Polhammar and mechanics, Feif could conjure forth a specific image of the 
monarch. He described how “His Majesty has a particular liking of mechan-
ics” and repeatedly wrote of the king’s interest in maintaining the corre-
spondence. He wrote how he wanted Polhammar to write longer letters, 
which “His Majesty himself would read […] with pleasure”. Furthermore, 
he pointed out the haste with which the king had wished to answer 
Polhammar. From this, Feif argued, Polhammar should have been able to 
discern “what a gracious consideration His Majesty has for his work, and 
what he could expect in the future.”62 In a letter of 5 March, Feif once again 
described the king’s great interest in and aptitude for mechanics, “a science 
to which His Majesty takes a particular liking, wherefore His Majesty is not 
completely unskilled in it.” Presenting himself as sharing the king’s interests 
Feif promised to use “all my diligence to persuade the whole world that 
among us, arts and sciences are held in appropriate respect”.63  
 
The relational performances found in these letters follow similar pat-
terns to those discussed in previous chapters: they were made in a relation-
ship of superiority and submission, between actors who were anything but 
peers. Nevertheless, by relating to each other, both parties shaped them-
selves in each other’s image. The relation between the monarch and the 
mechanicus, formed through their correspondence, had a somewhat differ-
ent power dynamic than that between the old and the young mechanical 
practitioner. Although Karl XII was 22 years younger than Polhammar, it is 
obvious that he was the senior party in the relationship. As an absolute 
                                                   
60 “förebåda frihetstidens tankevärld”; Hildebrand: Kungl. Svenska Vetenskapsakademien vol. 1, 72. 
“hur moderna de verka för sin tid – de kunde i så måtto lika väl varit skrivna omkr. 1739”; ibid., 
73. “utom allt tvivel, att han i hela sin brevväxling […] är i hög grad ett direkt språkrör för 
kungen, för Carl XII själv.”; ibid., 72. 
61 Karlsson: Den jämlike undersåten, 36. 
62 “H:s M:t har en särdeles lust til mechanicen,”; Feif: “Letter to Polhammar, 1712-02-09”, 239. 
“H:s M:s sielf lärer läsa dem med nöije igenom”, ibid., 241. “hwad nådig omtanke H:s M:t har for 
des arbeten, och hwad han framdeles kan hafwa at förwänta.”; ibid., 242. 
63 “en wettenskap hwartil H:s M:t har särdeles lust, hwarföre Hans M:t eij heller lärer finnas så 
aldeles okunnig däruti.”; Casten Feif: “Letter to Christopher Polhammar, 1712-03-05”, Karolinska 
förbundets årsbok (1911), 243. “al min flijt at öfwertyga hela werlden, det konster och wettenskaper 
hos oss blifwa håldne uti tilbörligit wärde”; ibid., 243–4. 

 
 
142
monarch, he is perhaps the most extreme case of how age and social status 
intersected in the patriarchal order of early modern Sweden. As an active 
middleman in this asymmetric relationship, Feif did not only make 
Polhammar in the image of a mechanicus: he also made Karl XII into a 
certain type of œconomically minded monarch, acting according to both 
mechanical and cameral principles. 
Third parties. Making mechanics matter 
Feif’s correspondence with Polhammar was not only of concern to Feif, 
Polhammar and the king. A broader circle discussed the relationship be-
tween Polhammar and Karl XII, whose relation resonated in Feif’s letters to 
other officials in Sweden. For example, Feif and Nicodemus Tessin (1654–
1728) explicitly discussed royal patronage of useful arts and sciences. Tessin 
had made a career by offering the monarch his services as an architect and 
organiser of ceremonies, and, like Polhammar, his success depended on the 
patronage of both Karl XI and Karl XII. Compared with Polhammar, he 
was a much more successful client and, in 1716, he even became marshal of 
the realm.64 Feif wrote to Tessin about Polhammar just weeks after receiving 
Polhammar’s first letter. He described how “His Majesty has not known 
until now that he had such a man in his realm, and much laments that he 
has been unknowing for so many years.”65 He thus rushed to present the 
king’s new relationship with Polhammar to his contact. Despite the king’s 
professed previous ignorance of Polhammar, the existence of such a man in 
the realm was a sign of the king’s interest in useful mechanical and beautiful 
arts. In a roundabout way, Feif wrote that, although the king did “not wish 
to brag about his knowledge”, the Karl XII was “not unskilled in architec-
ture”. Because of the king’s interest in this art, Feif could promise Tessin 
that the king would “promote beautiful and useful arts and sciences in every 
way. A proof thereof is Polhammar”.66 
 
In his letters, Feif made sure to highlight the king’s enthusiasm for 
Polhammar time and time again. On 19 November, Feif again mentioned 
Polhammar to Tessin. Tessin had lamented how the young were uninterest-
ed in the arts. However, Feif explained how this was due to lack of encour-
agement, which in turn resulted from unpatriotic sentiments: “How would it 
                                                   
64 On the relationship between Tessin and the monarchs Karl XI and Karl XII, see Snickare: 
Enväldets riter, 29–43; Snickare: “Shaping the ritual space”, 133; Linda Hinners: De fransöske 
handtwerkarne vid Stockholms slott 1693–1713. Yrkesroller, organisation, arbetsprocesser (Stockholm, 
2012), 46–8. 
65 “H. M:t har aldrig förr än nu vettat, at han hade en sådan man i sitt rike, och beklagar myket, at 
han i så många åhr har måst gå fåfäng.”; Casten Feif: “Letter to Nicodemus Tessin, 1712-02-30”, 
in Andersson & Brinkman (eds): Handlingar vol. 1, 146. 
66 “vil intet skryta med sine wettenskaper”; ibid. “är intet så osnäl i Architecturen,”; ibid., 145. “på 
alt sät lärer befordra vackra konster och nyttige vettenskaper, et bevijs däraf är Påhlhammar.”; 
ibid., 146. 

 
 
143
be possible for anyone to find an appetite thereof,” Feif wrote, “as long as 
we value what strangers do considerably more”. Polhammar,  Feif argued, 
would have been praised to the skies had he been a stranger, “but because 
he is a Swede, he is not much esteemed for all his knowledge.” But Feif 
continued on the positive note that because “His Majesty loves sciences, 
more people will doubtless commit themselves to them”.67 Likewise, Feif 
discussed Polhammar in letters to Arvid Horn (1664–1742), the president of 
the chancery [Kanslikollegium]. Their correspondence touched on several 
œconomical subjects. In this context, Feif wrote how it would please the 
monarch if Horn aided Polhammar who “can accomplish many useful 
things in our manufactories.” Again, the royal patronage of Polhammar 
became a symbol of the king’s interest in useful arts and sciences, and in 
turn a proof of their importance to the realm.68 
 
To present the king’s interest in mechanics was something more than to 
reveal an expression of personal opinion. As the locus of the body politic, 
the king’s interest in mechanics was perceived as corresponding to the inter-
est of his subjects. Therefore, the relational performances of mechanics 
carried out in this correspondence not only shaped Polhammar and the 
king, but also attributed to mechanics new meanings in relation to the polit-
ical order. By writing about the relationship between the king and Polham-
mar, Feif could present himself as an important broker and assure other 
potential clients that they too could expect benevolent responses from the 
monarch. When Feif wrote about Polhammar to Tessin, he presented the 
king as in favour of work similar to Tessin’s. By reading of how the king 
treated Polhammar, the architect Tessin could be certain of similar just 
treatment.  
 
In his correspondence with third parties, Polhammar presented his rela-
tionships with Feif and the king in the same manner. In a letter of 31 May 
1712 to Pehr Elvius the elder, the mathematics professor in Uppsala, 
Polhammar related how “Chancery Councillor [Cancelierådet] Feif writes that 
His Majesty is very much a libhaber [sic], or a lover, of mechanics, and knows 
fairly much thereof.” Moreover, he told his friend of how the king “yearns, 
as he [Feif] writes, that he could talk to me”.69 Polhammar continued to 
describe to Elvius how the king cared so much for useful knowledge and its 
practitioners that he wished that young men would study mechanics.  
                                                   
67 “huru är det möijeligit at någon skal få lust därtil, så länge man hoos oss tycker ålijka mera om 
det som främmande giöra”; “men efter han är en svensk, acktas han intet stort med al sin vetten-
skap.”; “Hans M:t älskar vettenskaper, så lära flera lägga sig därpå”; Casten Feif: “Letter to Nico-
demus Tessin, 1712-11-19”, in Andersson & Brinkman (eds): Handlingar vol. 1, 162. 
68 “kan skaffa mycken stor nytta uti wåra manufacturer.”; Casten Feif: “Letter to Arvid Horn, 
1712-03-26”, Personhistorisk tidskrift (1921), 111. 
69 “H. Cancelirådet Feif förmehler att Hanss Maij:tt ähr myket libhaber eller älskare af 
mechanicen, och förstår sig tembligen well der uthi.”; “lengtar myket, som han skrifver, att få tala 
med mig”; Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Petrus Elvius, 1712-05-31”, in Liljencrantz (ed): Chris-
topher Polhems brev, 88. 

 
 
144
Therefore, Polhammar informed his friend at Uppsala University that “the 
students [lit. subjects] of the academy, who consider themselves inclined to 
learn [mechanics], gain no disadvantage if they apply themselves to it early 
in life.”70 By writing of the king’s interest in mechanics, Polhammar could 
present his own work as prestigious and as essential to the education of 
future men of the state. As in Feif’s correspondence, the making of a me-
chanically inclined monarch was intimately related to the making of both 
Polhammar into a useful man and mechanics into a feasible path to a useful 
manhood. Thus, Polhammar recognised the connection between the me-
chanical interest of the monarch, and mechanics as an important part of the 
body politic. By staging the monarch as interested in mechanics, young men 
would identify it as a feasible way to fashion themselves into manly subjects. 
Making Polhammar an arbiter of mechanical aptitude 
The relational performances of the monarch and the mechanicus were en-
tangled with the relationships discussed in the two previous chapters: of 
mechanics as a means for a boy to become a useful man, and for young men 
to become part of the bureaus in Stockholm. Through the stipends in me-
chanics, established in his Laboratorium Mechanicum of the Bureau of Mines in 
1699, Polhammar had already attained a position where he was the authority 
on whether or not young men showed promise in the mathematical and 
mechanical arts. As seen in Chapter 3, until the 1720s, Polhammar held the 
authority to identify who among the young of the realm were mechanically 
apt. On 21 March 1712, Feif reaffirmed this position: “No one,” Feif ar-
gued, “must […] be accepted [as a stipendiary], whom [Polhammar] does 
not deem to have a considerable aptitude for mechanics, so that they in time 
can accomplish something useful”. No consideration should be given to 
applicants’ “various recommendations,” Feif proposed: only their aptitude 
should matter. Feif gave Polhammar one suggestion as to where to search 
for such boys: maybe the children of master craftsmen “in the crafts that are 
related to mechanics” could benefit from Polhammar’s education.71 
 
As pointed out in Chapter 2, in an intergenerational relationship be-
tween mechanical practitioners, issues of identity were paramount: but by 
which qualities could someone identify an apt mechanical practitioner? In 
which ways did mechanical practitioners relate to other personas, such as 
that of the craftsman or the scholar? Feif’s letter to Polhammar about the 
stipendiaries puts these questions in a new perspective. The didactic narra-
                                                   
70 “dhe subjecta som wijdh accademien finna sig der till böjliga att lära, giöra intet illa mot sig om 
dhe aplicera sig der till i tijd.”; Polhem: “Letter to Petrus Elvius, 1712-05-31”. 
71 “måste ingen därtil antagas, som icke H:r Direct. finner hafwa det särdeles genie til mecha-
niquen, så at de med tiden något nyttigt kunna uträtta”; Feif: “Letter to Polhammar, 1712-03-21”, 
244. “hwariehanda recommendationer,”; ibid., 244–5. “uti de handtwärken som hafwa gemen-
skap med mechaniquen”; ibid., 245. 

 
 
145
tives found in speeches and prefaces were not only a matter of hypothetical 
discussion, they were also a means for Polhammar – arbiter of the mechani-
cal aptitude of boys by royal decree – to present systematic criteria for rec-
ognising mechanical competence. Here we can find a Swedish parallel to the 
French development described by Jay Smith and discussed above. By mak-
ing Polhammar the single authority for the stipends, and by highlighting 
competence in mechanics in favour of recommendations, it seems as if Feif 
wished to systematise these positions in the Swedish bureaucracy. Paradoxi-
cally, through a personal relationship with the king, Polhammar was instilled 
with a power to sidestep the personal modality of service – based on net-
works of kinship and favours – in the Swedish bureaucracy. Of course, in 
reality, as discussed in the previous chapter, Polhammar used this authority 
to promote his own sons, as well as other young men who were close to 
him. 
 
The establishment of Polhammar’s authority, based on his perceived 
relationship with the monarch, can be seen in Stromberg’s letters to 
Polhammar. As a result of having received letters from Feif, Stromberg in 
turn wrote to Polhammar on 6 June 1712, explaining that: 
I have recently received a letter from Bender by Chancery Councillor Feif, 
which among other things conveys how since His Majesty has been duly 
notified of [Polhammar’s] great talent, and rare aptitude, for the mechani-
cal sciences, His Majesty has shown a particular royal grace and liking of 
[him].72 
 
Much like in a children’s game of Chinese Whispers, Polhammar’s initial 
self-presentation as a useful mechanicus in his letter to Feif in Bender had 
travelled from Feif to the king, back again to Feif, then to Stromberg in 
Stockholm, and finally back to Polhammar. What Stromberg communicated 
to Polhammar was his own interpretation of what Feif had told him about 
the king’s reactions to reading Polhammar’s letters. Having circulated 
through this chain of correspondence, Polhammar’s initial self-presentation 
returned to him in a new form authorised by the monarch. It was no longer 
a subjective performance by a single man, but an officially sanctioned de-
scription of his mechanical excellence; the king, through Feif,  had author-
ised Polhammar’s self-presentation as an official truth. Carrying out the 
royal will, Stromberg promised Polhammar monetary and symbolic re-
sources; he offered him his services and promised to help him financially in 
                                                   
72 “Som iag nyl. erhållet bref från Bender af Hr Cancellie Rådet Feif, derutinnan bland annat 
äfwen förhähles, at sedan Hans Maj:t är worden behörigen underrättad om H:r Directeurens 
stora talent och ogemena genie uti Mechaniska wettenskaper, har Hans Kongl. Maj:t låtit förspör-
ja en serdeles Konglig ynnest och benägenhet för H:r Directeuren,”; Nils Stromberg: “Letter to 
Christopher Polhammar, concerning the King’s recommendation of Polhammar”, 1712-06-03, I 
p:23 1, 64, KB. 

 
 
146
order to encourage “the completion and maintenance of his ingenious spec-
ulations and his useful machines”.73 
 
Polhammar’s authority as a mechanicus was established by repetitious 
performances of self-presentation, which were passed on and amplified 
through a chain of correspondence. Simultaneously, the chain reinforced 
the role of mechanics as an identificatory practice of a useful subject. This 
was not the first time Polhammar had fashioned himself into such an ideal 
subject, nor would it be the last.74 Moreover, Polhammar was not alone in 
using the correspondence to acquire royal authority. All parts of the chain – 
be they monarchs, secretaries or civil servants – used the relationship be-
tween Polhammar and the king to do the same. Interestingly, the corre-
spondence from Polhammar to Feif and back again took place in a relatively 
short time between February and November 1712. It seems as if a perceived 
relationship between Polhammar and the king was in the interest of many 
actors at this specific time. For Polhammar, it was a means of establishing 
authority for himself as well as for the mechanical arts; for Feif and mem-
bers of the civil administration in Stockholm, it was a last ditch attempt, 
after the military failure of the battle of Poltava in 1709, to re-form Karl XII 
into a cameral monarch with an interest in manufactories. 
A sudden silence 
This circulation of correspondence, between two corners of Europe, was 
carried out over the improvised and fragile infrastructure that the king used 
to maintain contact with the administration in Stockholm while abroad. On 
13 December 1712, Feif sent one last letter to Polhammar before the corre-
spondence was put to a halt by the events of the Skirmish at Bender [Kala-
baliken i Bender] in February 1713. Karl XII had outstayed the welcome of 
his Ottoman hosts, and was now captured and forced to return to Sweden. 
 
However, in the summer of 1713, Feif re-established his correspond-
ence with Tessin.  On 22 June, he wrote a long letter to his friend. In this 
letter, Feif again touched on œconomy and policing, and expressed his wish 
to procure works by Wilhelm von Schröder and Marc-René d’Argenson. On 
13 July, Feif continued his discussion on cameral matters in yet another 
letter. He admitted that he wished Tessin’s letters (just like Polhammar’s) to 
be “four times longer than they are, because they very much please His 
                                                   
73 “sinrijka Speculationer och nyttige Konst-Machiners förfärdigande och upprätthållande”; ibid. 
Polhammar acquired similar help by decree from the government’s office to the council, the 
clearest example perhaps being tax and customs relief for his manufactory in Stiernsund. See e.g.: 
Karl XII: “Copy of letter to the council on new privileges for Stiernsund”, 1712-03-13, I p:23 1, 
59, KB. 
74 It would be possible to make a similar analysis of Polhammar’s relationship with Karl XI and 
Fabian Wrede, when he received stipends for travelling abroad and the Laboratorium Mechanicum 
of the Bureau of Mines. Likewise, the refashioning of the then ennobled Polhem into a typical 
man of the “Age of Liberty” would reveal another remaking of the mechanical practitioner. 

 
 
147
Majesty. They are read more than one time.” He also described his library of 
books on œconomy and policing, and argued that “our œconomy and police 
need a considerable library, if they are ever to be put in a good condition.” 
Feif even suggested that Tessin should consider the establishment of a Swe-
dish “Academie de [sic] Sciences”, which Tessin should preside over.75 
 
Although Feif continued his correspondence about economics with 
Tessin in 1713, there are no preserved letters from Feif to Polhammar from 
that year. It was not until the autumn of 1714 that Polhammar again re-
ceived letters from the chain of correspondents that he and the king were 
part of. On 6 October 1714, Stromberg communicated to Polhammar the 
king’s decision to award him the position of extraordinary assessor in the 
new Bureau of Commerce.76 On 20 December, Feif wrote to Polhammar 
again, ordering that he should prepare to travel to the king in Stralsund as 
soon as the ice broke.77 This voyage never came to pass. Instead, Polham-
mar, Feif and the king would not meet until the king returned to Sweden. 
Accidentally, this coincided with Swedenborg returning from his European 
tour. 
Stiernsund revisited. The affection of Polhammar and Swedenborg 
When Swedenborg returned to Sweden, he re-established his relationship 
with Polhammar. In a letter to Benzelius of 8 September 1714, he expressed  
a very great desire to return home to Sweden, and to take in hand all 
Polhammar’s inventions, make drawings, and furnish descriptions of 
them, and also to test them by physics, mechanics, hydrostatics, and hy-
draulics, and likewise by the algebraic calculus.78 
Between 1716 and 1718, and with Benzelius’ assistance, Swedenborg started 
to publish Polhammar’s inventions and other curious works in the journal 
Daedalus Hyperboreus under the auspices of the Collegium Curiosorum in Uppsa-
la. Through this work, Swedenborg would become increasingly connected 
to Polhammar and consequently, by proxy, to Karl XII. Together, the rela-
tionships of these men would become a vortex through which all those 
involved were shaped into useful men of the absolutist regime. 
 
Writing to Swedenborg on 7 December 1715, Polhammar praised the 
younger man’s work on publishing his inventions in Daedalus Hyperboreus. To 
                                                   
75 “fyra gånger så långa som de äre, medan de myket förnöija Hans M:t de läsas mehr än en gång 
igenom,”; “vår œconomie och vår police behöfver anseenlige bibliothek, om de skola komma i god 
stand.”; Casten Feif: “Letter to Nicodemus Tessin, 1713-07-17”, in Andersson & Brinkman (eds): 
Handlingar vol. 1, 180. 
76 Nils Stromberg: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1714-10-06, I p:23 1, 82, KB. 
77 Casten Feif: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1714-12-20, I p:23 1, 86, KB. 
78 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, received 8 September 1714”, in Tafel (ed): 
Documents vol. 1, 232. This section is to a high degree based on letters found in Tafel’s collection 
of English translations of letters related to Swedenborg. Therefore, I do not present the original 
quotes here. References to the original sources can instead be found in Tafel (1875). 

 
 
148
him, Swedenborg was “a ready mathematician, and well qualified for doing 
this and similar achievements.” Moreover, he was pleased with the praise he 
had received from Swedenborg in a proposed preface of the work, although 
he wished the young man to tone it down “so that the sense of delicacy may 
not be offended thereby”.79 Three days later, Polhammar praised Sweden-
borg in a letter sent to Benzelius:  
Young [Swedenborg] is a ready mathematician and possesses much apti-
tude for the mechanical sciences; and if he continues as he has begun, he 
will, in course of time, be able to be of greater use to the King and to his 
country in this [capacity] than in anything else.80 
As before Swedenborg left on his tour, the two men were tied together 
through relational performances of praise. On 19 December 1715, 
Polhammar invited Swedenborg to Stiernsund, stating that he would “expe-
rience both pleasure and delight in discussing upon [my mechanical designs] 
with one who is interested in them; for otherwise it would be like loving 
some one [sic] by whom you are not loved in return.”81 In September the 
next year, Polhammar yet again invited Swedenborg to his home in 
Stiernsund: 
Your arrival in Stiernsund will be most agreeable to me, and if my experi-
ence can be of any use to you, I will give it with so much the greater 
pleasure, as the fruit of it will be of use to the public and will accrue to my 
own honour.82 
 
The letters present a loving relationship between Polhammar and the 
much younger Swedenborg,  based on both emotional dependence and 
mutual benefits. Like the relationship between Polhammar and the king, it 
was an asymmetric relationship between two actors of different positions. 
In this case, the relationship between Polhammar and Swedenborg followed 
the imagined intergenerational relationships of mechanics, whereby 
Polhammar adopted the superior role of the older man and Swedenborg the 
subjugated role prescribed to the young. Still, by publishing Polhammar’s 
inventions, Swedenborg did not only act as a passive apprentice being 
shaped by his master, but also presented Polhammar as a Northern Archi-
medes, or Daedalus, to a wider European audience of scholars as well as to 
the king. Thus, again we find a relationship of superiority and submission in 
which both parties gained authority and were shaped in relation to each 
other. 
                                                   
79 Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Swedenborg, 7 December 1715”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 242. 
80 Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Ericus Benzelius, 10 December 1715”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 243–5. 
81 Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Swedenborg, 19 December 1715”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 246. 
82 Christopher Polhem: “Letter to Swedenborg, 5 September 1716”, in Tafel (ed): Documents 
vol. 1, 271. 

 
 
149
Daedalus and the sovereign. The conflation of two relationships 
Soon after Swedenborg’s return to Sweden, the king also re-appeared in the 
realm. By the early autumn of 1716, Karl XII had settled in the university 
town of Lund in the southernmost part of the country. The king stayed in 
Lund until 1718, and while residing there he took an interest in the work of 
the academy.83 He visited a mathematical lecture given by the professor in 
astronomy and mathematics, Conrad Quensel, and Johan Jacob Döbelius’ 
defence of a dissertation on the nature of sense perception. Furthermore, he 
frequented Andreas Rydelius’ lectures in philosophy.84 Like the correspond-
ence studied earlier, the king’s stay in Lund provided ample opportunities 
for various actors to reinvent themselves as well as the king. 
 
As Swedenborg was set to travel to Stiernsund in September 1716, 
Polhammar received command from the king to join him in Lund. 
Polhammar invited Swedenborg to accompany him and, in preparation for 
their voyage, Swedenborg made a stop at Benzelius’ in Uppsala to prepare a 
special bound edition of the four issues of Daedalus Hyperboreus explicitly 
written for a royal audience. This edition of the Daedalus was a tailor-made 
gift for Karl XII, printed on high-quality paper, and it included a dedication 
to the king written by Swedenborg just for this occasion.85 Swedenborg 
commenced his dedication with a poem: 
Lo Daedalus did mount the winds, and from on high 
 
Did scorn the snares King Minos laid on earth. 
So mount the winds, my Daedalus, by thine own art 
 
And scorn the snares the common herd shall lay.86  
 
In his poem, Swedenborg related to the ancient myth of Icarus and his 
father Daedalus, the mechanicus and namesake of Swedenborg’s journal. In 
the myth, hoping to escape the island of Crete, Daedalus explores unknown 
arts in order to fabricate wings for his son and himself. Taking off into the 
sky, Icarus and Daedalus are seen by common men, as described in an Eng-
lish renaissance translation of Ovid’s version of the myth: 
The fishermen Then standing angling by the Sea, and shepeherdes leaning 
then | On sheepehookes, and the Ploughmen on the handles of their 
Plough, | Beholding them, amazed were: and thought that they that 
through | The Aire could flie were Gods. And now did on their left side 
stand.87 
                                                   
83 Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden, 428–41; Liljegren: Karl XII i Lund, 57–69. 
84 Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden, 430. For a discussion of Rydelius’ philosophy in relation to the 
absolutist theocracy, see Chapter 2. 
85 Alfred Acton (ed): The letters and memorials of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1, 1709–48 (Bryn AthynPA, 
1948), 121. 
86 Ibid., 122. 
87 Ovid: The XV bookes of P. Ouidius Naso, entytuled Metamorphosis, translated oute of Latin into English 
meeter, by Arthur Golding Gentleman, a worke very pleasaunt and delectable (London, 1567), 99. 

 
 
150
Sawday discusses two roles given to invention in the Icarus myth by renais-
sance culture. First, the myth was read as a tragedy of Icarus’ fall from the 
sky. Consequently, in the renaissance, Daedalus was not only a positive 
character. For example, for Bacon,  Daedalus was a symbol of mechanical 
skill used for a negative purpose.88 At the same time, the myth was the story 
of how a certain kind of man could bend nature to his own purpose.89 In his 
poem, Swedenborg picked up on this second role of the Icarus myth, but he 
focused less on invention as a process of bending nature than as a process 
of shaping the inventor himself. Through his “own art”, Swedenborg’s 
Daedalus would be elevated to a position from which he could “scorn the 
snares the common herd shall lay”. Knowing the intended reader for his 
work, the lines of verse presented mechanics as a technique not only for 
Swedenborg and Polhammar, but also for the king, to reaffirm their authori-
ty elevated above other subjects of the realm. 
 
Swedenborg’s ensuing dedication, written in the expected submissive 
style, is a stark contrast to the men flying in the winds. Here he stated that 
he had wished “to come forward with some small mathematical investiga-
tions and observations, and lay them down in deepest submission at your 
Majesty’s feet”. This he dared to do because of the monarch’s recognised 
interest in: 
literary art in general and, in particular, in studia mathematica, a signal proof 
whereof is the fact that your Royal Majesty has ever regarded with grace 
the designs and machines which Assessor Pålheimer [sic] has already set 
up for the service and use of your Royal Majesty and his Kingdom.90 
Finally, Swedenborg concluded the preface by linking the presented work, 
as well as the king’s reaction to it, to the conditions for mechanical practi-
tioners as a whole: “If this work wins your Majesty’s grace, it will certainly 
rouse up many other men, in submissiveness to lay bare their thoughts, and 
to offer them for your Royal Majesty’s gracious pleasure.”91 
 
Acton argues that the preface “was clearly designed to enlist the King’s 
support”.92 But apart from this obvious observation, what is striking is how 
this was done. Swedenborg’s text intertwined the relational performances of 
Swedenborg–Polhammar and Polhammar–Karl XII into a coherent whole. 
The king’s interest in mathematical and mechanical arts, and the recognition 
of Polhammar’s work were, using the circular logic uncritically related by 
older historians, proof of each other. In the dedication, Swedenborg grafted 
himself onto this relationship as the junior partner in his and Polhammar’s 
intergenerational relationship. The combination of these two relationships 
                                                   
88 Sawday: Engines of the imagination, 215. 
89 Ibid., 24–30. 
90 Acton (ed): The letters and memorials of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1, 122. 
91 Ibid., 122. 
92 Ibid. 

 
 
151
made it possible for Swedenborg to present all three men as useful and vir-
tuous through his mathematical work. 
 
On 6 December, after Polhammar and Swedenborg had arrived in 
Lund, Polhammar submitted another “humble memorial” recommending 
Swedenborg to the king. In this text, the presentations of Polhammar, Swe-
denborg and the king, and the virtues of mechanics once again merged. 
First, Polhammar noted how “your Majesty’s grace and delight in the me-
chanical sciences has become so manifest”. He also pointed out how the 
king knew that “mechanics is a study which demands much labor and 
brainwork”. Furthermore, he argued that mechanics had until now been 
held in low esteem. It had been seen “as the art of a common workman”, in 
spite of the fact that it required “the best subjects and the quickest talents 
that can be found in nature”. The only way to rectify this injustice would be 
if “subjects who are skilled in this science be regarded with no less honor 
than others whose studies are merely mediocre.”93 
 
Once again, the monarch’s interest in mechanics was supposed to corre-
spond to the role of mechanics in the Swedish realm, and again Polhammar 
picked up on this connection. He presented the young Swedenborg as a 
possibility for the king to give mechanics the recognition it deserved: “At 
this time I know of no one who seems to have a greater bent for mechanics 
than Herr Emanuel [Swedenborg].” Nevertheless, Polhammar complained, 
Swedenborg did not study mechanics. Polhammar explained why: “that he 
applies himself to other studies, is caused by the small regard in which, ac-
cording to former custom, mechanics is held.” 94 Therefore, Polhammar 
asked whether it would not be “useful to grant some prerogative of honor 
to one who has a natural bent for mechanics”.95 
 
In a letter to Benzelius,  from late December 1716, Swedenborg related 
the king’s positive reaction to Polhammar’s request, while he reinforced the 
image of the king’s interest in mechanics: “Since His Majesty graciously 
looked at my Dædalus,” Swedenborg wrote, the king had “advanced me to 
the post of an extraordinary assessor in the [Bureau] of Mines; yet in such a 
way, that I should for some time attend the Councillor of Commerce, Pol-
heimer [sic]”.96 It pleased Swedenborg that the king “pronounced so favour-
able and gracious a judgment respecting me, and himself defended me 
against those who thought the worst of me; and that he has since promised 
me his further favour and protection”. Moreover, he noted how the “Daeda-
lus has enjoyed the favour of lying these three weeks upon His Majesty’s 
table, and has furnished matter for many discussions and questions”. It had 
                                                   
93 Ibid., 125. 
94 Ibid. 
95 Ibid., 125–6. 
96 Emanuel Swedenborg: “Letter to Benzelius, December 1716”, in Tafel (ed): Documents vol. 1, 
273–4. 

 
 
152
even, Swedenborg noted, “been shown by His Majesty to many persons.”97 
Lying on the king’s table, his book became a manifestation of the relation-
ships, formed around mechanics, between the monarch and the mechanici. 
Swedenborg’s letter was a performance on several levels. First, it contained 
a description of how his Daedalus was performed in Lund, giving him a posi-
tion as well as prestige. This description, in turn, was a performance in its 
own right, by which Swedenborg presented himself as a mechanicus by 
royal decree and fashioned the king into a monarch with an interest in 
mathematics. As in the case of Polhammar, the asymmetric relationship 
between Swedenborg and the king thus involved the exchange of mutual 
favours as well as mutual presentations of selves. Interestingly, not only did 
Swedenborg graft himself onto Polhammar through his presentations to the 
king, the royal gifts Swedenborg received tied him even closer to the older 
mechanicus. 
 
On 10 December, the king wrote to the Bureau of Mines that he was 
pleased to “advance Em: Sw. to be Extraord: Ass.,” but that he should “ac-
company Councillor of Commerce Polhammar and be his assistant in insti-
tuting his constructions and inventions”.98 While binding Polhammar and 
Swedenborg to his royal persona, the king bound the two mechanical practi-
tioners together as master and assistant. In the process, the king raised the 
two mechanical practitioners to the upper echelons of the Swedish civil 
bureaucracy, and consolidated mechanics as an identificatory practice of a 
useful manly subject. Suitably, it was at this time, in December 1716, that 
Christopher Polhammar was ennobled and became Christopher Polhem.99 
The limits of an absolute monarch 
How was the king shaped by these relationships? As pointed out earlier, in 
the chain of letters in 1712, the king was already presented as a man with a 
taste for mechanics. Polhammar argued that, as a consequence of this al-
leged royal interest, the role of mechanics in the realm had changed too. In 
the ensuing events of 1716, we see that the monarch’s interest in mechanics 
is already taken for granted in the performances of Polhammar and Swe-
denborg:  the two men shaped themselves in relation to an imagined 
mechanicus monarch. Furthermore, the performances of Polhammar and 
Karl XII reinforced the monarch as a mechanical Liebhaber, or a lover of 
mechanics. Mechanics seems to have worked as a symbol through which 
Karl XII and his administration could present themselves as caring for the 
œconomy of the realm during an economic and military crisis. Still, there 
                                                   
97 Ibid., 274. 
98 Acton (ed): The letters and memorials of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1, 136–7. 
99 For a discussion of Polhammar’s ennoblement, see Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems 
lefnadsteckning”, 49. 

 
 
153
were boundaries to how the king could engage with mechanics and mathe-
matics; his interest could not transgress the asymmetrical logic of a relation-
ship between sovereign and subject. The emotional knots that bound the 
monarch and the mechanici together were thus not unproblematic. By being 
related to each other, they risked acting in ways that were unsuitable for 
men of their respective position. 
 
The limits of the king’s performance in relation to knowledge makers 
are seen during some events in the autumn of 1717. At this time, Karl XII 
composed his Antropologia physica, fourteen “theses” that many of his biog-
raphers have taken to testify to the king’s interest in the philosophical theo-
ries of his day. Antropologia physica discussed how human beings react to 
stimuli, and follow the mainstream of enlightenment thinking on these mat-
ters. Karl XII started to work on his theses after having discussions with 
David Hein, a diplomat from Hesse and a former student of the Halle pie-
tist Christian Thomasius. He had Feif translate them into German, and 
wished him to send them to Hein for comments. However, Feif advised the 
king against it: he argued that the king should leave it to the philosophers to 
take sides in philosophical controversies. If Hein were to show the king’s 
theses to Thomasius, the philosopher might turn them into print with his 
own commentaries. In turn, this would make it possible for Thomasius to 
refute the absolute king like he would any other fellow philosopher, which, 
argued Feif,  would be negative to the prestige of the Swedish realm.100 
 
Possibly, Feif had religious motives for discouraging the king from en-
gaging with the pietist philosopher.101 In the light of the conflict between 
pietism and Lutheran orthodoxy, discussed in Chapter 2, this is not unlikely. 
But there also existed political reasons for the king to keep a distance from 
Thomasius. Having befriended and defended Johann Reinhold Patkul – a 
Livonian who had argued for the independence of this province of the 
Swedish empire and who had been convicted of high treason in his absence 
– Thomasius was not any philosopher, but a chess piece in the foreign poli-
cy of the king.102 Irrespective of his motives, here, as in his correspondence, 
                                                   
100 Hatton: Charles XII of Sweden, 430–1. 
101 Ibid., 431. 
102 In 1701, Thomasius had published a defence of Patkul, Christian Thomasius: Gründliche iedoch 
bescheidene Deduction der Unschuld Hn. Joh. Reinhold von Patkul (Leipzig, 1701). Still, Patkul was exe-
cuted in 1707 after having come in the hands of Karl XII. His death was debated in a large num-
ber of writings all over Europe, well into the middle of the eighteenth century, and must hence 
still have been a matter of concern for the Swedish king in 1718. See for example: Lorentz Ha-
gen: Das schemertzliche doch seelige Ende, des welt-bekandten Joh. Reinhold Patkuls (Cologne, 1714); Lo-
rentz Hagen: Een kort verhaal, wegens de verschrikkelyke dood, van den vermaarden heer Johann Reinold van 
Patkul, generaal van zyn koninklyke majesteyt van Zweeden (Amsterdam, 1718); Michael Ranft and 
Johann Samuel Heinsius: Die merkwürdige Lebensgeschichte derer vier berühmten schwedischen Feldmarschal-
le, Grafen Rehnschild, Steenbock, Meyerfeld und Dücker nebst dem angefügten merkwürdigen Leben und jämmer-
lichen Ende des bekannten Generals Johann Reinhold Patkuls. Zur Erleuterung vieler wichtigen Umstände der 
Geschichte Königs Caroli XII von Schweden, ans Licht gestället von einem Liebhaber der neuesten Historie 
(Leipzig, 1753); Lorentz Hagen: Anecdotes concerning the famous John Reinhold Patkul. Or, an authentic 

 
 
154
Feif was concerned with how the king presented himself to his subjects as 
well as to the rest of Europe. In this case, he cared about what the king 
should not be seen as doing. Feif’s actions show how he was aware of the 
fine line between presenting the king as a Liebhaber and as someone who 
himself had pretentions to participate in mechanical or philosophical discus-
sions. They also reinforce the point that patronage was not only a matter of 
appearances for the client, but maybe even more so for the patron. 
 
This again illustrates the importance of maintaining an asymmetric and 
hierarchical relationship between the monarch and mechanici or philoso-
phers. By intervening directly in philosophical discourse, the king would risk 
becoming subordinated to a specific philosophical school, and by extension, 
in this case, to the philosopher Thomasius. Such an action would break the 
asymmetric logic of these relationships of submission and superiority, and 
could thus undermine the king’s position as an absolute authority. Feif’s 
advice to him is similar to the discussions of how mechanically apt boys 
should interact with craftsmen, discussed in Chapter 2: he should aim to 
become identified as a specific cameral kind of monarch by entering into 
relationships with mechanical practitioners, but he should avoid becoming 
one of them, because this involved acts of submission unfitting for a man of 
his standing.103 
 
Feif’s advice highlights the complex mutual self-fashioning of royal pat-
ronage. In the case of Polhammar’s patronage of Swedenborg, there existed 
a constant presupposition that the intergenerational relationship facilitated 
the younger of the two to fashion himself into the image of the older. But 
the relational performances of the mechanicus and the monarch were 
somewhat different. They were never made into each other’s image, but still 
they were formed in relation to each other. Karl XII, Polhammar and Swe-
denborg never became similar; still, they became part of each other, having 
interlaced their persons through a stylised repetition of acts mediated in 
letters. When these two asymmetric relationships conflated, mechanics and 
mathematics were reconsolidated as identificatory practices of a pious sub-
ject. 
                                                                                                                        
relation of what passed betwixt him and his confessor, the night before and at his execution. Translated from the 
original manuscript, never yet printed (London, 1761); Anonymous: Breve ragguaglio della vita e della morte 
del conte Giovanni Patkul, nobile di Livonia, tradotto dal idioma inglese per illustrazione della vita di Pietro il 
Grande … e di Carlo duodecimo. (Lugano, 1761). On Patkul and his writings on Livonia, see Pärtel 
Piirimäe: “The pen is a mighty sword. Johann Reinhold Patkul’s polemical writings”, Die baltischen 
Länder und der Norden. Festschrift für Helmut Piirimäe zum 75. Geburtstag (Tartu, 2005), 314–41. On 
Karl XII, Thomasius and Patkul, see Brunius: Andreas Rydelius och hans filosofi, 14–15. 
103 Compare to the discussion on the mechanicus and the craftsman on page 72–76. 

 
 
155
The death of a monarch – reinventing the mechanicus 
The last sentence of the previous section could have been the end of a nar-
rative, had not the basis for the royal authority given Polhem,  now enno-
bled, and Swedenborg soon been swept away. On the morning of 30 No-
vember 1718, while he was laying siege to Fredrikshald in Norway, Karl XII 
died from a stray bullet that penetrated his head. In the aftermath of his 
death, the role of the monarch in the Swedish political order changed. Over 
the following years, Sweden’s government would change too, and with it the 
expectations of how to perform mechanics.104 
 
The king’s death affected Polhem profoundly. In the French edition of 
his travel journal, the travelling French protestant and naturalised English-
man Aubry de la Motraye discussed Karl XII’s support for Polhem. Motraye 
had lived with the king in the Ottoman Empire, and had followed him on 
his northward journey to Sweden. There, he had lived with the king in 
Lund, and he had travelled to Uppsala, to Polhammar’s Stiernsund and fi-
nally to Lappland, the unsettled lands at Sweden’s northern periphery. Mo-
traye wrote of how Karl XII had ennobled Polhammar, and thus made him 
into Christopher Polhem, and that Polhem had planned several mechanical 
projects when Motraye was in Sweden. But Motraye did “not think that the 
changes in Sweden since that time have allowed him to continue with 
them.”105 As pointed out by Motraye, these men, who had fashioned them-
selves into trustworthy mechanici by becoming entangled with the former 
king, had partly lost these benefits in the new political system.106 Not only 
did their networks of patronage lose power, the authority that they had cul-
tivated in relation to the absolute monarch diminished. 
 
The symbol of Polhem as a Swedish Daedalus,  made in relation to the 
absolute monarch, did not survive for much more than a year. But it did not 
stay dead long: the authority given to Polhem during the Swedish absolut-
ism was to be revived in the late 1730s. Then, Jöran Andersson Nordberg 
rehabilitated Karl XII in an officially sanctioned biography, which included 
a letter by Swedenborg in which he narrated his mathematical encounters 
with the late king.107 At the same time, the networks around the newly 
founded Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences remade Polhem into a  
                                                   
104 A description of the events after the death of Karl XII can be found in Lennart Thanner: 
Revolutionen i Sverige efter Karl XII:s död. Den inrepolitiska maktkampen under tidigare delen av Ulrika 
Eleonora d.y:s regering (Uppsala, 1953). 
105 “je ne crois pas que les changemens arrivez en Suede depuis lui ayent permis de le continuer.”; 
Aubry de La Motraye: Voyages du sr. A. de La Motraye, en Europe, Asie & Afrique; où l’on trouve une 
grande varieté de recherches geographiques, historiques & politiques vol. 2 (The Hague, 1727), 306. 
106 Bring also picks up on this changed attitude towards Polhem, pointing out that “when Karl 
XII fell for the bullet in Fredrikshald, Polhem almost disappeared from the stage for a while.” (in 
original: “när Karl XII föll för kulan vid Fredrikshall, nästan försvann Polhem för en tid från 
skådeplatsen,”); Bring: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, 57. 
107 Nordberg: Konung Carl den XII:tes historia, 599–600. 

 
 
156
figurehead of their programme of useful knowledge, laying the foundation 
for the historiography of Polhem as a man of the so-called “Age of Liber-
ty”. The groundwork for the heroic narratives of Polhem of the nineteenth 
century was thus ironically lain down by the performances by which first 
Polhammar, later Polhem, remade himself in relation to the shifting political 
orders of his time. In the early 1700s, Polhammar hardly exhibited the vi-
sionary power of imagining an industrial future. At this time, Polhammar 
was first a man of his time and then struggling to keep up with it. 
Conclusions. Interrelated personas 
In early modern Europe, the monarch and the mechanicus were interrelated 
on a structural level, in ways that ascribed the two personas meanings that 
could be pieced together and actualised in actors’ performances. Through 
these mechanistic frameworks, by which society and nature could be made 
intelligible, patronage of mechanics became a means of staging both mon-
archs and mechanics. Relationships between monarchs and mechanical 
practitioners were thus never only personal: they were also manifestations of 
a political order. Through relational performances within this order, the king 
was staged as an enlightened and perceptive sovereign and the mechanical 
practitioner as a mechanicus, a pious subject diligently offering his mechani-
cal services to the publicum. 
 
In this chapter, I have focused on two asymmetric relationships, which 
were conduits of relational performances that shaped both parts of each 
relationship. First, I have analysed the relationship between Polhammar and 
the young Swedenborg,  a clear example of the intergenerational relation-
ships of mechanics discussed in Chapter 2. This relationship was based on 
the submission of the younger party. However, Swedenborg was not only 
passive in his relationship to Polhammar: his act of submission did not only 
deprive him of agency, but also enabled him to take action. Second, I have 
discussed the relationship between Polhammar and Karl XII, which was 
actively mediated by the king’s secretary Casten Feif.  This relationship was 
based on submission and superiority, and here too acts of submission ena-
bled action. In Feif’s letters, we find performances that staged Polhammar 
as a mechanicus, and the king as a cameral monarch interested in œconomy 
and mechanics. Unlike the relationship between Polhammar and Sweden-
borg, this relationship was never personal. The staging of these two men 
was made through a chain of correspondents, with Feif in the centre. In the 
end, it is not even certain if Karl XII was personally involved in his sup-
posed relationship with Polhammar. Nonetheless, Feif’s staging of these 
two men had ripple effects throughout the Swedish realm. Not only did the 
staging of the king present mechanics as an identificatory practice of a pious 
subject, suitable for able young men to engage with; moreover, by being tied 

 
 
157
to the king, Polhammar reconsolidated his authority to identify mechanical 
aptitude in young men. This case is thus a concrete example of how early 
modern state power and knowledge making relied on, and legitimised, each 
other.108 At the same time, there were limits to how one could act within 
these relationships. Only by acting in accordance with their asymmetric 
logic could the junior and senior parties maintain the relationship in spite of 
inhabiting vastly different positions in the absolutist order. 
 
When Swedenborg dedicated the Daedalus to Karl XII, these two rela-
tionships conflated. The king became the patron not only of one mechanical 
practitioner, but also of an intergenerational relationship of mechanics. This 
triangular structure of patronage manifested not only the proper relation-
ship between subjects and sovereigns, but also between the young and the 
old. As such, the conflated relationship between these men became a sym-
bol for how mechanics was a means of becoming a pious subject in the 
absolutist order. Although strong, this symbol of pious mechanics would 
not outlive the death of Karl XII in 1718. After the king’s demise, mechani-
cal practitioners needed to find new means of aligning their techniques with 
the political order. In the next and final chapter, we turn to one such at-
tempt by the previously mentioned Anders Gabriel Duhre. 
                                                   
108 As such, the correspondence studied in this chapter supports Peter Dear’s findings in Dear: 
“Mysteries of state, mysteries of nature”. 

 
 
158
5. A mechanicus on the kneeler. Duhre’s 
balancing act of vice and virtue 
Anders Gabriel Duhre was perhaps the most prolific author of mechanical 
projects of the 1720s. After a career in the civil and military administration 
in the 1710s, in a series of works from 1722 he proposed to transform soci-
ety by founding, what he called, a Laboratorium mathematico-–œconomicum. Like 
the already discussed Laboratorium mechanicum of the Bureau of Mines, 
Duhre’s Laboratorium would be primarily an educational institution. He envi-
sioned it to spearhead reform of mining and agriculture: as its name implied, 
it would revitalise the realm by raising men with a mathematical and œco-
nomical approach to work.1 
 
By the early 1720s, the political order of the Swedish state changed, and 
with it the relevant audiences of mechanical performances. In Chapter 4, I 
showed how the monarch and the mechanicus were interrelated by asym-
metric relationships of patronage. However, in the constitutional monarchy 
of the 1720s, royal patronage increasingly needed to be complemented with 
support in parliament and in the bureaus. Thus, in comparison to the earlier 
regime – where personal relationships with the king and his government 
office were the basis for a mechanicus’ authority – mechanical practitioners 
of the 1720s needed to relate to a broader group of actors. Such conditions 
also required new forms of self-presentation, made in relation to hetero-
geneous audiences. Mechanical practitioners presented themselves through 
printed publications, and proposals to parliament, and by participating in 
the communities of the state administration. The aim of this chapter is to 
understand how early mechanical practitioners performed in this much 
more complex web of relationships. 
 
Duhre’s publications were initially well received by their intended audi-
ence: the recently empowered Swedish parliament and the state administra-
tion in Stockholm. Soon the state awarded him the lease of the royal estate 
of Ultuna [Ultuna kungsladugård], near Uppsala. The income from the estate 
was supposed to support a permanent Laboratorium, where mathematics 
would be joined together with “useful crafts”. But Duhre’s Laboratorium 
would not last. Soon Duhre became entangled in controversies and dis-
putes, which undermined his work. In 1731, he lost the estate to another 
                                                   
1 Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 4–5. 

 
 
159
tenant, the new county governor [landshövding] of Uppsala, Johan Brauner 
(1668–1743). In this chapter, I follow Duhre from his early days as a stu-
dent, through his rise as a well-esteemed mechanicus and mathematicus, to 
the eventual suspension of the Laboratorium (in 1731) and to his death in 
1739. Because of the vast amount of material concerning the Laboratorium – 
in the form of three printed publications, two extensive bound folios of 
handwritings left in the parliamentary archive and numerous other docu-
ments – Duhre is a unique case for understanding how actors of the early 
constitutional monarchy could present themselves as faithful subjects 
through mathematics and mechanics. Despite this fact, Duhre’s Laboratorium 
has been little studied by historians. Perhaps his Laboratorium is too contra-
dictory – embedded in the agricultural society and cameralism of the early 
modern Swedish state – to find a place in twentieth-century narratives of 
early modern mechanics as the midwife of industrialism. The clear failure of 
Duhre’s project makes it virtually impossible to use him as a starting point 
for a heroic narrative of a man ahead of his time. Consequently, he has of-
ten been characterised as the opposite of Polhem:  as a dreamer and a vi-
sionary but a useless project maker. Also, Duhre’s personal qualities – de-
scribed as those of a competent mathematician who found it difficult to 
speak to or interact with his fellow men – have been used to explain the 
failure of his Laboratorium.2 
 
Here I seek understanding that goes beyond individual psychology. 
Duhre cannot be described as an introvert and shy mathematician: he was 
also valued as a teacher, and he competently presented himself as relevant to 
the rising parliamentary system of the early 1720s. He walked on a razor’s 
edge between successfully performing as a mechanicus and ending up as the 
unsociable dreamer twentieth-century historians made him out to be. And 
although, at one time, he might have been considered the embodiment of a 
pious mechanicus, he would soon fall from grace by failing to live up to his 
                                                   
2 The greater part of the studies that discuss Duhre were written in the first half of the twentieth 
century. Most of these studies are either dismissive of Duhre’s work, describing it as the product 
of a dreamer, or only mention him in passing. Duhre and his work are discussed in: Ewert Wran-
gel: Frihetstidens odlingshistoria ur litteraturens häfder 1718–1733 (Lund, 1895), 104–5; Georg Schau-
man: Studier i frihetstidens nationalekonomiska litteratur. Idéer och strömningar 1718–1740 (Helsinki, 
1910), 112–16; Per Magnus Hebbe: “Anders Gabriel Duhres ‘Laboratorium mathematico-
oeconomicum’. Ett bidrag till Ultunas äldre historia”, Kungl. Landtbruks-akademiens handlingar och 
tidskrift 72 (1933), 576–94; Hildebrand: Kungl. Svenska Vetenskapsakademien vol. 1, 175–87; Bengt 
Hildebrand: “Anders Gabriel Duhre”, SBL 11 (Stockholm, 1945), 506; Anders Grape: Något om 
Anders Gabriel Duhre och en honom ägnad latinsk dikt (Stockholm, 1949); Anders Grape: Ihreska 
handskriftssamlingen i Uppsala universitets bibliotek vol. 2 (Uppsala, 1949), 285–8; Tore Frängsmyr has 
discussed Duhre in relation to Wolffianism in Sweden in Wolffianismens genombrott i Uppsala, 64–6; 
More recently, Duhre and his laboratorium have been mentioned briefly in Lindqvist: Technology 
on trial, 99, 252; Olov Amelin: Medaljens baksida. Instrumentmakaren Daniel Ekström och hans efterföljare 
i 1700-talets Sverige (Uppsala, 1999), 47, 190; Staffan Rodhe has given what could be called an 
internalist history of Duhre’s mathematics in Matematikens utveckling i Sverige fram till 1731 (Uppsa-
la, 2002), 50–84. 

 
 
160
audiences’ expectations. Using the case of Duhre, I thus argue that mechan-
ics was not a one-time show, but that mechanical practitioners continuously 
needed to enact the norms and skills that were expected of them. Further-
more, when mechanical practitioners succeeded, their performances in-
creased in complexity. Because of this rising complexity, initial success, ac-
complished by mechanical practitioners’ grand promises, could ironically set 
the stage for eventual failure. 
Becoming a good mechanicus 
The father of Anders Gabriel Duhre, Gabriel Andersson Duhre  (deceased 
1726), was a student of the nation of Södermanland, one of the regionally 
divided student societies of Uppsala University. After his studies, he became 
a tutor [præceptor] of the royal pageboys between 1672 and 1691. As a reward 
for his work at court, in 1676 Gabriel received the knight’s fee [Rusthåll] of 
Gnista in the parish of Vaksala, east of Uppsala. At Gnista, he lived with his 
first wife and the couple had two sons: Carl Gabriel Duhre  (1680–1753) 
and Anders Gabriel Duhre (c.1681–1739). In March 1694, Gabriel’s wife 
died and was buried in the churchyard of the local parish church. Exactly 
1 year after her funeral – following the expected pattern of how a boy on 
the verge of becoming a man was to substitute experienced male tutors for 
his mother – the boys left home. Following in their father’s footsteps, on 
7 March 1695, Anders and Carl matriculated at Uppsala University.3 
 
While the Duhre family was not of noble heritage, it still belonged to the 
upper echelons of the Uppsala community. As manifested by the knight’s 
fee of Gnista, the family gained its means of subsistence through royal and 
state patronage. Like their father before them, Anders and Carl would come 
to depend on such patronage for their livelihood. This did not set the 
Duhre family apart from their peers: in the Swedish economy, based on 
credit and in which economic resources were scarce, social status was gen-
erally based on symbolic rather than economic capital. Credit was based on 
one’s position in personal networks structured around, for example, kinship, 
gender and social status. Also, credit was not only an economic concept: to 
have good credit signalled that you were trusted and part of influential net-
works.4 Thus, in spite of their relative poverty, the Duhres can be seen as 
inhabiting a social position just below newly ennobled families. Their social 
place is clearly manifested by their father’s second marriage to Christina 
Wudd, the second daughter of the recently ennobled Paul Wudd. Although 
                                                   
3 Bengt Hildebrand: “Duhre, släkt”, SBL 11 (Stockholm, 1945), 505. I have not been able to 
locate the name of Duhre’s mother in the records of the local parish. 
4 Klas Nyberg: “Jag existerar endast genom att äga kredit”, 187. 

 
 
161
the Duhres were not of noble standing, they possessed enough status for 
men of the family to marry women from the lesser nobility.5 
 
There are few accounts of Anders’ and Carl’s lives as students. The 
most detailed one is a short autobiography, found in a drafted preface to a 
never published mathematical treatise by Anders. There, he described how 
he had not studied mathematics in Uppsala, although he considered that “I 
have been fully inclined towards philosophical disciplines since childhood”. Ac-
cording to his own account, “ignited by the innate love that I carried for 
these disciplines,” he started to study mathematics when he was 25 (i.e., 
around 1705–6).6 At the expense of his parents, he visited Bergslagen to 
study mechanics and mathematics with Christopher Polhammar, as mechan-
ically apt and inclined young men were expected to do. However, after liv-
ing there for six months, Duhre ran out of funds and returned to Uppsala.7 
 
The earliest document in Anders’ hand was written shortly after he re-
turned from Bergslagen. In a letter to the Bureau of Mines of 20 May 1707, 
he applied for the mechanical stipend in Polhammar’s Laboratorium Mechani-
cum.8 He wished to use the stipend to return to Bergslagen, where he would 
continue his studies with Polhammar. Again, he wrote of how he had com-
menced his studies of mathematics “not without my parents’ great expense 
and inconvenience”. He also explained that he had studied more “theoria” 
than he had “praxis”, and gave two reasons for this asymmetry. First, he 
considered it to be easier to learn praxis after acquiring “a taste for theoria”. 
Second, learning praxis was “more costly than I, a man without means, 
could bear.”9 In his preface from 1714, he again professed that he was too 
poor to make progress in “the mechanical praxis and the part of physica, 
which requires expenses and experiments.”10 In these letters of self-
                                                   
5 These marriages are discussed in Hildebrand: “Duhre, släkt”.  
6 “Ifrån barndommen har iag fuller warit inclinerad till philosophiska discipliner”; “uptänd af den 
infödda kiärleken, som iag bar till samma discipliner,”; Anders Gabriel Duhre: “Förtahl. Hwilket 
And. Gab. Duhre är sinnad att sättia framman för sitt mathematiska wärk, som han nu hafwer 
under händer uti upsååt at låta och uthgå på wårt Swenska Moders mål”, A 29, UUB [≈1714], 
unpaginated. In this manuscript, Duhre wrote that he started to study mathematics when he was 
25 years old, that he was 28 when he finished studying for Polhem, that he was 31 when he 
started working on his mathematical work and that he was 34 at the time of writing the manu-
script. Given the fact that Anders was born after Carl, who later inherited Gnista, and that An-
ders does not mention being an auscultator in the Bureau of Mines (which he became in 1715), it 
is likely that the manuscript is published in 1714 or early 1715 and that Duhre was born in late 
1680 or early 1681.  
7 On Polhammar, later ennobled Christopher Polhem, as a teacher of mechanics and an ariter of 
mechanical aptitude, see page 100–2. 
8 Anders Gabriel Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “Application for stipendium mechanicum”, 
1707-05-20, E4/120/791, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. Compare to my analysis of Polhammar’s 
Laboratorium and his role as an arbiter of mechanical aptitude in Chapter 3, page 100–2. 
9 “icke utan mina K: Föräldrars stora omkostnad och olägenheet”; “smak af theorien”; “större 
omkostnader, än iag en medellös karl länge tåla.”; ibid. 
10 “framsteg uti mechaniska praxi och den dehl af Physica, som fordrar omkostnad och experiment-
er.”; Duhre: “Förtahl”. 

 
 
162
presentation, Duhre echoed Polhammar (discussed in Chapter 4): whereas 
theoretical talk was cheap, praxis and the integrated practice of the two epis-
temic virtues required financial support from the state. This view would also 
resonate in Duhre’s project proposals of the 1720s. 
 
However, Anders Gabriel Duhre did not receive the stipend in mechan-
ics (as shown in Chapter 3, Polhammar instead favoured his own son), and 
he thus did not return to Polhammar in Bergslagen. He instead stayed at his 
family’s knight’s fee. There, in his own spare time and without a tutor, he 
studied pure mathematics from books. According to his autobiography, he 
“met great obstacles, and wasted much time” and he turned almost 31 be-
fore he made any notable progress. His claim that he did not receive any 
instruction is however inconsistent with other statements that he made. 
Later, in the same biography, he described his studies with the professor of 
astronomy Pehr Elvius (the elder), who: 
not just lent me his best mathematical books all the time, together with in-
formation on the method of how to read them quickly in a fruitful way, 
but who also, every time I returned the borrowed book to him, spared no 
effort in examining how well I understood what seemed most curious in 
them.11 
 
At roughly the same time, Christopher Polhammar issued him a certifi-
cate of mathematical competence. This certificate very much corresponds 
with Anders’ own descriptions of his skills, found in his stipend application 
in 1707 and his unpublished preface. Polhammar identified Duhre as a man 
of rare theoretical aptitude in “mechanics [and] geometry”, and admitted having 
seen few Swedes with the same grasp of “ingenious algebra”. Nevertheless, 
Polhammar stated that because of his lack of means, Anders unfortunately 
lacked knowledge of praxis.12 On 26 September 1715, Anders Gabriel Duhre 
submitted an application to auscultate in the Bureau of Mines. In his appli-
cation, he again requested the mechanical stipend. Here, instead of present-
ing himself in Polhammar’s image – in other words, as a mechanicus who 
combined theoria and praxis in diligent work – he emphasised his compe-
tence in pure mathematics. “By using my humble capacity,” he could “in-
struct those, who wish to learn the fundaments in the actual Pure Mathemati-
cal Science”. Such knowledge, in turn, would facilitate “a greater skill in Studi-
um Physica and the mechanical praxis”, knowledge that Duhre argued depended 
                                                   
11 “mötande swårigheter, med så stoor tijd spillan”; “icke allenast altijd låhnte mig sina besta 
mathematiska böcker, iämbte underrättelse om methoden at i snarhet läsa dem med frucht, utan 
iämbwäl hwar gång som iag lefwererade honom samma låhntagna böcker igen, hade mödan 
ospard at examinera huru iag förstod det, som der uti syntes märckwärdigast.”; ibid. 
12 “Mechaniquen, Geometrien”; “den sinnerijke Algebra”; Christopher Polhem: “Betyg för Andreas 
Duhre”, 1712–07–30, X 241:Duhre, UUB. Interestingly, Polhem wrote this certificate the same 
year that he initiated his correspondence with Casten Feif and Carl XII. 

 
 
163
partly on mathematics, partly on practice [öfningen].13 Duhre, lamenting his 
lack of practical skill, instead offered his mathematical services to the king, 
Karl XII:  
Although I must confess that the lack of means, which until this day has 
been my steady companion, as if through force has excluded me from op-
portunities to train myself in praxis. Nevertheless, I dare not to wish any-
thing more, than to be able to show the Royal Bureau of Mines, without 
sparing any effort, what I could accomplish among the sharp ingenia, who 
are determined to serve the Royal Bureau of Mines in the mining districts, 
or who in any other way wish to serve king and fatherland, in a capacity 
that require a mature mathematical knowledge.14 
Instead of presenting himself as a man who could bridge the divide between 
theoria and praxis, Duhre argued that he, by virtue of his mathematical com-
petence, could foster the young men of the Bureau into officials who em-
braced both these epistemic virtues. He presented the Bureau with the 
promise of a mathematical foundation for its work. Initially, the Bureau 
seems not to have been completely convinced. On 23 April 1716, it sent a 
letter to Polhammar discussing Duhre’s application. Although they wished 
to promote “such a quick ingenium”, they referred to the letter, discussed in 
Chapter 3, where Polhammar had suggested that Duhre would perhaps be 
of more use as a mathematics teacher in Karlskrona. The Bureau suggested 
that Polhammar should assess the possibility of giving Duhre such a posi-
tion.15 Whether or not Polhammar ever did this, Anders Duhre was accept-
ed by the Bureau as a stipendiary in mechanics from 9 May 1717.16 
 
Around this time, Anders moved to Stockholm with his brother Carl. 
Whereas Anders primarily studied pure mathematics, his older brother fo-
cused on mechanics. Anders authored mathematical treatises and Carl 
worked on mechanical inventions for the Bureau of Mines.17 As a stipendi-
                                                   
13 “effter min ringa capacitet informera dem, som åstunda en grundelig kundskap i sielfwa Rena 
Mathematiska Wetskapen”; “större skickelighet till Studium Physica och mechaniska praxin”; Duhre: 
“Application to auscultate”. 
14 “Ty fast än iag måste bekienna, at medellösheten, som in till denna dag, warit min stadiga 
föllieslagare, har lijka såsom med wåld uthstängt mig ifrån tillfällen at öfwa mig til praxi; icke 
desto mindre, understår iag mig intet högre önska, än med ospard flijt in för det höglofl Kongl 
Bergz Collegium kunna wijsa, hwad iag hos dhe qwicka ingenier skulle kunna uthrätta, som hafwa 
i sinnet at antingen i Bergzlagerna wara höglofl Kongl. Bergz Collegium till tienst, eller elliest i 
något annat sätt betiena Konungen och Fäderneslandet, i sådana beställningar, som fordra en 
mogen mathematisk kundskap.”; ibid. 
15 “ett så snällt ingenium”; Bureau of Mines: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1716-04-23, 
I p:23 1, 101, KB. 
16 Hildebrand: “A G Duhre”. 
17 The mechanical work of Carl Duhre is even less known than that of his brother. Nonetheless, 
there are a number of sources on his inventions from the late 1710s and early 1720s. On 21 
November, Carl Duhre submitted an invention for the extraction of water from mines to the 
Bureau of Mines; Carl Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “On an invention for water extraction”, 
1719-10-29, E4/143/177, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. In a letter of 23 March 1721, he again 
notified the Bureau of his work. And he also informed the Bureau that he had continued the 

 
 
164
ary, Anders gave mathematical lectures in Stockholm, just as he had prom-
ised in his application. Together with his fellow auscultator, Georg Brandt, 
he published these lectures as the textbook Mathesin Universalem, discussed in 
Chapters 2 and 3.18 In 1718, Anders wished to relocate to lecture at Uppsala 
University. In a letter of 20 January, in which he asked the Bureau to rec-
ommend him for a vacant position in astronomy in Uppsala, Anders pre-
sented his plan to transform this professorship into one that taught “a fun-
damental geometry, mechanics, and basic algebra together with its use, or 
application, to geometry, mechanics and useful things.”19 
 
When Anders did not receive the professorship, he started writing a 
geometrical treatise instead. In a letter to the Bureau of 29 October 1719, he 
asked for monetary support for his work. Here he also presented some as-
pects of his life in Stockholm during this time. He resided there, “in spite of 
the difficulties of the time” because “here live diverse lovers of useful 
knowledge”. These “lovers” lent Duhre money to complete his treatise. At 
the time of writing his letter, Duhre lived in Stockholm in order to supervise 
the printing of his work, and he asked the Bureau to support him.20 From 
1720, Duhre held a position as “algebraist” in the fortification corps and his 
Geometria was published in 1721.21 Nonetheless, his economic difficulties 
continued. In a letter of autumn 1721, Duhre solicited the Bureau for addi-
tional aid, because he was “exhausted and in great debt” after having pub-
                                                                                                                        
work on his invention with the help of his brother Anders. In this letter, he asked the Bureau to 
support his work financially; Carl Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “On an invention for water 
extraction, continued”, 1721-03-23, E4/146/313, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. In a letter of 24 
April 1721, Anders Gabriel discussed an invention of his and his brother Carl for the running of 
mills in still water; Anders Gabriel Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “On an invention for the 
running of mills in still water”, 1721-04-24, E4/147/141–2, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. Anders 
Gabriel Duhre also published on this invention in a printed book some years later, Anders Ga-
briel Duhre: Tanckar, angående huruledes man i mangel af strömar och fall måtte med en synnerlig förmån, 
allestädes (hwarest stilla stående watn finnes) kunna drifwa allehanda rörliga wärck (Stockholm, 1723). 
 
Carl Duhre and his inventions are also discussed in two letters from the Bureau of Mines to 
the king in the early 1720s, where the Bureau proposes that Carl should be given a stipend due to 
his skill in mechanical work (Bureau of Mines to The Royal Majesty: “On Carl Duhre”, 1720-01-
19, 8/19, Kollegiers m fl, landshövdingars, hovrätters och konsistoriers skrivelser till Kungl Maj:t; 
Bureau of Mines to The Royal Majesty: “On Carl Duhre, continued”, 1721-04-17, 8/19, Kolle-
giers m fl, landshövdingars, hovrätters och konsistoriers skrivelser till Kungl Maj:t. 
18 These lectures resulted in the publication Brandt: Mathesin universalem. 
19 “en fundamental Geometrie, Mechanique, och Grundelig Algebra, iemte dess bruk eller application till 
Geometrien Mechaniquen och nyttige saker.”; Anders Gabriel Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “On 
professorship in astronomy”, 1718-01-20, E4/142/38, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA, 40. 
20 “utan anseende till tydernas swårhet”; “här finnes en och annan af nyttige wetskapers elskare”; 
Anders Gabriel Duhre to the Bureau of Mines: “On support for a geometrical work”, 1719-10-
29, E4/144/512, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. His living in Stockholm to supervise his work hints 
at a wish to supervise the printing process similar to that of authors in early modern England, 
which Adrian Johns has discussed in Adrian Johns: The nature of the book. Print and knowledge in the 
making (Chicago, 1998), 101–3.  
21 Hildebrand: “A G Duhre”; Duhre: Geometria. 

 
 
165
lished his two mathematical works “for the public good”.22 This letter is not 
only a sign of Duhre’s poverty: publishing his mathematical works, together 
with his work in the Bureau and the fortification corps, had given him a 
wealth of symbolic capital and had made him into a trustworthy man in the 
eyes of important audiences. In other words: he was a man of credit. De-
spite his poverty, by the early 1720s, Anders Gabriel Duhre was recognised 
as an able mathematician and civil servant. At this time, his Geometria was 
the most comprehensive mathematical treatise in Swedish to date. Also, he 
taught private mathematics classes to promising students such as Anders 
Celsius  and Samuel Klingenstierna. All in all, the position from which 
Duhre approached parliament in the 1720s was hardly that of a nobody. 
Duhre’s proposal of mathematical–œconomical 
redemption 
In 1722, Duhre published his Well-intentioned thoughts, a short proposal of 28 
pages. There he discussed his plans for what he called a “Laboratorium math-
ematico–œconomicum”. This Laboratorium, which Anders wished to establish 
together with his brother Carl, aimed at “the cultivation of the most useful 
arts and sciences and their earnest use in the public as well as private œcon-
omy”.23 Duhre invited the readers to a dialogue: he presented his work “to 
the judgement and consideration of reasonable people, concerning what 
should be considered before I venture to present such [a project] to the 
honourable estates of Sweden”. In yet another attempt at dialogue, Duhre 
published another book later the same year, supposedly based on readers’ 
comments on his earlier publication.24 
 
Both Duhre’s books proposed an educational institution that differed 
from universities. It would teach knowledge that was based on mathematical 
and œconomical principles. He stated that the mathematical sciences, as well 
as experimental physics [experimental physiquen], were the source of “all the 
other worldly sciences and arts”. Such knowledge would only come to full 
use, however, if it were combined with “a diligent exercise in all sorts of 
practice and crafts”. Therefore, the Laboratorium would teach young men 
mathematics together with crafts such as carpentry and turning. Men who 
knew how to combine these techniques would produce knowledge that was 
useful and beneficial to the publicum. Thus, Duhre’s proposal was similar to 
                                                   
22 “utmattad och i stor skuld fördiupad”; “för det allmenna besta”; Anders Gabriel Duhre to the 
Bureau of Mines: “Lack of means”, 1721-10-18, E4/147/308, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
23 “de högnödigste wetskapers samt konsters planterande och alfwarsamma lempande, så til 
Publique som til Privat Oeconomie”; Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, title page. 
24 “under förnuftigt Folcks ompröfwande och betänckiande, öfwer det som kan wara, at wid 
detta påminna, innan jag bör fördrista mig sådant Swea Rikes Samtlige Högloflige Ständer Ödmi-
ukast föredraga”; ibid. Duhre: Förklaring. 

 
 
166
his earlier application to auscultate in the Bureau of Mines, as well as to his 
application for the professorship in Uppsala in the 1710s.25 
 
Duhre’s argument was hardly an original one. His proposal was based 
on the early modern social epistemology of mechanics, found, for example, 
in the coming-of-age narratives discussed in Chapter 2. The Laboratorium 
would teach boys both mathematical discernment and artisanal diligence, in 
order to foster them into men who submissively worked for the good of the 
state. Much of what Duhre suggested could also be found in the values and 
norms that came to be instilled in auscultators of the Bureau of Mines.26 
Furthermore, his suggestions are similar to those found in contemporary 
German publications, such as Tschirnhaus’ widely circulated treatise on 
useful knowledge; the pedagogy of August Hermann Francke’s orphanage 
in Halle, established in 1695; and Christoph Semler’s plans in his Neueröffnete 
Mathematische und Mechanische Real-Schule from 1709.27 However, Duhre’s 
project is a very early example of an œconomical academy. In many re-
spects, his plans for a Laboratorium resemble later German “model farms”, 
such as those envisioned by Gottfried Schreber in 1763 and realised in the 
Friedrich Casimir Medicus’ Lautern Physical-Œconomical Society in 1774.28 
Interestingly though, Duhre’s mathematico–œconomical estate predates 
Schreber’s blueprints by 40 years. 
 
Issues of character and virtue took centre stage in Duhre’s two publica-
tions of 1722. His presentation of himself and his students was interrelated, 
constituting another example of intergenerational relationships of mechan-
ics. It was these imagined relationships – formed around virtuous 
knowledge – that Duhre presented to the four estates of parliament. He 
argued to his readers not only that he was a pious subject, but also that he 
could make a whole new generation of young men in his own image. There-
fore, the greater part of his publications discussed who could do both math-
ematics and crafts, what kind of person could make useful knowledge and 
how Duhre’s contemporaries could identify and value such a man. In his 
Well-intentioned thoughts, he summarised the problem: 
Considering that these persons [i.e., his students] should not learn crafts 
for the reason of becoming craftsmen, thus one must ask: after they have 
gained a mature knowledge in the above mentioned sciences and arts, to 
                                                   
25 “alla de öfriga werldsliga wetskaper och konster”; “en flitig öfning uti allehanda practique och 
handtwärck”; Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 2. 
26 See Chapter 2 and 3. 
27 Tschirnhausen: Gründliche Anleitung zu nützlichen Wissenschafften, absonderlich zu der Mathesi und 
Physica, wie sie anitzo von den Gelehrtesten abgehandelt werden. Dritte Aufflage vermehret und verbessert; Chris-
toph Semler: Neueröffnete mathematische und mechanische Real-Schule (Halle, 1709). On the educational 
use of practical mathematics in Francke’s schools, see Whitmer: “Eclecticism and the technolo-
gies of discernment in pietist pedagogy”. The parallels between Duhre’s plans and contemporary 
German pedagogues are discussed in Wiberg: Till skolslöjdens förhistoria vol. 1, 30–5. 
28 Wakefield: The disordered police state, 114. 

 
 
167
which ends should they be used, how should they be rewarded, and how 
could the usefulness of establishing such a Laboratorium be so great?29 
 
As discussed in Chapter 2, Duhre wanted the students of his Laboratori-
um to learn the skills of craftsmen without becoming craftsmen themselves. 
Instead, he wished to teach “the mathematical sciences and experimental 
physics” to young students.30 This was to be accomplished by an array of 
means, one being the translation of important mathematical works into 
Swedish. Without textbooks in Swedish, Duhre argued, it would “be impos-
sible to reap their full use and utility”.31 He also argued that the education of 
the Laboratorium should be given in Swedish, and that it should be free. In 
this way, he hoped to attract students of modest origins who were destitute 
of means [medellösa]. Apt boys could be found in all social strata, and a broad 
base of recruitment would guarantee that the state used its subjects’ poten-
tial as efficiently as possible. As discussed earlier, Duhre himself repeatedly 
presented himself as such a useful, but poor, man. When he argued that 
poor boys were more susceptible to bad influences than young noblemen, 
he thus discussed a category of boys to which he had previously presented 
himself as belonging. However, such students from modest backgrounds 
were not necessarily virtuous, because they could have been badly brought 
up. The Laboratorium thus needed to introduce poor apt boys to a virtuous 
way of life.32 
 
For Duhre, it was “the depravations of the youth, which are either in-
nate or have been inveterated by a bad upbringing,” which were “the only 
and greatest obstacles to my intent.”33 Parents’ neglect or inability to raise 
children into virtuous subjects could therefore inflict great harm on the 
common good. Duhre complained how “the mighty dominion of evil de-
sires to such a degree has conquered human reason”.34 Less than virtuous 
actions shaped young people into bad subjects and consequently damaged 
the state. By neglecting the upbringing of their children, parents (and here 
Duhre specifically addressed women) failed in the duties of a pious subject. 
As a solution, Duhre recommended parents, who lacked knowledge in how 
to educate their child, to “read the work published in English by the ingen-
                                                   
29 “Såsom dessa Personer icke böra lära handtwärcken til den endan, at de skola blifwa 
handtwärckare; Altså frågas, sedan de uti ofwannämde wetskaper och konster, hade bekommit en 
mogen kundskap, hwar til de sedan skulle brukas, huru de skulle blifwa belönte, och huruledes 
nyttan af ett sådant Laboratorii uprättande kan wara så stor?”; Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 5. 
30 “de Mathematiska Wetskaper samt Experimental Physiquen”; Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 2. 
31 “omöyeligit, at deras fulla lempande och nytta kunna erhållas”; ibid., 3. Compare to the discus-
sion of the relationship beteen Swedish and Latin in mathematical textbooks on page 51–6. 
32 Ibid. 
33 “ungdomens wanarter, som antingen äre infödda, eller igenom en ond uptuchtelse kommit at 
inrotas, såsom detta mit upsåts endasta och största hinder.”; ibid., 25. 
34 “onda begärelsers starcka wälde så hafwa öfwerwunnit menniskliga förnuftet”; ibid., 26. 

 
 
168
ious Englishman John Locke, which now, because of its great value and use-
fulness, is translated into our mother tongue”.35 
 
In Some thoughts on education, translated into Swedish as early as 1709, 
Locke presented a plan for the education of children, seen as shaped by 
their actions and sensual perception. He thus expressed a performative con-
cept of self: the actions of those around them, together with their own re-
petitive performance, moulded children into diverse forms. Because chil-
dren were formed by their parents’ actions, physical punishment should 
only be used sparingly, and in most cases only when all other means of cor-
rection had failed.36 In that way, children would learn how to embrace what 
was good, and not just to fear physical punishment. Duhre’s argument, that 
boys who practised what was virtuous would become pious and submissive 
subjects, can thus be seen as an adaption of Locke into the hierarchical or-
der of the Swedish state. According to Duhre, although “at first glance, 
many women might consider [what Locke argues] strange and laborious […] 
they will eventually recognise how they were erroneous in their judge-
ment.”37 Hence, the educational role that Duhre attributed women in raising 
a mechanicus corresponds to the fictional female characters discussed in 
Chapter 2 (see page 57–58). While the via media leading to mechanical man-
hood was not open to women, their hand was central in nurturing apt boys 
who, in time, would become virtuous and useful men. 
 
Seeing the moral responsibility he would have for his students, Duhre 
did not wish to locate his Laboratorium in a large town full of immoral influ-
ences. In a town, “the youth may have the opportunity to associate with bad 
company, which is the cause of all thereof resulting vice.”38 Especially, he 
argued, “the children of poor people, and young students destitute of 
means, suffer a great risk in large towns”.39 Therefore, the Laboratorium 
should be located in the countryside. While rural areas did “not provide the 
opportunities to socialise with all sorts of people, which one can find in 
large towns”, in the countryside the young could “acquire a habit of doing 
what is virtuous, so that they may be found, as it were, unskilled in all bad 
                                                   
35 “läsa den myckit sinnerika Engelsmannens Johan Lockes der om uppå Engelska språket utgång-
na wärck, som nu sedermera för dess ogemena wärde och nyttighet finnes uti wårt modersmål 
öfwersatt”; ibid. 
36 Shapin: A social history of truth, 75. 
37 “fast än något der uti kan förekomma mångom af fruentimren wid första åskådande äfwen så 
sällsamt, och beswärligit, som de sedan måtte sådant omdömme tilskrifwa sin egen missräkning.”; 
Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 26. John Locke: Some thoughts concerning education (London, 1693). The 
Swedish translation that Duhre refers to is John Locke and Matthias Riben (tran.): Herr Johan 
Lockes tankar och anmärkningar angående ungdomens uppfostring först skrefne uti engelskan, men nu för deras 
serdeles wärde och nyttighet uppå swenska öfwersatte (Stockholm, 1709). 
38 “ungdomen kan hafwa tilfälle at umgå med ondt sälskap, hwilcket är uphofwet til alla der af 
flytande odygder.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 28. 
39 “fattigt folcks barn och medellösa unga emnen uti stora städer äre underkastade en myckit stor 
fara”; ibid. Duhre’s line of reasoning is in line with a general class dimension in Swedish  
eighteenth-century discussions of the moral influence of towns. See Sennefelt: Politikens hjärta, 48. 

 
 
169
things.” By unlearning their ability to do bad actions, young men would “in 
time acquire the skill of being of use for the realm, and also of being agree-
able in all company.”40 In Duhre’s text, usefulness, virtue and social ac-
ceptance were interrelated. 
 
As discussed in Chapter 2, Duhre presented numerous examples of 
immoral mathematical and mechanical practitioners. Such men were not 
only bad subjects, they also brought disgrace upon the mathematical scienc-
es. It was because of these bad mathematicians that “mathematical knowledge 
is innocently subjugated to all kinds of loathsome judgements everywhere 
where it is not prevalent.”41 In his publications, these bad examples worked 
as counter-images of himself and his own project. There was always a risk, 
he argued, of associating mathematics with ambitious promises. Because 
mathematics was an “immature science in relation to its expected progress,” 
mathematicians could “fear disapproval from all those, who do not know 
the great extent of its possible applications.”42 Therefore, to establish an 
education that fostered virtuous mathematicians, who would deliver on their 
promises, was also to salvage the reputation of mathematics. But were the 
performance of Duhre’s school not to meet the expectations of his audience 
– expectations that Duhre consciously raised by promising great results – he 
could expect to meet disproval. 
 
In his publications, Duhre’s projected person, his Laboratorium and his 
students formed a coherent whole. The Laboratorium was presented as a 
virtuous place, isolated from bad influences, where Duhre – a useful and 
virtuous mathematicus – would pass on his own traits to the students. 
There, a whole new generation of useful and virtuous subjects would be 
educated in the norms and techniques by which mathematics and crafts 
could promote the economy of the publicum. After having made his argu-
ment clear, Duhre laid down his final sales pitch for the project, presenting 
the consequences it would have for the Swedish state: 
[A] worn out country has stumbled upon the straightest road to its re-
demption, after it has been advised to let well intending and wise people 
examine what one could possibly attain through the application of the two 
principal sciences [i.e., mathesis and physica].43 
                                                   
40 “icke tillåter at hafwa den anledning til umgiänge med allehanda slag af folck, hwilcken man 
kan hafwa uti stora städer”; Duhre: Förklaring, 28–9. “til en så faststäld wana, at giöra det som 
dygdigt månde wara, at de måtte finnas lika såsom oskickeliga til alt wanartigt.”; ibid., 29. “at med 
tiden för Riket blifwa gangneliga, och tillika uti alt umgiänge behageliga.”; ibid. 
41 “Mathematiska wetskapen oskyldigt måtte wara underkastad widriga omdömmen å alla orter, 
hwarest den intet är giängse.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 12. 
42 “omogenhet i anseende til dess förmodade tilwäxt”; “befruchta misshag hos alla dem, som icke 
weta huru wida dess Application sig månde sträcka.”; ibid., 14. 
43 “et utmattadt Rike har råkat uppå den ginesta wägen ledsagande til dess uprättelse, sedan det 
kommit uppå det rådet, at låta wälmenande och klokt folck undersöka hwad man månde kunna 
uträtta igenom de twänne hufwud wetskapers Application”; ibid., 16. 

 
 
170
By teaching the skills of craftsmen together with the “principal sciences”, 
Duhre proposed a formal route of education for men in the Swedish state. 
This, in turn, would facilitate an economic redemption of the Swedish 
realm. Thus, what Duhre presented was not only an educational institution, 
but also a vision of a well-ordered state, administered along mathematical, 
mechanical and cameral principles. His Laboratorium was the model of such a 
state, as well as a school for the men who could fully realise the model. 
The publications as performance in the parliament of 
1723 
The publications from 1722 were the basis for Duhre’s submission to the 
Swedish parliament of 1723. In the spring of 1723, he presented a proposal 
to the four estates of parliament in which he had concretised his vision. In 
this proposal, he suggested that he should be awarded the royal estate of 
Ultuna, south of Uppsala, the revenue of which he would use to fund his 
Laboratorium. Ultuna had seen a number of tenant farmers come and go over 
the first decades of the eighteenth century. During the Great Northern War, 
Karl XII had pawned the estate to the counts Carl Gustaf and Thure Gabri-
el Bielke. In 1713, they had in turn transferred their contract to the Uppsala 
professor of theology and cathedral dean, Lars Molin. At the time of the 
parliamentary sessions of 1723, the county governor, Baron Magnus 
Cronberg, had leased the estate for only 2 years. It seems as if none of these 
tenants had invested much work or resources in Ultuna. By the early 1720s, 
it was a run-down estate, far from the visions found in Duhre’s publica-
tions.44 Its location suited Duhre, however. Not only was it close to the 
university in Uppsala, Ultuna happened to be located just west of Gnista, 
controlled by the Duhres. The royal estate and the family estate of the 
Duhres were separated only by the King’s Meadow [Kungsängen]. By acquir-
ing Ultuna, they would thus control most of the fertile fields just south of 
Uppsala. Also, Duhre turned the bad shape of the estate into an argument. 
He proposed to the parliament that, through his care, the estate could be 
transformed from an object that required substantial investment into a La-
boratorium that would restore not only Ultuna itself but also the whole Swe-
dish state. 
 
Duhre was successful in selling this vision to his audience. In the proto-
cols of the estates of the parliament in Stockholm, it is possible to study the 
reception of Duhre’s proposal. On 29 March, the report of the Deputation 
of Cameral Matters and Œconomy [Cammar- och œconomiedeputationen] con-
cerning Ultuna was read to the members of the clerical estate. This report 
                                                   
44 Hebbe: “Anders Gabriel Duhres ‘Laboratorium mathematico-oeconomicum’. Ett bidrag till 
Ultunas äldre historia”, 576. 

 
 
171
suggested that Ultuna, on some conditions, should be leased to Duhre “to 
establish a Laboratorium mathematico–œconomicum there” and that he should be 
given a privilege so that no one else should be allowed to “construct [things] 
after the method and design of his inventions.” The estate gave its full sup-
port to the first proposal, and decided to give the second proposal some 
further thought.45 The very next day, the clerical estate communicated their 
decision to the nobility as well as the burghers.46 
 
On 4 April, the peasant estate discussed the report at some length, but 
decided to postpone their decision. They continued their discussion on 9 
April, only to decide that they would leave the decision to the king.47 The 
same day, the burghers and the nobility also discussed Duhre. The burghers 
noted in their protocol that the current tenant of Ultuna, Baron Cronberg, 
had submitted a counter-proposal concerning Ultuna to the Deputation of 
Cameral Matters and Œconomy. Cronberg had argued that the office of the 
county governor (which he inhabited) should be given Ultuna permanently. 
Likewise, Duhre had submitted another request for Ultuna. The deputation 
had again sided with Duhre, and the burghers agreed with the deputation’s 
decision. They noted that Ultuna had never before been the residence of 
any governor. But more importantly: “such a Laboratorium œconomicum-
mathematicum [sic], which Duhre offers to establish, is rather useful for the 
public”. The burghers anticipated good results from the Laboratorium, high-
lighting “Duhre’s known diligence and inclination to devote both his work 
and knowledge to the service of the publicum”.48  
 
The nobility was less decided. Their protocol of 9 April described 
Cronberg’s counter-proposal in greater detail than the burghers’ protocol, 
and the governor argued that Duhre “was more skilled in mechanics than in 
farming”. Cronberg also argued that it would be better to give Duhre a 
house and a salaried position in Stockholm, where he could teach young 
men mathematics. In Stockholm, wrote Cronberg, “there are a number of 
youths who could profit thereof.” While Baron Hugo Hamilton agreed that 
one should “support the mathematical sciences,” he objected that: “one 
must not take someone else’s property”. Baron Göran Silfwerhielm an-
swered that “If Doctor Molin would still have had Ultuna, no one would 
have talked about that [i.e., the property issues].” The elephant in the room, 
                                                   
45 “at ther inrätta et laboratorium mathematico-oeconomicum”; “bygga effter hans inventioners 
methode och inrättning.”; Axel Norberg: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 6 [1723] (Stockholm, 
1982), 88. 
46 Ibid., 92–4. See also Nils Staf: Borgarståndets riksdagsprotokoll från frihetstidens början vol. 2 [1723] 
(Stockholm, 1951), 100; Sten Landahl: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll från och med år 
1719 vol. 2 [1723] (Stockholm, 1876), 161. 
47 Sten Landahl: Bondeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 1 [1720–7] (Stockholm, 1939), 128–9. 
48 “et sådant Laboratorium oeconomicum-mathematicum [sic], som Duhre tilbjuder sig at inrätta, 
är för publico ganska nyttigt”; “Duhres försporde flit och åhoga at wilja upoffra både arbete och 
wetskap til publici tjänst”; Staf: Borgarståndets riksdagsprotokoll från frihetstidens början vol. 2 [1723], 
107. 

 
 
172
which Silfwerhielm not so subtly hinted at, was the fact that Cronberg him-
self was a parliamentary representative of the noble estate, and this was 
probably why the tenantship was a more complicated matter for the nobility 
than for the other estates. A large number of the nobles were in favour of 
the report’s suggestion, but others wanted to refer it back to the Deputation 
of Cameral Matters and Œconomy. Finally, the estate decided to convey 
Cronberg’s counter-proposal to the other estates and to the deputation.49 
 
On the morning of 11 April, the nobles had communicated Cronberg’s 
proposal to the clerical estate, but they did not much care for it. The clerics 
pointed out that it had already communicated its decision on the matter, and 
that it would not change its position.50 On 8 May, all four estates again dis-
cussed what was to be done about the Ultuna estate. The peasant estate 
stood by its old verdict: the king should decide. The burghers and the cleri-
cal estate remained positive about the deputation’s proposal. Among the 
nobility, Cronberg was the only one who argued for his counter-proposal. 
The rest of the estate seemed tired of debating the issue, and after a short 
discussion they too decided to agree to the deputation’s original proposal. 
Thus, after 8 May, no estate was opposed to Duhre’s proposal. 
 
Hence, the lease of the royal estate was transferred from Cronberg to 
Duhre. This is in itself interesting: Cronberg was a baron, a member of the 
noble estate of the Swedish parliament, and the county governor of Uppsala 
where the royal estate was situated. Obviously Duhre did not acquire the 
estate because of his official social rank. He was neither a member of the 
nobility, nor did he hold a high position in the state administration. Instead, 
his status was linked to his visions for an orderly state. In his publications, 
Duhre had woven together the Laboratorium with the image of himself as an 
ideal mechanicus and mathematicus. Judging from the protocols, he con-
vinced the estates by successfully meeting their expectations of what consti-
tuted a mechanicus. By making himself the symbol of a dream of prosperity, 
he made himself worthy of the royal estate. His success was not only a result 
of his publications: the audiences judged these publications through their 
preconceptions of their author. Duhre’s position as a junior official in the 
civil and military administration, with a reputation for mathematical skill, 
made it possible for him to argue convincingly for the redemptive proper-
ties of mathematics integrated with crafts. In the eyes of the estates, Duhre’s 
mathematical and œconomical dreams seem to have held more sway than 
Cronberg’s position or concern for Duhre’s lack of agricultural experience. 
By beholding the future through Duhre’s Laboratorium mathematico–
                                                   
49 “lagdt sig mehr uppå mecaniquen än åkerbruk”; Landahl: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdag-
sprotokoll från och med år 1719 vol. 2 [1723], 167. “hvarest finnes en hop ungdom, som deraf profit-
era kunna.”; “matematiska vettenskaper böra uphielpas,”; “men man får intet taga bort en annans 
egendomb.”; “Om Doctor Molin har nu haft Ultuna, så har ingen talt om det.”; ibid., 168. 
50 Norberg: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 6 [1723], 103. 

 
 
173
œconomicum, the members of the estates could imagine a new Swedish state 
transformed into a well-ordered cameral machine. 
The Laboratorium as performance in the parliament of 
1726–7 
In 1725, the rector magnificus and the academic senate [konsistoriet] of Upp-
sala University received notification from the Bureau of Accounts of the 
establishment of a Laboratorium mathematico–œconomicum in Uppsala.51 Duhre 
had envisioned his Laboratorium to be hierarchical in structure – like the rest 
of early modern society – with craftsmen, crofters and students subordinat-
ed to its members. The members would teach the students their respective 
skills and be moral examples for the young men. In practice, the education 
that Duhre gave at his Laboratorium came to be structured differently from 
that originally foreseen in his publications. Whereas Duhre had envisioned a 
more or less self-sufficient school, his Laboratorium came to be strongly 
linked to Uppsala University. 
 
In the 1720s and the 1730s, he would have assistants teach mathematics, 
as well as crafts such as turning and engraving, to students from the univer-
sity. His initial plan was for his former private students in mathematics, 
Celsius and Klingenstierna,  to teach at his Laboratorium. Because these men 
became occupied elsewhere, Duhre hired the mathematician Thomas Fuchs 
to give these lectures instead.52 Duhre also hired the auscultator of the Bu-
reau of Mines, Carl Meurman, who had travelled to the Netherlands to learn 
the art of engraving, to teach the students of the Laboratorium this art. 
(Meurman also engraved the frontispiece of Celsius’ Arithmetica, see 
page 60.)53 In the 1730s, many applicants to the Bureau of Mines had at-
tended mathematical lectures or craft exercises linked to Duhre’s Laboratori-
um. This also coincided with the increased number of applicants to the Bu-
reau who discussed mathematics (see Chapter 3). Thus, the Laboratorium 
mathematico–œconomicum would have a noticeable impact on the Swedish min-
ing administration, and probably on the other branches of the state admin-
istration as well54 Using the funds of Ultuna, as well as his private savings, 
                                                   
51 Kammarkollegium: “Letter to the academic senate of Uppsala University”, 1725-09-04, Colle-
giernas bref & resolutioner för Uppsala Universitet 1623–1733, UUA, 413. 
52 Anders Gabriel Duhre: “Memorial angående Ultuna med bilagor”, 1731, Frihetstidens utskott-
shandlingar, R 2556, RA, 83–4. 
53 Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 97. 
54 Seventeen of the students who took classes in mathematics and crafts at the Laboratorium 
would later apply to auscultate in the Bureau. These were Olof Olofsson Kalmeter (1711–66), 
Johan Urlander (1712–1802), Harald Christiernin (1711–91), Johan Fredrik Ennes (1711–73), 
Fredrik Muncktell (1710–63), Olof Colling (?–1766), Daniel Tilas (1712–72), Ludvic von Bromell 
(1710–33), Gustaf Lundstedt (1710–66), Reinhold Persson Löfman (1712–68), Thomas Blixen-
stierna (1711–53), Carl Fredrik Geringius (1714–76), Gustaf Spalding (1709–78), Henrik Teofil 

 
 
174
Duhre also financed a number of publications in Swedish. For example, 
Celsius’ Arithmetica (1727), discussed in Chapter 2, was published on 
Duhre’s initiative and he also funded Mört’s Swedish translation from 1728 
of Christian Wolff’s Entdeckung der wahren Ursache von der wunderbahren Ver-
mehrung des Getreydes (1719). Mört’s translation of this work on agriculture 
was explicitly written for the Ultuna Laboratorium, which was noted in its 
title.55 
 
Duhre imagined an institution where agricultural practice, crafts, math-
ematics and œconomy would benefit each other. However, the agricultural 
foundation for the Laboratorium would eventually generate a number of 
problems, after the granting of the lease of Ultuna in 1723. From the start, it 
was an institution marked by the friction between the grand visions of its 
founder and the agricultural practice through which it was funded. In his 
publications, Duhre downplayed this friction. He recognised the importance 
of agricultural skills, as well as the fact that he was no farmer himself. How-
ever, he suggested that he would initially hire a “sensible farmer”, from 
whom he could learn the necessary farming skills. In little time and with 
little effort, Duhre imagined he would be able to “learn as much, as such a 
farmer knows”. The management of the estate would then be an integrated 
part of the mathematical and mechanical education at Ultuna. When his 
mathematical–œconomical Laboratorium was up and running, the responsi-
bility for the estate would be passed around, with two members of the La-
boratorium caring for the fields one year at a time. Even though this might 
hamper their studies, the members would consider it a benefit. By running 
the estate, the young would learn the practices of private econo-
my [hushållningen]. Also, by carrying out agricultural work, the members 
would “have their senses refreshed by a variety of useful chores, and […] 
thus be a good help for their fellow brothers, who are to care fore the 
household.”56 
 
That Duhre considered farming to be an important skill for a maker of 
useful knowledge is unsurprising. An overwhelming part of eighteenth-
century Europe was made up of rural societies structured around farming 
and agricultural work. In this respect, the Swedish core provinces around 
Lake Mälaren were typical of the rest of the continent. Because the income 
                                                                                                                        
Scheffer (1710–59), Anders Lundström (1711–93), Carl Henric Wattrang (1713–66), and Carl 
Anthelius (1712–?). Compare ibid., 317–31; with “Incoming correspondence from the 1730s”, 
E4/164–92, Bergskollegiums arkiv, RA. 
55 Celsius: Arithmetica; Christian von Wolff and Johan Mört (tran.): Christian Wollffs Grundeliga 
underrättelse om rätta orsaken til sädens vnderbara förökelse, vti hwilken tillika förklaras träns och plantors 
wäxt i gemen; såsom första profwet, af vndersökandet om plantors wäxt, på tyska först vtgifwen; men sedermera 
alla hushållare i gemen, och i synnerhet Ultuna laborator. til tienst, på swenska öfwersatt, och med hans kongl. 
maj:ts allernådigste privilegio vplagd. (Stockholm, 1728). 
56 “förståndig Landtman”; “lära så mycket, som en sådan Landtman förstår.”; Duhre: Förklaring, 
40. “hafwa sina sinnens förfriskning af nyttiga sysslors ombyte, och […] således wara sina med-
bröder, som skola skiöta hushållningen, til en god hielp.”; ibid., 41. 

 
 
175
from the Ultuna estate was the economic foundation of Duhre’s Laboratori-
um, and agricultural reform was one of its goals, farming skills became cen-
tral to Duhre’s ability to function as a director of his Laboratorium. In turn, 
these skills became part of his performance as a useful subject. In order to 
be deemed competent in running Ultuna, Duhre had to perform as a com-
petent master of the household [husbonde] for the parliament and state ad-
ministration in Stockholm. When they offered him the lease, these audienc-
es also raised their expectations of him. Thus the initial success of his publi-
cations did not only mean that he gained resources for his project, but also 
that he was now required to add a new repertoire to his performance as a 
useful subject. Duhre found himself relocated: from the well-defined hierar-
chical framework of a junior official in the Bureau of Mines to the position 
of a master of a royal estate with responsibilities not only for his Laboratori-
um but also for servants and crofters. 
 
At first, Duhre’s reputation as a virtuous man was a resource at Ultuna 
and his early years seem to have passed relatively smoothly. He developed 
the Ultuna estate; he constructed new buildings, such as a new smithy; and 
he managed to attain the lease of the King’s Meadow, in between Ultuna 
and the Duhre family estate of Gnista. At the parliamentary session in 
Stockholm 1726–7, it was clear that he had consolidated his position as a 
well-respected and competent man. In 1726, he submitted a new proposal 
to the estates, comprising 31 pages in small print and entitled “And. Gab. 
Duhre’s Humble proposal, directed at the highly praised estates at the par-
liament of 1726, concerning some of the means by which he and his brother 
Carl Duhre, as through a small-scale model, aim to show the possibility of, 
without a cost to the public, establishing the Ultuna Society, along with a 
report on what he has accomplished since [taking over] the royal estate of 
Ultuna”. This publication was longer than those of 1722; in detail it enu-
merated what Duhre had accomplished so far and what he wished to ac-
complish at Ultuna in the future.57 In his proposal, Duhre argued that the 
short-term lease should be made permanent. On 16 November 1726, he 
even presented this proposal to the clerical estate in person.58 
 
The estates were generally in favour of Duhre’s new proposal; their 
reaction was clearly based on his reputation as a man of action who could 
be trusted to act in the interest of the state. The parliamentary protocols 
from this period are filled with praise of his project. In July 1727, a new 
                                                   
57 Anders Gabriel Duhre: And. Gab. Duhres Ödmiukaste memoriale stäldt til Swea rikes samtel. högloflige 
ständer wid 1726 åhrs riks-dag (Stockholm, 1726). The full original title, quotes above, reads “And. 
Gab. Duhres Ödmiukaste memoriale stäldt til Swea rikes samtel. högloflige ständer wid 1726 åhrs 
riks-dag, om en deel af de utwägar hwar med han och desz broder Carl Duhre lika såsom med en 
modell uti litet emna wisa giörligheten. Af, at utan det almännas betungande uprätta Ultuna 
societet, jemte berättelse om det, som den förra ifrån sit avträde til Ultuna kongz ladugård kan 
hafwa uträttat”. 
58 Axel Norberg: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 7 [1726–31] (Stockholm, 1975), 106. 

 
 
176
proposal from the Deputation of Cameral Matters and Œconomy suggested 
that he should be given a lifetime lease of Ultuna. The peasant estate were 
generally positive about this suggestion, mainly because of their view of 
Duhre’s character, “who in this institution does not have any motive of 
personal gain but, oppositely, has the honourable intent to use all his time, 
reason and earthly possessions to the service and use of the publicum”.59 In 
the noble estate, Tomas Fehman described Duhre as “an example without 
example, that he not only makes himself a slave of the public, but also gives 
away what he might win.” On the other hand, Jacob Grundelstierna gave a 
word of warning: “To this date, he has not performed, but has only hawked 
hay and other things from the estate.”60 The clergy estate were also positive 
in its reaction, but wished for Duhre’s project to be better evaluated.61 Simi-
lar praise of Duhre can, moreover, be found in the preface to the Swedish 
translation of Johan Friedrich Weidler’s Institutionibus mathematicae from the 
same year. The translator Mört, who later the same year was accepted as an 
auscultator in the Bureau of Mines, described “Anders Gabriel Duhre’s 
praiseworthy intent, to serve the public good,” his “beautiful works with 
useful proposals for the development of the manufactories,” as well as how 
he “wanted to give any young man who is so inclined, the opportunity care-
fully to learn all sorts of mathematical things, together with the proper exer-
cise of practice.”62 
 
In 1727, Duhre was thus perceived as an incarnation of the good 
mechanicus. He embodied positive values such as public spiritedness, dili-
gence and mathematical creativity; he was considered the herald of an afflu-
ent future; and he was seen as a guarantor of a well-ordered state. Although 
he initially managed to live up to these high expectations, nevertheless he 
would soon be criticised for not meeting his audiences’ rising demands. 
Between the end of the parliament of 1727, and the next session in 1731, a 
number of events would unfold that would radically change his authority to 
weave mechanical and mathematical dreams. 
                                                   
59 “som vid detta värk icke har någon afsicht på sin enskylte förmon utan tvert om et berömvärdt 
upsåt at använda all sin tid, förstånd och timmeliga välfärd til publici tienst och nytta”; Landahl: 
Bondeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 1 [1720–7], 677. 
60 “et exempel utan exempel, at han icke allenast giör sig til en träl för publico, utan ock skiäncker 
bårt det han kan förvärfva.”; “Härtil dags har han intet præsterat, utan bara månglat ut höö och 
annat som fallit vid gården.”; Sten Landahl: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll från och med 
år 1719 vol. 5 [1726–7] (Stockholm, 1879), 398. 
61 Norberg: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 7 [1726–31], 393. 
62 “Anders Gabriel Duhres berömliga upsåt, at tiena det allmänna bästa,”; “wackra Skrifter och 
nyttiga förslag til Manufacturernas uphielpande,”; “will gifwa hwar och en af Ungdomen som sielf 
har lust, tilfälle at få grundeligen underrätta sig i hwarjehanda Mathematiska saker, och der jämte 
behörigen öfwa sig uti practiqven.”; Weidler and Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig, preface. In 
his application to the bureau, Mört discussed his skill in mathematics, experimental physics and 
chemistry. See Johan Mört: “Application to auscultate”, 1725-01-22, E4/159/912, Bergskollegi-
ums arkiv, RA. 

 
 
177
Dirty stories of the bad mechanicus 
From 1727, things went downhill fast. In the parliament of 1731, Duhre’s 
character, and the good intentions of his project, began to be questioned. 
Soon he would be more similar to the bad mechanicus that he, in his publi-
cations of 1722, had put forth as his opposite, than to the man who would 
save the Swedish state. In order to understand his transformation from a 
mathematical and œconomical saviour of the realm to an impostor selling 
false mathematical dreams, we must focus in on the local community 
around the Ultuna estate. The regional archives in Uppsala, as well as the 
national archive in Stockholm, contain a number of documents from the 
years 1727–31, which show a Duhre who had diverged radically from the 
man in the written sources discussed earlier. 
 
On 19 September 1728, the hundred court [häradsrätt] of Ulleråker, with 
jurisdiction over Ultuna, was in session. Among its cases was one that in-
volved Duhre. According to the county sheriff [länsman] Petter Hartman, 
during Michaelmas of 1727 – just after the parliamentary session in Stock-
holm and while Mört was writing his celebration of the Laboratorium – 
Duhre had repeatedly fornicated with Anika Jeansdotter63, a maid at Ultuna. 
These acts had not only been committed “in [Duhre’s] bedroom there at 
Ultuna, but also in the cowshed, so that he had never left her alone or had 
given her any peace”. On 13 July 1728, Anika gave birth to a child, whom 
she argued was Duhre’s bastard.64 This court case, of fornication in a cow-
shed, might seem far from the epistemological issues of Duhre’s mathemat-
ical and mechanical work. However, because early modern mechanics was 
performed in relation to a social epistemology where virtue and usefulness 
were interwoven, this story is of more relevance to Duhre’s visions than one 
might first believe. 
 
In the seventeenth- and eighteenth-centuries, natural philosophy was 
performed in households.65 There, women and children partook in 
knowledge making, conducted in homes controlled by male natural philoso-
phers. But the household also played an important part for an unmarried 
                                                   
63 Unlike the men mentioned in the protocol, Anika Jeansdotter’s name was not written in Anti-
qua to make it stand out. Instead, it was written using the same German handwriting used in the 
rest of the text. Most likely, this reflected her low status, as a woman and a commoner. Unfortu-
nately, this also means that her surname is unclearly written and hard to read. ”Jeansdotter” is my 
interpretation of it. 
64 “icke allenast inne uti hans Cammare der på Ulltuna, utan och i Fähuset, så att hon alldrig för 
honom fått wara i fred och oförsökt”; “Dombok från Ulleråker ting (1711–29)”, A1:2, Ulleråkers 
häradsrätt, ULA. 
65 See for example Gadi Algazi: “Scholars in households. Refiguring the learned habitus, 1480–
550”, Science in context 16:1–2 (2003), 9–42; Frances Harris: “Living in the neighbourhood of 
science. Mary Evelyn, Margaret Cavendish and the Greshamites”, in Hunter and Hutton (eds): 
Women, science and medicine 1500–1700, 198–217; Frances Willmoth and Rob Iliffe: “Astronomy 
and the Domestic Sphere. Margaret Flamsteed and Caroline Herschel as Assistant-Astronomers”, 
in Hunter and Hutton (eds): Women, science and medicine, 235–65. 

 
 
178
male mathematician such as Duhre. Duhre had to perform as a good master 
of the household, in order to be recognised as a credible knowledge maker 
and educator. In this context, being unmarried was a problem.66 In his 
Thoughts on mechanics (1740), Polhem elaborated on the mechanical practi-
tioner as a selfless subject.67 In this text, published in the mid 1700s, Polhem 
had adapted to the new constitutional regime. Like many others before him, 
he explicitly linked œconomy to mechanics through a marital metaphor, inter-
weaving the publicum (i.e., state) and the private households of the realm. 
Public and private economy (oeconomia and hushåldning) depended on each 
other “like a husband and his wife”. The publicum could be considered the 
man of the house: it cared for the private households of the realm from a 
patriarchal position. But it also depended on the orderly and virtuous con-
duct of the subordinated private households. Polhem considered mechanics 
to be the servant of this patriarch, as were geometry, chemistry, botanical 
anatomy, and other useful sciences and arts.68 Thus, Polhem considered the 
value and authority of mechanics to come from its submission to the ulti-
mate power. He explained the epistemic purpose of mechanics through a 
marital and patriarchal metaphor: mechanics should bring theoria and praxis 
into matrimony, for the benefit of their master. Being wed, the two would 
be able to produce legitimate children instead of bastards; in other words, 
they would produce useful men and machines built according to a plan in-
stead of just haphazardly.69 In Polhem’s Thoughts on mechanics, the social order 
of good government – both of the state and the private households – was 
envisioned as a social–epistemic order where the relationship between theoria 
and praxis was similar to that of a husband and a wife in a private house-
hold.70 
 
The house and its master were central in the agricultural economy and 
the patriarchal ideology of eighteenth-century northern Europe.71 The house 
and the Hausvater or Husbonde (i.e., the master of the household, or husband) 
                                                   
66 Lyndon Roper’s account of the gender relationships in the Holy Roman Empire in this period 
is also applicable to Sweden: “The real man was a household head, a little patriarch ruling over 
wife, children, servants, journeymen and apprentices”; Roper: Oedipus and the Devil, 46. 
67 On the patriarchal order of early modern Sweden, see also Chaper 2, page 42–44. 
68 “som mannen med sin hustru.”; Polhem: “Tankar om mekaniken”, 188. Polhem’s analogy 
between state and marriage follows a long tradition using the same language. See Scott: “Gen-
der”, 1070–5. For a discussion of how the early modern state was conceptualised through family 
metaphors that at the same time “influenced the state model of political power in the making”, 
see Sarah Hanley: “Engendering the state. Family formation and state building in early modern 
France”, French historical studies 16:1 (1989), 26. 
69 Polhem: “Tankar om mekaniken”, 190. 
70 Similar relationships between theoria, praxis, husbands and wives can also be found in other 
texts by Polhem/Polhammar. See for example Polhem: “Samtahl emällan fröken Theoria och 
byggmästar Practicus”; Polhem: “Samtahl och discurs emellan theoria och praxis om mechaniska 
och physicalska saker huar igenom ungdomen, som der till har lust, kan lära något”.  
71 Karin Hassan Jansson: Kvinnofrid. Synen på våldtäkt och konstruktionen av kön i Sverige 1600–1800 
(Uppsala, 2002), 80. 

 
 
179
were the chief representations of domestic groupings in the Germanic and 
Scandinavian world, until the late eighteenth century when the concept of 
the family took hold. The “house” differed from the family in that it includ-
ed servants and focused not only on the relationships of husband–wife–
children.72 Andreas Marklund has shown how the house can be character-
ised as consisting of three power relations: between the husband–wife, the 
parent–child and the master–servant. It was through these relationships that 
Polhem described the role of the mechanical practitioner in the state. To use 
a concept minted by Sarah Hanley, Polhem presented mechanics as a part of 
the Family–State compact, in which concepts of public power, the private 
household and mechanics legitimised each other. Similarly, in Duhre’s case, 
how the power relations of Ultuna’s household were perceived mattered to 
how the Laboratorium performed as a model of an ideal political order. 
 
Duhre did not marry until 1731, when he was 51 years old. As a junior 
civil servant in Stockholm there was no possibility, or necessity, for him to 
have a wife.73 Therefore, while the Ultuna estate household was made up of 
the patriarchal relationships between Duhre and his subjugated servants and 
young students, it lacked the relationship between a husband and a wife. 
Because of the absence of such a third power relation, the other two consti-
tutive power relations of Duhre’s household were ambiguous. This ambigui-
ty also gave further meaning to the fornication court case. In eighteenth-
century Sweden, as in other parts of Europe, infidelity and extramarital sex 
were considered threats to social order. They could bring about uncertainty 
concerning fatherhood, as well as unwanted economic liability for house-
holds or whole communities.74 At a time when there was an ideological par-
allel between the state and the household, domestic disorder was a threat to 
the social order.75 In the case of Ultuna, which Duhre presented as a model 
for a whole cameral order of society, such acts of vice undermined the very 
socio-epistemological foundation of the Laboratorium. If Duhre’s household 
literally produced bastards, this in turn reflected badly on his perceived abil-
ity to perform the epistemic virtues of theoria and praxis, in order to produce 
virtuous men, useful machines, and an orderly and prosperous state. 
 
Duhre had submitted a written response to the hundred court, where he 
disputed Jeansdotter’s claims. He “denied having had any improper relations 
or carnal intercourse with this woman”. Instead, the story “had been all 
made up, out of anger against him”. He also argued that he had not been at 
Ultuna at the time of conception, “that is, when the pigs there at Ultuna 
were slaughtered”. From Michaelmas until 5 November, he had been in 
                                                   
72 Marklund: In the shadows of his house, 11. See also Dieter Schwab: “Familie”, Geschichtliche Grundbe-
griffe. Historishes Lexicon zur politischen-sozialen Sprache in Deutschland (Stuttgart, 1975). 
73 Marklund: In the shadows of his house, 64. Hildebrand: “A G Duhre”. 
74 Karin Hassan Jansson: “Ära och oro. Sexuella närmanden och föräktenskapliga relationer i 
1700-talets Sverige”, Scandia 75:1 (2009), 31. 
75 Jansson: Kvinnofrid, 81. 

 
 
180
Stockholm “to deal with some personal affairs”. Also, he contended, “dur-
ing her service, this woman had often been in the farm-hands’ quarters and 
giggled and enjoyed herself with the men there”. Duhre argued that proba-
bly one of the servants of the estate was the child’s father. He proposed that 
the maid accused him, instead of the real father, because he would be able 
to support her financially. Alternatively, he suggested, the father might be a 
married man, whom she did not dare to reveal out of fear of a harsher pun-
ishment.76 Thus, Duhre paradoxically based his defence on his problematic 
position as an unmarried master of an estate. Being the tenant of a royal 
estate made him a plausible target for women who wanted support for their 
bastard children and his status as unmarried further facilitated such claims, 
because of the laxer penalties for fornication compared with adultery. 
 
Duhre called four witnesses to his defence: Christopher Hörner, a 
clockmaker from Uppsala; his wife Margareta Mejer; Gördid Matzdotter, 
the wife of the carpenter at Ultuna; and the maid Kierstin Matzdotter. In 
October 1727, Hörner had constructed a clockmaker’s workshop at Ultuna 
and during that period his wife had been a householder on the estate. 
Hörner pointed out that at this time, “Duhre had mostly been away,” but 
that he “however, sometimes briefly had come home for a day or two”. 
Nevertheless, none of these witnesses could testify to Duhre’s absence at 
the beginning of November. Instead, the maid Kerstin told the court how 
“Duhre one evening, at two times had called Anika  into his chambers to 
blow up the fire, and that she had remained in there for a while”. Kierstin 
did not know “if something had happened between them” at that time. 
Apart from Duhre’s witnesses, the court called two midwives, Maria Månsel 
and Kiersten Ersdotter, who had delivered the bastard child. The two 
women described Jeansdotter’s childbirth as difficult. Throughout the 
delivery they had repeatedly asked her who the father was, and she had 
consistently maintained that it was Duhre.77 
 
Things did not go in Duhre’s favour. The case continued at the next 
court session on 18 January 1729. Here, Hartman charged Duhre to free 
himself by taking a personal oath to his innocence [personlig edgång], which 
was a common procedure for men involved in fornication cases. Duhre 
declined to take the oath, and thus he and Anika were found to be guilty. To 
the modern observer, Duhre’s choice might seem illogical. If his innocence 
was just some words away, and he had spent the previous session arguing 
                                                   
76 “nekade sig haft med denne qwinsperson något olofl:t omgiänge och kiötzlig beblandelse”; “af 
arghet wara på honom opdichtat”; “nembl:n då Swinen der på Ulltuna Slachtades”; “för några 
sine angielägenheter”; “att som denne Qwinsperson mycket trägit under sin tjänstetid wistatz i 
drängestugan och der med drängarne gas[s]at och flesat”; “Dombok från Ulleråker ting (1711–
29)”. 
77 “H:r Duhre merendels warit borto; dock ibland då och då som hastigast på en dag el:r par 
kommit hem”; “Hr Duhre en Afton 2:ne Ggr ropat Anika in at blåsa på Eelden, då hon någon 
stund drögt der inne”; “om då något skiedt dem emellan, wet hon intet”; ibid. 

 
 
181
for his innocence, how come he now chose to remain silent? Karin Hassan 
Jansson has discussed a rape case from 1781, involving a farmhand named 
Carl, which casts light on Duhre’s silence. Hassan Jansson shows how the 
court had a strong suspicion of guilt, but found the evidence inconclusive. 
Therefore, the farmhand should ideally have been forced to give an oath to 
his innocence. However, because of his bad reputation, the court feared that 
he might perjure himself. Therefore, it did not let him swear to his inno-
cence. Instead it freed him on the grounds of inconclusive evidence.78 The 
case of the farmhand highlights how, in Swedish eighteenth-century provin-
cial courts, it could be better to free a man of bad reputation than to risk 
him telling lies under oath and consequently undermining the reputation of 
the court as a place of truth. For Duhre, the case was reversed: he was a 
professional truth-teller and his reputation was built around him as a virtu-
ous man who provided useful knowledge to the publicum. In such a position, 
to accept a ruling that he opposed was better than to risk arousing suspicion 
of having lied under oath. Thus, on 18 January, Duhre and Anika were 
found guilty and charged with fines: Duhre with 10 silver dalers and Anika 
with twice the amount (i.e., 20 silver dalers). Duhre was judged to be the 
father, who should consequently pay Anika support. Also, one Sunday each, 
the two were to stand on the kneeler [pliktpall] (i.e., on the two or three 
steps in church where people found guilty of fornication were to stand or 
kneel to be pilloried and shamed during mass).79 
 
This case of fornication underlines Duhre’s new responsibilities when 
he became the master of Ultuna. It no longer sufficed for him to publish 
books promising the immense rewards of the Laboratorium: he needed to 
display that he could handle the complexities of running a royal estate. It 
also shows that the social dynamics of the Ultuna estate were not discon-
nected from Duhre’s performance as a mechanicus. In a culture where vir-
tue and usefulness were intimately connected, and where Duhre gained a 
royal estate on the basis of his good character, a mechanicus on the kneeler 
was a bad mechanicus. 
Violent stories of the bad mechanicus 
Duhre’s failures as a master of an estate did not stop with fornication: he 
was also charged with abusing his servants. In early modern Sweden, the 
master of an estate had the right to administer physical punishment to his 
subordinates, whether they were his immediate family or his servants. But 
punishments needed to be perceived as just, and the law separated lawful 
                                                   
78 Jansson: “Ära och oro”, 34. 
79 “Dombok från Ulleråker ting (1711–29)”; “Plikt, 7, Plikt-pall”, SAOB 
<http://g3.spraakdata.gu.se/saob/> [accessed 4 April 2015]. 

 
 
182
punishment [aga] from physical abuse [misshandel]. To cross this line was to 
stop being a master and start being a tyrant of the house [hustyrann]. As An-
dreas Marklund points out, in its capacity of underscoring husbandly au-
thority “the House was not a physical entity: it was a field of responsibility, a 
political mandate.”80 In many ways the role of the good master and the vir-
tuous civil servant thus intersected: like bureau officials, masters of estates 
were responsible for a small part of the Swedish kingdom.81 The master of 
the house was supposed to police his small domain, and to maintain its or-
der. He should not only control his own impulses, but also moderate his use 
of violence in order to control subordinates. Consequently, his position 
carried an authority based on violence exercised reasonably. In practice, 
however, there was a thin line between “disciplinary flogging and brutish 
excesses.”82 As discussed earlier, in early modern Europe the orderly house 
corresponded to an orderly society, and a master of a house who failed to 
control his dominion – either because of too little or too much violence – 
was also a danger to the social order. This was even clearer in the case of 
Duhre, who was a tenant of a royal estate, because he literally managed royal 
property. By parliamentary decree, his mandate over the Ultuna household 
should be policed by all the administrative bureaus. To these audiences, he 
was expected on the one hand to show that he did not intend to put his 
own interests before those of the publicum, while on the other hand he had 
to manifest his autonomy and his ability to perform the duties of a master. 
These demands arose from elevated expectations following his successful 
publications of 1722. 
 
Attached to a proposal, handwritten by Duhre for the parliament of 
1731, are copies of documents from another session of the hundred court in 
Ulleråker. Although these documents were selected and copied by Duhre 
and thus might be incomplete, his choice to include them in his proposal 
can also be seen as part of a performance made in relation to audiences in 
Stockholm. As such, it shows that the events at the hundred court had im-
plications for what image his Laboratorium projected to the estates. The at-
tachments represented a wide range of perspectives, many which are very 
critical of Duhre. These sources can thus be interpreted as several layers of 
                                                   
80 Marklund: In the shadows of his house, 67. 
81 Ibid., 71–2. Compare to my discussion of the patriarchal order of early modern Sweden, page 
42–44. 
82 Ibid., 72. The control of impulses and use of violence has been analysed to a large degree by 
historians of masculinity. On violence and masculinity in Sweden, see David Tjeder: “Konsten att 
blifva herre öfver hvarje lidelse. Den ständigt hotade manligheten”, in Berggren (ed): Manligt och 
omanligt, 177–96. In an English early modern context, the complex and contradictive nature of 
impulses, violence and authority, expected from heterogenous masculinities, has been discussed 
by Philip Carter: “James Boswell’s manliness”, in Tim Hitchcock and Michèle Cohen (eds): Eng-
lish masculinities 1660–1800 (London & New York, 1999), 111–130. For a discussion on control 
of impulses and self-fashioning in English early modern science, see Golinski: “The care of the 
self and the masculine birth of science”. 

 
 
183
performances made by a variety of actors – locally in Ultuna, in the town of 
Uppsala and in parliament in Stockholm – which intersected in several 
complex ways. These overlapping performances carried a number of impli-
cations for Duhre’s ability to present himself as a mechanicus. 
 
It was a clerk by the name of Eric Hanssen who brought assault charges 
against Duhre to the attention of the hundred court in Ulleråker. In a letter 
to the court, faithfully copied in Duhre’s proposal to the parliament, 
Hanssen claimed to be the spokesman for a large number of Duhre’s croft-
ers. He had compiled a list of complaints against Duhre, which the crofters 
were claimed to have made, and had sent it to the new county governor in 
Uppsala, Johan Brauner.83 Duhre heard of these complaints from the gover-
nor on 2 August 1730.84 In his letter, Hanssen argued that Duhre had un-
lawfully seized his crofters’ farm animals, which were grazing in the King’s 
Meadow. When the crofters had asked to have their animals returned, 
Duhre supposedly had beaten them without due cause. The crofters begged 
that the governor command Duhre to return the animals and that “Duhre 
may henceforth be bound not to give us blows and lashes, so mercilessly, at 
his own pleasure and after his own hard heart”. Instead of having the right 
to inflict physical punishment, the crofters argued that the court should “let 
the criminal penance according to the law, and not through [Duhre’s] 
blows”.85 
 
In his written response, Duhre described the accusations as preposter-
ous and completely unwarranted. The crofters had been “deluded into hav-
ing an unfounded suspicion” of him and they had “let themselves be per-
suaded to present a punishable insubordination to me, their rightful mas-
ter”. Also, the crofters’ written complaints were “an unfounded petition in 
which I, without the slightest reason, was attacked with many insulting ac-
cusations and statements”.86 Duhre was convinced that the crofters would 
see the error of their ways and that they would beg for forgiveness. Instead, 
on 14 August, he was called to the governor for a meeting with Hanssen. At 
this meeting, Duhre was confronted with a second written complaint, 
which, he stated, “was even more offensive than the previous one”.87 
                                                   
83 In 1729, Johan Brauner replaced the former county governor Cronberg. Thus, like his prede-
cessor he seems to have had a personal interest in the Ultuna estate. 
84 Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 237–40. The complaints by Duhre’s crofters can be seen in the 
lights of other social conflicts between lords and servants in early modern Sweden. See Ulla 
Koskinen: “‘Benevolent lord’ and ‘willing servant’. Argumentation with social ideals in late-
sixteenth-century letters”, in Karonen (ed): Hopes and fears, 55–76. 
85 “Duhre må blifwa förbuden, at ey understå sig med hugg och slag så obarmhertelig oss hädan 
efter tractera efter sit egit godtycko och hårda sinne”; “låta den brotslige plikta efter lag och ey 
med slag”; Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 238. 
86 “förledna til en ogrundad misstancka”; ibid., 158. “låto sig öfwertalas, til at först emot mig, 
som war deras rätta husbonde, förklara en straffwärdig olydno”; ibid., 159. “en ogrundad 
klagoskrift, hwaruti iag utan någon den ringesta orsak blef angripen med många skimfeliga be-
skyllningar och utlåtelser”; ibid., 160. 
87 “wara mera anstötelig än den förra”; Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 162. 

 
 
184
 
In their second complaint, the crofters accused Duhre of having called 
them “wild beasts and senseless brutes” and that “he seeks all sorts of pre-
texts of justice to profit and enrich himself from what is rightfully ours”. He 
had denied them “the free use of our pastures, for grazing as well as hay-
making, and instead let the crofters of his tax farms have their animals at the 
King’s Meadow”, actions that were “both unreasonable and indisputable”. 
Furthermore, the complaint speculated that Duhre had been “in some con-
fused and unfortunate state”, and that he had therefore “been inclined to 
such unchristian actions”.88 The crofters questioned the core components of 
Duhre’s character. Not only did being accused of being “out of his senses” 
undermine his self-presentation as a man of reason, it was also suggested 
that he put his personal gain before the well-being of the estate; that he 
treated his subordinates badly, verbally as well as physically; and that he was 
“confused” and “unchristian”. Unsurprisingly, Duhre considered these ac-
cusations “awful remarks and insinuations concerning [his] office, morals 
and reputation”.89 The crofters had presented him as a man who could con-
trol neither his servants nor his own sensuous impulses. Thus, their insub-
ordination jeopardised the virtuous performance of Duhre and his Laborato-
rium. The boundary between just and unjust violence did not only matter for 
Duhre as a master, but also for his role as an educator. As seen earlier, when 
Duhre argued in parliament for the importance of good morals among the 
youth, he recommended Swedish parents to read a recent translation of 
John Locke, who argued that parents should restrain from corporal pun-
ishment in most areas of a child’s education.90 If Duhre lacked the ability to 
distinguish between abuse and just punishment for his servants, could he be 
trusted with the education of young men and to be sincere in his education-
al programme? How he was perceived as performing in master–servant 
relationships corresponded to how he was trusted with giving his students a 
good education. 
 
The fact that it was his servants who accused him added to Duhre’s 
burden. The projected image of Duhre and his Laboratorium consisted of the 
collective performances of the Ultuna household. If these performances 
were harmonious, audiences in Stockholm and Uppsala would perceive it as 
a useful and virtuous place. The performances of the estate could be seen as 
those of “a set of individuals whose intimate cooperation is required if a 
given projected definition of the situation is to be maintained.”91 The serv-
                                                   
88 “wildiur och oförnuftiga bestar”; ibid., 246. “han söker under allehanda skien af rät kunna 
profitera och rikta sig af det os med rätta tilkommer”; ibid., 242. “at förneka os wåra enghagars 
frija nyttiande, så wäl uti gräsbetande som höets bergande, och i det stället låta sina torpare på des 
Skathemman hafwa sina Creatur i Kongs engen, är både dels oskiäligt dels och odisputerligit”; “i 
något förwirrat och beklagl. tilstånd”; “et så ochristel:t procederande”; ibid., 241. 
89 “hämska expressioner och insimulationer [sic] rörande mit embete, seder och existimation”; Duhre: 
“Memorial, 1731”, 162. 
90 Duhre: Wälmenta tanckar, 25. 
91 Goffman: The presentation of self in everyday life, 108. 

 
 
185
ants’ signatures made such a harmonious performance impossible; instead, 
they projected a disorderly house, where the master could not control his 
subordinates. What was at stake in the court case was thus ultimately the 
reputation of the Laboratorium and Duhre’s character. Having his crofters 
turned into adversaries broke the collective performance and undermined 
the presentation of self that Duhre projected to his audience in Stockholm. 
Thus, simply proving the crofters wrong was not sufficient. If he wished to 
re-establish the team performance, he had to prove that the accusation had 
never been made. 
 
Duhre recognised that the acting out of his servants could have grave 
repercussions. In a letter to the court, he described how “lovers of the Ul-
tuna institution” wished him to report what had happened to the “due in-
stances” (i.e., the bureaus in Stockholm). Also, he warned about the “dire 
effects the insubordination of the crofters, subjugated to me, would have 
for all masters of households, and the likes, if it is not corrected with a 
proper punishment in order to scare and warn other bad servants”.92 This 
was a matter of “defence of public security” and on 24 August he submitted 
a request to the county governor for a proper judge to examine the case.93 
Hence, Duhre not only argued that the crofters were wrong in what they 
claimed – he also argued that their actions were a threat to the social order. 
The court case was not just a quarrel within the Ultuna estate: it was an 
event that could possibly disrupt the whole realm. Ultimately, it broke the 
ideal patriarchal order of the early modern state, in which all subjects pious-
ly performed according to their place in relationships of subjugation and 
superiority. Therefore, Duhre left Uppsala for Stockholm, where he would 
“turn to his royal majesty in the deepest humility”.94 To the king, Duhre 
recapitulated what he had written to the county governor, and asked that 
the Court of Appeal [hovrätten] should appoint a group, which Duhre would 
fund, that would examine the claims of the crofters.95 
 
Duhre’s request led to extraordinary sessions of the hundred court on 
1 and 5 December the same year, to which he, Hansen and the crofters were 
called. There, the crofters surprisingly denied ever even having heard of 
their own accusations. In his proposal to the parliament of 1731, Duhre 
described how “when the crofters, whom I had subpoenaed, […] were to 
prove [their] unfounded words of abuse […], the correct context of the 
matter was finally revealed”. Suddenly, it was evident that “these simpletons 
knew not a word of what was written in their so called complaints, which to 
                                                   
92 “Ultuna wärckets elskare”; “wederbörlig ort”; Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 162. “hwad skadelig 
påfölgd denna mina underhafwande Torpares olydno månde hafwa för alla husbönder och för 
dem som stå uti deras ställen, om den med behörig näpst ey skulle blifwa rättad, andra wanartige 
tienare til sky, skräck och warnagel”; ibid., 162–3. 
93 “almenna säkerhetens förswar”; Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 163. 
94 “i diupaste underdånighet wända mig til hans Kongl. Maij:t”; ibid., 164. 
95 Ibid., 250. 

 
 
186
a degree concerned the duty of my office, my honour and my reputation”. 
While the crofters “were not without spite” towards him, they had allowed 
this resentment to be “put in their heads”.96 Consequently, Duhre accused 
Hanssen of having compelled the simple crofters to submit complaints they 
did not understand. He argued that Hanssen was personally responsible for 
what had previously been considered the crofters’ list of complaints. Duhre 
did not only want the court to convict Hanssen for the actual words of 
abuse, but also to establish that Hanssen alone had made the accusations.97 
By freeing the crofters from guilt, and by undoing Hanssen’s status as their 
spokesman, Duhre could re-establish the order of Ultuna and the virtue of 
his person. 
 
Hanssen wished to defend himself against the accusations in the coming 
regular winter session of 21 January 1731. However, he failed to make an 
appearance there, and thus the court ultimately ruled in Duhre’s favour. The 
court convicted Hanssen on several accounts. Among other things, first, he 
had inflamed the crofters. Second, he had “called Mr Duhre unchristian and 
the worst tyrant against his crofters, as if he were bothering them beyond 
their ability”. The court pointed out that “all the crofters give high praise to 
Duhre, and that each man, who knows him, will assume his innocence, that 
he does not want to act unjust against any lesser man”. Third, Hanssen had 
described Duhre as “out of his senses”. Fourth, he had misled the crofters 
to claim privileges that “are proper for no subject of the realm to demand”. 
Also, he had “taunted and criticised the royal majesty as well as arrange-
ments and decrees made by the estates at a public parliament, by which 
Duhre has been given the lease of Ultuna for life, by writing that Duhre 
attained this benefit before other [better] qualified”. Finally, which under-
lines how this case was connected to Duhre’s Laboratorium, the judge ruled 
that Hanssen had “written sneerfully and scoffingly of the œconomical at-
tempts that Duhre projected for the betterment of the œconomy of the 
realm”.98 
                                                   
96 “det kom der til at dessa af mig lagligen instämda Torpare […] skulle bewisa de ogrundade 
tilmälen […], yppades först sakens rätta samanhang”; “at dessa enfaldiga stackare icke wiste et 
ord af det som stod i bem:te deras så kallade beswärspunchtar, och i någon måtto rörde min 
embets plicht, heder och existimation”; “intet woro fria ifrån den ilwillia”; “sig låtit intala”; ibid., 
173. 
97 Ibid., 257–8. 
98 “Det Cammarskrifwaren H:r Eric Hanssen uphissat de enfaldige torparne och brukt dem at 
underskrifwa sådane saker, som de aldrig honom ombedit at angifwa, ia intet til en del hört sig 
dem föreläses.”; “Utropat H:r Duhre såsom ochristl:ig och den wärsta tyran emot sine torpare, 
som skulle han plåga dem öfwer deras förmåga”; “samtl:e torparne gifwa H:r Duhre gådt loford, 
och hwar man, som honom kiänner, skal anta hans oskyldighet, at han intet wil giöra någon orätt 
emot mindre någon menniskia”; “som wore han ochriste och ifrån sina sinnen”; “ingen un-
dersåtare i riket skal anstå at begiära”; ibid., 259. “tadlat och carperat Kongl. May:t och Riksens 
Ständers på en almän Riksdag allernådigst giode anstalt och förordning, hwarigenom Ultuna är 
uplåtit H:r Duhre til arrende uti des lifstid, i det han skrifwer, at H:r Duhre kommit til en sådan 

 
 
187
 
What the court’s ruling makes clear is that we cannot separate the agri-
cultural economic foundation of Ultuna from Duhre’s presentations of him-
self, and the Laboratorium, to parliament in Stockholm. Not only was the 
agricultural practice planned to be a part of Duhre’s education of his makers 
of useful science. The actions of the crofters of his estate were a part of 
Duhre’s performance as a mechanicus. Obviously, the estate was the eco-
nomic foundation of his Laboratorium and the controversies undermined this 
foundation. If Duhre failed as the master of Ultuna, he would not be able to 
finance his educational institution, nor would the members of parliament in 
Stockholm trust him to run it. In its reply, the court also made clear that 
Duhre received a certain amount of protection from criticism by being sub-
jected to the estates. Having been granted the lease of Ultuna from parlia-
ment, Duhre was seen as a spokesperson for the publicum and as having 
submitted to the ultimate political authority. To argue, like Hanssen did, that 
Duhre had attained his position before others more qualified, was to criti-
cise the judgement of the publicum and – as a result – to introduce disorder 
into the realm. The performances of Duhre and his Laboratorium were thus 
also part of a greater performance of the Swedish state.  
 
Although Duhre won his case against Hanssen and the crofters, the 
controversies created by the court case undermined his position. The mere 
fact that he considered it necessary to present his side of this court case to 
the parliament of 1731 shows the lasting effects of the controversy. The 
court case also made him a less credible collaborator. He described: 
how these scattered evil rumours also have deterred several learned men 
from the candour and diligence, by which they […] gladly had wished to 
serve the school at the Ultuna Laboratorium as its permanent members, and 
how I, because of this, have lost other indispensible people, such as 
craftsmen and other workers.99 
The scholars’ change of heart was not only the result of a general fear of 
moral contamination. The repeated irregularities undermined Duhre’s ability 
to show that the Laboratorium would be permanent. He described how 
workers declined positions on his estate “by no other reason than that they 
have let themselves believe that the royal estate of Ultuna will be let out 
again, at the next parliamentary session, in the same way as before”.100 Be-
cause of these cases, in which Duhre’s ability to perform as a master of his 
estate was put on trial, his audiences were starting to question whether the 
                                                                                                                        
förmån framför andra meriterade”; “Skrifwit håniskt och försmädeligt om de œconomiske försök 
som H:r Duhre til Lands œconomiens underhielpande wälmenat projecterat”; ibid., 260. 
99 “huru dessa omkring spridda widriga ryckten, iemwäl hafwa afskräckt åtskilliga af lärda karlar 
ifrån den frimodighet och flit, hwar med de […] gierna welat wara, til det erforderliga Informations 
wärckets tienst wid Ultuna Laboratorium, såsom des beständiga ledamöter och huru iag igenom 
detta kommit at missgå annat för mig omisteligt folk, af handtwärckare, och andra arbetare”; 
Duhre: “Memorial, 1731”, 60–1. 
100 “af ingen annan orsak än at de låtit sig inbilla, at Ultuna Kungsladugård wid nestkommande 
Ricksdag kommer at bårtarenderas på samma sätt, som tillförende”; ibid., 62. 

 
 
188
Laboratorium was permanent enough to be trusted. Therefore, it was essen-
tial for Duhre to perform successfully as a master of Ultuna in order to be 
recognised as a virtuous and credible partner among scholars, craftsmen and 
farmhands alike. 
Cows and order in the King’s Meadow 
In the case against the crofters, Duhre had been accused of letting his own, 
and some of his friends’, farm animals into the crofters’ pastures, in a way 
that damaged the pastures in the long run.101 Duhre was involved in yet 
another court case concerning the same issue, in which his position was 
undermined by the very farm economy that was supposed to support his 
Laboratorium. As mentioned earlier, after receiving the lease of Ultuna on 
28 May 1724, Duhre applied for a lease of Kungsängen. He was not the only 
one interested in this pasture; the royal horseman [hingstridaren], Lars 
Kihlgren, had also shown an interest in the lease. In his application for the 
lease of the King’s Meadow, Duhre argued that he would be a better tenant 
of the pasture. As part of his argument, he proposed new and harsher graz-
ing rules to be imposed on him. He wished “that someone, through your 
lordship’s authorisation, would have the power to […] impose severe fines 
on him who causes more farm animals to be led into the pasture”.102 
 
At first glance, this proposition might seem strange. Why did Duhre 
want to impose harsh rules and heavy fines on himself? In the light of the 
responsibilities of a master of a royal estate, discussed earlier, it is easier to 
understand Duhre’s actions. To submit to strict rules for grazing his farm 
animals was a way to be a virtuous and unselfish subject of the state. The 
orderly grazing of Duhre’s cows projected Ultuna as a cameral model socie-
ty, and its owner as a selfless mechanist–cameralist. Duhre’s virtuous per-
formance made sense because of the organic economy of grazing, in which 
meadows were considered a resource that needed to be carefully conserved, 
and grazing was an activity that needed to be balanced against the con-
straints of the land. To lead more farm animals than allowed into a pasture 
was a way for a tenant to earn extra money from a lease, but such additional 
profit deteriorated the grazing grounds in the long run. As the King’s 
Meadow belonged to the crown, this was in effect a way of stealing from 
the state, or at least to put your personal gain ahead of the publicum. Conse-
quently, if Duhre were perceived to be leading more animals onto the 
King’s Meadow than the land could sustain, this would break his selfless 
performance. Such actions would present him as a man who had made 
                                                   
101 Ibid., 238–9. 
102 “at någon af Eders Hög Grefl:e Excell:ce befulmäktigat måtte hafwa makt at […] belägga den 
med ansseenlige böter, som är orsaken at flere Cratur blifwit insläpta uti ängen”; ibid., 274. 

 
 
189
grand œconomical and mathematical promises to parliament, only to enrich 
himself using royal property. 
 
Limiting the way he could use the grazing grounds was thus a way, as it 
were, to set the scene for future virtuous balancing acts in the King’s Mead-
ow. Duhre was successful in his proposal. On 30 June 1724, the Councillor 
of the Realm, Nicodemus Tessin, gave Duhre the lease of the King’s Mead-
ow and also accepted the new harsher rules.103 However, some years later, 
Duhre’s actions would drag him into yet another court case in which his 
Laboratorium and his character were at stake. On 18 June 1728, the royal 
horseman Kihlgren complained to the county governor’s office that Duhre 
had led far more animals into the pasture than his contract allowed.104 
Duhre considered this case to be connected to the crofters’ case and dis-
missed Kihlgren’s accusations as “gross and intertwined falsehoods”. Fur-
thermore, he argued “that in time it will be possible to show that 
Kilgren [sic] never would have dared to present them, unless he, like my 
[…] crofters, had been enticed by a rumour spread by my opponents”.105 
 
Despite his strong denial of Kihlgren’s claims, Duhre admitted that 
there had been more farm animals in the pasture than the contract allowed. 
There was a reason for this, however. He reflected on how “I saw myself 
placed between two difficulties”. On the one hand, “in Uppsala I was de-
scribed as one who grudges the inhabitants of the town of Uppsala the 
freedom to lead their farm animals into the King’s Meadow of Uppsala, in 
exchange for the grazing fee”. From the burghers’ perspective, Duhre had 
admitted too few animals into the meadow. On the other hand, Kihlgren ar-
gued that Duhre had let too many animals onto the grazing grounds.106 From 
Duhre’s perspective, no matter how he acted, he could not please everyone. 
He considered himself caught in the middle of two conflicting interests, of 
which he could not satisfy both. Pleasing the locals in Uppsala required that 
he let them use the King’s Meadow as they had done previously. But such a 
course of action would break the contract he had signed with the govern-
ment in Stockholm. Duhre and his Laboratorium were stuck in a balancing 
act between the national and regional levels of eighteenth-century Sweden. 
 
On 28 October 1730, the county sheriff Bohman carried out an inspec-
tion of the pasture, initiated by the county governor of Uppsala together 
with a group of local peasants. They found that the grazing cows had left 
the pasture in total chaos. Their report pointed out that “the grass roots are 
                                                   
103 Ibid., 275–8. 
104 Ibid., 282. 
105 “så grofwa och sammanwridna osanningar”; “med tiden lärer kunna förmärkas, det Kilgren 
sig aldrig underståt med dem framkomma, så framt han äfwen som mina […] torpare sig ey låtit 
förledas af et igienom owännen utsprit ryckte”; ibid., 291. 
106 “iag såg mig wara stad emellan twenne swårigheter”; ”at iag i Upsala af owännerna uttyddes 
för den som miesunnar Upsala stads innewånare friheten, at i Upsala Kongs eng inläya sina crea-
tur emot de wanl:e betespeng:ar”; ibid., 292–3. 

 
 
190
partly pulled up by the farm animals and lay on the ground everywhere”. 
The sheriff and the peasants also described how “the black soil is visible at 
some places and the Royal Stable’s [Kungliga Hovstallet] pasture near the 
town, where the farm animals enter, is at places badly trampled and in bad 
shape”.107 The inspection did not look good for Duhre. He had, however, 
anticipated this outcome and initiated a parallel assessment of the meadow 
by the government in Stockholm. The county sheriff Petter Hartman,  who 
had presented Duhre’s fornication charges 2 years earlier, carried out this 
second inspection. The two inspections by Bohman and Hartman resulted 
in two completely different conclusions. In his report, Hartman argued: 
“that no parts of the King’s Meadow of Uppsala, neither at the Royal Sta-
ble’s nor at Ultuna’s parts, has suffered any damage whatsoever”.108 Whereas 
Bohman and his group interpreted the roots lying on the ground as a sign of 
chaos, Hartman’s group saw the orderly state of a field prone to flooding in 
autumn. Bohman argued that the grass roots lying on the ground were signs 
of destruction. Hartman,  on the other hand, argued that the state was nor-
mal for pastures at this time of year. Whether or not the meadow had been 
preserved was thus not a simple matter of fact. The condition of the field 
was a matter of interpretation, and the resolution of whether the field was 
damaged or not was ultimately a matter of who carried the authority to de-
fine the situation. In the case of the King’s Meadow, Duhre’s inspection, 
ordered by the publicum, trumped the investigation initiated by the county 
governor. The King’s Meadow was thus decided to be an orderly place.109 
 
In many ways the differences between the two inspections correspond-
ed to the evaluations of Duhre’s Laboratorium. The performances of Duhre 
and of his cows were both subject to audiences’ interpretations. The facts 
on the ground, the dirt and roots left where the cows had grazed, could be 
interpreted as signs of either chaos or order. Likewise, there did not exist a 
neutral matter of fact, a common ground or consensus, which made it evi-
dent whether or not Duhre had performed what he had promised the par-
liament of 1727. The interpretations of the trampled ground were thus one 
means for audiences in Uppsala and Stockholm, living in an agricultural 
society, to evaluate whether Duhre was a trustworthy and selfless mathe-
matical–œconomical reformer of agricultural practice. The two inspections 
show that there was a rising ambivalence as to what was the actual intent of 
his project: public service or personal gain. In the case of Duhre’s Laborato-
rium, the final judgement was made by the estates of the parliamentary ses-
sion of 1731. 
                                                   
107 “gresrötterne äro öfweralt til en dehl af creaturen upryckte ok på iorden liggandes”; “at swarta 
iuorden på några ställen synes och at Kongl. stal statens eng wid staden der creaturen hafwa sin 
ingång, är til en dehl illa trampat och medfaren.”; ibid., 301. 
108 “at Upsala Kongeng å intet ställe, hwarcken å Kongl. Hof Stalletz eller å Ultuna dehlar har 
tagit någon den ringaste skada”; ibid., 310. 
109 Ibid., 309. 

 
 
191
A morally ambiguous mechanicus in the parliament of 
1731 
During the parliament of 1731, the future of Duhre’s Laboratorium was un-
decided. In preparation for the parliamentary session, Duhre had collected 
copies of documents concerning the controversies after 1727. Interestingly, 
he included documents concerning his cows and servants, but he did not 
include his fornication case in the proposal. Either he considered this case 
irrelevant to his work at Ultuna, or he chose to exclude it, perhaps because 
he was found guilty. Still, by binding his copies together into a handwritten 
folio and submitting it to the estates, Duhre himself judged the cases con-
cerning his servants and his cows, at least, as relevant to the performance of 
his Laboratorium. 
 
On 5 June 1731, the nobility discussed a report from the deputation 
now named the “Deputation of Cameral Matters, Œconomy and Com-
merce” [Cammar- œconomie och commercie- Deputationen] concerning the Ultuna 
estate. The report was not in favour of Duhre. After having heard the aca-
demic senate of Uppsala University, the deputation considered Duhre’s 
mathematical lectures superfluous. Between 1727 and 1731, the university 
had appointed Duhre’s former students Celsius and Klingenstierna profes-
sors – Klingenstierna of geometry (1728) and Celsius of astronomy (1730) – 
and they were now in charge of the mathematical education there.110 Fur-
thermore, according to the report, Duhre had failed to establish his Labora-
torium on the estate; the deputation even considered this vision impossible 
to realise, given the resources at his disposal. Therefore, they wished to re-
lease him from his tenancy. Nevertheless, they believed that he had acted 
with good intent: it was out of “sincere love and out of the duty of a subject 
for the public good and enrichment”, that he “had taken on more than has 
been in his power to bring about”. Therefore, they suggested, Duhre should 
be considered free from all obligations to the public. The report also dis-
cussed the uncertain condition of the estate, noting that it had been argued 
against Duhre that he had “devastated the Ultuna forests”, that he had “car-
ried off hay”, that he had “used the crofters [of Ultuna] on his own proper-
ties”, and that he had “trampled the meadows”. These aggravating circum-
stances, it concluded, should be evaluated in an inspection.111 
 
The nobility reacted with anger to the deputation’s consideration. Johan 
Fredrik Didron argued that “Duhre should be held responsible for having 
                                                   
110 H. J. Heyman: “Anders Celsius”, SBL 8 (Stockholm, 1929), 266; Sten Lindroth: “Samuel 
Klingenstierna”, SBL 21 (1975–7), 319. 
111 “af uprichtig kiärlek och undersåtelig plicht för det allmennas upkomst och förkofring mera 
sig åtagit, än i dess krafter varit at efterkomma”; Sten Landahl: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdag-
sprotokoll från och med år 1719 vol. 6 [1731] (Stockholm, 1887), 423. “Ultunaskogens utödande”; 
“höets afförande”; “torparnes nyttiande på des egne lägenheter”; ibid., 422. “engarnes förtram-
pande”; ibid., 422–3. 

 
 
192
deceived the members of parliament to give him the estate and [then] not to 
keep his promises.” Similarly, Carl Henrik Wrangel was enraged that 
“Duhre has not kept what he has promised.” Brauner – the new governor in 
Uppsala, who himself had handed in a counter-proposal to the deputation, 
was unsurprisingly the harshest critic. He described Duhre’s shortcomings 
and argued that he instead should be the tenant of Ultuna. Duhre would 
“ruin the estate”, were he to be left as its tenant. Also, Brauner insinuated 
economic wrongdoings: “I do not know if its commonly known that he has 
married and has given her 2,000 copper dalers, although he owns nothing 
and has donated everything he owns to the society.”112 Charles Emil Lew-
enhaupt calmed the members by pointing out that it would be unwise for 
the noble estate to “admit that they had let themselves be deceived”, and 
that it would be best to let the king decide on the conditions by which 
Duhre would leave Ultuna. The rest of the nobility agreed with Lewen-
haupt, and also decided that Brauner should be the new tenant of Ultuna.113 
 
On 11 June, the same report was read to the peasants, the clergy and the 
burghers. All estates agreed with the nobility; however, the peasants stressed 
that Duhre should be responsible for the damage he had done to the fields 
and meadows.114 In the parliament of 1731, the positive view of Duhre as a 
virtuous and useful man had thus all but disappeared. While the deputation 
did not consider him to have deceived the publicum intentionally, he was no 
longer deemed a competent mathematicus who could raise the realm from 
poverty singlehandedly. Instead, they viewed him as a man who did not 
know his own limitations. The members of the noble estate were even less 
favourable of Duhre’s person. For them, he was an imposter and a con 
man. The only reason for not scolding Duhre publicly was the reluctance of 
the estate to admit to having been deceived in the first place. 
 
Interestingly, many of the local controversies that unfolded between 
1727 and 1731 are mentioned in the protocols of the estates: Duhre’s rela-
tionship with his crofters, his handling of the fields and his personal rela-
tionships. Whereas his successful performance as a good mechanicus in 
1723 and 1727 was interwoven with the presentation of a moral man, his 
loss of Ultuna in 1731 was likewise linked to his character. The former good 
                                                   
112 “Duhren borde vara ansvarig för det han bedragit Riksens Ständer till at lemna honom 
kongsgården och icke hållit det han lofvat.”; Landahl: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll 
från och med år 1719 vol. 6 [1731], 423. “at Duhren ey hållit hvad han lofvat.”; ibid., 424. “så ruin-
erar han gården”; “Jag vet intet, om det är bekant, at han gift sig och har gifvit henne tvåtusende 
Dahl. kmt, them han likväl intet äger, uthan förskrifvit alt thet han äger till Societeten.”; ibid., 
423. On 4 March 1731, Duhre had married the widow Ingeborg Stefansdotter, previously married 
to the peasant Erik Pedersson. Bengt Hildebrand: “Anders Gabriel Duhre”, 506. This timely 
marriage could of course be related to lacking third power relation, between a husband and a 
wife, at Duhre’s estate. 
113 “at säija det de hafva låtit bedraga sig”; ibid., 424. 
114 Sten Landahl: Bondeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 2 [1731–4] (Stockholm, 1945), 128; Norberg: 
Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 7 [1726–31], 664–7; Nils Staf: Borgarståndets riksdagsprotokoll från 
frihetstidens början vol. 4 [1731] (Stockholm, 1958), 187. 

 
 
193
mechanicus was now received as an immoral man who deceived the public 
for personal gain, or at least as an overly optimistic man who did not know 
the limits of his powers. As a junior civil servant in Stockholm, Duhre had 
been a pious part of the hierarchical bureaucracy. There, it had been clear 
who was his superior, and, consequently, what expectations his audience 
had of his performance. In the parliament of 1722, he had been required to 
appease a more heterogeneous audience, but his performance was still a 
straightforward affair of presenting a vision of the future in printed form. 
At Ultuna, conditions had been different. As I have shown, in order to un-
derstand his performance, one has to see Duhre and the Ultuna estate as a 
team performance. Success or failure depended on how audiences in Stock-
holm and Uppsala perceived the master–servant relationship at Ultuna and 
how it related to other local groups. Whether or not Duhre was convicted in 
the court cases concerning Ultuna, they conjured forth an alternative image 
of the estate. Instead of being a vision of a good cameral order, founded on 
a mathematical–œconomical foundation, it had become the mirror image of 
a disorderly state. According to this image, Duhre failed as a master because 
of his inability to control his violent and selfish impulses. Was Duhre self-
less and virtuous, or moody and violent? 
Epilogue. Œconomical dreams of a bad mechanicus 
By the late 1730s, Anders Gabriel Duhre’s reputation had hit rock bottom. 
In the parliamentary debates, his project was generally considered a failure. 
And worse: Duhre was perceived as a man who had promised the world but 
had failed to deliver. He lost the estate at Ultuna, and was publicly de-
nounced as an imposter and a con man. Destitute and in debt, he moved 
back to his family estate at Gnista, inherited by his older brother Carl after 
the death of their father in 1726. But Duhre did not accept his defeat. He 
submitted to the parliament of 1738–9 an extensive handwritten proposal 
similar to the one he had compiled in 1731.115 Also, he started writing what 
would become his last work: The highest wealth of Sweden, built on an œconomical 
foundation (1738). This work was Duhre’s last attempt to convince his con-
temporaries of the merit of his mathematical and œconomical dreams. It 
was also where he made his boldest and most comprehensive claims. There, 
he presented a whole new ideal state, organised after œconomical and mathe-
matical principles.116 
                                                   
115 Anders Gabriel Duhre: “Handlingar ang. Ultuna. Ingivna av Anders Gabriel Duhre”, 1738–9, 
Frihetstidens utskottshandlingar, R 2702, RA. 
116 Anders Gabriel Duhre: Sweriges högsta wälstånd, bygdt uppå en oeconomisk grundwal (Stockholm, 
1738). The same year, Duhre also published an excerpt of the same work; Anders Gabriel Duhre: 
Utdrag af Anders Gabriel Duhres oeconomiske tractat, kallad Sweriges högsta wälstånd, hwarutinnan  

 
 
194
 
His argument was structured in the form of a geometric proof, starting 
from three principles. First: that virtue was the same as the contribution to 
“the edification and multiplication of human coexistence”. Second: that the 
habits people acquire when young set them on a way of life, which they only 
with difficulty can turn away from. Third: public usefulness should be con-
sidered the principal law of the realm. Following this law, everyone should 
only conduct work that they are capable of, and anyone who does not con-
tribute to the common good should be considered “pernicious vermin”.117 
Therefore, in Duhre’s ideal realm, the number of scholars should be limited. 
No more people should lead this life than the number that “is proven to be 
indispensible for the filling of the required offices and positions in the cleri-
cal and the worldly estate.”118 
 
Instead, his ideal realm was to be filled by men “who care for necessary 
knowledge in Mathematics and […] physics gained through experiments”. The-
se men should first have “acquired a mature skill and experience in tech-
niques, crafts and all other practice”. Then they would “apply these princi-
ple sciences [i.e., mathematics and physics] to the affairs of the realm.”119 
Hence, Duhre had sharpened, rather than changed, his rhetoric as a conse-
quence of his own radically altered conditions. He still based his argument 
on the promised fruits of virtuous men raised through mathematical and 
artisanal exercises. The œconomical principles in The highest wealth of Sweden 
are thus not very different from those found in Duhre’s earlier works.  
Although he proposed changes at a whole new level in this work, changes 
that would fundamentally change the social order, these reforms were moti-
vated using the same arguments found in his works from the 1720s. 
 
The reception of this work, however, was the complete opposite of that 
of his publications of 1722. The bad response can hardly be attributed to a 
diminishing interest in œconomical works in the 1730s and 1740s. These 
decades saw a number of prominent works that were similar to Duhre’s.120 
                                                                                                                        
sammanhanget så wäl som sakens höga wigt och angelägenhet, til alla wälsinte patrioters widare ompröfwande, 
warder kort och tydeligen å:daga lagd (Stockholm, 1738). 
117 “mennskliga sammanlefnadens uppbyggelse och förmering”; Duhre: Sweriges högsta wälstånd, 6. 
“fördärfwelig ohyra”; ibid., 7–8. 
118 “pröfwes oumgängelige til nödig tiensters och bestälningars beklädande uti det Andeliga och 
Werldsliga Ståndet.”; Duhre: Sweriges högsta wälstånd, 9. 
119 “som winlägga sig om en erforderlig kundskap uti Mathematique och den der uppå grundade 
Natur kunnigheten, förwärfwad igenom försök”; “förwärfwat sig en mogen snäll- och erfarenhet 
uti handalag, handwerken och al annan practique”; “lämpa dessa Hufwud-Wetenskaper til Landets 
angelägenheter.”; ibid. 
120 Duhre’s work can be compared to the contemporary œconomical works by Anders Norden-
crantz: Arcana oeconomiæ et commercii, eller Handelens och hushåldnings-wärkets hemligheter (Stockholm, 
1730); Olof Hamrén: Manufacturs-spegel, som genom tilförlåtelige uträkningar och uprichtiga grundsatzer 
gifwer et fulkommeligit lius om manufacturers och fabriquers rätta art och beskaffenhet, samt oskattbara nytta 
genom försiktig anlägning (Stockholm, 1738); Lars Salvius: Tanckar öfwer den swenska oeconomien igenom 
samtal yttrade […] emellan fru Swea, fru Oeconomia, Herr Mentor, Herr Flit, Herr Sparsam, och Frans. 
(Stockholm, 1738); Carl Linnaeus: “Tankar om grunden till œconomien genom naturkunnigheten 

 
 
195
What had changed though, was Duhre’s reputation. Whereas the members 
of the parliament of 1723 viewed him as the embodiment of a mechanicus, 
15 years later his character did not carry the same sway. His performance in 
Ultuna had compromised his trustworthiness in the eyes of his contempo-
raries. Thus, when he revealed that his work at Ultuna had only been a 
model that showed how society as a whole should be organised, many were 
sceptical of his promises. After the failure of his Laboratorium, they required 
more from him than the grand promises of a publication on œconomy. 
 
One reaction to Duhre’s last work was a satirical poem in Latin. It pre-
sented the “famous” Duhre and his work: 
A name since long remembered in the hyperborean realms, 
Duhre, also in our patria a famous old man 
Hitherto secret, a long time in the making 
Lo! To your eyes, patria, he presents a work 
No other parent, has been able to conceive as worthy an 
offspring: every page speaks of its master.121 
Although the anonymous author was never explicitly critical of Duhre, the 
poem magnified his promises to the absurd. The poem described how 
Duhre’s work would bring amounts of gold and riches to the realm, larger 
than those that had been brought back from the New World; how his work 
would let the fields and craftsmen of Sweden feed millions; and how “the 
hyperborean lands” would come to attract brilliant minds from abroad. 
Duhre’s work was “the stone, for a long time sought for in vain/which truly 
will give us a golden age”.122 The highest wealth of Sweden magnified Duhre’s 
own claims from the 1720s to a degree that might have been considered 
absurd to his contemporaries, given the failure of his Laboratorium. This 
poem suitably magnified the praise and promises of his first proposals, so as 
to make his new claims seem even more bizarre. 
                                                                                                                        
och physiquen”, Kungliga vetenskapsakademins handlingar (1739–40), 411–29; Jonas Alströmer: Sveri-
ges wälstånd om det will (Stockholm, 1745). 
121 “Nomen hyperboreis dudum memorabile terris, | DUHRIUS, & patrio notus in orbe senex, | 
Hactenus occultum, meditatum tempore longo, [ En! tibi conspicuum, patria, sistit opus. | Haud 
alio nasci potuit tam digna parente | Progenies: dominum pagina quæque refert.”; Anonymous: 
In opus Andreæ Gabrielis Duhre, summa felicitas Sveciæ, dictum, Svetice, Sueriges högsta wälstånd. (No place, 
undated); See also Grape: Något om Anders Gabriel Duhre och en honom ägnad latinsk dikt. There also 
exists a shorter version of the poem, printed 1738 in Stockholm, titled In Andreæ Gabrielis Duhre 
opusculum svethicum, dictum Summa Sveciæ felicitas, Svethicè, Sweriges högsta wälstånd (Stockholm, 1738). 
122 “Hic lapis est, longo frustra quæsitus ab ævo, / Qui vere nobis aurea secla dabit.”; Anony-
mous: In opus Andreæ Gabrielis Duhre, summa felicitas Sveciæ, dictum, Svetice, Sueriges högsta wälstånd. 

 
 
196
Conclusions. Integrating the good and the bad 
mechanicus 
The history presented in this chapter, following Duhre from his parents’ 
estate at Gnista and back again, is hard to reconcile with a heroic narrative. 
While he presented dreams of prosperity and order, his history is one of 
making and unmaking. Therefore, it is not possible to characterise him as a 
certain kind of man – good or bad, competent or useless – using the availa-
ble historical sources. Even in the decades following his death, Duhre was 
discussed in numerous and diverse ways. In a speech at the Royal Swedish 
Academy of Sciences, commemorating Ekström, Wargentin called Duhre 
“laudable” and his “Laboratorium Mechanicum [sic]” a school “established with 
very good intentions”. At this Laboratorium, Duhre had hired “a German 
born erudite Mechanicus, named Fuchs” but the academy came to a halt, be-
cause of “jealousy and persecution”.123 
 
In a similar speech about Celsius, von Höpken  presented Duhre’s 
school as a shelter where Celsius “could protect himself under the permit, 
that the late Gabriel Duhre [sic] had received from parliament, to teach the 
youths at the university.”124 Similarly in 1768, commemorating Klingenstier-
na, Strömer  told of how Duhre “was a famous mathematicus at that time 
[in 1718], and an ardent promoter of such studies”. But, according to 
Strömer, Duhre “was not much of a speaker, expressed what he thought 
unclearly, and was usually so confused that he could not see what happened 
in the company of others.”125 Similarly, in Torbern Bergman’s speech about 
Brandt, Duhre was described as someone who was very competent in math-
ematics (even “more than at that time was considered useful or advisable”), 
but also “somewhat strange in his social intercourse, because of a lack of 
good upbringing”.126 Most early twentieth-century historians of Duhre 
picked up on Bergman’s and Strömer’s negative descriptions. In a biograph-
ic article on Duhre, Hildebrand  managed to summarise both the positive 
and negative portrayals of him in a single sentence: “despite all his noticea-
ble flaws, the enthusiastic Duhre was a pioneer for many modern ideas, 
especially as regards the technical vocational education and the rationalisa-
                                                   
123 “berömvärde”; “i mycken välmening uprättad”; “en til börden Tysk vitter Mechanicus, vid 
namn FUCHS”; “genom afund och förföljelser”; Wargentin: Åminnelse-tal öfver Daniel Ekström, 11. 
124 “måste han skydda sig under det tilstånd, framledne GABRIEL DUHRE af Riksens 
Högloflige Ständer erhållit, at vid Högskolen få undervisa ungdomen.”; Höpken: Åminnelse-tal 
öfver […] Anders Celsius, 11. 
125 “en berömd Mathematicus, på den tiden, och nitisk upmuntrare til det studium”; römer: 
Åminnelse-tal öfver Samuel Klingenstjerna, 12. “hade inga talegåfvor, kom oredigt fram med det han 
tänkte, och var oftast så tankespridd, at han icke såg hvad som hades för händer i sällskaper.”; 
ibid., 12–13. 
126 “längre, än i allmänhet den tiden räknades både nyttigt och rådligt”; “något sällsam i omgänge, 
af brist på tjänlig upfostran”; Torbern Bergman: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne bergs-rådet och medicinæ 
doctoren … Georg Brandt, hållet för kongl. vetenskaps academien, uti stora riddarehus-salen, den 9 aug. 1769 
(Stockholm, 1769), 7. 

 
 
197
tion of farming.”127 Many twentieth-century histories of Duhre’s Laboratori-
um describe these events as a personal failure that can be explained by 
Duhre’s strange character and lack of social skills, a character they infer 
from the short comments in Strömer’s speech. That is, they see the events 
as an effect of tragic inherent traits in Duhre himself.128 
 
Such a psychological explanation is hard to reconcile with Duhre’s life 
up until 1727 (i.e., his first 46 years). As seen in this chapter, during those 
years Duhre made a career in the state bureaucracy in Stockholm, published 
important mathematical textbooks and, ultimately, charmed the Swedish 
parliament into giving him a royal estate. Up until this point, few sources 
suggest that he had a hard time making his thoughts clear or that he could 
not handle himself socially. In sources later than 1727 though, he comes 
across as a less successful and selfless man. Rather than to suggest that he 
had a sudden change of personality during the autumn of 1727, his shifting 
character provides an opportunity to contemplate how historical actors pre-
sent themselves to contemporary audiences and posterity. 
 
Like Polhammar/Polhem in the previous chapter, Duhre was hardly a 
static person. Instead, he was constantly occupied with making and re-
making himself through mathematical and mechanical techniques. Also, as 
in the case of Polhem, Duhre ended up in a relationship with the publicum 
that was not positive for his career or his reputation. While Polhammar 
nourished a close relationship with Karl XII and the absolutist regime, 
which was not helpful after the death of Karl XII, Duhre projected an im-
age of unconditional love for the publicum, which involved promising results 
that were hard or impossible to deliver. Whereas Polhammar’s relationship 
with the absolutist king became a problem for him during the early constitu-
tional monarchy, Duhre’s relationship with the estates became a problem in 
relation to the social framework of the local agricultural community around 
Uppsala. The complexities of performing as a master of an estate reflected 
badly on Duhre and his mathematical–œconomical project, and this failure 
contributed the low support for his project in the parliament of 1731. At the 
heart of Duhre’s Laboratorium lay a vision of an easy fix for the Swedish 
state’s serious economic problems. Therefore, Duhre needed to promise 
                                                   
127 “Med alla sina påtagliga brister var den entusiastiske D. en föregångsman för många moderna 
idéer, särskilt rörande den tekniska yrkesutbildningen och lantbrukets rationalisering.”; Hilde-
brand: “A G Duhre”. 
128 These characterisations are prevalent through much of the studies on Duhre from the first 
half of the twentieth century. Duhre is described as: “a rather strange person” (in original: “en 
ganska egendomlig personlighet”); Henrik Schück: Ansatser till ett universitet i Stockholm före 1800-
talet (Stockholm, 1942), 39. Furthermore, he has been described as “a great sanguinian, an enthu-
siast who did not take the realities of life into account” (in original: “en stor sangviniker, en 
entusiast som föga räknade med livets realiteter”); Hebbe: “Anders Gabriel Duhres ‘Laboratori-
um mathematico-oeconomicum’. Ett bidrag till Ultunas äldre historia”, 590. Likewise, Duhre’s 
ideas have been described as “immensely naïve” (in original: “gränslöst naiva”) as well as “origi-
nal – and yet uninteresting” (in original: “originella – och likväl ointressanta”); Schauman: Studier i 
frihetstidens nationalekonomiska litteratur, 115–16. 

 
 
198
much, and constantly raise the stakes, in order to appease his audiences. 
These raised stakes meant that the complexity of Duhre’s performances 
increased over time: he came to rely on an increasingly heterogeneous set of 
supporting actors, in the community surrounding his estate, and, likewise, 
the audiences of his performances multiplied. 
 
Duhre’s performances of the good mechanicus carried the seed of his 
future failure. In order to succeed in his performance of the useful mathe-
matical–œconomical subject in 1723, he needed to arrange the scene and 
raise expectations to the extent that he could hardly avoid performing as a 
bad mechanicus some years later. Some contemporary audiences, such as 
the Deputation of Cameral Matters, Œconomy and Commerce of 1731, 
were more aware of this unstable dynamic than most twentieth-century 
historians. They saw that Duhre had promised too much in his earlier 
presentations of his Laboratorium, but that he had done this out of love for 
the publicum. In their eyes, this freed him of guilt. He would never have been 
able to deliver what he had promised the optimistic parliamentarians of the 
1720s: singlehandedly to turn the Swedish state into a well-ordered society. 
For some, Duhre’s actions was good enough, as long as it was perceived 
that he had held a virtuous intent when he had courted the publicum with his 
impossible mathematical and œconomical dreams. 

 
 
199
6. Conclusion. Performing the mechanicus 
This book is about mathematics and mechanics in the early modern Swedish 
state. However, unlike most previous work on the subject, my focus has not 
been the history of ideas, or the practices of machine building and 
knowledge making. Instead, I have studied mechanics as an exercise of vir-
tue, which nurtured a certain kind of man. This man was denoted by the 
Latin word “mechanicus”, roughly translatable as “a man of mechanics”. 
The mechanicus was a persona, existing in between the individual and the 
collective. This persona consisted of a number of expectations as to who a 
mechanical practitioner should be. There was an expected life narrative, 
stipulating how a mechanically apt boy should be raised into a man. This 
man, in turn, was expected to possess certain skills, and he was supposed to 
perform them in a specific way. Last, but not least, in his performance of 
mechanics, he was to relate to his superiors and subordinates in a way that 
identified him as a pious subject. 
 
The mechanicus, the object of study of this thesis, was a performative 
actors’ category. In other words, the expectations that constituted it existed 
in the encounters between mechanical practitioners and their audiences. 
Consequently, I have approached the mechanicus through the numerous 
relationships by which mechanical practitioners made themselves relevant to 
their time. Such relationships are found in the coming-of-age narratives of 
commemorative speeches and textbook prefaces, in the community of men 
working in the Bureau of Mines in Stockholm, in the correspondence be-
tween Polhammar and the absolute monarch Karl XII, and in Duhre’s ef-
forts to reform the Swedish constitutional monarchy of the 1720s by math-
ematical, œconomical and mechanical means. These relationships were con-
duits of intertwined dialectic processes, which not only moulded a man into 
the form that was expected of a mechanicus, but also changed actors’ and 
audiences’ expectations of how a mechanicus should act. In other words, 
mechanical practitioners were part of an early modern social epistemology, 
which was both flexible and dynamic. 
 
Here I develop and draw together the main observations of this thesis. 
My conclusions are presented in three thematic sections, each discussing 
one important aspect of my study. First, I discuss the implications of seeing 
the mechanicus as a persona, formed in relation to the political order of the 
early modern Swedish state. Second, I consider how studying mechanics as 
relational performances facilitates new means of understanding the diverse 

 
 
200
and shifting meanings early modern actors ascribed to it. Finally, I analyse 
the changes in the role of mathematical and mechanical performances be-
tween 1700 and 1750, and suggest that we should approach these changes 
by focusing on historical actors’ own understanding of them. 
The mechanicus of the Swedish state 
The mechanicus of the early modern Swedish state lay claim to a socio-
epistemic space, defined in relation to a vast number of early modern 
groups and actors. This heterogeneous group of relational others consisted 
of, for example, academic scholars, craftsmen, pure mathematicians, com-
mon miners, monarchs, peasants, the sovereign and even God. The expecta-
tions that constituted the mechanicus can be seen as a dialectic of difference 
and similarity: he was defined by relationships of superiority and subordina-
tion to all of these other actors, as well as by distinctions of gender, age and 
social status. 
 
But then who was the mechanicus? First, he was a man of mature age. 
To identify the mechanicus as a man is not merely to recognise a simple 
matter of fact, but also to suggest that the practices, social structures and 
imaginations of mechanics carried certain expectations on how to perform 
gender. The mechanicus was imagined as having once been a boy, who had 
entered useful manhood through the exercise of mathematics and crafts. 
These exercises had made him embrace certain virtues, such as concord and 
diligence, as well as the epistemic virtues theoria and praxis (i.e., codes of per-
forming both as a pious subject and a trusted knowledge maker). 
 
Whereas pure mathematics, and especially geometry, was recognised as 
an exercise of discernment and concord, the exercise of crafts nurtured a 
diligent and hardworking manly subject. When integrated, the exercise of 
mathematics and crafts were seen as nurturing the epistemic virtues of theo-
ria and praxis in a boy. Because the mechanicus was identified as possessing 
this broad range of manly virtues, he was also recognised as a useful man 
who could make important contributions to the body politic. This virtuous 
and useful man performed selflessly in relation to his contemporaries, and 
his actions were directed by the needs of the publicum. My observations thus 
reinforce Runefelt’s argument that, in early modern Sweden, the concepts of 
virtue and usefulness were interchangeable. However, having studied virtue 
and usefulness as relational concepts enacted in performances, I have 
shown something more than how these terms were related in early modern 
publications. Early modern men also performed virtue and usefulness in 
relation to their contemporaries, and a man was required to display proper 
submission and superiority, in a number of relationships, in order to be 
virtuous and useful. Usefulness and virtue were closely related because they 
were both means of performing as a good subject, aligned with the political 

 
 
201
order. Mechanics was useful because it integrated pure mathematics with 
crafts. By balancing the connotations of these two sets of techniques, and 
by presenting their combination as novel, mechanical practitioners present-
ed themselves as men who were able to rearrange, and to perfect, the rela-
tionships of the early modern state according to the demands of the sover-
eign. Thus, the usefulness of mechanics cannot be separated from the way 
in which it shaped a virtuous man. This man, the mechanicus, could amend 
the imbalances of the early modern Swedish theocracy in order to preserve 
it, while his machines, consisting of correctly placed cogwheels, correspond-
ed to a harmonious state and an orderly nature. 
 
When a mechanical practitioner succeeded in performing as a mechani-
cus, he was recognised as a useful and virtuous man. The virtues of mathe-
matics and crafts structured the intergenerational relationship imagined in 
textbooks, and they formed the basis for an emerging symbolic role of ge-
ometry and mechanics in the Bureau of Mines of the first half of the eight-
eenth century. They were even constitutive of men, as in the case of 
Polhammar, deemed worthy as clients of absolute monarchs, who in turn 
shaped themselves into enlightened sovereigns through patronage of me-
chanical work. In the constitutional monarchy, as the case of Duhre shows, 
such a man became a symbol, uniting parliament around a vision of an or-
derly future. However, while eighteenth-century audiences associated certain 
characteristics with a good mechanicus – virtuous conduct, disinterestedness 
and submission to the ultimate power – they also knew how to identify a 
bad mechanicus. Failure to meet the expectations of how to perform as a 
mechanicus brought disgrace not only to the practitioner himself, but also 
to the very techniques that he performed. This antithesis of the good 
mechanicus was identified by his lack of self-knowledge, his false promises, 
his appetite for private gain and his useless inventions. A bad mechanicus 
was either an accomplished but selfish man, or someone who claimed to 
possess skills that he did not have. In either case, such a man used the posi-
tive connotations of mechanics for his own personal gain to the detriment 
of the common good. The grand promises of mechanical practitioners al-
ways risked being interpreted as the claims of imposters who promised too 
much, or who sought to benefit themselves. Thus, the performances of the 
virtuous mechanicus also carried the seed of the bad mechanicus. 
 
Early modern audiences had seemingly contradictory expectations of a 
mechanicus. He was a free actor, who could be compared to the sovereign, 
or even God, while at the same time he was recognised as a lowly civil serv-
ant who could be trusted because he was integrated into the strict hierar-
chies of the early modern state. In the patriarchal Lutheran state of Sweden, 
where relationships of superiority and subordination were never a zero-sum 
game, acts of submission could be enabling. In this hierarchical state, where 
private economic resources were scarce, the act of submitting – either to 
one’s elders, to the state apparatus, directly to the sovereign, or to the  

 
 
202
nebulous publicum of the constitutional monarchy – was a way to become 
trusted to act. Because submission was a prerequisite for action, Swedish 
mechanical practitioners never possessed “free action” of the kind that 
Shapin describes as central to English seventeenth-century gentlemen. In 
the English “great civility”, all “free action had to be freely disciplined”.1 In 
the Swedish state, however, men were part of a web of asymmetric relation-
ships, ultimately leading up to the sovereign or the publicum. To be trusted 
was to assume an easily identifiable, and stable, position in this web, and to 
perform mechanics was one way to claim such a position. Also, perfor-
mances of mechanics were interpreted differently depending on the position 
of the subject who carried them out. What this person had done previously 
– his social status and his character – mattered to how his mechanical per-
formances were received by audiences in the Swedish state. 
 
Paradoxically, mechanics was imagined both as an activity that trans-
gressed socio-epistemic categories and as an exercise that fostered a submis-
sive, and obedient, subject. For many mechanical practitioners, this para-
doxical position was productive. On the one hand, these men highlighted 
the creative ways in which they transcended imagined socio-epistemic di-
chotomies. That is, they could present themselves as existing in between, 
and therefore outside, opposing concepts and groups such as those of theoria 
and praxis, or mathematicians and scholars. On the other hand, these socio-
epistemic transgressions were not seen as threats, as long as the mechanicus 
was considered to act in the interest of the publicum. Because of this produc-
tive paradox, the creative transgressions of the mechanicus were feasible 
means of self-presentation. Because sovereigns, and other patrons, expected 
a mechanicus to transgress these boundaries, historical actors did not con-
sider these transgressions as challenges to the political or religious order. 
Instead, they were expected transgressions, aligned to the theocratic order of the 
early modern state. 
 
Because these transgressions were expected, it is important to be careful 
when interpreting autobiographical writings by early modern mechanical 
practitioners. Such sources are more than neutral self-descriptions: they 
were formulated in relation to certain audiences with specific expectations. 
In many cases, documents, which at first glance might appear to be written 
by historical actors existing in between contemporary cultures, were actually 
produced by actors who catered to the dreams of a balanced state of their 
audiences in government and in the cameral bureaus. Recently, historians of 
science and technology have begun to study the role of “go-betweens” and 
“hybrids” in knowledge making.2 My cases underscore how one should be 
cautious when using such modern categories to describe historical phenom-
ena. At least, it is important to specify exactly what we mean when discuss-
                                                   
1 Shapin: A social history of truth, 39. 
2 For examples of such studies, see page 20 note 23. 

 
 
203
ing early modern engineers and mechanical practitioners in these terms. Can 
we really understand this category of men as truly transgressive if contem-
porary audiences repeatedly expected, or even demanded, that these trans-
gressions be made? Do not such categorisations risk becoming a new form 
of celebratory history, which misses the actual roles that these men had in 
early modern cultures?  
Relational performances 
By studying the performances of mechanical practitioners, I set out to un-
derstand the mechanicus as more than an ethereal ideal. Performances of 
mechanics were made in various relationships of numerous types and be-
tween heterogeneous actors. However, these relationships shared some 
characteristics. First, they were asymmetric. In other words, they were not 
relationships of peers, but between actors defined by different social distinc-
tions such as gender, social status and age. Second, they were mutually shap-
ing. Not only did the relationships change those who entered into them, they 
also formed what was expected of a mechanicus. Third, the relational per-
formances of mechanics were balancing acts. That is, they needed to be re-
peated continuously and their outcome was never certain. A man did not 
become a mechanicus once and for all: actors constantly needed to relate 
and adapt to the changing expectations of their audiences. 
 
The asymmetry of early modern relationships has been pointed out by 
numerous studies of early modern patron–client relationships. These studies 
have generally focused on clients’ tactics to attain authority and resources 
for their work, as well as on patronage as a means to gain symbolic capital.3 
Similarly, histories of science often portray historical actors as rational 
agents who used certain premeditated strategies in order to reach clearly 
defined goals: such as making knowledge, building instruments or asserting 
authority. I have wanted to nuance such accounts by showing how these 
asymmetric relationships profoundly shaped the goals and priorities of the 
men who were part of them. Ultimately, these relationships had a performa-
tive dynamics of their own, beyond the control of either of the involved 
parties. What started out as a mutually beneficial relationship could in time 
develop into an affiliation that proved problematic for both parties. 
 
Such relationships were more than alliances of necessity. For example, 
while the initial relationship between Polhammar and Karl XII can certainly 
be described as a mutually beneficial one between a client and a patron, 
Polhammar’s emotional connection to the monarch after 1718, which was 
certainly not beneficial either to him or the dead king, is more difficult to 
understand from such a perspective. Polhammar’s loyalty to the late mon-
                                                   
3 For examples of such studies of patronage, see page 125-6 note 9. 

 
 
204
arch was the result of a mutually shaping relationship based on sameness 
and difference. In such a relationship, the partners partly surrendered con-
trol of who they were. The newly ennobled Polhem of 1720 was thus 
shaped by, and entangled in, a relationship that was no longer favourable to 
him. Leaving the relationship, however, meant abandoning a part of whom 
he had become, and the only way to shed parts of oneself was to engage in 
new relational performances, made for other audiences. Thus, Polhem 
would not leave Karl XII fully behind until he found a new audience in the 
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences of the mid-1700s. 
 
The actors who entered into these mutually shaping relationships strug-
gled with how to relate to one another without losing themselves. On the 
one hand, men who wanted to shape themselves in each other’s image 
needed to become emotionally close. On the other hand, emotional connec-
tions always involved submission. No matter if you were the superior or 
subordinate party, to engage in an asymmetric relationship was both ena-
bling and disabling: you always gave up some means of agency in order to 
gain others. For example, the imagined intergenerational relationships be-
tween mechanically apt boys and experienced mechanical practitioners in-
volved close and loving emotions. These cordial emotions, however, needed 
to be held in check, so that the parties to the asymmetric relationship did 
not become peers. The uncertain emotions of these relationships made 
them unstable. They were structured around a love that rose from mutual 
recognition, but it came to a halt as soon as the involved parties became too 
similar. Because these relationships always required both intimacy and de-
tachment, they were constant balancing acts. 
 
Often, the relational performances of mechanics cannot simply be un-
derstood as a relationship between an actor and an audience. For example, 
the Bureau of Mines was a community of men consisting of a web of rela-
tional performances. Its officials simultaneously performed for each other, 
and perceived the performances of their colleagues. Also, many relational 
performances of mechanics were re-enacted by a larger circle of actors for 
wider audiences. The relationship of Karl XII and Polhammar included 
correspondence, consecutive letters that each moulded the two men in 
slightly new forms. Thus, like the Bureau of Mines, this chain of corre-
spondence cannot simply be described as a series of self-presentations made 
by one actor in relation to one audience. In this correspondence, the actual 
individuals behind the names “Karl XII”  and “Polhammar”  were less im-
portant than the symbols that they constituted. For example, the king’s own 
voice was seldom heard in these letters. Instead, his reactions, opinions and 
wishes were described, interpreted and forwarded by a team of men making 
themselves spokespersons for the monarch. In the end, it is not even certain 
that he was personally involved in his relationship with Polhammar.  
 
Identificatory acts were not only made in relation to immediate perfor-
mances, but also in relation to the perceived character of the actors who 

 
 
205
performed them. Whether or not contemporary audiences identified a per-
formance of mechanics as successful depended partly on the relational his-
tory between the mechanical practitioner and the given audience. On the 
one hand, the logic of these relationships was straightforward: a mechanical 
practitioner who had been deemed successful in previous projects was likely 
to be trusted again. On the other hand, success also generated negative 
feedback: previous success tended to raise audiences’ expectations, and me-
chanical practitioners thus constantly needed to raise the stakes of their 
performances. Such negative feedback can be seen in the rise and fall of 
Duhre and his Laboratorium. Duhre’s initial success, in the state bureaucracy 
and as a mathematical author, reflected well on his character and made it 
possible for him to acquire the lease of Ultuna. At the same time, the very 
same success multiplied his audiences and raised their expectations of what 
a mechanicus, such as him, could accomplish. In the end, he was unable to 
meet the increasingly high demands of his diverse audiences and, conse-
quently, he and his mathematical visions fell from grace. Similarly, failure to 
perform did not necessarily have immediate negative effects for an actor. 
Often audiences, invested in specific relational performances, had an incen-
tive to cover up failed performances, at least to a degree. Admitting that an 
actor had failed in his performance could reflect badly on the audience, who 
had shaped itself in relation to a mechanical practitioner. Perhaps the clear-
est example of such a cover-up is the discussion about Duhre’s project in 
the noble estate of the parliament of 1731. 
 
Early modern dreams of mechanical perfection seldom, if ever, came to 
fruition. The Swedish state, although imagined otherwise, was a disorderly 
and ever-changing structure. Likewise, the transgressions expected of a 
mechanicus were unstable as well. I have approached the line between the 
good and the bad mechanicus, or between success and failure, not as de-
fined by essential qualities of men, but as drawn by actors’ performances. In 
other words, audiences identified character traits in an actor, such as virtue 
and usefulness, according to how he performed; a man who might have 
performed virtuously at one time could soon lose this trait in the eyes of his 
audience. Therefore, if we want to fully understand the role of the mechani-
cus of the early modern Swedish state, we have to study how mechanical 
techniques were performed in relationships between actors and audiences. 
By studying such relationships, I have highlighted the diverse processes by 
which a mechanicus was made and unmade through anxious mechanical 
performances. 
Taking the “modern” out of the early modern 
I have wanted to disentangle eighteenth-century mechanical practitioners 
from long narratives of the rise of industrialism and the making of moderni-

 
 
206
ty. The actors studied in this thesis differed from the entrepreneurial indi-
viduals identified by economic historians and historians of technology. By 
relating the performances of these actors to the expectations of their con-
temporaries, rather than to long-term effects, I have shown how the histori-
cal actors themselves perceived the merits and risks of being a mechanicus, 
and how they performed in relation to this persona. 
 
Although this has been a synchronic study, not primarily interested in 
how the role of the mechanicus changed over the studied time period, it has 
nonetheless identified some interesting changes between 1700 and 1750. As 
visible in the applications to auscultate in the Bureau of Mines, as well as in 
mathematical publication by auscultators and in documents that they tran-
scribed (all discussed in Chapter 3), the role of mathematics in the Swedish 
mining administration – and especially of geometry and mechanics – 
changed during the first half of the eighteenth century. In many ways, this 
development is the opposite of what would be expected from a rising tech-
nocratic management of a mechanised and industrialised mining production. 
While, in the early eighteenth century, mathematics (in the broad early mod-
ern sense) was almost exclusively linked to mining mechanics, by the 1720s, 
it had gained a new symbolic role of relevance to a wider group of mining 
officials. Whereas historians such as Mokyr and Jacob have argued that the 
application of mathematical prescriptive knowledge to the know-how of 
craftsmen was significant to the industrial revolution, it seems as if, in the 
Bureau of Mines, such “application” predated a more general use of math-
ematics. Similarly, while historians have argued that the mathematisation of 
crafts was part of a process of disciplining craftsmen, in the Bureau it seems 
as if mathematical approaches spread from mechanical practitioners, who 
exercised crafts, to a broader group of cameralists. If we were to use the 
Bureau as an example of broader developments, we would thus end up with 
a model of how early modern mathematics, which at the beginning of the 
1700s was recognised as an applied form of knowledge used for building 
machines, by the mid-eighteenth century also gained a symbolical role in 
defining a distinct category of cameral men. 
 
This development of a symbolical role of mathematics can also seen 
when comparing the careers of Duhre and Polhammar. Whereas Polham-
mar’s career during the Swedish absolutism was primarily based on his being 
identified as a man who could save the realm through his machine building, 
Duhre was mainly seen as a similar saviour because of his ability to teach 
mathematics and to foster boys into virtuous and useful men. Although 
there was no radical break here – Polhammar had an interest in mathemati-
cal and mechanical education, and Duhre dabbled in machine building – 
their self-presentations still leaned in different directions. This difference is 
further accentuated if we see both these men as products of the community 
of the Bureau of Mines. It is thus possible to see them as embodying the 
different roles of mathematics in the Bureau of the early and mid-eighteenth 

 
 
207
century. Along with the changed roles of mathematics in the early modern 
Swedish state, the audiences for mathematical and mechanical performances 
also changed. When the government was radically transformed from an 
absolute monarchy to a constitutional one, the personal relational perfor-
mances between the monarch and mechanical practitioners were replaced 
by performances for a much broader audience. This change in audiences 
went hand in hand with the new role of mathematics at this time. For 
Duhre, to link mathematics to a much broader set of activities, and not only 
to mining mechanics, was a way to show his relevance to his heterogeneous 
audience. 
 
How are we to understand the changing role of mathematics and the 
emergence of broader audiences during the first half of the eighteenth cen-
tury? A key argument of this thesis has been that early modern actors and 
audiences considered mechanics meaningful because they shared anticipations 
of how a mechanical practitioner should act. This argument might appear 
self-evident. However, as discussed in Chapter 1, a number of historians, 
following a liberal narrative of historical progress, have described  
eighteenth-century mechanical practitioners to be entrepreneurial individu-
als, or agents of change, who were at odds with the expectations of their 
time. Many Swedish historians, as well as historians of science and technol-
ogy, have understood the work of mechanical practitioners through abstrac-
tions such as “industrialisation” or “rationalisation”. Although such broad 
generalisations certainly have undeniable appeal, and often a prominent 
place in concluding chapters such as this one, they are also problematic. 
When investigating early modern mechanics through the lens of such ab-
stractions, we become blind to the actors’ own understanding of what they 
were doing. First, these abstractions obscure the aspects of early modern 
mechanics that do not easily fit into their long narratives. When studying 
early modern mechanics in order to understand the spread of industrialism, 
it is convenient to ignore how historical actors discussed it as a transforma-
tive exercise of virtue, or how they integrated such work into a theoretical 
order. By ignoring instead the long narrative of industrialism, I have been 
able to turn my focus to these often-neglected aspects of early modern me-
chanics. Second, long narratives tend to explain the failure of historical ac-
tors teleologically, by relating it to what would come. Such narratives might, 
for example, explain the failure of mechanical practitioners to deliver on 
their dreams by showing why certain eighteenth-century societies were not 
mature enough for modern technology, or that “science and technology” 
had not developed to the point where they could truly benefit each other. 
But such an answer seems to beg yet another question: if mechanics was not 
mature enough to deliver, then why did eighteenth-century states repeatedly 
reward grand mechanical visions that were hard to realise? 
 
By having focused on the performances of mechanical practitioners in 
relation to the expectations of contemporaries, I have presented an alterna-

 
 
208
tive narrative, which nuances our understanding of early modern mechanics. 
In the aftermath of the cases presented in this thesis, it is certainly still pos-
sible to see the actions of mechanical practitioners, such as Duhre and 
Polhammar, as part of the processes of modernity. However, it is evident 
that these actors themselves did not relate their work to the abstractions of 
modernisation theorists. In order to integrate their own understanding of 
mechanics into a narrative of industrial progress, we would therefore have 
to assign them an ironic, or tragic, role. We would have to view them as 
guardians of an early modern order who were also, nonetheless, instigators 
of modernity. In other words, if men such as Duhre and Polhammar 
brought about a modern industrial world, they did so unintentionally while 
working hard to perfect the status quo of an early modern theocracy. Alter-
natively, we might write a more straightforward history, which makes these 
men actors in a history that is more chaotic and non-linear than long narra-
tives can account for. 
 
If I were forced to make a choice between these two general historical 
frameworks, I would put my faith in the second one. Accordingly, I do not 
think that the general developments, which I have identified, should neces-
sarily be linked to processes of modernity, ranging over centuries. Such 
general long-term narratives of modernity provide little understanding of 
the historical specificity of the changing roles of mathematics in the Swedish 
state. In order to better understand the ways in which mathematics fostered 
useful subjects, it would be necessary to study a broader set of institutions 
in which mathematics and mechanics were part of the education of officials: 
for example, the fortification corps, the artillery, the navy and the Bureau of 
Commerce. However, it would not be a stretch to argue that the new role of 
mathematics in the Swedish state administration of the 1720s, as an exercise 
in discernment and consent, might be linked to the changing status of the 
Swedish realm: from a Baltic empire to a post-imperial entity struggling to 
find a new and stable identity. 
 
This thesis has provided a synchronic understanding of eighteenth-
century mechanical practice. I have shown how early moderns understood 
mechanics not only as a means of making machines, but also as a way to 
craft pious subjects aligned to a theocratic political order. By ignoring long-
term historical change, I have been able to focus on the men, relationships 
and performances that were forged through mechanical work. Mechanical 
exercises, and the relationships they established, were believed to foster a 
pious man: the mechanicus. This mechanical man became a means of imag-
ining a structure where disordered men, a chaotic nature or an unbalanced 
society were made orderly. If the mechanicus were a man ahead of his time, 
he belonged to a well-ordered future that would never come to pass. 

 
 
209
Glossary 
Auskultant 
Auscultator 
Bergskollegium 
Bureau of Mines 
Bergsman 
Approximately “A man experienced in mining 
and smelting” (see page 94, note 44) 
Bergsråd 
Mine Councillor 
Bergssciencer 
Mining sciences 
Bergsväsendet 
Mining and smelting 
Bergswettenskaper 
Mining sciences, or knowledge of mining (de-
pending on context) 
Bruk 
Ironworks 
Brukspatron 
Iron master (lit. a patron of a bruk) 
Cammar- och œconomiedeputationen 
Deputation of Cameral Matters and Œconomy 
Domprost  
Cathedral dean 
Fältkansli 
Field office 
Generalbergsamt 
General mining board 
Hovrätt 
Court of Appeal 
Husbonde 
Master of the household 
Hushåll 
House 
Häradsrätt 
Hundred court 
Ingenium / snille 
Aptitude 
Kammarkollegium 
Bureau of Accounts 
Kammer 
Fiscal chamber 
Kanslikollegium 
Chancery 
Kansliråd 
Chancery Councillor 
Kollegium 
Bureau 
Konsistorium 
Academic senate 
Kungliga vetenskapsakademien 
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences 
Kungsladugård 
Royal estate 
Landshövding 
County governor 
Länsman 
County sheriff 
Memorial 
Proposal 
Pliktpall 
Kneeler 
Statskontoret 
State Office 
Wet(t)enskap 
Science/knowledge (depending on context, 
see page 37) 
 

 
 
210
List of illustrations 
Cover art. Detail from the frontispiece of Georg Andreas Böckler’s Theatrum 
Machinarum Novum (1661). (Photo: Uppsala University Library.) 
 
Figure 1 (page 60). The frontispiece of Anders Celsius’ Arithmetica. The 
engraving was signed as invented and made [inven. et fecit] by J[an] 
Klopper, the teacher of drawing at Uppsala, and sculpted [Sc.] by Carl 
Meurman, auscultator in the Bureau of Mines. (Photo: Uppsala University 
Library.) 
 
Figure 2 (page 90). Proportions of various topics mentioned in the applications 
to the Bureau of Mines between 1720 and 1750. 
 
Figure 3 (page 90). Table of topics in auscultation applications 1700–50, 
grouped by decade; relative (and absolute) values. 
 
Figure 4 (page 99). The frontispiece of Fredrik Palmqvist’s Introduction to algebra 
(1748). The text reads “In the service of the fatherland.” Framed by a 
laurel are five mathematical works in Swedish, many of them discussed in 
Chapter 2. Besides Palmqvist’s Introduction to algebra itself, the books were 
Celsius’ Arithmentica (1727), Elvius’s  treatise on waterwheels Mathematiskt 
tractat om effecter af vatn-drifter (1742), Strömer’s translation of Euclid’s 
Elementa (1744), and Palmqvist’s own treatise on The solidity and strength of 
bodies (1744). (Photo: Uppsala University Library.) 
 
Figure 5, 6 & 7 (page 117). llustrations of mechanical powers, from the margins 
of Brandt’s handwritten manuscript (UUB A 28). From top to bottom: 
the pulley, the inclined plane (in the form of a wedge) and the screw 
(Photo: Uppsala University Library.) 
 
Figure 8 (page 131). The cameralist order of society represented in the form of a 
portable machine model, offered to King Frederik IV of Denmark and 
Norway around 1700. (Photo: Tor Aas Haug/Norsk Bergverksmuseum.) 
 
Figure 9 (page 133). Engraving enclosed in a letter from Birger Elfwing to Karl 
XII. (Reproduced from Ernst E. Areen: “Birger Elfving”, 19.)	  
 

 
 
211
Bibliography 
Manuscript sources 
 
Library of the Diocese of Linköping (Linköpings stiftsbibliotek) 
Codex Br. 31. Letter from Collegium Curiosorum to Casten Feif: “Copy of letter of 
recommendation for Polhammar”, 1711-10-05. 
 
RA: National Archives, Stockholm (Riksarkivet) 
 
Bergskollegium, huvudarkivet 
A1. Protocols of the Bureau of Mines 
 
38–106 (1700–50). Discussions on auscultation and the Stipendium Mechanicum etc. 
D6. Notes and copies by Daniel Tilas 
 
14. “Om nuvarande Bergskollegium, dess historia, organisation, verksamhet m.m.”, 
225–305. 
E1. Incoming royal letters 
 
7 (1698–1700) “Decision on instating a stipendio mechanico”, 1699-07-22 
[page 594]. 
E4. Incoming letters, supplements and inquiries 
 
105–223 (1700–50). Applications to auscultate, applications for the Stipendium 
Mechanicum, requests for study tours, letters from Anders Gabriel Duhre and Carl 
Duhre. 
 
Frihetstidens utskottshandlingar 
Duhre, Anders Gabriel: “Handlingar ang. Ultuna. Ingivna av Anders Gabriel Duhre”, 
1738–9, R 2702. 
———: “Memorial angående Ultuna med bilagor”, 1731, R 2556. 
 
Kollegiers m fl, landshövdingars, hovrätters och konsistoriers skrivelser till Kungl Maj:t.  
8. Letters from the Bureau of Mines to the king 
 
7. “On stipends to the auscultators”, 1691-06-16. 
 
19. (1719–22) “Concerning rank”, 1719-06-01. 
 
——— “On Carl Duhre”, 1720-01-19. 
 
——— “On Carl Duhre, continued”, 1721-04-17. 
 
22 (1730–4). “Concerning rank”, 1730-01-26. 
 

 
 
212
 
ULA: Regional Archives of Uppsala (Landsarkivet i Uppsala) 
 
Ulleråkers häradsrätt 
A1:2. “Dombok från Ulleråker ting (1711–29). 
 
KB: Royal Library, Stockholm (Kungliga biblioteket) 
Karl XII: “Copy of letter to the council concerning new privileges for Stiernsund”, 
I p:23 1, 1712-03-13 [page 59]. 
Bureau of Mines: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1716-04-23, I p:23 1 [page 101]. 
Casten Feif: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1714-12-20, I p:23 1 [page 86]. 
Nils Stromberg: “Letter to Christopher Polhem concerning the King’s recommendation 
of Polhammar”, 1712-06-03, I p:23 1 [page 64]. 
———: “Letter to Christopher Polhem”, 1714-10-06, I p:23 1 [page 82]. 
 
Uppsala University Library (UUB) & Uppsala University Archives 
(UUA) 
 
Collegiernas bref & resolutioner för Uppsala Universitet 1623–1733, UUA 
Letter from Kammarkollegium to the academic senate of Uppsala University,  
1725-09-04. 
 
Handwritten manuscripts 
Brandt, Georg: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”, A 28 [page 245–
302]. 
 ———: “Om geometrien”, A 28 [page 41–81]. 
———: “Om perspektivkonsten”, A 28 [page 538–67]. 
———: “[On Philosophia naturali]”, A 28 [page 334–465]. 
Duhre, Anders Gabriel: “Förtahl. Hwilket And. Gab. Duhre är sinnad att sättia 
framman för sitt mathematiska wärk, som han nu hafwer under händer uti upsååt 
at låta och uthgå på wårt Swenska Moders mål”, A 29 [≈1714]. 
Polhem, Christopher: “Betyg för Andreas Duhre”, 1712–07–30, X 241:Duhre. 
Lars Schultze: “Kort betänkande huru en yngling som tänker söka sin fortkomst vid 
bergsväsendet bör sin tid anlägga”, D 1433, UUB. 
———: “Kort handledning till Driftkonsten eller Mechaniken”, D 1433, UUB. 
———: “Om geometrien”, C 1433, UUB. 
Online resources 
SAOB: Svenska Akademins ordbok, http://g3.spraakdata.gu.se/saob/ 
National Museum of Science and Technology, Stockholm: “Christopher Polhem. 
Tillbaka till framtiden” <http://www.tekniskamuseet.se/1/2604.html> [accessed 
27 March 2015]. 

 
 
213
Printed sources and literature 
Acton, Alfred (ed): The letters and memorials of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1, 1709–48 (Bryn 
Athyn PA., 1948). 
Agner, Eric: Arithmetica fractionum. Thet är: räkne-konst vthi brutne-tahl (Stockholm, 1710). 
———: Geodæsia Suecana eller Örtuga delo-bok (Stockholm, 1730). 
Ahlström, Walter: Arvid Horn och Karl XII 1710–1713 (Lund, 1959). 
Alder, Ken: Engineering the revolution. Arms and Enlightenment in France 1763–1815 
(Princeton NJ, 1997). 
Algazi, Gadi: “Scholars in households. Refiguring the learned habitus, 1480–1550”, 
Science in context 16:1–2 (2003), 9–42. 
Almquist, Johan Axel: Bergskollegium och Bergslagsstaterna 1637–1857. Administrativa och 
biografiska anteckningar (Stockholm, 1909). 
Almquist, Karl Gustaf: Andreas Rydelius’ etiska åskådning (Lund, 1955). 
Andersson, Gustaf & Carl Gustaf von Brinkman (eds): Handlingar ur v. Brinkmanska 
archivet på Trolle-Ljungby vol. 1 (Örebro, 1859). 
Alströmer, Jonas: Sveriges wälstånd om det will (Stockholm, 1745). 
Althin, Torsten: Christopher Polhem och Stjernsunds manufacturverk (Säter, 1950). 
Amelin, Olov: Medaljens baksida. Instrumentmakaren Daniel Ekström och hans efterföljare i 
1700-talets Sverige (Uppsala, 1999). 
Andersson, Gustaf, and Carl Gustaf von Brinkman (eds): Handlingar ur v. Brinkmanska 
archivet på Trolle-Ljungby (Örebro, 1859). 
Annerstedt, Claes: Upsala universitets historia 3 vols. (Uppsala, 1908). 
Anonymous: In Andreæ Gabrielis Duhre opusculum svethicum, dictum Summa Sveciæ felicitas, 
Svethicè, Sweriges högsta wälstånd (Stockholm, 1738). 
———: In opus Andreæ Gabrielis Duhre, summa felicitas Sveciæ, dictum, Svetice, Sueriges högsta 
wälstånd (No place, undated). 
———: Samtal emellan en herre och en fru, om geometriens nytta för unga studerande (Stockholm, 
1743). 
———: Breve ragguaglio della vita e della morte del conte Giovanni Patkul, nobile di Livonia, 
tradotto dal idioma inglese per illustrazione della vita di Pietro il Grande … e di Carlo 
duodecimo (Lugano, 1761). 
Apostolidès, Jean-Marie: Le roi-machine. Spectacle et politique au temps de Louis XIV (Paris, 
1981). 
Areen, Ernst E.: “Birger Elfving. Hedemora gevärsfaktori och Furudals styckebruk”, 
Svenska vapenhistoriska sällskapets årsskrift 3 (1931), 3–76. 
Ashworth, William J.: “The ghost of Rostow. Science, culture and the British industrial 
revolution”, History of science 46:3 (2008), 249–74. 
———: “The British industrial revolution and the ideological revolution. Science, 
neoliberalism and history”, History of science 52:2 (2014), 178–99. 
Aurelius, Aegidius Matthiæ: Arithmetica eller een kort och eenfaldigh räknebook, uthi heele och 
brutne taal. Medh lustige och sköne exempel, them eenfaldighom som til thenne konst lust och 
behagh hafwe (Uppsala, 1614). 
 
 

 
 
214
Barker, Peter, and Bernard R. Goldstein: “Theological foundations of Kepler’s 
astronomy”, Osiris 16 (2001), 88–113. 
Barnes, Barry: “On the conventional character of knowledge and cognition”, Philosophy 
of the social sciences 11:3 (1981), 303–33. 
Beik, William: “The absolutism of Louis XIV as social collaboration”, Past & Present 
188:1 (2005), 195–224. 
Bennett, Jim: “The mechanical arts”, in Katharine Park and Lorraine Daston (eds): The 
Cambridge history of science vol. 3: early modern science (Cambridge, 2008), 673–95. 
———: “The mechanics’ philosophy and the mechanical philosophy”, History of science 
24 (1986), 1–28. 
Berch, Anders: Åminnelse-tal, öfver commerce-rådet Henric Kalmeter, efter kongl. vetensk. 
academiens befallning, hållit i stora riddarhus-salen den 13. martii, 1752 (Stockholm, 1752). 
Bergman, Torbern: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne bergs-rådet och medicinæ doctoren … Georg 
Brandt, hållet för kongl. vetenskaps academien, uti stora riddarehus-salen, den 9 aug. 1769 
(Stockholm, 1769). 
Biagioli, Mario: Galileo, courtier. The practice of science in the culture of absolutism (Chicago, 
1993). 
———: “The social status of Italian mathematicians, 1450–1600”, History of Science 27:1 
(1989), 41–95. 
Bijker, Wiebe, and Trevor Pinch: “The social construction of facts and artifacts. Or 
how the sociology of science and the sociology of technology might benefit each 
other”, in Wiebe Bijker, Thomas Hughes, and Trevor Pinch (eds): The social 
construction of technological systems. New directions in the sociology and history of technology 
(Cambridge MA, 1987), 17–50. 
Bloor, David: “Wittgenstein and Mannheim on the sociology of mathematics”, Studies in 
history and philosophy of science. Part A 4:2 (1973), 173–91. 
Boethius, B: “Aegidius Matthie Upsaliensis Aurelius”, SBL 2 (Stockholm, 1920), 451–4. 
Bohnstedt, M: “Från Bendertiden. Casten Feifs brev till Arvid Horn 1710–12”, 
Personhistorisk tidskrift (1921). 
Bourdieu, Pierre, Olivier Christin, and Pierre-Etienne Will: “Sur la science de l’État”, 
Actes de la recherche en sciences sociales 133:1 (2000), 3–11. 
Brandt, Georg: En grundelig anledning til mathesin universalem och algebram, efter herr And. 
Gabr. Duhres håldne prælectioner sammanskrifwen (Stockholm, 1718). 
Brianta, Donata: “Education and training in the mining industry, 1750–1860. European 
models and the Italian case”, Annals of science 57:3 (2000), 267–300. 
Bring, Samuel E.: “Bidrag till Christopher Polhems lefnadsteckning”, Christopher Polhem. 
Minnesskrift ufgifven av Svenska teknologföreningen (Stockholm, 1911). 
———: Christopher Polhem. The father of Swedish technology (Hartford CT, 1963). 
———: “Några bref från Casten Feif till Christopher Polhem”, Karolinska förbundets 
årsbok (1911), 233–56. 
Brobergs, Gunnar: “Then gifte Philosophen eller en man som blyges att wara gift”, 
Annales Academiæ regiæ scientiarum Upsaliensis:s. Kongl. Vetenskapssamhällets i Uppsala 
Årsbok 26 (1985–86), 72–91. 
Brunius, Teddy: Andreas Rydelius och hans filosofi (Lund, 1958). 

 
 
215
Burke, Peter: The fabrication of Louis XIV (New Haven, 1992). 
Butler, Judith: “Performative acts and gender constitution. An essay in phenomenology 
and feminist theory”, in Henry Bial (ed): The performance studies reader, 2nd edition 
(London & New York, 2007). 
Carlqvist, Gunnar: “Karl XII:s ungdom och första regeringsår”, in Samuel E. Bring 
(ed): Karl XII. Till 200-årsdagen av hans död (Stockholm, 1918), 43–86. 
Carter, Philip: Men and the emergence of polite society. Britain 1660–1800 (Harlow, 2001). 
———: “James Boswell’s manliness”, in Tim Hitchcock and Michèle Cohen (eds): 
English masculinities 1660–1800 (London & New York, 1999), 111–130 
Cavallin, Maria: I kungens och folkets tjänst. Synen på den svenske ämbetsmannen 1750–1780 
(Gothenburg, 2003). 
Celsius, Anders: Arithmetica eller Räkne-konst, grundeligen demonstrerad af Anders Celsius 
(Uppsala, 1727). 
Celsius, Olof: Åtminnelse-tal öfver lands-höfdingen, bärgs-rådet Lars Benzelstierna, hållit för Kongl. 
vetenskapsacademien den 6 dec. 1758 (Stockholm, 1759). 
de Certeau, Michel: The practice of everyday life (Berkeley & Los Angeles, 1984). 
Chang, Hasok: “We have never been whiggish (about phlogiston)”, Centaurus 51:4 
(2009), 239–64. 
Christensen, Dan Ch.: Det moderne projekt. Teknik & kultur i Danmark-Norge 1750–
(1814)–1850 (Copenhagen, 1996). 
Clairaut, Alexis Claude and Pehr Elvius (tran.): Inledning til geometrien. Af herr Clairaut 
(Stockholm, 1744). 
Clark, William: Academic charisma and the origins of the research university (Chicago, 2006). 
Cohen, Michèle: “‘Manners’ make the man. Politeness, chivalry, and the construction of 
masculinity, 1750–1830”, Journal of British studies 44:2 (2005), 312–29. 
Collins, Harry M.: Changing order. Replication and induction in scientific practice (Chicago, 
1992). 
———: “Learning through enculturation”, in Angus Gellatly, Don Rogers, and John 
A. Sloboda (eds): Cognition and social worlds (Oxford, 1989), 205–15. 
Collins, H. M.: “The seven sexes. A study in the sociology of a phenomenon, or the 
replication of experiments in physics”, Sociology 9:2 (1975), 205–24. 
Condren, Conal: “The persona of the philosopher and the rhetorics of office in early 
modern Europe”, in Conal Condren, Stephen Gaukroger, and Ian Hunter (eds): 
The philosopher in early modern Europe. The nature of a contested identity (Cambridge, 2006), 
66–89. 
Condren, Conal, Stephen Gaukroger, and Ian Hunter: “Introduction”, in Conal 
Condren, Stephen Gaukroger, and Ian Hunter (eds): The philosopher in early modern 
Europe. The nature of a contested identity (Cambridge, 2006), 1–16. 
Connell, Raewyn: Masculinities (Cambridge, 2005). 
Cooper, Alix: Inventing the indigenous. Local knowledge and natural history in early modern Europe 
(Cambridge, 2007). 
———: “‘The possibilities of the land’. The inventory of ‘natural riches’ in the early 
modern German territories”, in Margaret Schabas and Neil De Marchi (eds): 
Oeconomies in the age of Newton (Durham NC, 2004), 129–53. 

 
 
216
Corneanu, Sorana: Regimens of the mind. Boyle, Locke, and the early modern cultura animi 
tradition (Chicago, 2011). 
Cronstedt, Axel Fredrik: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne directeuren och kongl. vetensk. acad. 
ledamot Henric Theoph. Scheffer, på kongl. vetensk. acad. vägnar, hållit i stora riddarehus-salen, 
den 17. september 1760 (Stockholm, 1760). 
Dahlgren, Stellan: “Karl XI:s envälde - kameralistisk absolutism?”, Makt & vardag 
(Stockholm, 1993), 115–32. 
Dahl, Per: Svensk ingenjörskonst under stormaktstiden. Olof Rudbecks tekniska undervisning och 
praktiska verksamhet (Uppsala, 1995). 
Dalin, Olof von: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. vetenskaps academiens medlem och secreterare, herr 
Pehr Elvius (Stockholm, 1750). 
———: Then swänska Argus no. 5 (Stockholm, 1732). 
Danielsson Malmros, Ingmarie: Det var en gång ett land. Berättelsen om svenskhet i 
historieläroböcker och elevers föreställningsvärldar (Lund, 2012). 
Daston, Lorraine: “Enlightenment calculations”, Critical inquiry 21:1 (1994), 182–202. 
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Gailson: Objectivity (New York, 2007). 
Daston, Lorraine, and Otto Sibum: “Introduction. Scientific personae and their 
histories”, Science in context 16:1 (2003), 1–8. 
Dear, Peter: Discipline & experience. The mathematical way in the scientific revolution (Chicago, 
1995). 
———: “Mysteries of state, mysteries of nature. Authority, knowledge and expertise in 
the 17th Century”, in Sheila Jasanoff (ed): States of knowledge. The co-production of science 
and social order (London, 2004), 206–24. 
———: The intelligibility of nature. How science makes sense of the world (Chicago, 2006). 
Deason, Gary B.: “Reformation theology and the mechanistic conception of nature”, in 
David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. Numbers (eds): God and nature. Historical essays on 
the encounter between Christianity and science (Berkeley, 1986). 
Duhre, Anders Gabriel: And. Gab. Duhres Ödmiukaste memoriale stäldt til Swea rikes samtel. 
högloflige ständer wid 1726 åhrs riks-dag (Stockholm, 1726). 
———: Förklaring öfwer des tilförende uthgifne Wälmente tanckar angående huru han tillika med 
sin broder är sinnad at utan almenna bestas betungande uppå deras egit äfwentyr uprätta ett 
laboratorium mathematico-oeconomicum (Stockholm, 1722). 
———: Första delen af en grundad geometria, bewijst uti de föreläsningar, som äro håldne på 
swänska språket uppå kongl. fortifications contoiret i Stockholm (Stockholm, 1721). 
———: Sweriges högsta wälstånd, bygdt uppå en oeconomisk grundwal (Stockholm, 1738). 
———: Tanckar, angående huruledes man i mangel af strömar och fall måtte med en synnerlig 
förmån, allestädes (hwarest stilla stående watn finnes) kunna drifwa allehanda rörliga wärck 
(Stockholm, 1723). 
———: Utdrag af Anders Gabriel Duhres oeconomiske tractat, kallad Sweriges högsta wälstånd, 
hwarutinnan sammanhanget så wäl som sakens höga wigt och angelägenhet, til alla wälsinte 
patrioters widare ompröfwande, warder kort och tydeligen å:daga lagd (Stockholm, 1738). 
———: Wälmenta tanckar, angående huru jag tillika med min broder är sinnad, at utan almenna 
bestas betungande, uppå wårt egit äfwentyr uprätta et laboratorium mathematico-oeconomicum 
(Stockholm, 1722). 

 
 
217
Dunér, David: “Sextiofyra och åtta istället för tio. Karl XII, Swedenborg och konsten 
att räkna”, Scandia 67 (2001), 211–38. 
———: Tankemaskinen. Polhems huvudvärk och andra studier i tänkandets historia (Nora, 
2012). 
———: The natural philosophy of Emanuel Swedenborg. A study in the conceptual metaphors of the 
mechanistic world-view (Dordrecht, 2013). 
———: Världsmaskinen. Emanuel Swedenborgs naturfilosofi (Lund, 2004). 
Edgerton, David: “Innovation, technology, or history. What is the historiography of 
technology about?”, Technology and culture 51:3 (2010), 680–97. 
———: The shock of the old. Technology and global history since 1900 (New York, 2007). 
Eisenstadt, S. N., and Louis Roniger: “Patron–client relations as a model of structuring 
social exchange”, Comparative studies in society and history 22:1 (1980), 42–77. 
Ekedahl, Nils: Det svenska Israel. Myt och retorik i Haquin Spegels predikokonst (Uppsala, 
1999). 
Eklund, Eric: Upfostrings-läran, som wisar sätt och medel til ungdomens rätta skiötsel och 
underwisning (Stockholm, 1746). 
Ekström, Daniel: Tal, om järn-förädlingens nytta och vårdande (Stockholm, 1750). 
Ellenius, Allan: Karolinska bildidéer (Uppsala, 1966). 
Elvius, Pehr: Mathematisk tractat, om effecter af vatn-drifter, efter brukliga vatn-värks art och lag 
(Stockholm, 1742). 
Euklides, and Mårten Strömer (tran.): Euclidis Elementa eller grundeliga inledning til 
geometrien, til riksens ungdoms tienst på swenska språket utgifwen (Uppsala, 1744). 
Fletcher, Anthony: Gender, sex and subordination in England 1500–1800 (New Haven, 
1995). 
———: Growing up in England. The experience of childhood, 1600–1914 (New Haven, 2008). 
Florén, Anders, and Göran Rydén: Arbete, hushåll och region. Tankar om 
industrialiseringsprocesser och den svenska järnhanteringen (Uppsala, 1992). 
Fors, Hjalmar: “J. G. Wallerius and the laboratory of enlightenment”, in Hjalmar Fors, 
Enrico Baraldi, and Anders Houltz (eds): Taking place. The spatial contexts of science, 
technology and business (Sagamore Beach MA, 2006), 3–33. 
———: “Kemi, paracelsism och mekanisk filosofi. Bergskollegium och Uppsala cirka 
1680–1770”, Lychnos (2007), 165–98. 
———: Mutual favours. The social and scientific practice of eighteenth-century Swedish chemistry 
(Uppsala, 2003). 
———: The limits of matter. Chemistry, mining, and Enlightenment (Chicago, 2015). 
Frängsmyr, Tore: Wolffianismens genombrott i Uppsala. Frihetstida universitetsfilosofi till 1700-
talets mitt (Uppsala, 1972). 
Friedrich II of Prussia: “Considérations sur l’état présent du corps politique de 
l’Europe”, Oeuvres posthumes de Frédric II, roi de Prusse vol. 6 (Berlin, 1788 [1736]), 3–
52. 
Fuchs, Thomas: The mechanization of the heart. Harvey and Descartes (Rochester, N.Y, 2001). 
 
 

 
 
218
Gabbey, Alan: “Between ars and philosophia naturalis. Reflections on the 
historiography of early modern mechanics”, in J. V. Field and Frank A. J. L. James 
(eds): Renaissance and revolution. Humanists, scholars, craftsmen, and natural philosophers in 
early modern Europe (Cambridge, 1993), 133–45. 
Garber, Daniel: “Remarks on the pre-history of the mechanical philosophy”, in Sophie 
Roux (ed): The mechanization of natural philosophy (Dordrecht, 2013), 3–26. 
Gaukroger, Stephen: Francis Bacon and the transformation of early-modern philosophy 
(Cambridge, 2001). 
———: “The persona of the natural philosopher”, in Conal Condren, Stephen 
Gaukroger, and Ian Hunter (eds): The philosopher in early modern Europe. The nature of a 
contested identity (Cambridge, 2006), 17–34. 
Gaunt, David: Utbildning till statens tjänst. En kollektivbiografi av stormaktstidens 
hovrättsauskultanter (Uppsala, 1975). 
Gauvin, Jean-François: Habits of knowledge. Artisans, savants and mechanical devices in 
seventeenth-century French natural philosophy (Cambridge MA, 2008). 
Genette, Gerard: Paratexts. Thresholds of interpretation (Cambridge, 1997). 
Gillispie, Charles Coulston: Science and polity in France at the end of the old regime (Princeton 
NJ, 1980). 
Goffman, Erving: The presentation of self in everyday life (London, 1990). 
Golinski, Jan: Science as public culture. Chemistry and Enlightenment in Britain, 1760–1820 
(Cambridge, 1992). 
———: “The care of the self and the masculine birth of science”, History of science 40 
(2002), 125–45. 
Goodman, Dena: The republic of letters. A cultural history of the French Enlightenment (Ithaca, 
1994). 
Grape, Anders: Ihreska handskriftssamlingen i Uppsala universitets bibliotek, vol. 2 (Uppsala, 
1949). 
———: Något om Anders Gabriel Duhre och en honom ägnad latinsk dikt (Stockholm, 1949). 
Grauers, Sven: “Karl XII:s personlighet. Försök till analys”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok 
(1969), 7–82. 
Greenblatt, Stephen: Renaissance self-fashioning. From More to Shakespeare (Chicago, 2005 
[1980]). 
Hackett, Jeremiah: “Roger Bacon on scientia experimentalis”, in Jeremiah Hackett (ed): 
Roger Bacon and the sciences. Commemorative essays (Leiden, 1997), 278–316. 
Hacking, Ian: “Artificial phenomena. Essay review of Leviathan and the air pump”, The 
British journal for the history of science 24:02 (1991), 235–41. 
Hagen, Lorentz: Anecdotes concerning the famous John Reinhold Patkul. Or, an authentic relation 
of what passed betwixt him and his confessor, the night before and at his execution. Translated 
from the original manuscript, never yet printed (London, 1761). 
———: Das schemertzliche doch seelige Ende, des welt-bekandten Joh. Reinhold Patkuls 
(Cologne, 1714). 
———: Een kort verhaal, wegens de verschrikkelyke dood, van den vermaarden heer Johann Reinold 
van Patkul, generaal van zyn koninklyke majesteyt van Zweeden (Amsterdam, 1718). 
 
 

 
 
219
Hamrén, Olof: Manufacturs-spegel, som genom tilförlåtelige uträkningar och uprichtiga grundsatzer 
gifwer et fulkommeligit lius om manufacturers och fabriquers rätta art och beskaffenhet, samt 
oskattbara nytta genom försiktig anlägning (Stockholm, 1738). 
Hanley, Sarah: “Engendering the state. Family formation and state building in early 
modern France”, French historical studies 16:1 (1989), 4–27. 
Hård, Mikael: “Mechanica och mathesis. Några tankar kring Christopher Polhems 
fysikaliska och vetenskapsteoretiska föreställningar”, Lychnos (1986), 55–69. 
Harris, Frances: “Living in the neighbourhood of science. Mary Evelyn, Margaret 
Cavendish and the Greshamites”, in Lynette Hunter and Sarah Hutton (eds): 
Women, science and medicine 1500–1700. Mothers and sisters of the Royal Society (Stroud, 
1997), 198–217. 
Hatton, Ragnhild M.: Charles XII of Sweden (London, 1968). 
Hebbe, Per Magnus: “Anders Gabriel Duhres ‘Laboratorium mathematico-
oeconomicum’. Ett bidrag till Ultunas äldre historia”, Kungl. Landtbruks-akademiens 
handlingar och tidskrift 72 (1933), 576–94. 
Hedström, Jan-Olof: -igenom gode ordningar och flitigt upseende-. Bergsstaten 375 år (Uppsala, 
2012). 
Heilbron, John Lewis: Geometry civilized. History, culture, and technique (Oxford, 2000). 
Helander, Hans: “Introduction”, in Emanuel Swedenborg: Festivus applausus in Caroli XII 
(Uppsala, 1985), 9–50. 
Hessenbruch, Arne: “The spread of precision measurement in Scandinavia 1660–1800”, 
in Kostas Gavroglu (ed): The sciences in the European periphery during the Enlightenment 
(Dordrecht, 1999), 179–224. 
Heyman, H. J.: “Anders Celsius”, SBL 8 (Stockholm, 1929), 266. 
Hilaire-Pérez, Liliane: “Dissemination of technical knowledge in the Middle Ages and 
the early modern era. New approaches and methodological issues”, Technology and 
culture 47:3 (2006), 536. 
———: L’invention technique au siècle des Lumières (Paris, 2000). 
———: “Technology as a public culture in the eighteenth century. The artisan’s 
legacy”, History of science 45 (2007), 135–53. 
Hildebrand, Bengt: “Anders Gabriel Duhre”, SBL 11 (Stockholm, 1945), 506. 
———: “Casten Feif”, SBL 15 (Stockholm, 1956), 512. 
———: “Duhre, släkt”, SBL 11 (Stockholm, 1945), 505. 
———: Kungl. Svenska Vetenskapsakademien. Förhistoria, grundläggning och första organisation 
vol. 1 (Stockholm, 1939). 
Hildebrand, Ingegerd: “Falkenberg Af Sandemar, Gabriel”, SBL 15 (Stockholm, 1956), 
222–7. 
Hill, Katherine: “‘Juglers or schollers?’. Negotiating the role of a mathematical 
practitioner”, The British journal for the history of science 31:03 (1998), 253–74. 
Hinners, Linda: De fransöske handtwerkarne vid Stockholms slott 1693–1713. Yrkesroller, 
organisation, arbetsprocesser (Stockholm, 2012). 
Hodacs, Hanna, and Kenneth Nyberg: Naturalhistoria på resande fot. Om att forska, 
undervisa och göra karriär i 1700-talets Sverige (Stockholm, 2007). 
 
 

 
 
220
Högberg, Staffan: “Inledning”, Anton von Swabs berättelse om Avesta kronobruk 1723 
(Stockholm, 1983), 7–30. 
Höpken, Anders Johan von: Åminnelse-tal öfver astronomiæ professoren Anders Celsius efter 
kongl. vetenskaps academiens befalning hållit i stora riddarhus-salen d. 27 novemb. 1745. 
(Stockholm, 1745). 
Ihalainen, Pasi: “New visions for the future. Bodily and mechanical conceptions of the 
political community in eighteenth-century Sweden”, in Petri Karonen (ed): Hopes 
and fears for the future in early modern Sweden, 1500–1800 (Helsinki, 2009), 315–40. 
Ingemarsdotter, Jenny: Ramism, rhetoric and reform. An intellectual biography of Johan Skytte 
(1577–1645) (Uppsala, 2011). 
Israel, Jonathan I.: Radical enlightenment. Philosophy and the making of modernity 1650–1750 
(Oxford, 2001). 
Jacob, Margaret C.: The first knowledge economy. Human capital and the European economy, 
1750–1850 (Cambridge, 2014). 
Jacob, Margaret C., and Larry Stewart: Practical matter. Newton’s science in the service of 
industry and empire, 1687–1851 (Cambridge MA, 2004). 
Jansson, Karin Hassan: “Ära och oro. Sexuella närmanden och föräktenskapliga 
relationer i 1700-talets Sverige”, Scandia 75:1 (2009), 29–56. 
———: Kvinnofrid. Synen på våldtäkt och konstruktionen av kön i Sverige 1600–1800 
(Uppsala, 2002). 
Johannesson, Kurt: I polstjärnans tecken. Studier i svensk barock (Stockholm, 1968). 
———: “Om furstars och aristokraters dygder. Reflexioner kring Johannes Schefferus 
Memorabilia”, in Sten Åke Nilsson and Margareta Ramsay (eds): 1600-talets ansikte 
(Nyhamnsläge, 1997), 309–21. 
Johannisson, Karin: “Naturvetenskap på reträtt. En diskussion om naturvetenskapens 
status under svenskt 1700-tal”, Lychnos (1979), 107–54. 
Johns, Adrian: “The ambivalence of authorship in early modern natural philosophy”, in 
Mario Biagioli and Peter Galison (eds): Scientific authorship. Credit and intellectual 
property in science (New York, 2003), 67–90. 
———: The nature of the book. Print and knowledge in the making (Chicago, 1998). 
Johnston, Stephen: “Mathematical practitioners and instruments in Elizabethan 
England”, Annals of science 48:4 (1991), 319–44. 
Jones, Matthew L.: The good life in the scientific revolution. Descartes, Pascal, Leibniz, and the 
cultivation of virtue (Chicago, 2006). 
Josephson, Ragnar: “Karl XI och Karl XII som esteter”, Karolinska förbundets årsbok 
(1947), 7–67. 
Justi, Johann Heinrich Gottlob von: Der Grundriss einer guten Regierung in fünf Buchern 
(Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1759). 
Kaiserfeld, Thomas: Krigets salt. Salpetersjudning som politik och vetenskap i den svenska 
skattemilitära staten under frihetstid och gustaviansk tid (Lund, 2009). 
Kantorowicz, Ernst Hartwig: The king’s two bodies. A study in mediaeval political theology 
(Princeton NJ, 1957). 
Karlsson, Åsa: Den jämlike undersåten. Karl XII:s förmögenhetsbeskattning 1713 (Uppsala, 
1994). 

 
 
221
———: “En man i statens tjänst. Den politiska elitens manlighetsideal under det 
karolinska enväldet 1680–1718”, in Anne Marie Berggren (ed): Manligt och omanligt i 
ett historiskt perspektiv (Uppsala, 1999), 116–28. 
Klingenstierna, Samuel: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. vetensk. academiens framledne ledamot, 
commerce-rådet Christopher Polhem, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens vägnar hållit i stora 
riddarhus-salen (Stockholm, 1753). 
Koepp, Cynthia J.: “The alphabetical order. Work in Diderot’s Encyclopédie”, in 
Steven L. Kaplan and Cynthia J. Koepp (eds): Work in France. Representations, 
meaning, organization, and practice (Ithaca, 1986), 229–57. 
Koskinen, Ulla: “‘Benevolent lord’ and ‘willing servant’. Argumentation with social 
ideals in late-sixteenth-century letters”, in Petri Karonen (ed): Hopes and fears for the 
future in early modern Sweden, 1500–1800 (Helsinki, 2009), 55–76. 
La Motraye, Aubry de: Voyages du sr. A. de La Motraye, en Europe, Asie & Afrique; où l’on 
trouve une grande varieté de recherches geographiques, historiques & politiques vol. 2 (The 
Hague, 1727). 
Laborier, Pascale: “Les sciences camérales, prolégomènes à toute bureaucratie future ou 
parades pour gibiers de potence?”, in Pascale Laborier, Frédéric Audren, Paolo 
Napoli, and Jakob Vogel (eds): Les sciences camérales. Activités pratiques et histoire des 
dispositifs publics (Paris, 2011), 11–30. 
Laird, Walter Roy: “Robert Grosseteste on the subalternate sciences”, Traditio 43 
(1987), 147–69. 
Landahl, Sten: Bondeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 1 [1720–7] (Stockholm, 1939). 
———: Bondeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 2 [1731–34] (Stockholm, 1945). 
———: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll från och med år 1719 vol. 2 [1723] 
(Stockholm, 1876). 
———: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll från och med år 1719 vol. 5 [1726–7] 
(Stockholm, 1879). 
———: Sveriges ridderskaps och adels riksdagsprotokoll från och med år 1719 vol. 6 [1731] 
(Stockholm, 1887). 
Lappalainen, Mirkka: “Släkt och stånd i Bergskollegium före reduktionstiden”, Historisk 
tidskrift för Finland 87:2 (2002), 145–72. 
Latour, Bruno: Science in action. How to follow scientists and engineers through society (Cambridge 
MA, 1987). 
———: The pasteurization of France (Cambridge MA, 1988). 
Laurel, Lars: Åminnelse-tal öfver capitaine mechanichus vid fortificationen … Mårten Trievald, 
hållet på store riddar-hus salen, den 23 decemb. 1747 (Stockholm, 1748). 
Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger: Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation 
(Cambridge, 2005). 
Lawrence, Christopher, and Steven Shapin: “Introduction. The body of knowledge”, in 
Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin (eds): Science incarnate. Historical 
embodiments of natural knowledge (Chicago, 1998), 1–19. 
———: Science incarnate. Historical embodiments of natural knowledge (Chicago, 1998). 
Liedman, Sven-Eric: Den synliga handen. Anders Berch och ekonomiämnena vid 1700-talets 
svenska universitet (Stockholm, 1986). 

 
 
222
Liljecrantz, Axel Johan Carl Vilhelm: “Polhem och grundandet av Sveriges första 
naturvetenskapliga samfund. Jämte andra anteckningar rörande Collegium 
Curiosorum. I”, Lychnos (1939), 289–308. 
———: “Polhem och grundandet av Sveriges första naturvetenskapliga samfund. Jämte 
andra anteckningar rörande Collegium Curiosorum. II”, Lychnos (1940), 21–54. 
———:: Christopher Polhems brev (Uppsala, 1941). 
Liljegren, Bengt: Karl XII. En biografi (Lund, 2000). 
———: Karl XII i Lund. När Sverige styrdes från Skåne (Lund, 1999). 
Lindberg, Bo: Den antika skevheten. Politiska ord och begrepp i det tidig-moderna Sverige 
(Stockholm, 2006). 
Lindgren, Michael: “Christopher Polhem”, SBL 29 (Stockholm, 1995–7), 338. 
———: Christopher Polhems testamente. Berättelsen om ingenjören, entreprenören och pedagogen som 
ville förändra Sverige (Stockholm, 2011). 
Lindgren, Michael, and Per Sörbom: Christopher Polhem 1661–1751. “The Swedish 
Daedalus” (Stockholm, 1985). 
Lindqvist, Janne: Dygdens förvandlingar. Begreppet dygd i tillfällestryck till handelsmän före 1770 
(Uppsala, 2002). 
Lindqvist, Svante: Technology on trial. The introduction of steam power technology into Sweden, 
1715–1736 (Uppsala, 1984). 
Lindroth, Sten: Gruvbrytning och kopparhantering vid Stora Kopparberget intill 1800-talets början. 
2, Kopparhanteringen (Uppsala, 1955). 
———: Kungl. Svenska vetenskapsakademiens historia 1739–1818. 1:1, Tiden intill Wargentins 
död (1783) (Stockholm, 1967). 
———: “Samuel Klingenstierna”, SBL 21, (Stockholm, 1975–7), 319. 
———: Svensk lärdomshistoria. Frihetstiden (Stockholm, 1997 [1978]). 
Linnaeus, Carl: “Tankar om grunden till œconomien genom naturkunnigheten och 
physiquen”, Kungliga vetenskapsakademins handlingar (1739–40), 411–29. 
Locke, John and Matthias Riben (tran.): Herr Johan Lockes tankar och anmärkningar 
angående ungdomens uppfostring först skrefne uti engelskan, men nu för deras serdeles wärde och 
nyttighet uppå swenska öfwersatte (Stockholm, 1709). 
Lundgren, Anders: “Gruvor och kemi under 1700-talet i Sverige. Nytta och vetenskap”, 
Lychnos (2008), 7–42. 
Lundin, Sverker: Skolans matematik. En kritisk analys av den svenska skolmatematikens 
förhistoria, uppkomst och utveckling (Uppsala, 2008). 
MacLeod, Christine: “Concepts of invention and the patent controversy in Victorian 
Britain”, in Robert Fox (ed): Technological change. Methods and themes in the history of 
technology (Amsterdam, 1996), 137–53. 
———: Heroes of invention. Technology, liberalism and British identity, 1750–1914 (Cambridge, 
2007). 
———: Inventing the industrial revolution. The English patent system, 1660–1800 (Cambridge, 
1988). 
MacLeod, Christine, and Alessandro Nuvolari: “The ingenious crowd”. A critical 
prosopography of British inventors, 1650–1850 [working paper] (Eindhoven, 2005). 
Magnusson, Lars: Mercantilism. The shaping of an economic language (London, 1994). 

 
 
223
Mansén, Elisabeth: ”Samtal emellan en Herre och en Fru år 1743” in Emma Hagström 
Molin and Andreas Hellerstedt (eds): Lärda samtal. En festskrift till Erland Sellberg 
(Lund, 2014), 149–163. 
Marklund, Andreas: In the shadows of his house. Masculinity & marriage in Sweden, c. 1760 to 
the 1830s (Florence, 2002). 
Mauss, Marcel: Les techniques du corps (Chicoutimi, 2002 [1934]) 
<http://classiques.uqac.ca/classiques/mauss_marcel/socio_et_anthropo/6_Tech
niques_corps/techniques_corps.pdf> [accessed 27 April 2012]. 
Mayr, Otto: Authority, liberty & automatic machinery in early modern Europe (Baltimore, 
1986). 
Mennander, Carl Fredrik: Åminnelse-tal öfver theol. doct. dom-probsten och theol. professor 
primarius vid kongl. academien i Åbo, herr Gabriel Lauræus, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens 
vägnar, hållit den 19 december 1755 (Stockholm, 1756). 
Merchant, Carolyn: The death of nature. Women, ecology, and the scientific revolution (San 
Francisco, 1980). 
Missner, Marshall: “Skepticism and Hobbes’s political philosophy”, Journal of the history of 
ideas 44:3 (1983), 407–27. 
Moberg, Gustaf: Från exercitier till modern idrott (Uppsala, 1950). 
Mokyr, Joel: The gifts of Athena. Historical origins of the knowledge economy (Princeton NJ, 
2005). 
———: The lever of riches. Technological creativity and economic progress (New York, 1990). 
Mörk, Jacob Henrik: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne theologie doctoren och kyrko-herden i Bolstad i 
Carlstads stift, herr Nils Brelin, på kongl. vetenskaps academiens vägnar, hållit uti stora riddare-
hus salen (Stockholm, 1754). 
———: Åminnelse-tal öfver slotts-byggmästaren och kongl. vetenskaps academiens ledamot, herr 
Claes Eliander, hållit den 27 februarii, 1756 (Stockholm, 1756). 
Mukerji, Chandra: Impossible engineering. Technology and territoriality on the Canal du Midi 
(Princeton NJ, 2009). 
———: Territorial ambitions and the gardens of Versailles (Cambridge, 1997). 
Norberg, Axel: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 6 [1723] (Stockholm, 1982). 
———: Prästeståndets riksdagsprotokoll vol. 7 [1726–31] (Stockholm, 1975). 
Nordbäck, Carola: Samvetets röst. Om mötet mellan luthersk ortodoxi och konservativ pietism i 
1720-talets Sverige (Umeå, 2004). 
Nordberg, Jöran Andersson: Konung Carl den XII:tes historia (Stockholm, 1740). 
Nordencrantz, Anders: Arcana oeconomiæ et commercii, eller Handelens och hushåldnings-wärkets 
hemligheter (Stockholm, 1730). 
Nordenflycht, Hedvig Charlotta: “Autobiographical letter to H:r A.A. von Stiernman, 
1745-08-17”, Skrifter (Stockholm, 1996). 
Nordin, Jonas: Frihetstidens monarki. Konungamakt och offentlighet i 1700-talets Sverige 
(Stockholm, 2009). 
Norrhem, Svante: Uppkomlingarna. Kanslitjänstemännen i 1600-talets Sverige och Europa 
(Umeå, 1993). 
 
 

 
 
224
Nyberg, Klas: “‘Jag existerar endast genom att äga kredit’. Tillit, kreditvärdighet och 
finansiella nätverk i 1700-talets och det tidiga 1800-talets Stockholm”, in Mats 
Berglund (ed): Sakta vi gå genom stan. Stadshistoriska studier tillägnade Lars Nilsson den 
31/5 2005 (Stockholm, 2005), 184–211. 
Oldenziel, Ruth: Making technology masculine. Men, women, and modern machines in America, 
1870–1945 (Amsterdam, 1999). 
Olin, Martin: Det karolinska porträttet. Ideologi, ikonografi, identitet (Stockholm, 2000). 
Ong, Walter J.: Orality and literacy. The technologizing of the word (London, 1991). 
Ovid: The XV bookes of P. Ouidius Naso, entytuled Metamorphosis, translated oute of Latin into 
English meeter, by Arthur Golding Gentleman, a worke very pleasaunt and delectable (London, 
1567). 
Palmqvist, Fredrik: Inledning til algebra. Första delen (Stockholm, 1748). 
———: Underwisning i räkne-konsten (Stockholm, 1750). 
Persson, Fabian: Servants of fortune. The Swedish court between 1598 and 1721 (Lund, 1999). 
Persson, Mathias: Det nära främmande. Svensk lärdom och politik i en tysk tidning 1753–1792 
(Uppsala, 2009). 
Peursen, C. A. Van: “E. W. von Tschirnhaus and the ars inveniendi”, Journal of the history 
of ideas 54:3 (1993), 395–410. 
Picon, Antoine: French architects and engineers in the Age of Enlightenment (New York, 1992). 
Piirimäe, Pärtel: “The pen is a mighty sword. Johann Reinhold Patkul’s polemical 
writings”, Die baltischen Länder und der Norden. Festschrift für Helmut Piirimäe zum 75. 
Geburtstag (Tartu, 2005), 314–41. 
Polhem, Christopher: “[Att Gud alzmächtig ähr hela naturens uphof…]”, in Axel 
Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 3 (Uppsala & 
Stockholm, 1952), 304–15. 
———: “Berättelse om Fahlu grufvas tillstånd”, in Henrik Sandblad (ed): Christopher 
Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 1 (Uppsala & Stockholm, 1947), 26–40. 
———: “Lefvernesbeskrifning”, in Bengt Löw (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade 
skrifter vol. 4 (Uppsala & Stockholm, 1954 [1733]), 387–96. 
———: “Mechanica practica eller fundamental byggarekonst”, in Henrik Sandblad 
(ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 1 (Uppsala & Stockholm, 1947), 79–
83. 
———: “Samtahl emällan fröken Theoria och byggmästar Practicus om sitt 
förehafvande”, in Henrik Sandblad (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 1 
(Uppsala & Stockholm, 1947), 277–307. 
———: “Samtahl och discurs emellan theoria och praxis om mechaniska och 
physicalska saker huar igenom ungdomen, som der till har lust, kan lära något”, in 
Axel Liljencrantz (ed): Christopher Polhems efterlämnade skrifter vol. 3 (Uppsala & 
Stockholm, 1952), 427–45. 
———: Samtal emellan en swär-moder och son-hustru, om allehanda hus-hålds förrättningar 
(Stockholm, 1745). 
———: “Tankar om mekaniken”, Kungliga vetenskapsakademins handlingar 1 (1740), 185–
98. 
 
 

 
 
225
———: Wishetens andra grundwahl til ungdoms prydnad mandoms nytto och ålderdoms nöje; 
lempadt för ungdomen efter theras tiltagande åhr, uti dagliga lexor fördelt (Uppsala, 1716). 
Raam, Peder Nilsson: Then swenske åkermätningen, eller Ortuga deelo book, item een lijten 
tractat, om staaff och råå, och thes beskaffenheet (Strengnäs, 1670). 
Raeff, Marc: “The well-ordered police state and the development of modernity in 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe. An attempt at a comparative 
approach”, The American historical review 80:5 (1975), 1221–43. 
Ranft, Michael, and Johann Samuel Heinsius: Die merkwürdige Lebensgeschichte derer vier 
berühmten schwedischen Feldmarschalle, Grafen Rehnschild, Steenbock, Meyerfeld und Dücker 
nebst dem angefügten merkwürdigen Leben und jämmerlichen Ende des bekannten Generals 
Johann Reinhold Patkuls. Zur Erleuterung vieler wichtigen Umstände der Geschichte Königs 
Caroli XII von Schweden, ans Licht gestället von einem Liebhaber der neuesten Historie 
(Leipzig, 1753). 
Rausing, Lisbet: “Daedalus Hyperboreus. Baltic natural history and mineralogy in the 
Enlightenment”, in William Clark, Jan Golinski, and Simon Schaffer (eds): The 
sciences in enlightened Europe (Chicago, 1999), 389–422. 
———: Linnaeus. Nature and nation (Cambridge MA, 1999). 
———: “Underwriting the oeconomy. Linnaeus on nature and mind”, in Margaret 
Schabas and Neil De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton (Durham NC, 
2004), 173–203. 
Rimm, Stefan: Vältalighet och mannafostran. Retorikutbildningen i svenska skolor och gymnasier 
1724–1807 (Uppsala, 2011). 
Rinman, Sven: Åminnelse-tal öfver framledne bergmästaren … Axel Fred. Cronstedt, på kongl. 
academiens vägnar, hållet i stora riddarhus-salen den 6. martii, 1766 (Stockholm, 1766). 
Roberts, Lissa: “Filling the space of possibilities. Eighteenth-century chemistry’s 
transition from art to science”, Science in context 6:02 (1993), 511–53. 
———: “Full steam ahead. Entrepreneurial engineers as go-betweens during the late 
eighteenth century”, in Simon Schaffer, Lissa Roberts, Kapil Raj, and James 
Delbourgo (eds): The brokered world. Go-betweens and global intelligence, 1770–1820 
(Sagamore Beach MA, 2009), 193–238. 
———: “Geographies of steam. Mapping the entrepreneurial activities of steam 
engineers in France during the second half of the eighteenth century”, History and 
technology 27:4 (2011), 417–39. 
———: “Introduction. Workshops of the hand and mind”, in Lissa Roberts, Simon 
Schaffer, and Peter Dear (eds): The mindful hand. Inquiry and invention from the late 
Renaissance to early industrialisation (Amsterdam & Bristol, 2007), 1–8. 
Roberts, Lissa, Simon Schaffer, and Peter Dear (eds): The mindful hand. Inquiry and 
invention from the late Renaissance to early industrialisation (Amsterdam & Bristol, 2007). 
Roberts, Michael: The Age of Liberty. Sweden 1719–1772 (Cambridge, 1986). 
Roche, Daniel: France in the Enlightenment (Cambridge MA, 1998). 
———: La France des Lumières (Paris, 1993). 
Rodhe, Staffan: Matematikens utveckling i Sverige fram till 1731 (Uppsala, 2002). 
 
 

 
 
226
Rohr, Julius Bernhard von: Inledning til klokheten at lefwa, eller Underrättelse om, huru en 
menniskia, genom en förnuftig sitt lefwernes inrättning, kan bli timmeligen lycksalig 
(Stockholm, 1728). 
Roman, Christian Gustafsson: Wälmente tanckar om barna upfostring. I anseende till deras 
studier och lefnad (Västerås, 1743). 
Roper, Lyndal: Oedipus and the Devil. Witchcraft, sexuality and religion in early modern Europe 
(London, 1994). 
Roper, Michael, and John Tosh: “Introduction”, in Michael Roper and John Tosh (eds.) 
Manful assertions. Masculinities in Britain since 1800 (London, 1991), 1–24. 
———: Manful assertions. Masculinities in Britain since 1800 (London, 1991). 
Roux, Sophie, and Walter Roy Laird: “Introduction”, in Walter Roy Laird and Sophie 
Roux (eds): Mechanics and natural philosophy before the scientific revolution (Dordrecht, 
2007), 1–11. 
Ruder, Gustav: Anledning til snille-walet, eller Ungdomens snille-gåfwors och naturliga böjelsers 
bepröfwande, wal och anförande, til the wetenskaper, konster, ämbeten och syslor, med hwilka 
hwar och en kan wäl och beqwämligen tjena Gudi och fädernes landet (Stockholm, 1737). 
Runefelt, Leif: Dygden som välståndets grund. Dygd, nytta och egennytta i frihetstidens ekonomiska 
tänkande (Stockholm, 2005). 
———: Hushållningens dygder. Affektlära, hushållningslära och ekonomiskt tänkande under 
svensk stormaktstid (Stockholm, 2001). 
Rydelius, Andreas: Nödige förnufftz öfningar för all slags studerande ungdom, som wil hafwa sunda 
tankar, och fälla ett billigt omdöme om de högste och wichtigste ting i wärlden, hwilket i naturlig 
måtta bör wara deras yppersta ändamål, ehwad för stånds wahl de hälst willja giöra 5 vols. 
(Linköping, 1718–22). 
Rydén, Göran: “Skill and technical change in the Swedish iron industry, 1750–1860”, 
Technology and culture 39:3 (1998), 383–407. 
———: “The Enlightenment in practice. Swedish travellers and knowledge about the 
metal trades”, Sjuttonhundratal (2013), 63–86. 
Salvius, Lars: Tanckar öfwer den swenska oeconomien igenom samtal yttrade […] emellan fru Swea, 
fru Oeconomia, Herr Mentor, Herr Flit, Herr Sparsam, och Frans. (Stockholm, 1738). 
Savin, Kristiina: Fortunas klädnader. Lycka, olycka och risk i det tidigmoderna Sverige (Lund, 
2011). 
Sawday, Jonathan: Engines of the imagination. Renaissance culture and the rise of the machine 
(London, 2007). 
Schabas, Margaret, and Neil De Marchi: “Introduction”, in Margaret Schabas and Neil 
De Marchi (eds): Oeconomies in the age of Newton (Durham NC, 2004), 1–13. 
———: Oeconomies in the age of Newton (Durham NC, 2004). 
Schaffer, Simon: “Enlightened Automata”, in William Clark, Jan Golinski, and Simon 
Schaffer (eds): The sciences in enlightened Europe (Chicago, 1999), 126–65. 
———: “Experimenters’ techniques, dyers’ hands, and the electric planetarium”, Isis 
88:3 (1997), 456–83. 
———: “Swedenborg’s lunars”, Annals of science 71:1 (2014), 2–26. 
Schatzberg, Eric: “Technik comes to America. Changing meanings of technology 
before 1930”, Technology and culture 47:3 (2006), 486–512. 

 
 
227
Schauman, Georg: Studier i frihetstidens nationalekonomiska litteratur. Idéer och strömningar 
1718–1740 (Helsinki, 1910). 
Schiefsky, Mark J.: “Theory and practice in Heron’s Mechanics”, in Walter Roy Laird 
and Sophie Roux (eds): Mechanics and natural philosophy before the scientific revolution 
(Dordrecht, 2007), 15–50. 
Schmitt, Frederick F.: Socializing epistemology. The social dimensions of knowledge (Lanham 
MD, 1994). 
Schmoll, Barthold Otto: Kort anledning till geometrien, hwar effter officerarne wid Hans Kongl. 
May:tz infanterie här i Swerige till mathesin och fortification (Stockholm, 1692). 
Schück, Henrik: Ansatser till ett universitet i Stockholm före 1800-talet (Stockholm, 1942). 
Schwab, Dieter: “Familie”, Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe. Historishes Lexicon zur politischen-
sozialen Sprache in Deutschland (Stuttgart, 1975). 
Scott, Joan W.: “Gender. A useful category of historical analysis”, The American historical 
review 91:5 (1986), 1053–75. 
Semler, Christoph: Neueröffnete mathematische und mechanische Real-Schule (Halle, 1709). 
Sennefelt, Karin: Politikens hjärta. Medborgarskap, manlighet och plats i frihetstidens Stockholm 
(Stockholm, 2011). 
Sewell, William H.: “Visions of labor. Illustrations of the mehcanical arts before, in, and 
after Diderot’s Encyclopedie”, in Steven L. Kaplan and Cynthia J. Koepp (eds): 
Work in France. Representations, meaning, organization, and practice (Ithaca, 1986), 258–
86. 
Shapin, Steven: A social history of truth. Civility and science in seventeenth-century England 
(Chicago, 1994). 
———: “The invisible technician”, American scientist 77:6 (1989), 554–63. 
———: The scientific revolution (Chicago, 1996). 
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer: Leviathan and the air-pump. Hobbes, Boyle, and the 
experimental life (Princeton NJ, 1985). 
Shepard, Alexandra: Meanings of manhood in early modern England (Oxford, 2003). 
Sibum, H. Otto: “Experiencing experiment. Gestural knowledge and scientific change 
in early 19th-century Victorian culture”, Thought & culture 10 (2011), 38–55. 
———: “Experimentalists in the Republic of Letters”, Science in Context 16:1–2 (2003), 
89–120. 
———: “Les gestes de la mesure, Joule, les pratiques de la brasserie et la science”, 
Annales HSS July–October, 1998. 
———: “Reworking the mechanical value of heat. Instruments of precision and 
gestures of accuracy in early Victorian England”, Studies in history and philosophy of 
science. Part A 26:1 (1995), 73–106. 
Siljestrand, Karl K:son: Karl XII såsom filosof (Linköping, 1891). 
Sjöstrand, Wilhelm: Pedagogikens historia 4 vols. (Lund, 1954–66). 
Smith, Jay M.: The culture of merit. Nobility, royal service, and the making of absolute monarchy in 
France, 1600–1789 (Ann Arbor, 1996). 
Smith, Pamela H.: The body of the artisan. Art and experience in the scientific revolution 
(Chicago, 2004). 
 
 

 
 
228
Snickare, Mårten: Enväldets riter. Kungliga fester och ceremonier i gestaltning av Nicodemus Tessin 
den yngre (Stockholm, 1999). 
———: “Shaping the ritual space. Nicodemus Tessin the younger and Swedish royal 
ceremonies”, in Allan Ellenius (ed): Baroque dreams. Art and vision in Sweden in the era 
of greatness (Uppsala, 2003), 124–50. 
Spöring, Herman Diedrich: Johannis Moræi … äre-minne, i auditorio illustri på riddarehuset 
efter kongl. wetenskaps academiens befallning uprättadt (Stockholm, 1743). 
Stadin, Kekke: “Att vara god eller att göra sin plikt? Dygd och genus i 1600-talets 
Sverige”, in Janne Backlund (ed): Historiska etyder (Uppsala, 1997), 223–35. 
———: Stånd och genus i stormaktstidens Sverige (Lund, 2004). 
———: “The masculine image of a great power. Representations of Swedish imperial 
power c. 1630–1690”, Scandinavian Journal of History 30:1 (2005), 61–82. 
Staf, Nils: Borgarståndets riksdagsprotokoll från frihetstidens början vol. 2 [1723] (Stockholm, 
1951). 
———: Borgarståndets riksdagsprotokoll från frihetstidens början vol. 4 [1731] (Stockholm, 
1958). 
Stewart, Larry R.: Rise of public science. Rhetoric, technology and natural philosophy in Newtonian 
Britain, 1660–1750 (Cambridge, 1992). 
Strömer, Mårten: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. maj:ts troman, stats-secreteraren … Samuel 
Klingenstjerna, på k. vetensk. academiens vägnar hållit, den 27 jul. 1768 (Stockholm, 1768). 
Rudolf L. Tafel (ed): Documents concerning the life and character of Emanuel Swedenborg vol. 1 
(London, 1875). 
Thanner, Lennart: Revolutionen i Sverige efter Karl XII:s död. Den inrepolitiska maktkampen 
under tidigare delen av Ulrika Eleonora d.y:s regering (Uppsala, 1953). 
Theofrastos, and Abraham Magni Sahlstedt: Caracterer, eller Sede-bilder af människor 
(Stockholm, 1754). 
Thomasius, Christian: Gründliche iedoch bescheidene Deduction der Unschuld Hn. Joh. Reinhold 
von Patkul (Leipzig, 1701). 
Tilas, Daniel: Curriculum vitæ I–II, 1712–1757 samt fragment av dagbok september–oktober 
1767, Holger Wichman (ed) (Stockholm, 1966 [1712–57]). 
Tillaeus, Petrus: “General charta öfwer Stockholm med malmarne åhr 1733” 
(Stockholm, 1733). 
Tjeder, David: “Konsten att blifva herre öfver hvarje lidelse. Den ständigt hotade 
manligheten”, in Anne Marie Berggren (ed): Manligt och omanligt i ett historiskt 
perspektiv (Stockholm, 1999), 177–96. 
Tosh, John: “What should historians do with masculinity? Reflections on nineteenth-
century Britain”, History workshop 38 (1994), 179–202. 
Tribe, Keith: “Cameralism and the science of government”, The journal of modern history 
56:2 (1984), 263–84. 
———: Governing economy. The reformation of German economic discourse, 1750–1840 
(Cambridge, 1988). 
Tschirnhausen, Ehrenfried Walther von: Gründliche Anleitung zu nützlichen Wissenschafften 
absonderlich zu der Mathesi und Physica. Wie sie anitzo von den Gelehrtesten abgehandelt 
werden (Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1700). 

 
 
229
Uhr, Isaac Johan: En brukspatrons egenskaper (Uppsala, 1750). 
Ulff, Samuel Crispin: En liten doch utförlig grundritning och handledning, til de metall- och linne-
manufacturier, som nu inrättas i Hälsinge-land, at drifwas på åtskilligt nytt arbetz sätt, särdeles 
af landetz egne producter; hwilka under twenne societeter komma at sortera, såsom deras ägare 
och förläggare: blifwandes här ock något förestält om manufacturerne i gemen (Stockholm, 
1729). 
Vérin, Hélène: La gloire des ingénieurs. L’intelligence technique du XVIe au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 
1993). 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de: Histoire de Charles XII, roi de Suède, divisée en huit livres, 
avec l’histoire de l’empire de Russie sous Pierre-le-Grand, en deux parties divisées par chapitres 
(Geneva, 1768). 
Wahlström, Anders: Ethica mathematica. Heller mathematisk sedelära (Västerås, 1742). 
Wakefield, Andre: “Books, bureaus, and the historiography of cameralism”, European 
journal of law and economics 19:3 (2005), 311–20. 
———: “Butterfield’s nightmare. The history of science as Disney history”, History and 
technology 30:3 (2014), 232–51. 
———: “Leibniz and the wind machines”, Osiris 25:1 (2010), 171–88. 
———: The disordered police state. German cameralism as science and practice (Chicago, 2009). 
Wallerius, Göran: Tal emellan mathesin och physiquen om deras verkan och nytta uti bärgs-
väsendet, förestäldt i kongl. svenska vetenskaps academien af Göran Vallerius vid præsidii 
afläggande den 21 jan. 1744 (Stockholm, 1747). 
Wargentin, Pehr Wilhelm: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. observatoren och kongl. vetenskaps 
academiens ledamot, herr Olof Hiorter, efter kongl. vetenskaps academiens befallning, hållit i 
stora riddarhus-salen d. 18 april, 1751 (Stockholm, 1751). 
———: Åminnelse-tal öfver kongl. vetensk. academiens framledne ledamot, directeuren och 
mathematiska instrument-makaren, herr Daniel Ekström, hållit för kongl. vetenskaps 
academien, den 14 junii år 1758 (Stockholm, 1758). 
Warwick, Andrew: “Exercising the student body. Mathematics and athleticism in 
Victorian Cambridge”, in Christopher Lawrence and Steven Shapin (eds): Science 
incarnate. Historical embodiments of natural knowledge (Chicago, 1998), 288–323. 
———: Masters of theory. Cambridge and the rise of mathematical physics (Chicago, 2003). 
Waters, Malcolm: “Patriarchy and viriarchy. An exploration and reconstruction of 
concepts of masculine domination”, Sociology 23:2 (1989), 193–211. 
Weidler, Johann Friedrich: Institutiones mathematicae decem et sex pvrae mixtaeque matheseos 
disciplinas complexae (Wittenberg, 1718). 
Weidler, Johann Friedrich and Johan Mört (tran.): En klar och tydelig genstig eller anledning 
til geometrien och trigonometrien (Stockholm, 1727). 
Wermlund, Sven: Sensus internus och sensus intimus. Studier i Andreas Rydelius filosofi 
(Stockholm, 1944). 
Westfall, Richard S.: “The rise of science and the decline of orthodox Christianity. A 
study of Kepler, Descartes, and Newton”, in David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. 
Numbers (eds): God and nature. Historical essays on the encounter between Christianity and 
science (Berkeley, 1986). 
 
 

 
 
230
Whitmer, Kelly J.: “Eclecticism and the technologies of discernment in pietist 
pedagogy”, Journal of the history of ideas 70:4 (2009), 545–67. 
———: The Halle Orphanage as scientific community. Observation, eclecticism and pietism in the 
early enlightenment (Chicago, 2015). 
Wiberg, Albert: Christopher Polhem som slöjdpedagog (Gothenburg, 1938). 
———: Till skolslöjdens förhistoria. Några utvecklingslinjer i svensk arbetspedagogik intill 1877. 
Tiden intill 1861 vol. 1 (Stockholm, 1939). 
Widmalm, Sven: “Instituting science in Sweden”, in Roy Porter and Mikuláš Teich 
(eds): The scientific revolution in national context (Cambridge, 1992), 240–62. 
———: Mellan kartan och verkligheten. Geodesi och kartläggning, 1695–1860 (Uppsala, 1990). 
Willmoth, Frances, and Rob Iliffe: “Astronomy and the Domestic Sphere. Margaret 
Flamsteed and Caroline Herschel as Assistant-Astronomers”, in Lynette Hunter 
and Sarah Hutton (eds): Women, science and medicine 1500–1700. Mothers and sisters of 
the Royal Society (Stroud, 1997), 235–65. 
Winton, Patrik: Frihetstidens politiska praktik. Nätverk och offentlighet 1746–1766 (Uppsala, 
2006). 
Wise, M. Norton: “Mediating machines”, Science in context 2:1 (1988), 77–113. 
Wolff, Christian von and Johan Mört (tran.): Christian Wollffs Grundeliga underrättelse om 
rätta orsaken til sädens vnderbara förökelse, vti hwilken tillika förklaras träns och plantors wäxt 
i gemen; såsom första profwet, af vndersökandet om plantors wäxt, på tyska först vtgifwen; men 
sedermera alla hushållare i gemen, och i synnerhet Ultuna laborator. til tienst, på swenska 
öfwersatt, och med hans kongl. maj:ts allernådigste privilegio vplagd (Stockholm, 1728). 
Wrangel, Ewert: Frihetstidens odlingshistoria ur litteraturens häfder 1718–1733 (Lund, 1895). 
Wright, Thomas: William Harvey. A life in circulation (Oxford, 2012). 
Zanger, Abby E.: Scenes from the marriage of Louis XIV. Nuptial fictions and the making of 
absolutist power (Stanford CA, 1997). 
Zetherström, Johan Niclas: Rikets nytta af välbelönte ämbetsmän, tänkande informatorer och 
utvalde studerande (Stockholm, 1765). 
Zetterberg, J. Peter: “The mistaking of ‘the mathematicks’ for magic in Tudor and 
Stuart England”, The sixteenth century journal 11:1 (1980), 83–97. 
Öhrberg, Ann: Samtalets retorik. Belevade kulturer och offentlig kommunikation i svenskt 1700-
tal (Höör, 2014). 

 
 
231
Index of names 
Agner, Eric, 54 
Alder, Ken, 21–24 
Archimedes, 148 
Aristotle, 65, 120 
Aurelius, Aegidius Matthiæ, 98–100 
Bacon, Francis, 30, 150 
Barchaus, Anders, 92 
Beaumelle, Laurent Angliviel de La, 80 
Bennett, Jim, 19, 66 
Benzelius, Erik, 124, 136–139, 147–
149, 151 
Benzelstierna, Lars, 108 
Berch, Anders, 106 
Bergenstierna, Daniel, 105 
Bergman, Torbern, 196 
Biagioli, Mario, 29 
Bielke, Carl Gustaf, 170 
Bielke, Thure Gabriel, 170 
Bierchenius, Gustaf, 103 
Bohman (county sheriff), 189–190 
Bonde, Lars Fredric, 92 
Boyle, Robert, 30 
Brandt, Georg, 56, 58, 69, 72–73, 103–
105, 110, 112–122, 164, 196 
Bratt, Anders, 110 
Brauner, Johan, 159, 183, 192 
Brelin, Nils, 49 
Buddeaus, Johann Franz, 45 
Buschenfelt, Samuel (the younger), 96 
Butler, Judith, 17 
Camitz, Johan, 91 
Celsius, Anders, 48, 56–57, 60–62, 69, 
72, 99, 165, 173–174, 191, 196 
Celsius, Olof, 108 
Charles XII, king of Sweden. See Karl 
XII, king of Sweden 
Christina, Queen of Sweden, 83 
Corneanu, Sorana, 30 
Cronberg, Magnus, 170–172 
Cronstedt, Axel Fredrik, 109 
Daedalus, 148–150, 155 
Dalin, Olof von, 48 
Daston, Lorraine, 15 
de Certeau, Michel, 16, 77–78 
Descartes, René, 30 
Didron, Johan Fredrik, 191 
Duhre, Anders Gabriel, 38, 56, 65, 67, 
69, 73–74, 76, 82, 94, 100–105, 122, 
157–199, 201, 205–208 
Duhre, Carl Gabriel, 160–161, 163, 
165, 175, 193 
Duhre, Gabriel Andersson, 160 
Dunér, David, 135 
Ehrenfried Tschirnhaus, Walter von, 
67, 166 
Ekström, Daniel, 47– 49, 51–52, 196 
Elfwing, Birger, 132–133 
Elvius, Pehr (the elder), 143–144, 162 
Elvius, Pehr (the younger), 48, 74, 99 
Enander, Samuel, 71 
Ersdotter, Kiersten, 180 
Euclid, 53, 63, 99 
Fahlander, Per, 89, 107 
Fehman, Tomas, 176 
Feif, Casten, 126, 136, 138–147, 153–
154, 156 
Fletcher, Anthony, 42, 52, 70 
Fors, Hjalmar, 14, 34, 84, 87, 103 
Francke, August Hermann, 166 
Frederik IV, king of Denmark–
Norway, 130 
Friedrich II, Duke of Saxe-Gotha, 128 
Friedrich II, king of Prussia, 130 
Fuchs, Thomas, 173, 196 
Galilei, Galileo, 29 
Garber, Daniel, 120 
Genette, Gerard, 40 
Grundelstierna, Jacob, 176 

 
 
232
Gyllenhök, Per Strömmer, 93 
Hacking, Ian, 23 
Hamilton, Hugo, 171 
Hanley, Sarah, 179 
Hanssen, Eric, 183, 186–187 
Happe, Gottlob Christian, 128 
Hartman, Petter, 177, 180, 190 
Hein, David, 153 
Heron of Alexandria, 116, 120 
Hildebrand, Bengt, 140, 196 
Hill, Katherine, 68 
Hiärne, Carl Urban, 93 
Hiärne, Erland Fredrich, 109 
Hiärne, Urban, 84, 93 
Hobbes, Thomas, 129 
Horn, Arvid, 143 
Horrn, Johan, 103 
Höpken, Anders Johan von, 48, 196 
Hörner, Christopher, 180 
Jacob, Margaret C., 14, 206 
Jansson, Karin Hassan, 181 
Jeansdotter, Anika, 177, 180–181 
Jones, Matthew L., 30 
Justi, Johann Heinrich Gottlob von, 
130 
Kantorowicz, Ernst Hartwig, 127 
Karl XI, king of Sweden, 84, 86, 126, 
142 
Karl XII, king of Sweden, 38, 40, 45, 
84, 124–126, 132–136, 138–139, 
141–147, 149, 152–157, 163, 170, 
197, 199, 203–204 
Karlsson, Åsa, 141 
Kihlgren, Lars, 188–189 
Klingenstierna, Samuel, 71, 165, 173, 
191, 196 
Klopper, Jan, 60 
La Motraye, Aubry de, 155 
Lauræus, Gabriel, 71 
Laurel, 40 
Laurel, Lars, 39–41, 50 
Lave, Jean, 81 
Leibnitz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 136 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 30 
Leijell, Carl, 91 
Lewenhaupt, Charles Emil, 192 
Lindberg, Bo, 52 
Lindqvist, Svante, 21–24, 66, 84, 87, 
102 
Linnaeus, Carl, 68 
Littmarck, Gustav, 91 
Locke, John, 30, 168, 184 
Louis XIV, king of France, 126, 129, 
134 
Lundström, Magnus, 101 
Marklund, Andreas, 179, 182 
Matzdotter, Gördid, 180 
Matzdotter, Kierstin, 180 
Mauss, Marcel, 16 
Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, 
32 
Medicus, Friedrich Casimir, 166 
Mejer, Margareta, 180 
Mennander, Carl Fredrik, 71 
Meurman, Carl, 60, 173 
Mokyr, Joel, 13–14, 206 
Molin, Lars, 170–171 
Månsel, Maria, 180 
Mörk, Jacob Hendrik, 49 
Mört, Johan, 11, 31, 174, 176–177 
Newton, Isaac, 104 
Nordberg, Jöran Andersson, 155 
Nordbäck, Carola, 44 
Ong, Walter, 52, 54 
Palmqvist, Fredrik, 99–100 
Pascal, Blaise, 30 
Peter I, tsar of Russia, 134 
Polhammar, Christopher, 38–40, 51, 
67–68, 72–76, 82, 84–86, 100–105, 
122, 124–26, 132, 136–152, 154–
156, 159, 161–163, 178–179, 197, 
199, 201, 203–204, 206, 208 
Polhammar, Christopher the younger, 
101 
Polhammar, Gabriel, 101–102 
Polhem, Christopher. See Polhammar, 
Christopher 
Ramus, Petrus, 65 
Rangelius, N.N., 101 
Rinman, Sven, 109 
Roche, Daniel, 25 
Rohr, Julius Bernhard von, 61, 65 
Roper, Michael, 42 
Rosén, Nils, 61, 65, 69 

 
 
233
Rydelius, Andreas, 45, 55, 59–61, 63, 
66, 119, 149 
Sahlstedt, Abraham, 70 
Savin, Kristina, 44 
Sawday, Jonathan, 128, 150 
Schaffer, Simon, 23 
Schnack, Jonas, 91 
Schreber, Gottfried, 166 
Schultze, Lars, 112–113, 115 
Sewell, William, 75 
Shapin, Steven, 23–24, 28–29, 202 
Sibum, H. Otto, 15, 17, 77 
Silfwerhielm, Göran, 171–172 
Sloane, Hans, 136 
Smith, Jay, 28–29, 129, 145 
Snickare, Mårten, 46 
Sohlberg, Samuel, 102–103 
Stromberg, Nils, 138, 145, 147 
Strömer, Mårten, 53, 71, 99, 196–197 
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 126, 136–138, 
147–152, 155–157 
Tessin, Nicodemus (the younger), 
142–143, 146–147, 189 
Thomasius, Christian, 45, 153–154 
Tilas, Daniel, 86, 93, 108–109 
Tosh, John, 42 
Triewald, Mårten, 39, 50 
Uhr, Isaac Johan, 106–107, 122 
Ulff, Samuel Crispin, 95 
Ulrika Eleanora, Queen of Sweden, 46 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de, 
135 
Wakefield, Andre, 33, 128 
Wallerius, Göran, 100 
Wallström, Peter, 93 
Wargentin, Pehr, 49, 196 
Weber, Max, 42 
Weidler, Johan Friedrich, 176 
Wenger, Etienne, 81 
Westerberg, Peter, 91 
Whitmer, Kelly J., 55 
Widmalm, Sven, 96 
Wolff, Christian, 174 
Wrangel, Carl Henrik, 192 
Wrede, Fabian, 84, 138–139 
Zanger, Abby E., 127 
Zetherström, Johan Niclas, 80 
 


 
Institutionen för idé- och lärdomshistoria 
Uppsala universitet 
Uppsala Studies in History of Ideas (Nr 1-32: Skrifter) 
 
Editors: Sven Widmalm och H. Otto Sibum 
 
1. Per-Gunnar Ottosson, Scholastic Medicine and Philosophy: A Study of 
Commentaries of Galen’s Tegni (ca. 1300–1450) (1982) 
2. Franz Luttenberger, Neuroser och neuroterapi ca. 1880–1914 (1982) 
3. Roy Porter, The History of Medicine: Past, Present, and Future (1983) 
4. Tore Frängsmyr, Liten handbok för avhandlings- och uppsatsskrivare 
(1983) 
5. Anders Burius, Ömhet om friheten: Studier i frihetstidens censurpolitik 
(1984) 
6. Per-Gunnar Ottosson, Synen på pesten: Exempel och problem från svensk 
stormaktstid (1984) 
7. Hippokrates i urval, med inledning av Eyvind Bastholm (1984) 
8. Franz Luttenberger, Freud i Sverige: Psykoanalysens mottagande i svensk 
medicin och idédebatt (1988) 
9. Tore Frängsmyr, Science or History: Georg Sarton and the Positivist Tradi-
tion in the History of Science (1989). Nytryck ur Lychnos 1973/74 
10. Sven Widmalm, Mellan kartan och verkligheten: Geodesi och kartläggning, 
1695–1860 (1990) 
11. Lars Sellberg, Av kärlek till Fosterland och Folk: Gabriel Djurklou och 
dialektforskningen (1993) 
12. Urban Wråkberg, Vetenskapens vikingatåg: Perspektiv på svensk polar-
forskning 1860–1930 (1995). Ny upplaga 1999. 
13. Thomas H. Brobjer, Nietzsche’s Ethics of Character: A Study of Nie-
tzsche’s Ethics and its Place in the History of Moral Thinking (1995) 
14. Per Dahl, Svensk ingenjörskonst under stormaktstiden: Olof Rudbecks 
tekniska undervisning och praktiska verksamhet (1995) 
15. Suzanne Gieser, Den innersta kärnan: Djuppsykologi och kvantfysik, Wolf-
gang Paulis dialog med C.G. Jung (1995) 
16. Mikael Hörnqvist, Machiavelli and the Romans (1996) 
17. Tore Frängsmyr, ed., Nordström och hans skola: Bakgrund – nuläge –  
utveckling (1997) 
18. Tore Frängsmyr, Den gudomliga ekonomin: Religion och hushållning i 
1700-talets Sverige (1997) 
19. Gunnar Matti, Det intuitiva livet: Hans Larssons vision om enhet i en splitt-
rad tid (1999) 
20. Olov Amelin, Medaljens baksida: Instrumentmakaren Daniel Ekström och 
hans efterföljare i 1700-talets Sverige (1999) 

 
21. Gunnar Eriksson & Karin Johannisson, eds., Den akademiska gemenskap-
en: Universitetets idé och identitet, ett symposium till Tore Frängsmyrs 60-
årsdag (1999) 
22. Karl Grandin, Ett slags modernism i vetenskapen: Teoretisk fysik i Sverige 
under 1920-talet (1999) 
23. Martin Bergström, Anders Ekström & Frans Lundgren, Publika kulturer: 
Att tilltala allmänheten, 1700-1900. En inledning (2000) 
24. Karin Johannisson, Naturvetenskap på reträtt: En diskussion om naturve-
tenskapens status under svenskt 1700-tal (2001). Nytryck ur Lychnos 
1979/80 
25. Gunnar Eriksson, Olof Rudbeck d.ä. (2001). Nytryck ur Lychnos 1984 
26. Adrian Thomasson, En filosof i exil: Ernst Cassirer i Sverige, 1935–41 
(2001) 
27. Urban Josefsson, Det romantiska tidehvarfvet: De svenska romantikernas 
medeltidsuppfattning (2002) 
28. Olof Ljungström, Oscariansk antropologi: Exotism, förhistoria och ras-
forskning som vetenskaplig människosyn (2002)  
29. Oskar Pettersson, Politisk vetenskap och vetenskaplig politik: Studier i 
svensk statsvetenskap kring 1900 (2003) 
30. Hjalmar Fors, Mutual Favours: The Social and Scientific Practice of Eight-
eenth-Century Swedish Chemistry (2003) 
31. Ulrika Nilsson, Kampen om Kvinnan: Professionaliseringsprocesser och 
konstruktioner av kön i svensk gynekologi 1860–1925 (2003) 
32. Peter Josephson, Den akademiska frihetens gränser: Max Weber, Hum-
boldtmodellen och den värdefria vetenskapen (2005) 
33. Daniel Lövheim, Att inteckna framtiden: Läroplansdebatter gällande natur-
vetenskap, matematik och teknik i svenska allmänna läroverk 1900–1965 
(2006) 
34. Shamal Kaveh, Det villkorade tillståndet: Centralförbundet för Socialt Ar-
bete och liberal politisk rationalitet 1901–1921 (2006) 
35. Tobias Dahlkvist, Nietzsche and the Philosophy of Pessimism: A Study of 
Nietzsche’s Relation to the Pessimistic Tradition: Schopenhauer, Hart-
mann, Leopardi (2007) 
36. Tony Gustafsson, Läkaren, döden och brottet: Studier i den svenska rätts-
medicinens etablering (2007) 
37. Emma Shirran, Samhälle, vetenskap och obstetrik: Elis Essen-Möller och 
kvinnokliniken i Lund (2007) 
38. Torbjörn Gustafsson Chorell, Fascination (2008) 
39. Annika Berg, Den gränslösa hälsan: Signe och Axel Höjer, folkhälsan och 
expertisen (2009) 
40. Mathias Persson, Det nära främmande: Svensk lärdom och politik i en tysk 
tidning, 1753–1792 (2009) 
41. Louise Nilsson, Färger, former, ljus. Svensk reklam och reklampsykologi, 
1900–1930 (2010) 

 
42. Jenny Ingemarsdotter, Ramism, Rhetoric and Reform. An Intellectual Biog-
raphy of Johan Skytte (1577–1645) (2011). 
43. Maria Björk, Problemet utan namn? Neuroser, stress och kön i Sverige från 
1950 till 1980. (The Problem that had no Name? Neurosis, Stress and 
Gender in Sweden 1950-1980) (2011) 
44. David Thorsén, Den svenska aidsepidemin. Ankomst, bemötande, innebörd. 
(2013) 
45.  My Klockar Linder, Kulturpolitik. Formeringen av en modern kategori (2014)  
46. Jacob Orrje, Mechanicus. Performing an Early Modern Persona (2015) 
 
Beställningar gällande nr. 1–32 skall ställas till:  
Inst. för idé- och lärdomshistoria 
Uppsala universitet 
Box 629 
751 26 Uppsala 
 
Beställningar gällande fr.o.m. nr. 33 skall ställas till: 
Uppsala universitetsbibliotek 
Box 510 
751 20 Uppsala 
 
ISSN 1653-5197 


