•
•
•
•
Research Article 
The Influence of Shyness on Language Assessment 
Liesl Melnicka and Sarah C. Kuckera 
a Department of Psychology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater 
A R  T  I  C L E  
I  N  F  O  
Article History: 
Received June 20, 2022 
Revision received September 21, 2022 
Accepted May 31, 2023 
Editor-in-Chief: Stephen M. Camarata 
Editor: Mary Alt 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2023_JSLHR-22-00362 
Correspondence to Sarah C. Kucker: skucker@smu.edu. Sarah C. 
Kucker is currently at Southern Methodist University, University 
Park, TX. Disclosure: The authors have declared that no competing 
financial or nonfinancial interests existed at the time of publication. 
A B  S T  R  A  C  T  
Purpose: The goal of this study is to examine how shyness affects a child’s per-
formance on language assessments that vary in sociability. We hypothesized that 
accuracy on language tasks would be driven by shyness such that shyer children 
would perform better on nonsociable tasks compared to sociable tasks. 
Method: The procedures followed a quasi-experimental design. One hundred 
twenty-two participants, ages 17–42 months and varying in their tempera-
ment, each underwent a series of three language tasks. The order of tasks 
was randomized, and each task varied in the social interaction required: a look-
ing task, a pointing task, and a production task. Data were collected via Zoom, 
and parents reported their child’s shyness level via the Early Child Behavior 
Questionnaire. 
Results: Shyness was compared with participants’ accuracy across the three 
tests while controlling for age and vocabulary percentile. There were significant 
differences in children’s performance across the tasks, with respect to shyness. 
Shyer children performed worse on the production task compared to less shy 
children. All children did well on the pointing task regardless of shyness level, 
but performance was more nuanced on the looking task such that shyer chil-
dren were at times more accurate but also less likely to respond in general. 
Conclusions: As shown by these results, shyer and less shy children respond 
differentially to methods of language assessment that vary in sociability. It is 
important for clinicians to acknowledge shyness when choosing an appropriate 
assessment of children’s language. Future direction includes assessing perfor-
mance on standardized assessments. 
Supplemental Material: https://doi.org/10.23641/asha.23845521 
Children’s temperament drives their responses to the 
environment around them, including who they interact 
with and the nature of their interaction. Temperament 
also influences what and how children learn and how they 
express what they have learned. Children’s learning and 
behavior are shaped in return by the environment. This is 
especially true when it comes to testing a child’s learning, 
such as in language assessment where the style of tasks 
and environments where they are administered can vary 
widely. Though children will typically have a robust 
vocabulary by the second year of life, a child’s tempera-
ment, the environment, and task together must support 
their ability to bring that vocabulary knowledge to bear in 
a given moment. 
This study probes how temperament, and specifi-
cally shyness, influences children’s response to language 
and vocabulary tasks. Specifically, each type of vocabu-
lary task has different demands, especially in the amount 
of social interaction required (i.e., talking vs. gesturing vs. 
looking). Variability in these social elements may differen-
tially impact performance, leading to invalid conclusions 
about a child’s vocabulary. The key question is to what 
extent a child’s temperament, in combination with task 
constraints, ought to be considered. 
Relationship Between Language 
and Shyness 
Shyness, a facet of temperament, can be defined as 
feelings of distress and tension within social situations, spe-
cifically apprehension, awkwardness, and self-consciousness
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Copyright © 2023 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
3588
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

(Buss & Plomin, 1984). Unlike broad dimensions of tem-
perament such as effortful control (i.e., traits of self-
regulation) or surgency (i.e., traits of sociability and 
responsiveness), which capture traits of an individual 
regardless of situation, shyness specifically encompasses a 
child’s approach/avoidance to their social surroundings. 
For instance, shyer children want to interact but are inhib-
ited by social fear (Asendorpf, 1990). Shyness is thus 
uniquely related to social communication and language. 
Shyness is the opposite of sociability (spending time with 
and being responsive to others; Buss & Plomin, 1984). 
Importantly, shyness differs from both social anxiety and 
introversion; social anxiety is an extreme form of shyness 
that includes high neuroticism (Hofmann & DiBartolo, 
2010), and shyness manifests as a combination of both 
introversion and neuroticism (Briggs, 1988). 
Shyness emerges from both external social elements 
such as parent and peer interactions and internal inhibi-
tory processes (Eggum et al., 2009). In infancy, children 
first display shyness by appearing fearful, anxious, and 
wary when interacting with strangers. Around 1 year of 
age (the same age at which children typically begin speak-
ing one-word utterances; Bloom, 1973), children are intro-
duced to robust social contexts and begin to develop 
social skills. Due to their wariness of strangers, shyer chil-
dren may evade these social interactions (Buss & Plomin, 
1984; Putnam et al., 2006), which is a component of 
behavioral inhibition (i.e., the tendency to physically with-
draw from unfamiliar people or events, including social 
communication). 
During 
their 
second 
year, 
children 
develop an understanding of social and behavioral stan-
dards; because of this, shyer children then begin to evade 
interactions due to a fear of peer evaluation (Emde et al., 
2001). 
Once 
children 
reach 
school 
age, 
shyness 
is 
expressed by embarrassment when one is the center of 
attention (Crozier, 2001). Thus, from 1 to 5 years, shyness 
manifests primarily as fearfulness of strangers, which trig-
gers behavioral inhibition in social situations (Putnam & 
Rothbart, 2006). This can lead to fewer physical and 
verbal interactions. It is then no surprise that shyness also 
influences language and communication. 
During the developmental period in which shyness is 
emerging (years 1–3), children’s language and verbal skills 
are also rapidly developing and can interact with tempera-
ment. For instance, positive emotionality, attention, and 
social orientation are related to larger vocabularies (W. E. 
Dixon & Shore, 1997; Usai et al., 2009), and high shy-
ness is related to poorer language skills (Evans 1993; 
Slomkowski et al. 1992; K. A. Spere et al., 2004). Indeed, 
the interaction of shyness and language is a fundamental 
part of the definition of shyness, such that an element of 
shyness includes talking less, being quieter, and engaging 
less with conversational partners (Buss & Plomin, 1984; 
Coplan & Evans, 2009; Crozier, 1995; Evans, 1987; K. A. 
Spere et al., 2009). Not surprisingly, research finds shyer 
children tend to speak less in unfamiliar situations and 
engage in fewer conversations compared to their sociable 
peers (Asendorpf & Meier, 1993; Evans, 1987; K. A. 
Spere et al., 2009). This means shyness could hinder a 
child’s ability to successfully interact with others or use 
language effectively. 
Certain contexts may hinder shyer children’s lan-
guage use more than less shy children due to their reti-
cence in novel situations, especially social ones (Smith 
Watts et al., 2014). Research supports this idea, suggesting 
that shyness negatively influences children’s performance 
on some language assessments across a variety of settings. 
Hilton and Westermann (2017) showed that in a lab set-
ting, when children are presented with both familiar and 
novel items and asked to “find the cheem,” shyer children 
are less likely to identify the correct novel target compared 
to sociable children. Additionally, in a classroom or clinic 
setting, shyer children tend to score lower on standardized 
receptive and expressive language tasks (K. A. Spere 
et al., 2004). Furthermore, there is evidence that shyer 
children typically speak less, with shorter utterances, and 
perform more poorly on expressive language assessments 
(Evans, 1987, 1993). However, it is unclear if these find-
ings stem from the socially demanding circumstances of 
the assessment or from poorer language skills since no 
studies have examined the same children across multiple 
types 
of 
assessments 
that 
vary 
in 
social 
interaction 
demands. Additionally, while most temperament work has 
been done with preschool children, the vocabulary spurt 
occurs much earlier, around 18–24 months. Thus, examin-
ing younger populations may be beneficial. 
Theoretical Background 
While shyer children’s language acquisition differs 
from 
sociable 
children’s, 
the 
conceptual 
mechanisms 
underlying this phenomenon have been debated. Coplan 
and Evans (2009) suggested four major theories to explain 
the relationship between shyness and language. First, the 
“lack of practice makes lack of perfect” model suggests 
social ineptitude hinders shyer children’s chances to prac-
tice language, which leads to less robust skills. Another 
hypothesis, “bold is better,” predicts shyer children do not 
innately have impaired language, but rather, less shy chil-
dren have an advantage due to their willingness to prac-
tice language often. A third model, “a bird in the hand is 
worth two in the bush,” suggests that since shyer children 
are less likely to take risks (i.e., engaging in novel social 
situations), this limits their exposure to language and their 
opportunities to produce language socially—thereby hin-
dering 
their 
language 
development. 
Similarly, 
other
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3589
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
researchers have found that shyness may decrease a child’s 
ability to maintain attention to a language task. This sug-
gests shyer children may struggle to attend to objects and 
relevant language exposure, influencing vocabulary growth 
(Hilton et al., 2019). 
The final hypothesis and focus here is called the “I 
know it but won’t say it” model (Coplan & Evans, 2009). 
This hypothesis states the reason shyer children struggle to 
perform well on language tasks is not because they are lin-
guistically incapable, but rather because their shyness 
inhibits them from demonstrating knowledge through 
speech. That is, requiring a child to interact with an unfa-
miliar 
individual 
during 
a 
language 
assessment 
may 
heighten children’s shyness, influencing their performance 
(Crozier & Hostettler, 2003). Indeed, shyer children per-
form much better on vocabulary tests in a group environ-
ment rather than one-on-one (Crozier & Hostettler, 2003). 
This evidence—as well as evidence that shyer children per-
form better on receptive versus expressive language tasks 
(Evans 1993; K. Spere & Evans, 2009; K. A. Spere et al., 
2004)—indicates assessments with fewer social demands 
may lead to better performance for shyer children. Thus, 
it is possible that shyness does not inhibit language devel-
opment, but rather social elements prevent shyer children 
from demonstrating their linguistic abilities within the 
frame of the assessment. Accordingly, shyer children may 
perform more accurately on a test in which they do not 
verbally produce a response but can demonstrate knowl-
edge in another capacity, such as by shifting their gaze or 
pointing. 
Components of Language Use 
Speech is the most prominent element of language 
communication. However, language also involves compre-
hension of another’s speech, responsiveness toward a 
social partner, and the use of pragmatics (e.g., eye con-
tact, gestures, facial expression, prosody, and tone) when 
both listening and speaking. Not surprisingly, research 
shows shyer children have poorer pragmatic skills com-
pared to less shy children (Coplan & Weeks, 2009) and 
that the development of socio-communicative skills may 
be slower in shyer children (Coplan & Armer, 2005). 
Thus, shyer children who struggle with social communica-
tion may prefer interactions with less pragmatic elements 
than speaking, such as looking or pointing. 
During social communication, looking is perhaps 
the least socially demanding, as it has minimal pragmatic 
elements. The ability to look in a communicative context 
arises from early joint attention abilities, which includes 
following the direction of another’s gaze and eventually 
directing the attention of their social partner to an object 
or event (Mundy et al., 2007). In contrast, pointing and 
speaking require the use of more pragmatic or social 
skills. Children begin to point as early as the end of their 
first year and use pointing as a tool to focus a social part-
ner on a particular referent. When a child looks at some-
thing and points, they also utilize their gaze to further 
direct their social partner (Werner & Kaplan, 1963). Thus, 
pointing requires additional pragmatic skills beyond just a 
look, further requiring social understanding and aptitude. 
Since 
communication 
through 
spoken 
language 
includes even more pragmatic elements (prosody, tone, 
pitch), it may make speech more burdensome for those 
with social reticence. That is, one must understand social 
context clues and use nuanced vocal elements to produce 
the correct and intended meaning. Looking, pointing, and 
speaking are all effective forms of communication but 
require different levels of social and pragmatic abilities. 
Due to shyer children’s tendency to engage less with social 
partners and have poorer pragmatic skills (Coplan & 
Weeks, 2009; Evans, 1987), they may be less likely to ver-
bally produce words due to the social nature of speaking 
but may respond better to interactions with fewer prag-
matic burdens. 
Variability Across Types of Language 
Assessments 
Formal language assessments vary in the degree of 
social interactions required from the participant, specifi-
cally in the form of pragmatic elements associated with 
communication. Indeed, accurate assessment of speech 
and communication disorders is vital to an individual’s 
success and a clinician’s work. However, variability in the 
amount and impact of social elements in each assessment 
may differentially impact performance for shyer children, 
impacting the validity of such assessments. For instance, 
current standardized language assessments and tests range 
from measurement of expressive language skills (e.g., 
Expressive Vocabulary Test [EVT]; Williams, 2019) to 
receptive skills (e.g., Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test 
[PPVT]; Dunn, 1997) to caregiver report of vocabulary 
size (e.g., MacArthur–Bates Communicative Development 
Inventory [MCDI]; Fenson et al., 1994). In addition, lan-
guage assessments in the clinic and lab often utilize speech 
samples and naturalistic conversations to support their 
assessment. Some of these formats require lots of social 
interaction (i.e., speaking or playing with the administra-
tor), whereas others lessen pragmatic demands through 
pointing or looking, which likely interacts with a child’s 
temperament. Each of these assessments uses tasks meant 
to test the child’s knowledge of vocabulary words, yet 
they vary in how they do so and to what extent they draw 
on both verbal and behavioral or pragmatic elements. 
One method that is particularly low in social demands
3590
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

and pragmatic elements (and thus, possibly less influenced 
by shyness) is looking-based tasks. This method measures 
language comprehension without requiring the child to 
speak to or interact with the administrator, such as 
the Intermodal 
Preferential 
Looking 
Procedure 
(IPLP; 
Golinkoff et al., 1987). The IPLP assesses the emergence of 
vocabulary without requiring children to indicate their 
understanding through a purposeful action. Children are 
shown two images sidebyside and hear a word matching 
one of the images. Then, their eye movement and total 
gaze time are recorded (Golinkoff et al., 1987). Several 
studies demonstrate that IPLP and similar looking-based 
tasks reliably measure vocabulary comprehension across a 
variety of ages and demographic groups (Golinkoff et al., 
2013; Houston-Price et al., 2007). Importantly, however, 
little is known about how temperament might influence 
performance. 
Compared to looking-based tasks, other methods of 
vocabulary testing require more social interaction. For 
example, pointing or reaching methods require children to 
point to or select an item from a variety of options that 
matches a given word. Because a pointing task requires 
more pragmatic elements than a looking task, including 
the style of pointing and the conjunction of point with 
gaze shifting, this type of task may be more difficult for 
shyer children. Indeed, Gurteen et al. (2011) found that 
13- to 17-month-old children performed well at a preferen-
tial looking measure of word comprehension and novel 
word learning but more poorly at a preferential reaching 
version. Similarly, Axelsson et al. (2022) found that 
approachability (social receptiveness) predicted accuracy 
on pointing tasks in 2.5-year-old children but did not pre-
dict accuracy on looking. 
Pointing 
tasks 
are 
common 
in 
the 
field. 
For 
instance, the PPVT (Dunn, 1997) requires children to 
point to images in a booklet. Many standardized lab-
based word learning tasks also require similar pointing or 
selecting 
(Heibeck 
& Markman, 1987; Stelmachowicz 
et al., 2004). Because shyer children struggle with interac-
tive behaviors (Putnam et al., 2006), this type of socially 
demanding receptive language task may be more difficult 
for them compared to less shy children (see also Hilton & 
Westerman, 2017). 
A third, more socially demanding, approach for cap-
turing children’s linguistic abilities is through productive 
or expressive means that require children to verbalize their 
response. Compared to looking and pointing, speaking 
innately has more pragmatic elements (prosody, intona-
tion, pitch, eye contact), and these social communication 
elements may prevent shyer children from vocalizing their 
response, even if they know the correct answer. Expressive 
language skills can be measured through assessments such 
as the Test of Auditory Analysis Skills (Rosner, 1979) or 
EVT (Williams, 2019) or through naturalistic observation 
of children’s conversations with adults. Comparatively, 
research shows that shyer children tend to perform worse 
on expressive language tasks compared to receptive lan-
guage tasks (Evans, 1993; K. Spere & Evans, 2009; K. A. 
Spere et al., 2004). 
Because linguistic tests for young children are usu-
ally performed face-to-face and require social interaction 
with people unfamiliar to a child, the social environment 
could interact with the child’s shyness, hindering their per-
formance. Thus, when interpreting the results of language 
tasks, it is essential to differentiate between measuring 
children’s competence and performance (Crozier, 1997). 
Examining performance across a variety of situations or 
testing conditions that vary in social demands can help 
with this problem. 
This Study 
The goal of this study is to examine the influence of 
shyness on language tasks that vary in degrees of social 
interaction and pragmatic elements but are similar in stim-
uli, environment/setting, and other cognitive demands. 
Performance on three different language tasks that vary in 
the social interaction required were assessed: a looking task, 
a pointing task, and a production task. The hypothesis was 
that even after accounting for age, accuracy on language 
tasks would be negatively correlated with a child’s shyness. 
More specifically, we predicted the strength of the correla-
tion would vary across tasks, with a stronger relationship 
for more socially demanding production tasks (i.e., tasks 
that require children to verbally interact with the experi-
menter) and a weaker relationship for reaching- and espe-
cially looking-based tasks. Less shy children are predicted 
to be equally accurate across all tasks. 
Method 
Participants 
This study was approved by the institutional review 
board 
at 
Oklahoma 
State 
University. 
One 
hundred 
twenty-two children ages 17–42 months and their parents 
participated. 
All 
children 
were 
monolingual 
English 
speakers and were primarily from the central southern 
United States. See Table 1 for demographic information. 
For the recruitment process, researchers posted advertise-
ments on various social media platforms, with inclusion-
ary criteria being children who were monolingual English 
speakers and between the ages of 17 and 42 months, and 
exclusionary data being diagnosed with developmental
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3591
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
disabilities or being exposed to another language more 
than 50% of the time. Each participant was compensated 
with a $20 Amazon gift card. An additional five children 
were dropped from the analysis for being bilingual (n = 3)  
or due to Internet connectivity issues (n = 2). 
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of the sample. 
Characteristic
M
SD
Range 
Child age (months;days)
28;6
6;14
17;2–43;4 
Child gender
n = 63 female 
Child vocabulary 
MCDI-WS (n = 75)
197
184
3–676 
MCDI-III (n = 46)
50.3
27.7
2–95 
ECBQ - shyness facet
3.6
1.4
1–6.7 
Parent educationa 
6.5
3
3–9 
Parent incomea 
8.5
1
1–17 
Race 
White
n = 88  
Black
n = 1  
Native American
n = 0  
Asian
n = 4  
Mixed race
n = 27  
Not listed
n = 1  
Hispanic
n = 1  
a Education was  rank ordered with 1 as less than 7th grade and  8 as  
doctoral degree; a score of 6 indicated a 4-year college degree. 
Income was also rank ordered with a 1 as “less than $10,000” and 9 
as “more than $100,000.” MCDI-WS = MacArthur–Bates Communica-
tive Development Inventories: Words and Sentences; MCDI-III = 
MacArthur–Bates Communicative Development Inventories–III; ECBQ = 
Early Child Behavior Questionnaire. 
Materials/Stimuli 
Word/Item List 
A list of 24 nouns taken from Wordbank (Frank 
et al., 2017) was used for all tasks. These words had the 
highest 
probability 
of 
being 
known 
by 
children 
at 
17 months and had a typical or universal image that cor-
responded with them (e.g., the word “Momma” does not 
have a universal image, whereas “shoe” might). Five images 
of each item were normed by members of the lab (n = 14) 
blind to study goals, who were instructed to select the 
closest image to the target word (or note “none”), keeping 
in mind that the pictures were for children. Items that did 
not have a majority vote were reassessed; for instance, 
“duck” had split votes between a real duck and rubber 
duck. To reassess, members of the lab were given further 
direction to consider the frequency at which children 
would encounter the item represented in the image and 
voted again, this time deciding between the two images 
with the most votes. Final images can be found in Appendix 
1 on the Open Science Framework (OSF): https://osf.io/ 
hwrma/?view_only=905f836347114826a54e57d6d1c10cf1. 
Temperament 
The Early Child Behavior Questionnaire (ECBQ)– 
Short Form (Putnam et al., 2006) was used to measure 
temperament. The ECBQ is designed to capture parent-
reported temperament for children 12–36 months old. The 
questions ask parents to rate how often their children per-
form a certain behavior on a scale of 1–7. Responses are 
clustered according to three temperament dimensions: 
effortful control (EC), negative affect (NA), and surgency 
(S). Additionally, within these dimensions, 18 subdimen-
sions are measured: activity level/energy (S), attentional 
shifting (EC), attentional focusing (EC), cuddliness (EC), 
discomfort 
(NA), 
fear 
(NA), 
frustration 
(NA), 
high-
intensity pleasure (S), impulsivity (S), inhibitory control 
(EC), low-intensity pleasure (EC), motor activation (NA), 
perceptual sensitivity (NA), positive anticipation (S), sad-
ness (NA), shyness (NA), sociability (S), and soothability 
(NA). The subdimension of shyness was the focus of this 
study. The ECBQ-Short Form includes a total of 107 
items, of which five correspond to the shyness subscale. 
An example is: “When approached by an unfamiliar per-
son in a public place, how often did your child pull back 
and avoid the person?” (Putnam et al., 2006). The ques-
tionnaire was scored according to the published standard 
(Putnam et al., 2006), and children were given a score 
from 1 to 7, with 1 being the least shy and 7 being the 
shyest. See OSF for the other dimensions. The ECBQ 
demonstrates good internal reliability with an average 
Cronbach’s α of .74 (range: .65–.83). 
Vocabulary 
The MCDI (Fenson et al., 1994) was used to assess 
children’s vocabulary. Caregivers completed either the 
Words and Sentences version (MCDI:WS; for children 
17–30 months; Fenson et al., 1994) or the MCDI-III (for 
children over 30 months; Dale & Fenson, 1996) depending 
on their child’s age. Both vocabulary scales have reported 
strong reliability and criterion validity (Dale & Fenson, 
1996). The MCDI:WS also has strong published internal 
reliability with an α of .96 (Fenson et al., 1994). Each 
form has its own norms; thus, the normative vocabulary 
percentile score was used in the analyses instead of raw 
vocabulary size. Because vocabulary percentile is also used 
to assess children’s language delays, such as if they are 
late talkers (< 20th percentile), the inclusion here can also 
give insight on how relative vocabulary abilities for one’s 
age impact performance on these tasks. 
Procedure 
Parents completed the consent form, the ECBQ 
(Putnam et al., 2006), the MCDI, and demographic infor-
mation via a web link within a few days of the language 
tasks (M = 1.45 days, SD = 3.77). The language tasks
3592
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

were conducted via Zoom by an examiner, through a 
shared screen PowerPoint presentation. Examiners were 
research assistants, naive to the hypothesis and the child’s 
temperament. Examiners had prior training in research 
methods in the social sciences and experience working 
with children in a research environment. Examiners were 
trained on the specific experimental methods by the 
authors and completed a series of practice trials prior to 
leading a participant in the task themselves. During the 
Zoom, participants were able to see the examiner at all 
times. Interaction with the examiner prior to the main 
tasks was minimal and consisted only of a quick consent 
period with the parent. While the screen was shared for 
the main tasks, the examiner was present in a small 
picture-in-picture 
window. 
Parents 
were 
instructed 
to 
move the video of the examiner to the top middle portion 
of the participants’ screen, above images of the stimuli. 
The Zoom meeting was recorded, and the children’s 
responses were coded offline by research assistants naive 
to the hypothesis and children’s temperament. Children 
were seated in their parent’s lap or on their own, and par-
ents were instructed to adjust the camera as needed to 
center on the child. Parents were instructed to remain 
silent and only offer redirection if needed. 
Three different counterbalanced tasks were given to 
the participants, each of which measured vocabulary but 
varied in social and pragmatic elements. This included a 
production task, a pointing task, and a looking task. In 
the production task, the experimenter showed a single 
item on the screen and directly asked the child to verbally 
name it by asking, “What is this?” In the pointing task, 
two different images on either side of the screen were 
shown, and the child was instructed to point or reach for 
an image (i.e., “Can you point to the (target word)?”). In 
the looking task, two images were again shown on either 
side of the screen, and the child was prompted to “Look 
at the (target word).” Prompts were all given immediately 
after the image appeared on the screen, and children were 
given approximately 3 s to respond to each. 
The order of tasks was randomized, and each partici-
pant was given each task once. Each task began with warm-
up trials (one for production, two for pointing and looking 
with the target appearing once on either side), in which chil-
dren were offered correction and praise as needed. This was 
followed by six test trials without praise or correction. For 
each trial, experimenters only prompted the participant twice 
and then moved on, even if they did not respond. The 
orders of words and word pairs were randomized. 
Coding 
Research assistants, naive to the child’s tempera-
ment, coded each task. The coders were not the primary 
examiner on the child whom they were coding. Coders 
were trained on each coding type by the authors and 
achieved 90% reliability on a practice set of sample chil-
dren with these same tasks, created by both authors, prior 
to coding. In all cases, children whose responses matched 
the target were coded as correct. Any response that was 
not to the target was marked as “not correct.” This could 
include a choice to the foil item, an ambiguous answer, or 
a lack of response. The latter two “No Response” codes 
were included in the analysis (vs. being dropped from 
analysis as is standard) as a lack of a clear response may 
also indicate shyness (i.e., reticence to reply). Follow-up 
exploratory analyses examined the rate of No Response 
trials. Each task included task-specific coding directions, 
detailed below. 
Production 
For each production response, the correct number 
of phonemes was noted. Coders recorded which phonemes 
were said correctly or incorrectly (or not at all). Misarticu-
lation or accent variations were still considered correct. 
For example, if the correct response was “bee” and the 
child’s response was a southern-accented “beh,” it was 
marked as correct, but if the child produced “bug,” the 
response would be considered 50% correct because the 
first phoneme matches but not the second. A lack of a 
response was marked as 0% correct, which occurred in 
19.7% of the trials. The majority (68%) of children were 
reliability coded, with 92.47% agreement between coders. 
Any discrepancies were settled by a third coder. 
Pointing 
For pointing trials, research assistants indicated 
which item the child gestured toward. If the choice was 
the foil or it was unclear which item was the children’s 
final choice, it was marked as not correct. A total of 
15.7% of the trials were marked as “No Response” due to 
an ambiguous point or a lack of response altogether. The 
majority (69%) of children were reliability coded, with 
89.96% agreement between coders. Any discrepancies were 
settled by a third coder. 
Looking 
For the looking trials, frame-by-frame coding was 
done using ELAN (ELAN, 2022). Starting at the end of 
the prompt, coders recorded the participant’s gaze direc-
tion (i.e., left, right, center, or away from the screen) for 
each frame (every 33 ms). Two metrics were extracted 
from this: the total looking time to the target on each trial 
and moment-to-moment gaze trajectories across each time 
bin (each 33-ms frame segment) within a trial. The per-
centage of total time a child spent looking at the target on 
each trial was calculated for their overall accuracy. For 
moment-to-moment looking, the average time children
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3593
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
looked at the target in each time bin (each 33-ms frame 
segment) was averaged across all six trials. Approximately 
11.9% of frames were looks away from either item and 
marked as no responses. Here, 13% of children were reli-
ability coded, with 85.31% agreement between coders. 
Any discrepancies were settled by a third coder. 
Analysis 
This study sought to understand the differences 
between children’s performance on three language tasks 
that differed in the level of sociability required. The 
hypothesis was that accuracy across tasks would depend 
on children’s degree of shyness; that is, shyer children 
would perform worse on social tasks than nonsocial tasks. 
To test this hypothesis, two sets of analyses were run. 
First, bivariate correlations between shyness, age, vocabu-
lary percentile, and accuracy on each task were run to 
give an overview of relations between variables. Second, 
mixed-model regressions using the lmer package in R 
(Bates et al., 2015) were used to assess accuracy with 
follow-up tests using emmeans and emtrends (Lenth, 
2022). As suggested by prior work, analysis at the trial 
level can both avoid bias when calculating proportions 
from binomial data (correct vs. not) and increase power 
(P. Dixon, 2008; Jaeger, 2008). Thus, trial-by-trial responses 
were used here, resulting in linear models for production 
(in which number of phonemes per trial is the outcome) 
and overall looking (in which percent looking to the tar-
get on each trial is  the outcome), and logistic regressions  
for pointing (binomial for correct point or not) and look-
ing by frames (in which each frame is a binomial for cor-
rectly focused on target or not). In each model, fixed 
effects included a child’s shyness score as measured by 
the ECBQ (centered), age (in days, centered), and vocab-
ulary percentile (normative vocabulary rank, centered). 
Trial number was included as a covariate. We also 
included random effects when justified to increase power 
(Baayen et al., 2008). This included random intercepts of 
participant and item; the best-fitting model in most cases 
included both. The first overall model also included task as 
a predictor to determine if there were differences across 
tasks. As described below, this overall model was signifi-
cant, and thus, follow-up models examined tasks individu-
ally. t tests compared performance to chance (50%) in the 
pointing and looking trials. For visualization purposes, par-
ticipants were separated into shyer and less shy groups 
based on a median split of shyness scores (Mdn = 3.75).  
Finally, to measure reticence to respond, identical explor-
atory models predicting whether a child gave a response or 
not  were also run  for each task.  
Table 2. Overall accuracy across trial types and shyness groups. 
Response 
Production
Pointing
Lookinga 
Less shy
Shyer
Less shy
Shyer
Less shy
Shyer 
Correct
64.0% (45.2%)
43.2% (46.3%)
79.2% (40.6%)
68.9% (46.4%)
48.1% (30.2%)
50.1% (29.8%) 
Not correct 
Incorrect
21.3% (38.3%)
32.1% (43.2%)
9.6% (29.6%)
13.9% (34.6%)
43.6% (30.1%)
39.4% (29.5%) 
No response
14.7% (35.4%)
24.6% (43.2%)
11.1% (31.5%)
17.2% (37.8%)
8.3% (20.0%)
10.4% (19.9%) 
Note. 
Mean percentage across all children shown with SD in parentheses. Production measures overall average of the percentage of pho-
nemes across all children and trials, pointing is the overall average percentage of trials across all children, and looking is the overall average 
percentage of frames across all children. Shyness groups are based on median split. In the accuracy regressions, incorrect and no 
responses were collapsed together. 
a When looking is analyzed in the traditional manner, dropping the “looks away” frames, the overall % correct for less shy is 52.8% (31.2%) 
and shyer is 55.8% (31.4%). 
The main analyses were preregistered at OSF (https:// 
osf.io/hwrma/?view_only=905f836347114826a54e57d6d1c10cf1), 
with additional analyses noted as exploratory. All children 
who completed at least one trial in a task were included in 
the analysis, as were all trials in which the child was visibly 
present and/or could be at least partially heard. A priori 
power analyses estimated the sample collected would be 
sufficient to detect a small–medium effect. 
Results 
Overall, children completed the majority of each 
task despite the virtual modality. See Table 2 for descrip-
tive information of performance on each task. In the pro-
duction task, all children received all six trials. Across all 
production trials, children as a group were accurate on 
53.6% of the phonemes (SD = 46.9%, range: 0%–100%). 
In the pointing task, two children were dropped for being 
out of view and unable to be coded; the rest of the chil-
dren were largely accurate (M accuracy = 73.9% of trials, 
SD = 43.9%, range: 0%–100%), as a group choosing the 
target well above chance (50%), t(121) = 8.71, p < .001. 
In the looking task, eight children were out of frame, and 
the visibility of their eyes was limited. The remaining
3594
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

children were presented with all six trials. However, as fur-
ther explained below, children performed rather poorly in 
this task, with an overall accuracy of looking to the target 
on 49.1% of the frames on each trial (SD = 30.0%, range: 
0%–100%), no different from chance, t(109) = −0.60, p = 
.552. The surprisingly low performance is in contrast to 
prior work where children are relatively good at looking-
based tasks. However, the looking task was also scored in a 
manner that differed from prior work. Traditionally, frames 
in which a child looks away from the screen or does not 
respond are dropped prior to analysis, but here, we counted 
these looks away/no response frames as “not correct” to 
capture shyer children’s reticence. If instead, the looking 
task is analyzed in the more traditional way (dropping no 
response frames), children were above chance, focusing on 
the target, 53.8% of the time, t(109) = 2.51, p = .014.  
Correlation Analysis 
First, bivariate correlations were run comparing 
accuracy on each task, child’s age, vocabulary percentile, 
and shyness score. Shyness was negatively correlated with 
pointing and production accuracy, and when traditional 
analyses were used for looking (dropping no response 
frames), there was a significant positive correlation with 
accuracy. See Table 3. To examine the impact of age and 
vocabulary, additional regression analyses were then run. 
Regression: All Tasks Together 
Linear mixed-model regressions were used to assess 
trial-by-trial accuracy across tasks. The first full model 
included fixed factors of shyness (centered) and task (sum 
coded), which interacted with age, trial number, and 
vocabulary percentile (all centered). The best-fitting model 
included random intercepts of subject and item. There 
were significant effects of task (p < .001), age (p < .001), 
and vocabulary percentile (p < .001). There were also sig-
nificant interactions of Task and Shyness (p = .013), Task 
and Age (p < .001), Task and Vocabulary Percentile (p < 
.001), and a three-way interaction of Shyness, Task, and 
Vocabulary Percentile (p = .032). See Table 4. 
Table 3. Correlations between each variable and task performance. 
Variable
Age 
Vocabulary 
percentile
Shyness
Target looking 
Pointing 
accuracy 
Production 
accuracy 
Age 
Vocabulary percentile
.101 
[−.07, .27] 
Shyness
−.182* 
[−.35, −.01] 
−.136 
[−.30, .04] 
Target lookinga 
−.030 [−.23, .17]
−.018 
[−.22, .18] 
.099a 
[−.10, .29] 
Pointing accuracy
.385*** [.22, .53]
.291** 
[.12, .45] 
−.192* 
[−.36, −.01] 
.136 
[−.07, .33] 
Production accuracy
.621*** [.50, .72]
.389*** [.22, 
.53] 
−.300** 
[−.46, −.12] 
−.051 
[−.25, .15] 
.341*** [.17, .49] 
Note. 
95% confidence intervals are shown in brackets. Bolded items are significant. 
a Dropping the “looks away” trials (instead of counting them as not correct) results in a positive correlation between target looking and shy-
ness, r = .20* [−.00, .39]. 
*p < .05, two-tailed. **p < .01, two-tailed. ***p < .001, two-tailed. 
Overall, children performed better on pointing than 
either production (β = .19, SE = 0.02, p < .001) or look-
ing (β = −.23, SE = 0.03, p < .001), but overall perfor-
mance on production was similar to performance on look-
ing (β = −.03, SE = 0.03, p = .389). Shyness impacted 
each task differently—shyer children performed less accu-
rately on the production task compared to less shy peers, 
whereas shyness had the opposite effect on overall perfor-
mance on looking (see Figure 1). Indeed, examining just 
the most shy children found that they performed best on 
pointing over both production (β = .21, SE = 0.03, p < 
.001) and looking (β = −.22, SE = 0.04, p < .001), with 
performance on production and looking being no different 
(β = −.01, SE = 0.03, p = 1.00). Importantly, age 
impacted each task differently (see Figure 2) such that 
older children performed more accurately on production 
and slightly more accurately on pointing but relatively the 
same as younger children on looking. Finally, the same 
pattern held for vocabulary percentile—children with a 
higher normative vocabulary tended to perform more 
accurately on production and slightly more accurately on 
pointing but relatively the same as children with a lower 
vocabulary percentile on looking (see Figure 3). Nearly 
identical results are found for models that, instead of 
accuracy, predicted whether or not a child gave a No 
Response (see Supplemental Material S1): task (p < .001), 
age 
(p 
< 
.001), 
vocabulary 
percentile 
(p
=
 .024),
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3595
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
interactions of Task and Age (p < .001) and Task and 
Vocabulary (p < .001), and a three-way interaction of 
Shyness, Task, and Vocabulary (p =  .004) predict the 
number of times a child gave no response. Because of 
these 
task 
effects, 
each 
task 
was 
further 
analyzed 
individually. 
Figure 1. Relation between accuracy and shyness according to 
task. Linear regression lines shown for visualization purposes only. 
Table 4. Accuracy across tasks by shyness. 
Variable
χ2 
df
p 
Shyness
1.34
1
.247 
Task
105.72
2
< .001*** 
Age
53.77
1
< .001*** 
Vocabulary Percentile
23.69
1
< .001*** 
Trial
0.34
1
.559 
Shyness × Task
8.71
2
.013* 
Shyness × Age
0.14
1
.706 
Shyness × Vocabulary Percentile
0.13
1
.723 
Shyness × Trial
1.74
1
.187 
Task × Age
97.05
2
< .001*** 
Task × Vocabulary Percentile
39.79
2
< .001*** 
Task × Trial
0.02
2
.991 
Shyness × Task × Age
2.91
2
.233 
Shyness × Task × Vocabulary Percentile
6.89
2
.032* 
Shyness × Task × Trial
2.29
2
.318 
Note. 
If traditional analyses are used (dropping NR trials for all tasks), the results are nearly identical with 
the exception of a significant three-way interaction of Shyness × Task × Age instead of Shyness × Task × 
Vocabulary Percentile. See Supplemental Material S1. NR = No Response. 
*p < .05. ***p < .001. 
Regression: Production 
A linear mixed model was used to assess the propor-
tion of correct phonemes on each trial in the production
Figure 2. Relation between accuracy and age according to task. 
Linear regression lines shown for visualization purposes only.
3596
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

task. Fixed factors included shyness score, age, vocabulary 
percentile, and trial (all centered). Shyness interacted with 
the other factors. The best-fitting model included a ran-
dom intercept of subject and item. There were significant 
main effects of shyness (p = .040), age (p < .001), and 
vocabulary percentile (p < .001). Less shy children consis-
tently performed more accurately than shyer children, as 
did children who were older and had higher vocabulary 
percentiles (see Table 5 and Figures 4 and 5). Exploratory 
models predicted children’s rate of No Responses (see 
Supplemental Material S1). Here, age (p < .001) and 
vocabulary percentile (p < .001), but not shyness (p = 
.150), predicted if a child responded at all. There was also 
a significant interaction of Shyness and Trial (p = .036). 
There was no main effect of shyness as a predictor of No 
Responses; 
24.6% 
of 
shyer 
children’s
trials
 were
 No
Figure 3. Relation between accuracy and vocabulary percentile 
according to task. Linear regression lines shown for visualization 
purposes only. 
Table 5. Regression of trial-by-trial accuracy on production. 
Variable
β
t
p
 
Shyness
−.05
−2.08
.040* 
Age
.19
8.67
< .001*** 
Vocabulary Percentile
.12
5.35
< .001*** 
Trial
−.00
−0.14
.896 
Shyness × Age
.01
0.46
.649 
Shyness × Vocabulary Percentile
−.01
−0.48
.631 
Shyness × Trial
−.02
−1.57
.118 
*p < .05. ***p < .001. 
Figure 4. Relation between accuracy and age on the production 
task, split by shyness level. Median split used for shyness groups 
for visualization purposes only. 
Figure 5. Relation between accuracy and vocabulary percentile on 
the production task, split by shyness level. Median split used for 
shyness groups for visualization purposes only.
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3597
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
Responses, whereas 14.7% of the No Response trials were 
from less shy children (see Table 2). Taken together, chil-
dren who were shyer were less accurate on the production 
task, suggesting they had weaker vocabulary knowledge. 
However, as elaborated on in the discussion, there is no dif-
ference in reticence to respond on these production trials.
Regression: Pointing 
A logistic mixed-model regression was used to assess 
trial-by-trial performance on the pointing task. Fixed fac-
tors included shyness score, age, vocabulary percentile, 
and trial (all centered). Shyness interacted with the other 
factors. The best-fitting model included a random inter-
cept of subject and item. There was a significant effect of 
age (p <  .001) and vocabulary percentile (p = .001; see 
Table 6 and Figure 6). Importantly, as a group, children 
generally performed accurately at the task, with average 
performance well above 50% (M = 73.9%), t(121) = 8.71, 
p < .001. To further examine reticence, an exploratory 
model was run predicting No Responses (giving an answer 
vs. not). Again, there was a significant main effect of age 
(p < .001) and vocabulary percentile (p =  .044), but no 
effect of shyness; shyer children did not respond on 17.2% 
of the trials, compared to less shy children who did not 
respond on 11.1% of the trials. Thus, age and vocabulary, 
but not shyness, directly impact overall accuracy and reti-
cence to respond when pointing. 
Regression: Looking 
As noted above, children’s performance on the origi-
nal looking analysis was significantly lower than expected 
at only 49.1% accuracy (SD = 30.0%, range: 0%–100%), 
no different from chance, t(109) = −0.60, p = .552. This 
was surprising as looking tasks have traditionally had high 
validity, especially with well-known items such as those 
used here. However, the preregistered coding scheme used 
here varied from prior work—to capture shyer children’s 
hypothesized tendency to not respond at all, both looks to 
the incorrect item as well as looks away/no responses were 
counted as “not correct.” This could disproportionately 
penalize children for looking off screen at any point in a 
way that would not have impacted their performance in 
other tasks as much (e.g., pointing offscreen was very 
rare). Thus, we diverged from the preregistered analysis 
and instead dropped looks away from either item prior to 
analysis. See Supplemental Material S1 for the original 
preregistered looking analyses. 
Table 6. Regression of trial-by-trial accuracy on pointing. 
Variable
β
z
p
 
Shyness
−.19
−1.13
.258 
Age
.78
4.56 
< .001*** 
Vocabulary Percentile
.57
3.24
.001** 
Trial
.05
0.47
.636 
Shyness × Age
−.29
−1.57
.115 
Shyness × Vocabulary Percentile
.17
0.94
.350 
Shyness × Trial
−.13
−1.28
.202 
**p < .01. ***p < .001. 
Figure 6. Relation between accuracy and age on the pointing task, 
split by shyness level. Median split used for shyness groups for 
visualization purposes only. 
To 
assess looking 
performance, a 
linear 
mixed 
model was used to assess each child’s percent looking at 
the target on each trial. Fixed factors included shyness 
score, age, vocabulary percentile, and trial number (all 
centered). Shyness interacted with the other factors. The 
best-fitting model included a random intercept of subject 
and item. There were no significant effects (see Table 7).
Table 7. Regression of trial-by-trial accuracy on looking (traditional 
coding). 
Variable
β
t
p
 
Shyness
.03
1.86
.066 
Age
−.00
0.01
.943 
Vocabulary Percentile
.01
0.48
.631 
Trial
.01
0.66
.521 
Shyness × Age
.01
0.76
.447 
Shyness × Vocabulary Percentile
.02
−1.05
.294 
Shyness × Trial
−.00
−0.14
.887
3598
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

A model predicting No Responses showed only an effect 
of trial number (p =  .009). However, this analysis averages 
across the entire trial (which could last up to 3 s), which 
may not be informative if children begin to look away 
after initially focusing on the target. Thus, the time course 
of looking was also assessed.
A logistic mixed model was used to assess bin-by-
bin (frame-by-frame) looking to the target. Again, a tra-
ditional analysis (dropping frames in which children 
looked away from either item) was used here. This model 
included fixed factors of shyness, age, vocabulary percen-
tile, trial number, time bin (each sequential 33-ms frame 
chunk), 
and 
the 
interactions. 
Subject 
and 
item 
were 
included as random intercepts. There was a significant 
main effect of shyness (p = .034), time bin (p < .001), and 
an interaction of Shyness with Time Bin (p = .002). See  
Table 8. Over the course of the trial, children on average 
initially looked toward the target, but as the trial prog-
ressed, looking accuracy decreased (see Figure 7). Shyer 
children were more likely to stay focused on the target for 
significantly longer than less shy children before turning 
away. A nearly identical model was run to predict the num-
ber of frames in which a child refused to look at all (No 
Responses). This showed small effects of shyness (p = 
.054), a significant effect of time bin (p < .001), and signifi-
cant interactions of Shyness and Trial Number (p < .001)  
and Shyness with Time Bin (p = .013; see Supplemental 
Material S1). Here, less shy children overall had a No 
Response frame 8.3% of the time, whereas shyer children 
looked away 10.4% of the time (see Table 2). However, 
accuracy and the rate of No Responses were nuanced 
across time where the shyest children were more likely to 
look away in the first half of the trials (see Figure 8), but 
when they did look at the screen during this period, they 
were more accurate than their less shy peers (see Figure 7). 
Figure 7. Moment-by-moment looking to target across time bin (traditional analyses) in looking task. Median split used for shyness groups 
for visualization purposes only. 
Table 8. Accuracy across time bins in looking (traditional coding). 
Variable
β
z
p
 
Shyness
.15
2.12
.034* 
Age
−.02
−0.22
.823 
Vocabulary Percentile
.01
0.08
.934 
Trial
.05
0.60
.548 
Time Bin (frame)
−.18 
−18.47
< .001*** 
Shyness × Age
.07
1.02
.310 
Shyness × Vocabulary Percentile 
−.04
−0.66
.513 
Shyness × Trial
−.02
−1.61
.107 
Shyness × Bin
−.03
−3.07
.002** 
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001. 
Taken together, these results demonstrate that shy-
ness, age, and vocabulary percentile all influence accuracy 
and, at least when it comes to looking behavior, response
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3599
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
reticence on vocabulary tasks. Most importantly, there 
were significant differences in the impact of shyness. Chil-
dren generally performed best on pointing tasks despite 
their level of shyness. However, shyer children performed 
less accurately than less shy children on the production 
task. Comparatively, the evidence suggests that shyer chil-
dren may be slightly more accurate on looking tasks but 
initially showed reticence to engage as well. 
Figure 8. Moment-by-moment patterns of no-responses (looks away from screen) in looking task. Median split used for shyness groups for 
visualization purposes only. 
Discussion 
The main purpose of this study was to understand 
how shyness affects children’s performance on language 
assessment tasks that differ in the amount of social inter-
action required. Consistent with prior research (Hilton & 
Westermann, 2017; K. Spere & Evans, 2009; K. A. Spere 
et al., 2004), our findings indicated that overall, children 
performed better on pointing (receptive) compared to pro-
duction (expressive) tasks (see Figure 1). Importantly, this 
study tested young children (17–42 months) at an early 
crucial period in their language development. Our original 
hypothesis predicted that shyness would be negatively asso-
ciated with accuracy on all tasks and that shyer children 
would be worse at more social tasks compared to less social 
tasks. This was not entirely supported by our results. Spe-
cifically, children’s performance on the looking task (the 
least social) was generally lower than pointing, regardless 
of shyness. Also, on the pointing task (middle level of 
sociability required), age and vocabulary percentile pre-
dicted performance 
more than 
shyness. However, 
the 
results clearly demonstrated that for the production task 
(the most social task), shyness may have impacted chil-
dren’s performance. Each task is further discussed below. 
Production 
On the production task, age and vocabulary knowl-
edge significantly affected performance, such that older 
children and children with higher vocabulary percentiles 
were more accurate than younger children and those with 
smaller vocabularies (see Figures 4 and 5). Even when
3600
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

accounting for these factors, however, shyer children were 
significantly less accurate than less shy children on the 
production task, possibly because of the social and prag-
matic elements involved in requiring the child to speak. 
Importantly, shyer children’s performance on these pro-
duction trials was significantly lower than their perfor-
mance on pointing (see Figure 1), suggesting that some-
thing about production was harder for these children com-
pared to a nonverbal task. However, there were not signif-
icant differences in the rate of No Responses on produc-
tion trials for shyer children compared to less shy children 
(see Supplemental Material S1). Therefore, it was not 
likely reticence to speak that limited shyer children. Taken 
by itself, the production results suggest shyer children’s 
expressive knowledge is weak. However, when taken in 
conjunction with good performance on other tasks (partic-
ularly pointing), it implies that the story is more nuanced. 
Pointing 
On the pointing task, the results demonstrate that chil-
dren generally performed well, regardless of shyness, age, or 
vocabulary percentile. Most significantly, shyness did not, in 
general, hinder children’s pointing abilities. That is, even the 
shyest children were largely accurate and had low rates of 
No Responses. Age and vocabulary percentile, rather than 
temperament, appeared to be better predictors of abilities on 
such tasks with medium social demands. This thus gives evi-
dence that shyer children do possess vocabulary knowledge 
even if the production task did not demonstrate it. 
Looking 
All participants struggled with the looking task, gen-
erally performing barely above chance regardless of shy-
ness, age, or vocabulary percentile (see Figures 1–3). While 
contrary to our hypotheses, which predicted shyer children 
would still have some difficulty, the initial null effect of shy-
ness in the overall looking time is consistent with Axelsson 
et al. (2022; but see Hilton et al., 2019). Nonetheless, 
although all children performed poorly, the moment-by-
moment analysis across time bins/frames gives further 
insight into the effect of shyness at a more fine-grained 
level. Here, we find that shyer children actually performed 
better than the less shy children, especially during the first 
half of the trial (see Figure 7). This could be an indicator 
that the low level of interaction did not inhibit their per-
formance compared to their peers. However, shyer chil-
dren did show some reticence as they had higher rates of 
no responses, especially in these early time bins, suggesting 
there may still be some anxiety or uncertainty driving 
behavior. That is, shyer children were more likely to look 
away during the first part of a trial, but when they did 
attend to the task, they were more accurate than less shy 
children. This suggests there may be some social inhibition 
in shyer children but still prominent vocabulary knowledge. 
Beyond temperament, performance on the looking 
task provided insight about using Zoom-based looking 
measures. On average, children generally started looking 
toward the target initially but began to look away from it 
quickly thereafter, seemingly being distracted away from 
the task at hand. Why children looked elsewhere, espe-
cially in this virtual environment, is a key question for 
future work (see also Frank et al., 2016). 
Comparing Across Tasks 
Children’s overall accuracy on pointing was signifi-
cantly greater than their accuracy on production. As 
shown in Figure 1, while the shyest children generally per-
formed quite low on production (around 43%), they gener-
ally performed quite high on pointing tasks (around 68% 
accurate). There are several important notes about this 
disparity. 
First, 
shyer 
children 
consistently 
underper-
formed compared to less shy children on production at all 
ages. Second, the stimuli chosen for the tasks were 
straightforward, such that typically developing children at 
17 months of age have a high probability of knowing the 
answer (Fenson et al., 1994; Frank et al., 2017). Further, 
as a group, the children were well above 50% accurate on 
the pointing task, suggesting the majority of the children 
were able to understand words at that level of difficulty. 
Yet, shyer children were still less likely to verbally pro-
duce the correct responses on production trials. Notably, 
it is not simply that shyer children respond less (shyness 
was not a predictor in most of the No Response models), 
but rather that they give the wrong answer. 
There 
are 
other 
studies 
demonstrating 
similar 
results: At 2 years old, shyer children were less likely to 
verbally request or identify novel objects, although they 
had normal receptive language (Hilton & Westermann, 
2017), and at 4 years old, shyer children scored much 
lower on expressive language tasks compared to less shy 
children (K. A. Spere et al., 2004). K. Spere and Evans 
(2009)  found that for  children in kindergarten,  extreme  
shyness was strongly correlated with poor literacy and 
reading skills. This study suggests that shyness impacts 
expressive language even at 17 months. Why children 
perform poorly is a critical question. 
Theoretical Implications 
As the “I know it but won’t say it” theoretical 
model of shyness (Coplan & Evans, 2009) would predict, 
the production task was more difficult for shyer children 
as compared to the pointing or looking task. However, 
this theory would also suggest that shyer children would
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3601
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
be more likely to not answer at all (i.e., not speak) in the 
production task. In this study, shyer children demon-
strated two types of errors: a lack of response and a pro-
duction of an incorrect word. Shyness was not a predictor 
of No Responses, but shyness was a predictor of overall 
accuracy for production. Therefore, “I know it but won’t 
say it” cannot, by itself, account for why shyness predicts 
incorrect responses. 
Taken together, there is no clear evidence for this 
particular theory but, rather, support that a confluence of 
factors impacts a child’s ability to convey lexical knowl-
edge. There was a main effect of task such that some tasks 
were easier for children than others, suggesting that task 
demands impact children’s vocabulary performance. There 
were also impacts of age and vocabulary and interactions 
with shyness, suggesting child-specific factors matter as 
well. Thus, predicting the relationship between shyness 
and vocabulary may be more nuanced than prior theories 
may account for, and future work should continue to 
investigate why shyer children may struggle with produc-
tion tasks. 
Limitations 
This study has some potential limitations. Firstly, 
performance on the looking task was much lower than 
anticipated, especially given that all items were highly 
familiar to the children and looking tasks have traditionally 
been the least socially and cognitively demanding for chil-
dren of all ages. Nonetheless, this may be partially due to 
the manner in which the looking tasks were coded—when 
“looks away” from the screen were dropped from analysis 
(instead of being counted as not correct), performance was 
above chance (albeit, barely). Moreover, looking was coded 
from recordings of the Zoom sessions. While effort was 
taken to ensure the cameras were centered on the child at 
all times and coders were highly reliable with each other, 
differences in individual screen size and orientation of the 
child to the screen did vary considerably more than it does 
in lab-based looking tasks. Exploring avenues for improv-
ing looking in virtual modalities will be critical for future 
work (e.g., using platforms like LookIt). 
Second, the nature of Zoom could have differential 
effects on attention (McClure et al., 2018) and responsive-
ness (Strouse et al., 2018) compared to in-person testing. 
However, there is also evidence that using teletherapy 
in speech-language therapy is effective in some cases 
(Constantinescu 
et 
al., 
2014, 
Grogan-Johnson 
et 
al., 
2010). Although future research should examine telether-
apy and its efficacy, children do seem to respond well to 
the modality, and it can have positive outcomes (Wales 
et al., 2017). As such, examining the efficacy of language 
assessment online is relevant. 
Another potential limitation of this study is the sam-
ple diversity; 72% of the participants were White, and the 
average annual income was $75,000. Additionally, most 
were from the south-central United States. Children of 
lower socioeconomic status tend to score lower on lan-
guage assessments testing a variety of different language 
skills (Noble et al., 2005), as do children of minority eth-
nicities (Basit et al., 2015). Thus, it is important to have a 
diverse sample of participants. 
Another note is that the different methodologies 
used in the three language tasks had additional differences 
outside of the amount of sociability required. Mainly, the 
production task measured expressive language, whereas 
the pointing and looking tasks measured receptive lan-
guage, leading to different cognitive demands that may 
have affected children’s performance. Nonetheless, such 
differences in cognitive demands are impossible to dissect 
from the social elements of the task and would likely have 
impacted children equally, despite their degree of shyness. 
A final limitation is that this study had no measure 
of 
children’s 
attention 
to 
the 
language 
tasks 
given. 
Research has suggested that shyness may impact children’s 
attention during word learning activities, such that shyness 
negatively impacts children’s ability to attend to the target 
during 
fast 
mapping, 
even 
when 
words 
are 
familiar 
(Hilton et al., 2019). This suggests that low attention may 
result in poorer retention of words (see also Axelsson 
et al., 2022) and poor looking behavior (as seen in the 
looking task here) and perhaps even be responsible for 
shyer children’s lower reported vocabulary. Thus, it is pos-
sible 
that 
in 
this 
study, 
children’s 
ability—or 
lack 
thereof—to attend to the three language tasks may nega-
tively have influenced shyer children’s performance along-
side their shyness. This is particularly apparent in the 
looking task here—shyer children had a higher rate of no 
responses, indicating they actually attended to the screen 
less than their peers. One key element for the particular 
study is the virtual nature of it, which may demand a 
child’s attention in unique ways, yet little work has 
directly examined this new virtual communication context. 
Taken together, shyness and attention to a Zoom-based 
interaction may interact to drive performance, but specifi-
cally, how a lack of attention (or how temperament levels 
of attention focusing) influences performance on each task 
may be an area for future work. 
Conclusions 
Overall, our results suggest that shyness does, in 
fact, impact children’s performance on some language 
tasks, especially expressive ones. Because of this, speech 
pathologists, psychologists, educators, researchers, and
3602
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

others assessing language skills might take each individual 
child’s shyness into consideration. These professionals 
should be aware that shyer children may particularly 
struggle with production assessments. In this study, shy-
ness minimally impacted the pointing task and possibly 
helped children in looking. Thus, receptive assessments are 
potentially less biased against shyer children. 
Altogether, it may be important for future studies to 
continue to examine how to best close the gap between 
shy and sociable children’s language skills. Examining 
how shyness impacts children’s performance on standard-
ized language assessments may be important to demon-
strate specific language assessments that are most suitable 
for shyer children. Understanding how and why shyness 
may affect children’s language abilities is key. 
Data Availability Statement 
All materials and data as well as the preregistration for 
the study can be found on Open Science Framework: https:// 
osf.io/hwrma/?view_only=905f836347114826a54e57d6d1c10cf1. 
Acknowledgments 
This study was funded by an internal Oklahoma State 
Wentz Fellowship awarded to the first author. The authors 
express gratitude toward the Learning, Language, and 
Development Lab and Psychology Department at Oklahoma 
State University for providing support for this project, as 
well as the Lew Wentz Foundation at Oklahoma State for 
providing financial support. All materials and data for the 
study can be found on Open Science Framework: https://osf. 
io/hwrma/?view_only=905f836347114826a54e57d6d1c10cf1. 
References 
Asendorpf, J. B. (1990). Development of inhibition during child-
hood: Evidence for situational specificity and a two-factor 
model. Developmental Psychology, 26(5), 721–730. https://doi. 
org/10.1037/0012-1649.26.5.721 
Asendorpf, J. B., & Meier, G. H. (1993). Personality effects on 
children’s speech in everyday life: Sociability mediated expo-
sure and shyness-mediated reactivity to social situations. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(6), 1072–1083. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.64.6.1072 
Axelsson, E., Othman, N. N., & Kansal, N. (2022). Temperament 
and children’s accuracy and attention during word learning. 
Infant Behavior & Development, 69, Article 101771. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2022.101771 
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-
effects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and 
items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390–412. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2007.12.005 
Basit, T. N., Hughes, A., Iqbal, Z., & Cooper, J. (2015). The 
influence of socio-economic status and ethnicity on speech 
and language development. International Journal of Early 
Years 
Education, 
23(1), 
115–133. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09669760.2014.973838 
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S.  (2015). Fit-
ting linear mixed-effects models Using lme4. Journal of Sta-
tistical Software, 67(1), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss. 
v067.i01 
Bloom, P. (1973). One word at a time: The use of single word 
utterances before syntax. Mouton. 
Briggs, S. R. (1988). Shyness: Introversion or neuroticism? Jour-
nal of Research in Personality, 22(3), 290–307. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0092-6566(88)90031-1 
Buss, A. H., & Plomin, R. A. (1984). Temperament: Early devel-
oping personality traits. Erlbaum. 
Constantinescu, G., Waite, M., Dornan, D., Rushbrooke, E., 
Brown, J., McGovern, J., Ryan, M., & Hill, A. (2014). A pilot 
study of telepractice delivery for teaching listening and spoken 
language to children with hearing loss. Journal of Telemedi-
cine and Telecare, 20(3), 135–140. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1357633X14528443 
Coplan, R. J., & Armer, M. (2005). Talking yourself out of being 
shy: 
Shyness, 
expressive 
vocabulary, 
and 
socioemotional 
adjustment in preschool. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 51(1), 20– 
41. https://doi.org/10.1353/mpq.2005.0004 
Coplan, R. J., & Evans, M. A. (2009). At a loss for words? Intro-
duction to the special issue on shyness and language in child-
hood. Infant and Child Development, 18(3), 211–215. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/icd.620 
Coplan, R. J., & Weeks, M. (2009). Shy and soft-spoken: Shy-
ness, pragmatic language, and socio-emotional adjustment in 
early childhood. Infant and Child Development, 18(3), 238– 
254. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.622 
Crozier, W. R. (1995). Shyness and self-esteem in middle child-
hood. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 65(1), 85–95. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8279.1995.tb01133.x 
Crozier, W. R. (1997). Individual learners: Personality differences 
in education. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203286937 
Crozier, W. R. (2001). Shyness, self-perception, and reticence. 
Self-Perception: International Perspectives on Individual Differ-
ences, 2, 53–76. 
Crozier, W. R., & Hostettler, K. (2003). The influence of shyness 
on children’s test performance. British Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology, 73(3), 317–328. https://doi.org/10.1348/ 
000709903322275858 
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms 
for young children. Behavior Research Methods, Instru-
ments, & Computers, 28(1), 125–127. https://doi.org/10.3758/ 
BF03203646 
Dixon, P. (2008). Models of accuracy in repeated-measures 
designs. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 447–456. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2007.11.004 
Dixon, W. E., Jr., & Shore, C. (1997). Temperamental predictors 
of linguistic style during multiword acquisition. Infant Behav-
ior & Development, 20(1), 99–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0163-6383(97)90065-5 
Dunn, 
L. 
M. 
(1997). 
Peabody 
Picture 
Vocabulary 
Test–III 
(PPVT-III). American Guidance Service. 
Eggum, N. D., Eisenberg, N., Spinrad, T. L., Reiser, M., 
Gaertner, B. M., Sallquist, J., & Smith, C. L. (2009). Devel-
opment of shyness: Relations with children’s fearfulness, sex, 
and maternal behavior. Infancy, 14(3), 325–345. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/15250000902839971
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3603
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

•
•
•
ELAN (Version 6.4) [Computer software]. (2022). Nijmegen: Max 
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, The Language Archive. 
https://archive.mpi.nl/tla/elan 
Emde, R. N., Hewitt, J. K., & Kagan, J. (2001). Infancy to early 
childhood: Genetic and environmental influences on developmen-
tal change. Oxford University Press. 
Evans, M. A. (1987). Discourse characteristics of reticent chil-
dren. Applied Psycholinguistics, 8(2), 171–184. https://doi.org/ 
10.1017/S0142716400000199 
Evans, M. A. (1993). Communicative competence as a dimension 
of shyness. In K. H. Rubin & J. B. Asendorpf (Eds.), Social 
withdrawal, inhibition and shyness in childhood. Erlbaum. 
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J., 
Pethick, S. J., Tomasello, M., Mervis, C. B., & Stiles, J. 
(1994). 
Variability 
in 
early 
communicative 
development. 
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 
59(5), I-185. https://doi.org/10.2307/1166093 
Frank, M. C., Braginsky, M., Yurovsky, D., & Marchman, V. A. 
(2017). Wordbank: An open repository for developmental 
vocabulary data. Journal of Child Language, 44(3), 677–694. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000916000209 
Frank, M. C., Sugarman, E., Horowitz, A. C., Lewis, M. L., & 
Yurovsky, D. (2016). Using tablets to collect data from young 
children. Journal of Cognition and Development, 17(1), 1–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2015.1061528 
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Cauley, K. M., & Gordon, L. 
(1987). The eyes have it: Lexical and syntactic comprehension 
in a new paradigm. Journal of Child Language, 14(1), 23–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S030500090001271X 
Golinkoff, R. M., Ma, W., Song, L., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2013). 
Twenty-five years using the intermodal preferential looking 
paradigm to study language acquisition: What have we 
learned? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8(3), 316–339. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691613484936 
Grogan-Johnson, S., Alvares, R., Rowan, L., & Creaghead, N. 
(2010). A pilot study comparing the effectiveness of speech 
language therapy provided by telemedicine with conventional 
on-site therapy. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 16(3), 
134–139. https://doi.org/10.1258/jtt.2009.090608 
Gurteen, P. M., Horne, P. J., & Erjavec, M. (2011). Rapid word 
learning in 13- and 17-month-olds in a naturalistic two-word 
procedure: Looking versus reaching measures. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 109(2), 201–217. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jecp.2010.12.001 
Heibeck, E., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Word learning in chil-
dren: An examination of fast mapping. Child Development, 
58(4), 1021–1034. https://doi.org/10.2307/1130543 
Hilton, M., Twomey, K. E., & Westermann, G. (2019). Taking 
their eye off the ball: How shyness affects children’s attention 
during word learning. Journal of Experimental Child Psychol-
ogy, 183, 134–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2019.01.023 
Hilton, M., & Westermann, G. (2017). The effect of shyness on 
children’s formation and retention of novel word–object map-
pings. Journal of Child Language, 44(6), 1394–1412. https:// 
doi.org/10.1017/S030500091600057X 
Hofmann, S. G., & DiBartolo, P. M. (2010). Social anxiety: Clin-
ical, developmental, and social perspectives (2nd ed.). Aca-
demic Press/Elsevier. 
Houston-Price, C., Mather, E., & Sakkalou, E. (2007). Discrepancy 
between parental reports of infants’ receptive vocabulary and infants’ 
behaviour in a preferential looking task. Journal of Child Language, 
34(4), 701–724. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000907008124 
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from 
ANOVAs (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed 
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 434–446. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2007.11.007 
Lenth, R. V. (2022). emmeans: Estimated Marginal Means, aka 
Least-Squares Means. R package version 1.7.2. https://CRAN. 
R-project.org/package=emmeans 
McClure, E. R., Chentsova-Dutton, Y. E., Holochwost, S. J., 
Parrott, W. G., & Barr, R. (2018). Look at that! Video chat 
and joint visual attention development among babies and tod-
dlers. Child Development, 89(1), 27–36. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
cdev.12833 
Mundy, P., Block, J., Delgado, C., Pomares, Y., Van Hecke, 
A. V., & Parlade, M. V. (2007). Individual differences and the 
development of joint attention in infancy. Child Development, 
78(3), 938–954. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007.01042.x 
Noble, K. G., Norman, M. F., & Farah, M. J. (2005). Neurocog-
nitive correlates of socioeconomic status in kindergarten chil-
dren. Developmental Science, 8(1), 74–87. https://doi.org/10. 
1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00394.x 
Putnam, S. P., Gartstein, M. A., & Rothbart, M. K. (2006). Mea-
surement of fine-grained aspects of toddler temperament: The 
early childhood behavior questionnaire. Infant Behavior & 
Development, 29(3), 386–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh. 
2006.01.004 
Putnam, S. P., & Rothbart, M. K. (2006). Development of short 
and very short forms of the Children’s behavior questionnaire. 
Journal of Personality Assessment, 87(1), 102–112. https://doi. 
org/10.1207/s15327752jpa8701_09 
Rosner, J. (1979). Test of auditory skills. Academic Therapy 
Publications. 
Slomkowski, C. L., Nelson, K., Dunn, J., & Plomin, R. (1992). 
Temperament and language: Relations from toddlerhood to 
middle childhood. Developmental Psychology, 28(6), 1090– 
1095. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.28.6.1090 
Smith Watts, A. K., Patel, D., Corley, R. P., Friedman, N. P., 
Hewitt, J. K., Robinson, J. L., & Rhee, S. H. (2014). Testing 
alternative hypotheses regarding the association between behav-
ioral inhibition and language development in toddlerhood. Child 
Development, 85(4), 1569–1585. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.1221 
Spere, K., & Evans, M. A. (2009). Shyness as a continuous 
dimension and emergent literacy in young children: Is there a 
relation? 
Infant 
and 
Child 
Development, 
18(3), 
216–237. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.621 
Spere, K. A., Evans, M. A., Hendry, C.-A., & Mansell, J. (2009). 
Language skills in shy and non-shy preschoolers and the 
effects of assessment context. Journal of Child Language, 
36(1), 53–71. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000908008842 
Spere, K. A., Schmidt, L. A., Theall-Honey, L. A., & Martin-
Chang, S. (2004). Expressive and receptive language skills of 
temperamentally shy preschoolers. Infant and Child Develop-
ment, 13(2), 123–133. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.345 
Stelmachowicz, P. G., Pittman, A. L., Hoover, B. M., & Lewis, 
D. E. (2004). Novel-word learning in children with normal 
hearing and hearing loss. Ear and Hearing, 25(1), 47–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.AUD.0000111258.98509.DE 
Strouse, G. A., Troseth, G. L., O’Doherty, K. D., & Saylor, 
M. M. (2018). Co-viewing supports toddlers’ word learning 
from contingent and noncontingent video. Journal of Experi-
mental Child Psychology, 166, 310–326. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jecp.2017.09.005 
Usai, M. C., Garello, V., & Viterbori, P. (2009). Temperamental 
profiles and linguistic development: Differences in the quality 
of linguistic production in relation to temperament in children 
of 28 months. Infant Behavior & Development, 32(3), 322–330. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2009.04.001
3604
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research
Vol. 66
3588–3605
September 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Wales, D., Skinner, L., & Hayman, M. (2017). The efficacy of 
telehealth-delivered speech and language intervention for pri-
mary school-age children: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Telerehabilitation, 9(1), 55–70. https://doi.org/10. 
5195/ijt.2017.6219 
Werner, 
H., 
& 
Kaplan, 
B. 
(1963). 
Symbol 
formation; 
an 
organismic-developmental approach to language and the expres-
sion of thought. Wiley. 
Williams, K. T. (2019). Expressive Vocabulary Test–Third Edition 
(EVT-3). NCS Pearson.
Melnick & Kucker: Shyness on Language
3605
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

