Memes of 
Translation
The spread of ideas  
in translation theory
Revised edition
BENJAMINS
 ■ TR ANSL ATION
 ■ LIBR ARY
Andrew Chesterman

Memes of Translation

Volume 123
Memes of Translation. The spread of ideas in translation theory. Revised edition
by Andrew Chesterman
Advisory Board 
Rosemary Arrojo
Binghamton University
Michael Cronin
Dublin City University
Dirk Delabastita
FUNDP (University of Namur)
Daniel Gile
Université Paris 3 - Sorbonne 
Nouvelle
Amparo Hurtado Albir
Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona
Zuzana Jettmarová
Charles University of Prague
Alet Kruger
UNISA, South Africa
John Milton
University of São Paulo
Anthony Pym
Universitat Rovira i Virgili
Rosa Rabadán
University of León
Sherry Simon
Concordia University
General Editor
Yves Gambier
University of Turku
Associate Editor
Franz Pöchhacker
University of Vienna
Honorary Editor
Gideon Toury
Tel Aviv University
Şehnaz Tahir Gürçaglar
Bogaziçi University
Maria Tymoczko
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst
Lawrence Venuti
Temple University
Michaela Wolf
University of Graz
Benjamins Translation Library (BTL)
issn 0929-7316
The Benjamins Translation Library (BTL) aims to stimulate research and training in 
Translation & Interpreting Studies – taken very broadly to encompass the many different 
forms and manifestations of translational phenomena, among them cultural translation, 
localization, adaptation, literary translation, specialized translation, audiovisual 
translation, audio-description, transcreation, transediting, conference interpreting, 
and interpreting in community settings in the spoken and signed modalities.
For an overview of all books published in this series, please see 
www.benjamins.com/catalog/btl
EST Subseries
The European Society for Translation Studies (EST) Subseries is a publication channel 
within the Library to optimize EST’s function as a forum for the translation and 
interpreting research community. It promotes new trends in research, gives more visibility 
to young scholars’ work, publicizes new research methods, makes available documents 
from EST, and reissues classical works in translation studies which do not exist in English 
or which are now out of print.

Memes of Translation
The spread of ideas in translation theory
Revised edition
Andrew Chesterman
University of Helsinki
John Benjamins Publishing Company
Amsterdam / Philadelphia

doi 10.1075/btl.123
Cataloging-in-Publication Data available from Library of Congress:
lccn 2015045490 (print) / 2015048313 (e-book)
isbn 978 90 272 5868 7	 (Hb)
isbn 978 90 272 5869 4	 (Pb)
isbn 978 90 272 6738 2	 (e-book)
© 2016 – John Benjamins B.V.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microfilm, or any 
other means, without written permission from the publisher.
John Benjamins Publishing Company · https://benjamins.com
8
TM
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
the American National Standard for Information Sciences – Permanence 
of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ansi z39.48-1984.

Table of contents
Preface
ix
Chapter 1
Survival machines for memes
1
1.1	 Introducing memes  1
1.2	 Five translation supermemes  3
1.2.1	 Source-target  3
1.2.2	 Equivalence  4
1.2.3	 Untranslatability  6
1.2.4	 Free-vs-literal  8
1.2.5	 All-writing-is-translating  9
1.3	 The locus of memes  10
1.4	 A Popperian meme  12
1.5	 Update  13
Chapter 2
The evolution of translation memes
17
2.1	 Words  18
2.2	 The Word of God  19
2.3	 Rhetoric  21
2.4	 Logos  24
2.5	 Linguistic science  27
2.6	 Communication  31
2.7	 Target  34
2.8	 Cognition  38
2.9	 Theory in the current meme pool  40
2.10	Update  44
Chapter 3
From memes to norms
49
3.1	 Normative vs. prescriptive  50
3.2	 Norm theory  52
3.3	 Norms of language  54

vi	
Memes of Translation
3.4	 What counts as a translation?  56
3.5	 Translation norms  61
3.5.1	 Toury’s norms  61
3.5.2	 Expectancy norms  62
3.5.3	 Professional norms  65
3.6	 General translation laws and normative laws  68
3.6.1	 Translation laws  68
3.6.2	 Normative laws   71
3.6.3	 Explanations  72
3.7	 Norms as constraints  75
3.8	 On expectancy norms for English  79
3.9	 Update  82
Chapter 4
Translation strategies
85
4.1	 General characteristics of strategies  85
4.2	 A classification  89
4.2.1	 Syntactic strategies  91
4.2.2	 Semantic strategies  98
4.2.3	 Pragmatic strategies  104
4.3	 Motivation  109
4.3.1	 The significance threshold  110
4.3.2	 Compensation  112
4.4	 Update  112
Chapter 5
Translation as theory
115
5.1	 Tentative Theory, Error Elimination and translational competence  115
5.2	 Retrospective assessment  121
5.3	 Prospective assessment  125
5.4	 Lateral assessment  130
5.5	 Introspective assessment  133
5.6	 Pedagogical assessment  135
5.7	 Mind the gap!  138
5.8	 Update  141

	
Table of contents	
vii
Chapter 6
The development of translational competence
145
6.1	 Stages of expertise  145
6.2	 The significance of memes  148
6.3	 Suggestions for teaching  150
6.4	 Ontogenetic = phylogenetic?  156
6.5	 Bootstraps  163
6.6	 Update  164
Chapter 7
On translation ethics
167
7.1	 Background issues  167
7.2	 Norms, actions and values  170
7.3	 Clarity  173
7.4	 Truth  176
7.5	 Trust  178
7.6	 Understanding  181
7.7	 The Translator’s Charter  184
7.8	 Emancipatory translation  186
7.9	 Update  191
Epilogue
195
Appendix
197
References
201
Author index
219
Subject index
223


Preface
I see humanity as a family that has hardly met. I see the meeting of people, bod-
ies, thoughts, emotions or actions as the start of most change. Each link created 
by a meeting is like a filament, which, if they were all visible, would make the 
world look as though it is covered with gossamer. Every individual is connected 
to others, loosely or closely, by a unique combination of filaments, which stretch 
across the frontiers of space and time. Every individual assembles past loyalties, 
present needs and visions of the future in a web of different contours, with the 
help of heterogeneous elements borrowed from other individuals; and this con-
stant give-and-take has been the main stimulus of humanity’s energy. Once peo-
ple see themselves as influencing one another, they cannot be merely victims: 
anyone, however modest, then becomes a person capable of making a difference, 
minute though it might be, to the shape of reality. New attitudes are not promul-
gated by law, but spread, almost like an infection, from one person to another. 

(Zeldin [1994] 1995: 465–466)
In Classical Greece the source of truth, knowledge, revelation, was the oracle. A 
person officially designated to go and consult an oracle was known as a theoros 
(θεωρός; Liddell and Scott 1940: s.v.). Interestingly enough, the same term was 
also used of someone who was sent to attend a festival in some official capacity. 
Yet another sense of the word is that of ‘magistrate’, and more generally ‘spectator’, 
or ‘one who travels to see’ people and places (ibid.). The theoros, then, was inter-
ested in truth, knowledge, but also in pleasure. The word contains a sense of ra-
tional judgement (as a magistrate’s title), but the core meaning is simply someone 
who sees, who sees with a purpose.
From this noun came the verb theorein (θεωρεîv) ‘to see, gaze upon’. This see-
ing was distinct from older verbs of seeing, in that it emphasized the function of 
the seeing rather than the seeing itself. It meant ‘to be a spectator’, i.e. a spectator 
of something; it stressed the conscious, deliberate activity of seeing rather than 
some kind of purely passive perception (Snell 1975: 15). 
And by this path came the noun theoria, (θεωρîα) ‘theory’. It carried both the 
outward sense of ‘a looking at, a viewing‘ and the inner sense of ‘contemplation, 
speculation’ (OED, s.v. theory).
There is a delightful anecdote in Herodotus ([1920] Book I, §29–30) about 
the wise man Solon, who had come to work as a legislator for the Athenians, and 

x	
Memes of Translation
then evidently felt that he needed a break. So he left home and set out on a voy-
age “to see the world”, as Godley translates it. The original Greek literally states 
that he went out into the world “for the sake of theoria” – i.e. in order to see and 
contemplate.
It is in this sense that the term “theory” is used in this book. Theories them-
selves come in many shapes and sizes: some are a good deal more scholarly/ 
scientific or more formalized than others, some are empirical, others metaphori-
cal; some are at a high level of generality, others are more specific.
The book has three main aims. The first is metatheoretical: it offers a view of 
theory, in fact quite a few theories. It explores some of the main ways in which 
translation has been seen and contemplated, and suggests a conceptual frame-
work within which a number of disparate views of translation can be linked.
The second aim is theoretical. On this level, I set out to develop a particular 
theoretical view of translation, one that has been greatly influenced by the philos-
ophy of Karl Popper. I propose, in effect, a Popperian theory of translation. I also 
draw on norm theory and to some extent on action theory, in an attempt to weave 
various strands into a coherent whole. My fundamental building-blocks are the 
concepts of norm, strategy and value, plus Popper’s concepts of tentative theory, 
error elimination , and the evolution of objective knowledge.
My underlying metaphor for translation comes from the notion of memes: 
a meme is simply an idea that spreads (memes are explained in more detail in 
Chapter 1). The metaphor comes from sociobiology: ideas spread, replicate them-
selves, like genes do. My motive in using this metaphor as an umbrella-idea to 
cover many aspects of this book is to provide an alternative to the traditional 
transfer metaphor of translation. The meme metaphor highlights an aspect of the 
translation phenomenon that I want to foregound: the way that ideas spread and 
change as they are translated, just as biological evolution involves mutations. In 
this light, a translator is not someone whose task is to conserve something but 
to propagate something, to spread and even develop it: translators are agents of 
change. Translators, in fact, make a difference… The metaphor thus gives less 
priority to the notions of “preserving identity” or “sameness” which underlie the 
more traditional image of “carrying something across”, a something that some-
how remains unchanged. I offer the meme metaphor as a helpful way to look at 
translation. If it works as a way of stimulating new insights, fine; if not, we can 
forget about it. The applications of Popper’s ideas do not depend on the meme 
metaphor; nor do my arguments about norms, strategies and values. 
The third aim is more practical. Many practising professional translators are 
suspicious of theory, or may be of the opinion that there is no such thing as a the-
ory of translation anyway. Translator trainees, too, often feel that what they need 
is simply more practice, not high-flown talk about abstract theory. In response to 

	
Preface	
xi
such claims, I argue that a translator must have a theory of translation: to translate 
without a theory is to translate blind. I also argue that theoretical concepts can be 
essential tools for thought and decision-making during the translation process. 
My third aim is thus to demonstrate that translation theory can be useful – to 
translators themselves, to trainees and to their teachers. 
The book thus attempts to cover a fairly wide field, but certainly not the whole 
of Translation Studies. In particular, I do not focus on the technical side of trans-
lation: computer aids, terminological databases and the like; nor on interpreting. 
Nor am I interested in giving prescriptive advice: my attitude to norms is descrip-
tive, not prescriptive. 
The overall movement of the book goes from theory to practice. Chapter 1 
introduces the concept of the meme, borrowed from sociobiology into cultural 
evolution studies. By way of illustration, it discusses five “supermemes” of trans-
lation theory: the source-target metaphor, the equivalence idea, the myth of un-
translatability, the free-vs-literal argument, and the idea that all writing is a kind 
of translating. Memes are then argued to exist primarily in Popper’s World 3, and 
a Popperian meme is introduced that will be a recurrent theme in the book. 
Chapter 2 outlines the evolution of (Western) translation theory, in terms of 
eight major stages, each building on and reacting to its antecedents and overlap-
ping with them. These stages are not transitory but cumulative, so that the present 
picture we have of the phenomenon called translation – the total pool of ideas 
about translation, as it were – is composed of strata from all the previous stages. 
The chapter ends with a review of some conflicting ideas about translation theory 
in the current “meme pool”. 
Chapter 3 argues that some ideas about translation eventually become norms, 
and that norm theory provides powerful tools for thinking about both translation 
theory and translation practice.
Chapter 4 shifts the focus from product to process. Given that there are trans-
lation norms, how do translators seek to conform to them? This question is dis-
cussed in terms of the notion of translation strategies, which depend on and are 
oriented towards translation norms.
How do we assess attempts to conform to norms? Chapter 5 offers a Poppe-
rian approach to translation assessment, based on the view that any translation is 
itself a theory: a theory of the source text. As such, it undergoes the same sort of 
assessment, criticism, error elimination and corroboration as any other theory.
Chapter 6 is practical, pedagogical. It discusses what implications a Poppe-
rian translation theory has for translator training. What relation might there be 
between the evolution of translation theory and the maturing of an individual 
translator?

xii	 Memes of Translation
Chapters 1–3 thus explore how translation norms arise, and Chapters 4–6 
discuss various effects they have on translation practice. Chapter 7 then focuses 
on the ethical values underlying the norms that govern translational action.
Update
This revised edition includes Update sections at the end of each chapter, where I 
outline some of the later developments in research concerning the theme of the 
chapter, and in my own thinking, since the book was first published in 1997. I 
have also made some minor textual improvements and corrections and added 
some later references to the text.
Acknowledgements
Several friends and colleagues were kind enough to comment on parts or pre-
liminary versions of the original text, and were thus of invaluable assistance in 
the error elimination process. Thank you: Ritva Leppihalme, Mary Hatakka, Nely 
Keinänen, Seija Paddon, Ria Bülow-Møller. Thank you too, anonymous review-
ers, for some critical comments on earlier versions and for drawing my attention 
to some errors and to works I had overlooked. I have also benefited from other 
feedback on the first edition. And special thanks to whoever it was who anon-
ymously left in my pigeon-hole the Morgenstern poem and its translation, dis-
covered in a concert programme, as “a small contribution to translation theory”. 
Finally, a big “merci” to Yves Gambier for his encouragement and suggestions for 
this revised edition.
Any remaining weaknesses or errors are of course my own responsibility.

AC, Helsinki, January 1997

Revised edition: Helsinki, December 2015

Chapter 1
Survival machines for memes
1.1	
Introducing memes
Translations are survival machines for memes.
Memes? The concept comes from sociobiology, where it was introduced by 
Dawkins in The Selfish Gene (1976). He explains how he wanted a term which 
would be parallel to “gene” to describe the evolution of cultural phenomena, 
which (he argues) are subject to the same kinds of Darwinian laws of natural 
selection as genes proper:
[A meme is] a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation. ‘Mimeme’ 
comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit 
like ‘gene’. I hope my classical friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to 
meme. If it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related 
to ‘memory’ or to the French word même. It should be pronounced to rhyme 
with ‘cream’.
	
Examples of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of 
making pots or building arches. Just as genes propagate themselves in the gene 
pool by leaping from body to body via sperm or eggs, so memes propagate them-
selves in the meme pool by leaping from brain to brain via a process which, in the 
broad sense, can be called imitation. If a scientist hears, or reads about, a good 
idea, he passes it on to his colleagues and students. He mentions it in his articles 
and lectures. If the idea catches on, it can be said to propagate itself, spreading 
from brain to brain. 
(1976: 206; p. 192 in the 1989 edition)
Like genes, memes are replicators. Examples that Dawkins discusses are the idea-
of-God meme and the Darwinian-theory meme. These ideas do not necessarily 
exist in identical form in different human brains, but there is enough similarity 
between, say, different people’s ideas of Darwin’s theory for them to have a com-
mon denominator, and it is this common denominator which is the meme. “An 
‘idea-meme’,” writes Dawkins ([1976] 1989: 196), “might be defined as an entity 
that is capable of being transmitted from one brain to another.” The fashion for 
jeans, we might say, has spread like genes. 
On this view, ideas that turn out to be good ideas survive; i.e. those that are 
conducive to the survival of their carriers: people. By analogy with biology, these 
are known as mutualist memes, being of mutual benefit to themselves and their 

2	
Memes of Translation
carriers. Bad ideas (at least in theory, and in the long run) do not last; they are 
parasitic memes, because they eventually kill their host. Of course, it may take 
some considerable time before bad ideas are generally recognized to be potential-
ly threatening in this sense. If a meme is to survive, it must beat its rival memes, 
i.e. it must win new adherents, gain ever wider acceptance. In science, for in-
stance, the spread of an idea-meme can be plotted via a citation index: we can see 
how a given meme starts to spread slowly, reaches a peak of reference-frequency, 
and perhaps thereafter fades again. 
Dawkins argues that memes represent a new and different kind of evolution, 
although this evolution follows the same general Darwinian laws of selection, 
conservation and propagation as genetic evolution. Plotkin (1993: 769), summa-
rizing earlier work on cultural evolution, indicates the parallel quite explicitly: 
[C]ultural units, which we can call memes after Dawkins (1976), occur in various 
forms; selectional processes then result in these units being differentially propa-
gated by copying and transmission systems which move the units about in space 
and may conserve some of them in time. The differential survival of these units 
resulting from the action of such selection and transmission processes leads to 
changes in the frequencies of these units in the cultural pool over time; the cul-
ture shows descent with modification. In other words, cultural change is wrought 
by cultural evolution. 
Memetic evolution can even counter genetic evolution: culturally transmitted 
ideas and practices can become more powerful than purely genetic pressures – an 
obvious example is contraception: cultural values and practices override biolog-
ical ones. (For critical discussions of the parallels between genetic and memetic 
evolution, see Hull 1982, and the references in the Update section below.) 
Like “gene”, “meme” is a concept that can be defined and used at varying levels 
of generality. However, I find it useful to use the term supermeme for memes at a 
particularly high level of generality. 
Memes often occur in complexes, memomes, in mutual dependence with 
other memes. The idea-of-God meme, for instance, might thrive in complex co-­
operation with the patriarchal-authorities-know-best meme. It is often insight-
ful to think of a theory (a theory of translation, for instance) as a memome, a 
meme-­complex. 
Ideas and conventions that survive many generations, and are successfully 
transmitted from one culture to another, thus prove themselves to be interest-
ing and relevant to a wide circle of human beings. They become “received ideas”, 
commonplaces, topoi. They may even be felt to be good for human survival, in 
some way; at the very least, if they survive we can reasonably assume that they 
must serve some purpose which is seen at least by some people to be useful. At any 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
3
given time, there will therefore exist a meme pool of such ideas, just as there exists 
a gene pool of so-far-surviving genes. In fact, we could even define a culture in 
precisely these terms, as a population of memes (Hailman 1982: 232).
Anecdotal evidence of the influence of memes is suggested by an article in The 
Economist (February 9, 1994, p. 99) discussing candidates for modern wonders 
of the world. After listing the jumbo jet, the microprocessor, the telephone, the 
contraceptive pill, the oil rig, the H-bomb and the moon landing site, the writer 
proposes an eighth wonder that has also had immeasurable influence on modern 
life: Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle (roughly: that we cannot simultaneously 
be certain about both the location and the momentum of a particle). This is an 
excellent example of a meme, and of the effect that mutualist memes can have. 
Dawkins argues that human (and plant and animal) bodies are in fact sur-
vival machines for genes: they are the means whereby the genes ensure their own 
continuing replication, their own immortality. Human beings are also survival 
machines for memes, but they are not the only ones (although they are always 
at least indirectly involved in meme transmission). Meme transmission within a 
culture takes place through imitation and of course also through language. But for 
a meme to be transmitted verbally across language boundaries, if both sender and 
receiver lack the relevant multilingual competence there needs to be a translation. 
Indeed, the need for translation is a neat criterion for the existence of a cultural 
boundary (Pym 1992a: 26). We can thus see translations as survival machines for 
memes crossing cultural boundaries. 
1.2	
Five translation supermemes
Some memes encapsulate concepts and ideas about translation itself, and about 
the theory of translation. Let us call them translation memes (cf. Chesterman 
1996a). These memes are one of the central themes of this book: the most im-
portant types will be theoretical concepts, norms, strategies and values. Chapter 2 
will look at the evolution of translation memes, but first I shall introduce five 
supermemes of translation. They are ideas of such pervasive influence that they 
come up again and again in the history of the subject, albeit sometimes in slightly 
different guises. Some appear to be distinctly more beneficial than others. 
1.2.1	
Source-target 
The source-target supermeme is the idea that translation is directional, going 
from somewhere to somewhere. The widespread acceptance of this supermeme 

4	
Memes of Translation
has, in modern translation studies, given us the notions of Source Text (ST) and 
Target Text (TT). 
The dominant metaphor underlying this supermeme is that of movement 
along a path: cognitive linguistics would talk of a “path schema”, with the transla-
tion itself being the “trajector” moving along this path. Translations are thus seen 
as “moving” from A to B. Belonging to this same meme-complex there is also the 
accompanying idea that translations are “containers” for something else; as they 
are formed, translations “carry across” something from A to B. 
This supermeme clearly captures something of value about translation, but 
there is one important aspect which it misses: although they are directional, 
translations do not in fact move. If an object moves from A to B, when it arrives 
at B it is no longer at A. But translation does not eliminate the presence of the 
source text at A. True, some source texts may never have a source readership apart 
from the translator, in that they are produced solely as input for a translation, 
remaining unpublished in the source language. Such a source text may therefore 
be redundant after the act of translation; it may only exist as a note in the transla-
tor’s file, or a deleted computer document (for instance, the Finnish original of an 
information brochure for foreign students in Finland, to be published only in En-
glish). But this is not to say that texts automatically cease to exist at their point of 
departure after being translated: normally, source texts do not then cease to exist. 
On the contrary: a translation of a novel, an advertisement, a contract, or 
whatever, has merely extended the readership of (the memes carried by) these 
texts, it has spread their memes. But the memes themselves do not move: they are 
not absent from the source culture when they appear in the target culture. They 
do not move, they spread, they replicate. In place of the metaphor of movement, 
therefore, I would suggest one of propagation, diffusion, extension, even evolu-
tion: a genetic metaphor. Evolution thus suggests some notion of progress: trans-
lation adds value to a source text, by adding readers of its ideas, adding further 
interpretations, and so on.
1.2.2	
Equivalence
The equivalence supermeme is the big bugbear of translation theory, more argued 
about than any other single idea: a translation is, or must be, equivalent to the 
source, in some sense at least. This idea too is based on the path metaphor, in fact 
on the trope of “metaphor” itself. After all, the very term “translation” in English 
and related languages has the same root as “metaphor” – carrying across. If your 
view of translation is that you carry something across, you do not expect that 
this something will change its identity as you carry it. A metaphor states that two 
different entities can be seen as identical in some respect: X = Y. Source text and 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
5
target text are “the same”. Exactly what this “sameness” consists of is, of course, 
open to endless debate. 
One frequent ploy is to break up equivalence into various subtypes, for in-
stance a binary opposition between two main types. Nida (1964) distinguishes 
between formal and dynamic equivalence, for instance, the former focusing on 
the message itself (aiming at the same form and meaning) and the latter on its 
reception (aiming at the same effect). The two types are not mutually exclusive, 
however; formal equivalence may exist (in theory) at the lower grammatical levels 
of morpheme, word, phrase, perhaps up to sentence breaks, while dynamic equiv-
alence more naturally has to do primarily with the text as a whole (see Jakobsen 
1994a). Other scholars prefer different labels but make the same basic distinction 
between two main kinds of translation: semantic vs. communicative (Newmark 
1981), overt vs. covert (House 1981), documentary vs. instrumental (Nord 1991), 
imitative vs. functional (Jakobsen 1994a). 
Other classifications have been more complex: equivalence has been split up 
into functional, stylistic, semantic, formal or grammatical, statistical and textual 
subtypes, and then hierarchies are posited which give some subtypes higher pri-
ority than others, under different conditions. (See e.g. Koller 1979; Retsker 1993.) 
Such priorities obviously depend on text-type, communicative situation etc. In 
literary translation, for instance, it is commonly assumed that there should be a 
“sameness” of image or conceptualization, i.e. a kind of stylistic-semantic equiva-
lence (see e.g. Tabakowska 1993: 72 and elsewhere). 
Against this preoccupation with “sameness” alternative concepts have been 
proposed, positing a weaker degree of equivalence such as matching (Holmes 
1988) or family resemblance (Wittgenstein 1953: §66f.; see e.g. Toury 1980: 18), or 
similarity (e.g. Chesterman 1996b): Hervey and Higgins (1992: 24) take a trans-
lation to be “equivalent” if it is “not dissimilar in relevant respects”. These reflect 
the pragmatic reality that, in fact, (total) equivalence is a red herring, in that it 
is normally unattainable, and hence not a useful concept in translation theory. 
Pragmatically speaking, it can be argued that the only examples of absolute equiv-
alence are those in which an ST item X is invariably translated into a given TL 
as Y, and vice versa. In terms of information theory, the information would thus 
remain invariant under reversible encoding operations. Typical examples would 
be words denoting numbers (with the exception of contexts in which they have 
culture-bound connotations, such as “magic” or “unlucky”), technical terms (ox-
ygen, molecule), and the like (cf. Retsker 1993; however, technical terms can also 
be slippery – see Kußmaul 1995: 98). From this point of view, the only true test 
of equivalence would therefore be invariable back-translation. This, of course, is 
unlikely to occur except in the case of a small set of lexical items such as a finite 
terminological field, or simple isolated syntactic structures, set phrases and the 

6	
Memes of Translation
like (auf dem Tisch <=> on the table). The larger the syntatic unit, the less proba-
ble the possibility of absolute equivalence will be.
Some scholars have argued that the idea of equivalence is an illusion and 
should be abandoned (e.g. Snell-Hornby 1988). Others appear to define trans-
lation in terms of equivalence and equivalence in terms of translation, so that 
any translation is equivalent by definition. A non-equivalent translation, on this 
view, is a contradiction (cf. Toury 1980: 70). If translation theory studies trans-
lations, and all translations are by definition equivalent, it might seem that we 
can dispense with the term altogether, and focus instead on the wide variety of 
relations that can exist between a translation and its source. Of course, we could 
call these relations ‘kinds of equivalence’, but then we are no longer talking about 
strict sameness. (But see the Update section at the end of this chapter.)
1.2.3	
Untranslatability
This supermeme is closely linked to the previous one: if translation is defined in 
terms of equivalence, and since absolute equivalence is practically unattainable, 
translation must surely be impossible. Alternatively: it is assumed that equiva-
lence is, by definition, perfect; but perfection, in practice, is unattainable. This 
is the problem at the centre of Mounin’s discussion (Mounin 1963). This super-
meme constitutes the basic “objection prejudicielle” against translation (Ladmiral 
1994: 85f.). Another classical discussion of this idea is the famous essay by Ortega 
y Gasset (1937), who argues that translation is necessarily “a Utopian task” (al-
though he goes on to say that in this respect, translation is like many other human 
activities and aspirations, including communication in one’s mother tongue). 
This view has been held particularly with respect to literary translation: a 
typical example is Friedrich (1965), whose starting-point is what he takes to be 
the “reality” of untranslatability from one language to another. This fundamental 
untranslatability is simply assumed by Friedrich as given, although the rest of the 
essay of course belies this belief, in that it discusses literary translation as some-
thing that does nevertheless take place.
Another classical variant of this supermeme is the traditional argument that 
poetry is untranslatable. “Poetry by definition is untranslatable” claims Jakobson 
([1959] 1989: 59–60) – despite the fact that poetry is of course translated. Such 
views are obviously linked to the equivalence supermeme: no “translation” that is 
not totally equivalent is a translation. 
There are interesting religious and philosophical roots underlying this super-
meme. One is the Biblical legend of the Tower of Babel (taken up again by Derrida 
1985), the myth explaining why human beings find it impossible to communi-
cate with each other properly across languages. Another is the long shadow of 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
7
Aristotelian binarism: categories (such as “translatable”) are discrete: things are 
either absolutely translatable or not, and therefore mostly not. Yet another has 
been the idea promoted by ecclesiastical authorities of more than one religion that 
the divine Word should not be tampered with, not translated into vernacular lan-
guages, or not translated at all. And such views of course link up with attitudes of 
cultural isolationism; the fear of the Other; the belief that the world is composed 
of unconnected and impermeable billiard balls; the denial of the Oneness and 
inter-relatedness of everything. 
The diametrically opposing view is expressed e.g. by Benjamin ([1923] 
1963: 185): languages share a kinship that is marked by a convergence, so that 
“[l]anguages are not strangers to one another, but are, a priori and apart from 
all historical relationships, interrelated in what they want to express”, as Zohn’s 
translation puts it (Schulte and Biguenet 1992: 74). 
An opposing view is also crystallized in Katz’s (1978) Effability Principle, 
according to which any proposition can be expressed by some sentence in any 
language (although this principle is thus explicitly restricted to propositional 
meaning). Keenan (1978) rejects Katz’s principle, and thus agrees with the untrans-
latability thesis at least in its weak form: nothing is translatable exactly. Keenan 
argues that this is because human languages are by their very nature “imprecise”, 
fuzzy: they have to be, in order that we can talk about unlimited phenomena, in 
unlimited situations, to unlimited numbers of addressees, and so on. The built-in 
vagueness of language is thus functional: if languages were well-­defined systems 
like mathematics, we would be less efficient communicators. 
From the linguistic angle, the untranslatability idea looks like a restriction of 
language to langue only, to language as system; it seems to deny the role played 
by parole, by what people can do in their actual use of language. Translation is, 
after all, a form of language use; and from this point of view nothing is untrans-
latable: that is, everything can be translated somehow, to some extent, in some 
way – even puns can be explained. No communication is perfect, so why should 
translation be? Semiotically speaking, we could say that communication succeeds 
to the extent that the message decoded and interpreted by the receiver overlaps 
in some relevant way with that sent by the sender. Whereas the equivalence su-
permeme focuses on the overlap, the untranslatability supermeme focuses on the 
non-­overlapping part of the message: each supermeme then assumes that the part 
it sees is actually the whole picture. 
Moreover, it seems particularly shortsighted to maintain a belief in untrans-
latability in the face of the actual fact of translation. Looked at empirically, how-
ever, certain texts do tend to be more easily translated than others. Texts tend to 
be easier to translate when source and target cultures are in close cultural contact 
or share a similar cultural history, when source and target languages are related, 

8	
Memes of Translation
when the source text is already oriented towards the target readership (tourist 
brochures…), etc. (See e.g. Toury 1980: 24–25, summarizing previous work by 
Even-Zohar.) 
1.2.4	
Free-vs-literal 
Given that translation is nevertheless done, despite the impossibility of perfect 
equivalence, the terms in which it has been discussed have long been dominated 
by a single supermeme: the binary opposition between free and literal translation. 
Occasionally attempts are made to introduce a third term (e.g. Dryden [1680] 
1975), but the overall polarity has long remained between these two extremes. 
“Literal” is an unfortunate term: for some it means “word-for-word and 
therefore ungrammatical, like a linguist’s gloss”; for others it means “the closest 
possible grammatical translation, probably not sounding very natural”. In both 
cases, the stress is on closeness to the original form. 
A neat view of the relation between literal and free is given by Bark­hudarov 
(1993). He correlates the literal/free parameter with the translator’s choice of unit 
of translation: the smaller the unit of translation, the more literal the result, and 
the larger the unit, the freer the result (where the units are morpheme, word, 
phrase, clause, sentence). The appropriate unit of translation depends (among 
other things) on the kind of text: a translation that is “too literal” is based on too 
small units, and one that it “too free” on too large units. 
In the modern age, at the literal extreme we find Nabokov’s equation of lit-
eralness and absolute accuracy ([1955] 1992: 141), at least as regards literary 
translation: 
The person who desires to turn a literary masterpiece into another language, has 
only one duty to perform, and this is to reproduce with absolute exactitude the 
whole text, and nothing but the text. The term “literal translation” is tautological 
since anything but that is not truly a translation but an imitation, an adaptation 
or a parody.
 ([1955] 1992: 134) 
In close agreement, and not only for literary texts, is Newmark’s claim that lit-
eral translation should always be preferred where it is possible: “provided that 
equivalent-­effect is secured, the literal word-for-word translation is not only the 
best, it is the only valid method of translation” (1981: 39). 
An example of the other extreme is Robinson (1991), who argues that trans-
lators have the right to translate just how they feel, exploiting a wide range of re-
lations between source and target. Indeed, he writes that ultimately the only valid 
criterion for a translation is that source and target text should “stand in some kind 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
9
of recognizable relation to each other” (153). This is a long way from the tradi-
tional equivalence requirement, some kind of “sameness”. 
The dominance of this supermeme is indeed closely bound up with notions of 
equivalence. An advocacy of literal translation goes hand in hand with an adher-
ence to formal equivalence, while free translation tends to prioritize functional 
equivalence. The required degree of literalness or freedom depends partly on the 
text-type etc. 
The disadvantage of this supermeme is that it takes one particular type of 
translation – literal translation – and sets it up as one end of a single dimen-
sion. This rather prejudges the whole issue, and prevents us from looking at other 
dimensions. 
1.2.5	
All-writing-is-translating
Semiotically speaking, all writing, including translating, is the mapping of sig-
nifieds onto signifiers: we put meaning into words (cf. Jakobson 1959). This su-
permeme thus stresses not the impossibility of translation but its possibility, its 
familiarity. Translating is no more than a form of writing that happens to be re-
writing. Learning to speak means learning to translate meanings into words (cf. 
Paz 1971). Furthermore, translation is also like the comprehension of everyday 
speech, as Schleiermacher ([1813] 1963: 38) points out: we often have to rephrase 
another person’s words in our own minds, in order to understand. 
It is frequently said that we also translate across time within the same lan-
guage, as when we read Chaucer in a modern English translation. And even with-
out such a translation, when reading Chaucer in the original we are still somehow 
interpreting him into our own language. This hermeneutic view of translation has 
been stressed e.g. by G. Steiner (1975) and Paepcke (1986). 
The idea that all writing is translating also emerges strongly in postmodern 
approaches to intertextuality, from Benjamin to Derrida and beyond: the basic 
argument here is that no texts are original, they are all derivative from other texts, 
parasitical upon them; writers do not create their own texts but borrow and com-
bine elements from others, linking up in the global textual web. Our words are not 
ours: they have been used before, and our own use is inevitably tainted by their 
previous usage, in other people’s mouths. There are no “originals”; all we can do is 
translate. (For a discussion, see Gentzler 1993, especially Chapter 6.) 
Associated with this idea is a particular attitude to meaning. Whereas the 
equivalence supermeme would assume that meanings are somewhere “out there”, 
already existing in objective reality, this supermeme would oppose such a notion. 
Instead, it takes the view that meaning is something that is negotiated during the 

10	
Memes of Translation
communication or interpretation process itself, it grows out of this process and 
is shaped by it, in the same way as it has been shaped by all previous communi-
cation. It is not “given-for-all-time” but “made”, both historically and instanta-
neously. Where the former supermeme stresses accuracy, therefore (in the sense 
of conforming to an objective “truth”), this supermeme would stress appropriate-
ness (that is, appropriateness to a particular communicative situation). Against 
both these homogenizing notions of meaning, however, it is easy to argue that 
some meanings are more objective and stable than others, and that the relative 
priorities of accuracy and appropriateness are contingent on many conditions. 
The all-writing-is-translating supermeme thus stands in opposition to the 
untranslatability one: it represents the belief that not only is translation possible 
but that it is in principle not so very different from other kinds of language use. 
Technically speaking, this is a mutualist supermeme, benefiting both itself and 
the host organism.
1.3	
The locus of memes
Where do memes exist? To answer this question I turn to the philosophy of Karl 
Popper. Let us look first at his concept of the three Worlds. 
This has been one of Popper’s most influential contributions to the philos-
ophy of science (see especially Popper 1972: 106f.). World 1 consists of physical 
objects, such as chairs, trees, spiders. World 2 is the subjective world of states 
of consciousness, mental states, “behavioural dispositions to act” (106). And 
World 3 is “the world of objective contents of thought, especially of scientific and 
poetic thoughts and of works of art” (106; italics original). World 3 is the world of 
ideas, not as they exist in an individual’s mind (World 2) but as they exist in the 
public domain, in books, libraries, databases; as they exist “objectively”. World 3 
contains theories, problems, hypotheses, arguments. A book, as a physical object, 
exists in World 1, but a book’s contents exist in World 3: a book can be burned, 
but its contents are not thus destroyed. 
Popper’s three worlds obviously interact with each other. A theory starts 
life in World 2, in someone’s head; when expressed in words or figures it enters 
World 3, and a book containing it can prop open a door in World 1. As physical 
objects, spider’s webs exist in World 1, but such webs are produced by the in-
nate “behavioural disposition to act” in the spider’s World 2, and our shared idea 
of such webs exists in World 3. World 2 phenomena obviously affect World 1 
objects, and vice versa. More interestingly, World 3 also interacts with both the 
other worlds. World 3 phenomena are, first of all, the products of the interaction 
between Worlds 1 and 2; but – and this is the main point at issue here – World 3 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
11
phenomena also affect World 2 (and thereby World 1). Ideas, for instance, affect 
the way we think and behave. Theories can affect the way we view the world and 
act within and upon it. 
The way World 3 impinges upon Worlds 1 and 2 is not deterministic, howev-
er. Because the interaction between the three worlds is in constant flux, feedback 
from one world to another is inherent. Because of the existence of this flexible 
feedback and the constant adjustments it gives rise to, Popper needs a concept of 
influence or control which is somewhere between full determinism and complete 
randomness. He calls this non-deterministic control, exercised in particular by 
World 3 over World 2, plastic control (e.g. 1972: 239f.). Critical arguments are a 
means of plastic control over behaviour; our theories exert a plastic control over 
ourselves. 
In Popper’s own words: 
[T]he control of ourselves and of our actions by our theories is a plastic control. 
We are not forced to submit ourselves to the control of our theories, for we can 
discuss them critically, and we can reject them freely if we think they fall short 
of our regulative standards. So the control is far from one-sided. Not only do our 
theories control us, but we can control our theories (and even our standards): 
there is a kind of feed-back here.
 (1972: 240–241; italics original) 
So in which of these Worlds do we find memes? The answer is: in all three. As 
unexpressed thoughts, memes exist in World 2. But they presumably also exist in 
World 1, as neural patterns of synapses in the brain. A biologist puts it this way: 
Any cultural trait that is taken over by a given individual from another individual 
must accordingly be thought of as the transfer of a particular pattern of synaptic 
hotspots within the associative networks of one brain to the associative networks 
of another brain. 
(Delius 1989: 44) 
Elsewhere in the article from which the above quotation comes, Delius glosses 
memes as “constellations of activated and non-activated synapses within neural 
memory networks” (45), and talks about them competing “for synaptic space” 
(67). Tantalizingly, such ideas also seem compatible with Edelman’s theory of 
neuronal group selection (see Edelman 1992): the human brain appears to be 
even more astonishing than one might think. 
Most interestingly and relevantly for our purposes, however, memes also exist 
in World 3. Indeed, as ideas, theories, arguments and the like, memes are very 
typical inhabitants of World 3. As such, they of course affect our Worlds 1 and 2, 
so that the survival of the inhabitants of World 1 (such as ourselves) depends to 
some extent on what memes prevail in World 3 and on the nature of the influence 
(plastic control) they have. 

12	
Memes of Translation
Memes may even be felt to exert more influence than we feel comfortable 
with. In his exploration of the notion of consciousness (i.e. something in World 2), 
Dennett (1991: 202) gives graphic expression to this uncomfortableness: “I don’t 
know about you,” he says, “but I’m not initially attracted by the idea of my brain 
as a sort of dung heap in which the larvae of other people’s ideas renew them-
selves, before sending out copies of themselves in an informational Diaspora.” 
Dennett’s view of meme influence is evidently more deterministic than Popper’s 
plastic control. 
From this point of view, translation memes, i.e. theories and ideas about 
translation in general, inevitably affect the way translators think and translate. 
Not necessarily explicitly, of course, for an amateur translator may operate only 
with vague, implicit ideas about what an acceptable translation is, perhaps a per-
sonal intuitive theory of some kind. The relation between theory and practice will 
be one of my key themes in what follows.
1.4	
A Popperian meme
Before looking at the evolution of translation memes one further item needs to be 
added to our introductory framework. This is Popper’s schema which he uses to 
describe the process of scientific methodology, and in fact to describe the acqui-
sition of all rational knowledge. It is as follows: 
	
	 P1 → TT → EE → P2 
All knowledge acquisition, says Popper, starts with a Problem, P1. Confronted 
with this, we propose a Tentative Theory (TT) or tentative hypothesis, a trial 
solution, which is of course unlikely to be perfect, given the fallibility of human 
nature. A theory, at its simplest, is seen here as a problem-solving hypothesis, a 
proposed answer to a question. One of Popper’s more radical claims is that it is 
totally immaterial how we actually arrive at this tentative theory: by sheer chance, 
imagination, rational deduction, a flash of insight in a dream – whatever. 
The tentative theory is then subjected to a process of Error Elimination (EE), 
and it is the rigour of this methodological stage which distinguishes science prop-
er from pseudoscience or non-scientific knowledge. (No claim is being made here 
about the relative values of scientific vs. non-scientific knowledge: they are simply 
different kinds of knowledge.) At this stage, the Tentative Theory is exposed to 
tests and criticism of all kinds, it is compared with alternative theories, checked 
for internal consistency, checked against the data and against new data, checked 
for the testable hypotheses it generates, and so on, in a determined effort to prove 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
13
it wrong, i.e. to falsify it. A theory that cannot be falsified (potentially, at least) 
may or may not be a good theory, but it is not, for Popper, a scientific one. A theo-
ry that has been exposed to rigorous testing and criticism, that has survived more 
or less intact so far, is a well-corroborated theory; but being intrinsically a hypoth-
esis, a theory in Popper’s sense can never be finally confirmed or proved right, 
although it may be supported by further evidence. What matters is not whether a 
theory can be verified or not – for no verification can ever be final – but whether 
it can in principle be falsified or not. 
The result of the Error Elimination process is a new Problem, P2; and so it 
continues. Theories do not automatically lead to “the truth”, but they do aim to get 
increasingly closer to verisimilitude. 
A caveat is required here. As might be expected, Popper’s theory of scien-
tific theorizing has itself not gone without criticism. He has been criticized, for 
instance, for underestimating the process whereby hypotheses are painstakingly 
arrived at, and for being too anarchistic on this point (see e.g. Niiniluoto 1978); 
for overestimating the strength and significance of the falsifiability criterion and 
underestimating the way that the acceptance, survival and rejection of scientific 
theories may also depend on social and ideological factors – theories may become 
gradually “frustrated”, not dramatically falsified (see especially Kuhn 1970); and 
on other counts as well. My goal here, however, is not to present a critique of Pop-
per’s philosophy of science as such, nor to examine how it has been received and 
developed since, nor to evaluate its originality or Popper’s debt to other thinkers 
such as Peirce. (Readers are referred to Popper’s own intellectual autobiography – 
Popper 1992 – and the references therein.) I simply find inspiration in a number 
of Popper’s ideas, and seek to apply these to some of the problems posed by trans-
lation theory, and especially the problem of setting up a translation theory in the 
first place (Chesterman 1994a). 
The next chapter will use Popper’s schema as a means of structuring the way 
in which ideas about translation have developed. It will thus represent an outline 
Tentative Theory of this historical process.
1.5	
Update
By surprising coincidence, in the same year that this book was first published an-
other translation scholar, Hans Vermeer, published an article in Target speculat-
ing on the relevance of the meme concept to translation (Vermeer 1997). Neither 
of us was aware of the other’s interest in this subject at the time. Vermeer relates 
memes to the notion of culturemes, which he had made use of in some of his 
own work. Vermeer’s article raised many questions about memes, some of which 

14	
Memes of Translation
I have offered answers to, although many more still remain open. Vermeer also 
touches on the topic in a later issue of Target (Vermeer 1998), in the context of 
a brief discussion of intentionality, but does not develop the idea further there.
The meme metaphor has also been found useful by Franz Pöchhacker, in his 
introduction to Interpreting Studies (2004). However, the notion cannot be said 
to have entered the mainstream of Translation Studies. This may be partly due to 
critical responses to the meme concept in general. Some of these were collected 
in Rose and Rose (2001), and I summarized and commented on several of them 
in Chesterman (2005a). One of the most interesting crititicisms concerns the on-
tological status of memes: are memes only metaphors, or do they really exist in 
some way? If they do exist, is this form of existence significantly similar to the 
way genes exist, or significantly different? Opinions differ… Even if they are taken 
to be no more than a metaphorical way of conceptualizing how common ideas 
spread, I still find this a stimulating way of thinking, and not just about transla-
tion. True, any purely memetic account of the evolution of ideas still remains to 
be embedded in a rich historical and social context – a task which this book does 
not much deal with.
In some schools of behavioural science and cultural studies memetics seems 
to be flourishing. I refer interested readers to this website listing online publica-
tions on memetics: http://www.lycaeum.org//~sputnik/Memetics/, and to Susan 
Blackmore’s site at http://www.susanblackmore.co.uk/memetics/. Key volumes on 
memetics that have appeared since 1997 include Aunger (2000) and Blackmore 
(1999); see also Dennett’s philosophical books and papers defending Darwinism, 
both biological and cultural (e.g. 2004, Chapter 6). Two relevant French referenc-
es are Changeux (2003) and Cavalli-Sforza (2005).
I have more recently noted with interest that a Darwinist approach to trans-
lation is evident in the “eco-translatology” theory, which seems related to a me-
metic approach. Eco-translatology is founded on the idea that translation can be 
analysed in terms of selection and adaptation, like biological evolution. Transla-
tion practice is seen as an ecosystem, interacting with its environment. The theory 
has been mainly promoted so far by Chinese scholars (see e.g. Hu 2003), and is 
claimed to be partly inspired by ancient Chinese wisdom. At the time of writing, 
it is not yet so widely known in the West, although there have been five interna-
tional symposia on this approach to date.
The equivalence supermeme has continued to flourish, despite the criticisms 
directed against it (see e.g. Snell-Hornby 1988), and despite the importance of the 
skopos idea (see 2.6). Even though it does not seem helpful to define equivalence 
in terms of identity, except for special limited cases, it is still widely held to be an 
essential concept which can distinguish translation from other acts of commu-
nication. In my own work (e.g. 1998: Chapter 1) I have argued that Translation 

	
Chapter 1.  Survival machines for memes	
15
Studies can best interpret equivalence as relevant similarity, and discussed the 
different kinds of similarity typically focused on by Translation Studies and Con-
trastive Studies: divergent (roughly, where a likeness is created, e.g. by imitating) 
and convergent similarity (roughly, where a likeness is perceived between two 
separate entities).
Anthony Pym (e.g. 1995) has consistently defended the relevance of the 
equivalence idea to translation practice and Translation Studies. He argues that 
equivalence is a matter of belief: the translator believes – and implicitly claims – 
that the finished target text is equivalent (in some relevant way), and the client 
and/or reader normally accepts this belief and thus assumes equivalence. More 
recently (2007, 2010), he has proposed a distinction between two basic kinds of 
equivalence: natural equivalence and directional equivalence, which can also be 
thought of as the above-mentioned two types of similarity. The two types also 
characterize the foci of different kinds of translation theory. Natural equivalence 
between words and structures etc. in a given pair of languages already exists (e.g. 
in bilingual dictionaries; cf. “correspondence” in lexicography) before a given act 
of translating, and this relation is reversible; the translator just has to know the 
natural equivalent, or find it. Water in English is Wasser in German, and vice versa. 
(Cf. convergent similarity.) Directional equivalence, on the other hand, is created 
by the translator in a given context, and is not reversible. A directional translation 
might be very free indeed, and different translators of a given item, looking for 
a target item based on directional equivalence, would most likely come up with 
different solutions, which might all be valid. (Cf. divergent similarity.)
Arguments and proposals concerning the equivalence supermeme certain-
ly continue to invigorate Translation Studies. And not only Translation Studies:  
Patrick Cattrysse includes a critical analysis of the translation equivalence de-
bate in his book on Adaptation Studies (2014: Chapter 13.2.4). He calls for more 
conceptual and terminological clarity. For instance, he argues that Pym’s terms 
“directional” and “natural” are not polar opposites, and that the reversibility crite-
rion is more complex than it may appear. 


Chapter 2
The evolution of translation memes
People have been translating for thousands of years: it is one of the many useful 
things we can do with language. And people have also been thinking about trans-
lation for almost as long. Ideas about translation – about how to do it, how not 
to do it, when it seems impossible, and so on – have sprung up like mushrooms. 
Presumably, some of these ideas, these translation memes, have failed to win any 
general acceptance and have thus faded without trace. Others have remained cur-
rent for quite some time before giving way to others. And still others appear to be 
practically indestructible: cf. the supermemes in the previous chapter. 
This chapter suggests a way of surveying the evolution of translation memes. 
Recall Popper’s schema introduced above. Each attempt to solve a problem (i.e. 
each Tentative Theory) eventually gives rise to a further problem (P2), in an end-
less process, approaching ever closer to “truthlikeness”. Each theory evolves out 
of, and reacts to, a preceding one; each new theory seeks to correct or refine some 
aspect of an earlier one, or even offer an alternative starting point altogether, in 
different socio-cultural conditions. My focus here is on the ideas themselves, and 
I shall not discuss their socio-cultural causes in any detail. 
With this general picture of theory development in mind, let us now take a 
bird’s-eye look at the growth of translation theory. My intention here is not to of-
fer a detailed history of the field, nor do I claim to introduce new insights: much 
fuller and deeper treatments are available elsewhere (see e.g. Kelly 1979; Berman 
1984; Rener 1989; Bassnett 1991; Copeland 1991; Vermeer 1992; Ballard 1992; 
Venuti 1995a). My outline here is largely restricted to the European tradition. 
The idea of this chapter is to introduce some of the main strands of translation-­
theoretical thinking, and to argue that these strands still play a role in current 
work and practice. It may well be that if we are to build a comprehensive theory of 
translation, we shall have to incorporate all of these strands in one way or another, 
because each of them highlights one particular aspect of the phenomenon we call 
translation. The theoretical situation today is fragmented: one reason for taking 
such a general view here is the need to find a perspective from which the different 
strands can be related.
I shall distinguish eight major stages in this evolution (following Chesterman 
1995). Each stage can be seen as a particular meme or meme-complex, concerned 
with a particular question (P1) or set of questions. At each stage a number of 

18	
Memes of Translation
theoretical concepts and insights emerge, some of which survive into the meme 
pool of subsequent stages. The peaks of these stages are roughly chronological, 
but there is a good deal of overlap, so that the stages are cumulative rather than 
strictly successive: the stages primarily represent clusters of ideas rather than his-
torical periods. 
For clarity of exposition, to sum up each stage in the evolution of translation 
memes I suggest a dominant metaphor, which seems to encapsulate the set of 
ideas asociated with that stage. D’hulst (1992) makes the valuable point that such 
metaphors have an enormous influence on the way scholars and practitioners 
conceive of translation. However, if we look through the spectacles provided by 
a single metaphor alone, we run the risk of missing insights that would be facili-
tated by some other metaphor. A modern theory of translation needs to draw on 
many such metaphors. 
My eight meme-complexes and their associated metaphors thus offer a way 
of structuring the current meme pool of ideas about translation: it contains traces 
of them all. 
2.1	
Words
Etymologically, as noted above, English “translate” means ‘carry across’. It would 
appear that among the very first questions raised about translation, perhaps three 
thousand or so years ago, was “what is carried across?” And the answer was some-
thing like: we carry across the meanings inside words. For words are repositories 
of meaning. And words are the building blocks out of which language is con-
structed. Words are the first units of translation. 
Rener (1989) shows how the first theoretical ideas about translation in the 
west became closely tied up with the classical Greek view of language. Language 
was seen as a structure, a whole consisting of arranged parts. The prevailing met-
aphor was an architectural one: as a building is made of smaller units called bricks 
etc., so language structure is made of smaller units called words. 
Words are signs. A formal sign was taken to represent a meaning. For Plato, 
the meanings represented by word-signs were not only constant but absolute, ele-
ments of the true reality: Platonic Ideas. Far removed from the messy world of the 
everyday, “meanings” were manifestations of the Ideal: perfect, eternal. (For more 
detailed expositions, see Kelly 1979 and Robinson 1991.) For Aristotle too, signs 
mirrored reality. Translation was possible, because reality remained constant: the 
meaning of a word did not change when it was expressed via another form. 
It has taken a long time for this general conception of meaning to be toppled 
off its pedestal. It is therefore not surprising that it has also dominated (at least 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
19
western) thinking about translation theory. The idea of absolute and invariant 
meanings has been a very long-lasting translation meme. Perhaps its survival had 
something to do with the need to cling to something permanent amid the flux of 
translation. 
In practice, what the translator was thought to do was this: like a stone mason, 
he de-constructed the original structure and then used the same bricks to build a 
new structure elsewhere. The bricks were now not the words themselves, but the 
word-­meanings they contained or represented. Because the translator used the 
same bricks, the same word-meanings, equivalence was guaranteed. The meta-
phor I propose for Stage 1 is thus “translation is rebuilding.” 
Offshoots of this meme are to be found in many contemporary concepts, 
theories and applications of meaning, such as denotation (vs. connotation); lex-
ical semantics, especially componential analysis; lexicography and terminology 
studies. 
Furthermore, it is the reaction to this meme that triggers off the whole debate 
about translatability: can words of different languages actually “mean the same”? 
As long as meanings were conceived of as absolute, objectively existing “out there”, 
it was easy to answer “yes”. But this assurance gradually became worn away: all 
words? all words in all contexts? all words all the time? 
2.2	
The Word of God
From a focus on individual words (P1) there obviously had to emerge a focus on 
the structures in which words were arranged, for words alone, unstructured, do 
not make a language. It is this focus on formal structure which was associated 
with much of the early thinking on the translation of religious texts. Many of the 
foremost translators and theorists of this stage (in the West) were themselves in-
volved in such translations, primarily of the Bible. And it was the specific nature 
of this particular text-type that gave rise to the next major theoretical issue (a first 
P2, as it were). 
Because: if you believe that the scriptures are indeed the Word of God, and if 
you believe that you have a mission to spread this Word, you quickly find yourself 
in a quandary. The Word is holy; how then can it be changed? For translation does 
not only substitute one word-meaning for another but also reconstructs the struc-
tural form in which these word-meanings are embedded. Yet in holy texts, it was 
felt, even the form was holy. To meddle with the original form of the scriptures was 
to risk blasphemy, heresy; a translator might even risk his life (several centuries 
later, the translator Dolet was indeed burnt at the stake for “mistranslating” Plato 

20	
Memes of Translation
in such a way as to suggest something heretical about the posthumous existence 
of the soul). 
There were two ways out of this quandary, two Tentative Theories or ideas 
that had to work in tandem. One was to extend the idea of the meaning (Latin 
significatio) of a text in such a way that the meaning was not just carried by indi-
vidual words but by the text as a whole; then, by analogy with the invariance of 
word-­meaning, this extended meaning could also be claimed to remain constant 
in spite of the change of form (Latin sonum) it underwent in translation. God’s 
Word remained God’s Word, regardless of the language it was expressed in. (In-
cidentally, God could also inspire the translators of the Word just as he had in-
spired its original writers; this made it easier to translate with a clear conscience.) 
As with word-meanings, equivalence was presupposed: it was accepted that the 
divine truth contained in Holy Scripture was absolute and would therefore be 
preserved across languages. 
But this solution depended on a second theoretical idea, on another transla-
tion meme that has also been endowed with impressive longevity. This was the 
idea of (maximally) literal translation, “word-for-word” but preserving target-­
language grammaticality. In other words, it was accepted that the translator would 
have to make some formal (structural) changes during the process of translation, 
but these were to be kept to a minimum. Jerome was quoted by the French bishop 
Huetius ([1683] 1992: 92) as saying that even the very word order in sacred scrip-
tures is a mystery. 
This translation meme was motivated in the first place by fear: the fear of 
heresy and its consequences. It was also motivated by a respect for the authority 
of the source text. These are strong motivations, and we find frequent expressions 
of this attitude in what translators have written about their own work. In the early 
16th century, Erasmus wrote that he preferred “to sin through excessive scrupu-
lousness rather than through excessive license” ([1506] 1992: 60) – i.e. to translate 
too literally rather than too freely. Pym (1994) argues that in 12th-century Toledo, 
literalism functioned as a protection, allowing translators to translate works that 
would otherwise have been disapproved of or censored. Indeed, this is the trans-
lation meme that starts the argument about free vs. literal translation, which so 
dominates the traditional literature on translation. 
It is important to appreciate that this particular meme seems to have started 
life in the context of biblical translation, to which it was particularly appropriate, 
of course. From there, it spread to certain other contexts in which the form of the 
original text was somehow felt to be particularly significant: philosophy, scientific 
and technical texts. In the late 17th century, for instance, we find Huetius arguing 
that such texts should be translated with close attention to the form of the original, 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
21
without undue embellishment ([1683] 1992: 86f.), because only in this way could 
the translator guarantee to preserve truthfulness. 
There are a number of contemporary manifestations of this meme. One is 
Nida’s concept of minimal transfer (e.g. 1964), which he defines as a transfer that 
incorporates all and only the formal changes that are necessary to render the tar-
get text grammatical. This concept is closely linked to that of Nida’s formal equiv-
alence: (maximal) sameness of form rather than of effect. 
Another example is the notion of semantic translation (vs. communicative 
translation) developed by Newmark (1981): a semantic translation is one that fol-
lows the form of the source text as closely as possible. 
A third example is to be found in the general approach advocated by Vinay 
and Darbelnet ([1958] 1969). They outline a series of “translation procedures” 
ranging from “direct” (including “literal translation”) to “indirect” (including var-
ious formal, semantic and pragmatic changes). The gist of their argument is that 
one should translate as directly as possible, only having recourse to more indirect 
procedures when the result of a direct procedure is plainly inexact or ungrammat-
ical. In their opinion, then, the whole argument about free vs. literal translation 
is a red herring: one simply translates as literally as possible, for unmotivated 
changes (“freedom”) lead to inexact, less-than-optimal, translations. (See Chap-
ter 4 below for more on translation strategies.)
Reverence for the source text, and the consequent insistence on literal trans-
lation, is also evident in the ideas of some modern literary translators. Nabokov is 
a good example, as mentioned in the previous chapter. 
This reverence is also evident in what seems to be the dominant metaphor for 
this stage: “translation is copying”. Translators themselves have no authority, they 
are totally subservient to the source text; they are humble copiers; deviation from 
the original is a sin. 
2.3	
Rhetoric
The subsequent problem that arose was, of course, that not all texts are holy scrip-
tures or the like. Should other texts too be translated in the same literal way? 
One of the first scholars to make the link between translation method and 
text-type was Jerome, who himself translated both religious texts and literary 
classics. He argued that non-sacred texts should be translated more freely. This 
does indeed seem to correspond to what translators of sacred and less sacred 
works usually did. 
Schwarzwald-Rodrigue (1993), for instance, shows that translations of Bib-
lical and (less sacred) Mishnaic texts into Ladino (a Judeo-Spanish language) 

22	
Memes of Translation
consistently follow these different attitudes to the status of the source text: the 
Mishnaic texts are translated less literally. 
As the kind of texts that were translated shifted from biblical to secular, espe-
cially in the Renaissance period, so the dominant translation meme also shifted. 
Translation became more like interpretation, commentary, adaptation, even ex-
planation. Translators gave priority to the needs and tastes of their readers rath-
er than the strict form of the source. To some extent, this move away from ST 
dominance must have been a natural reaction to “over-literal” translations that 
had been heavily marked by source-language (SL) interference and thus sacrificed 
target-­language (TL) acceptability. The argument was often couched in terms of 
the opposition between servile adherence to the letter versus noble faithfulness to 
the spirit of the original (e.g. Dacier [1711] 1992: 12–13). 
This memetic shift was also a reaction against the servile status of the transla-
tor. In the 16th century, Dolet argued bluntly that translators should not become 
slaves to the original, by merely rendering word for word ([1540] 1992: 27). And 
later, in the 18th century, d’Alembert used similar images of servitude to criticize 
over-literal translators who submitted themselves to the yoke of the original, be-
coming mere copiers rather than genuine rivals ([1758] 1992: 111). 
A rival is a much more forceful agent than a passive copier. The idea of the 
translator as the rival of the original writer goes back to Quintilian, with his ad-
vocation that translators should engage in a struggle with the original, to em-
ulate and even surpass it rather than copy it (see e.g. Lefevere 1992: 50, 87). At 
this stage, the dominant metaphor for translating is imitating, not copying. One 
imitates a process, a creative process, rather than a passive product; imitating re-
quires its own creative force, even a virtuoso sense of “I can do this better than 
you can”. Translators began to assume more authority, more responsibility for the 
authorship of their translations. 
I call this stage that of rhetoric, for the first signs of it occur in that other clas-
sical tradition of language study: not grammar but rhetoric. (For a detailed study 
of the influence of the rhetoric tradition on translation theory, see Rener 1989.) In 
Roman education, translating from Greek (like paraphrasing within Latin) was an 
important rhetorical exercise in its own right, a form of language practice. But the 
benefit of such practice was not only felt by the individual orator; it was frequently 
argued that such translation also benefited the target language as a whole. 
This meme of target-language enrichment is something very different from 
the thinking of the previous stage. It represents the first of many pendulum swings 
between source dominance and target dominance. Translation is now seen not as 
source-oriented copying but target-oriented rhetoric, its main concern being au-
dience reception. There is more of a pride in the target language and its potential: 
source texts are there to be exploited for the benefit of the receiving culture. 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
23
The meme is a prolific one, and no more than some representative examples 
of its manifestation will be given here. One early instance is the traditional ar-
gument that we should translate non-sacred texts sense for sense, not word for 
word, found e.g. in Cicero. During the Middle Ages, vernacular translations of 
poetry and prose were often very free indeed, and raised the perennial question of 
how free a translation can get before it becomes something other than a transla-
tion, such as an adaptation (a point that we shall return to in a later chapter). (See 
Copeland 1991.) Even biblical translation came under the influence of the new 
meme: Luther took great care to make his German translation fit naturally into the 
vernacular, in order that its function should be more effectively served. Clarity, in-
telligibility, readability, fluency – these were the things that mattered. (See Venuti  
1995a for a critical discussion of the origins and history of the fluency ideal; 
Venuti himself argues that the ideal has canonized a bourgeois cultural dominance, 
and that it should be resisted. I take up this ethical issue in Chapter 7, below.) 
This rhetorical tradition reached its height during the Renaissance, with a 
paramount emphasis on what we might call the entertainment value of a text. 
Combined with a strong target-reader orientation, this inevitably led eventually 
to translations of inordinate freedom, perhaps belles but frequently infidèles. In 
the 17th century we thus have Cowley defending his Pindar translations with the 
justification that “I have … taken, left out, and added what I please …” ([1656] 
1975: 66), because, in keeping with the fashion of the time, his priority was the 
style of the original, not its content. Compare Dryden, making Virgil speak like a 
late 17th-century English gentleman ([1680] 1975); or Pope’s Homer in powdered 
wigs. A more extreme example is offered by de la Motte, whose cavalier transla-
tion of the Iliad reduced the work by about half by simply cutting out the “un-
interesting episodes” and passages that shocked or bored contemporary taste, so 
that the final translation could be actually presented as being better than Homer’s 
original ([1714] 1992: 28–30). The manifestation of this meme in Dutch 18th-­
century translation, stressing a prospective rather than retrospective (source-­
oriented) orientation, is described by Korpel (1993). The meme continues into 
the 19th century, with Fitzgerald plundering and reshaping the Rubaiyat at will, 
and even into the 20th, with Robinson’s (1991) virtual rejection of any authority 
other than that of the translator him- or herself. In fact, Robinson’s whole book 
The Translator’s Turn is an extended argument in favour of this view of translation 
(see especially p. 134f.). 
One of the most interesting manifestations of the Rhetoric meme is to be 
found in the ideas of certain postmodern scholars of translation. A striking image 
here is translation as cannibalism, absorbing the value of an original text and thus 
nourishing the target language and culture (see e.g. Vieira 1994). 

24	
Memes of Translation
2.4	
Logos
Just as the Rhetoric stage was in part a reaction against the previous literalism, so 
too it provoked its own inevitable reaction in turn. Already in 1680 Dryden was 
warning against the excesses of both free imitation and over-literalism, and ad-
vocating a middle path. A hundred years later, Tytler similarly sought to balance 
natural target-language style with a respect for the content of the original ([1790] 
1978: 16f.). 
However, it was not until the German Romantic movement that a genuinely 
new meme entered the pool, with respect to literary translation. An early expres-
sion of the new attitude comes in Schleiermacher’s argument against imitation 
in his essay “Ueber die verschiedenen Methoden des Uebersezens” (based on a 
lecture given in 1813; reprinted in Störig 1963: 38–70). Imitation, like copying, is 
ultimately impossible, he argues, and mere paraphrase destroys the spirit of the 
original. In place of these, rather than carrying the translation to the reader, the 
translation of literature should aim at a style that is deliberately marked, strange, 
foreign, so that the reader feels the translation to be unfamiliar and is thus moved 
back towards the original; the experience should be as if a foreign spirit were 
blown towards the reader. In other words, the pendulum swings back towards 
the original again. (But see Pym’s critical analysis of Schleiermacher’s binarism in 
Pym 1997, Chapter 1.)
Note how this attitude reflects a particular view of equivalence. The Word-of-
God stage had to presuppose total equivalence, and the Rhetoric stage, where it 
respected equivalence at all, prioritized stylistic equivalence above semantic and 
formal. But now equivalence of effect (pragmatic equivalence) is essentially de-
nied, inasmuch as target readers are deliberately exposed to a textual strangeness 
that did not necessarily form part of the source readers’ reading experience. For-
mal equivalence, however, is now given more weight: what this stage tended to 
mean in practice was a closer adherence to the textual structure of the original. 
Although equivalence of effect was thus implicitly denied, the actual effect of 
translations was a central concern. It was linked to a functional view of language 
as a whole: language was seen as a creative force, something that gave shape and 
form to the world and to human experience. Language was logos, the creative 
Word. To use language was thus to imitate the act of divine creation. 
To make sense of this memetic shift, two background factors must be borne 
in mind. One was the revival of hermeneutics, offering an alternative philosophy 
of language, stressing its function not as an instrument of communication but as a 
vehicle of expression, self-expression and creation. (This is discussed at length in 
Kelly 1979; for the classical and medieval roots, see also Copeland 1991.) 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
25
The other factor was the geopolitical situation of Germany itself, where these 
ideas first began to spread in Europe. At this period, Germany was only starting 
to grow into a single nation-state, and for the leading intellectuals of the time the 
major force of the unification process was the German language. A shared lan-
guage would create and unite a nation. This idea is an obvious development of the 
previous meme that translations enrich the target language. As the language of a 
nation is its spirit, a nation too can be enriched by enriching its language. 
This view of language gave translators enormous status and responsibility, for 
it is translators that have the power to give a nation the memes that it lacks. By 
bringing new forms and ideas into the target culture, translators do indeed help 
to shape that culture; they are instrumental in the creation and development of a 
national culture. And it is this role that suggests an appropriate metaphor for this 
stage of translation theory development: translating is creating. A translator is an 
artist who shapes language. 
Translating was the bringing of Erklärung, enlightenment: the changes it 
brought about in the target culture were therefore beneficial, metamorphoses to-
wards a higher stratum of development. It is this image that underlies Goethe’s 
([1819] 1963) understanding of translation, as an organic change of form; a given 
text translated at different periods would embody different stages in this meta-
morphosis, according to the evolutionary stages of the source and target cultures 
and to the target culture’s degree of familiarity with the source text. A plain prose 
translation would be followed by a “parodistic” one fully adapted to the target 
language and culture, and then later still by an “interlinear” one, closer to the 
original. (This idea is a source of the retranslation hypothesis: see Update below.)
The meme-complex that constitutes this Logos stage also has later manifes-
tations that are still current in today’s meme pool. One line of inheritance can be 
traced through Walter Benjamin’s classic essay on “Die Aufgabe des Übersetzers” 
([1923] 1963), the task of the translator. Here we find the same image of the trans-
lator as the bringer of light, the light of the pure language that underlies all lan-
guages; the same necessity of spurning total target-language naturalness in order 
to preserve a visible echo of the original. For Benjamin, a true translation should 
be transparent, not blocking the light of the original but allowing the underlying 
pure language (die reine Sprache) to shine through. It is the translator’s task to 
break through the barriers of his own language, in order that it can renew itself 
via contact with this “pure language”.
Benjamin’s ideas were followed up by the American translation workshop tra-
dition that grew partly out of the New Criticism movement (see Gentzler 1993). 
Here too, translation appears as a semi-mystical process embedded in creative 
writing. Translation can reveal the true meaning of a literary work, the universal 
essence of language; it is the interpretation tool par excellence. For Ezra Pound, a 

26	
Memes of Translation
translator should be able to find meaning that even the original author was not 
aware of (Gentzler 1993: 19–29). Frederick Will spoke of the feeling in the trans-
lation workshops that they were “working toward the single language which lies 
between, or among […] all the national languages” (1973: 158, cited in Gentzler 
1993: 35) – Benjamin’s image exactly. Gentzler sees this whole tradition as revolv-
ing around the concept of energy in language (1993: 40); it is admittedly difficult 
to be explicit about such abstractions, yet this energy looks very much like logos 
in another guise. Similarly, Berman (1984), Venuti (1992, 1995a) and May (1994) 
argue against the trend to “domesticate” (naturalize) literary translations; they 
propose a return to the deliberately “foreignizing” practices of the German Ro-
mantic Hölderlin. 
Venuti takes up the notion of “abusive fidelity” from P. Lewis (1985) and 
Derrida (1985), a fidelity that deliberately rejects the fluency ideal in favour of 
a translation that resists the normal usage of the target language, challenging 
the target-­language norms by playing with signifiers. Lewis argues that this kind 
of “strong translation” is the most appropriate way of translating texts such as  
Derrida’s writings, which themselves break source-language norms of usage. In so 
doing, the translator draws attention to the translation itself as text. Venuti argues 
that such a translation procedure is ethically motivated, in that it resists the “eth-
nocentric violence” inevitably committed by fluent translations. The foreignizing 
strategy he advocates also involves the exploiting of anachronistic corners in the 
target language. Bad translation negates the Otherness of the foreign by transmit-
ting it as familiar; good translation preserves this Otherness, by whatever means 
possible. May (1994) argues that translators of Russian literature into English have 
tended to neglect or under-use certain aspects of the narrative style of the origi-
nal, such as the use of Free Indirect Speech or an intrusive narrator, in favour of a 
more fluid style more in keeping with target-language ideals of clarity, explicitness 
and accessibility. Such a translation method is said to devalue the intrinsic opacity 
of language, favouring information transfer at the expense of aesthetic play. 
It seems paradoxical that these scholars are currently arguing for a translation 
method similar to the one advocated by 18th and early 19th-century German 
intellectuals, but with the opposite intention; this is perhaps partly because of the 
different historical positions of the target languages concerned. Schleiermacher 
wanted to boost the status of German, he had clear nationalistic aims; but Venuti 
wishes to reduce the hegemony of major languages such as English and force them 
to accept the Otherness of texts from other cultures. It is also paradoxical that if 
English, for instance, is indeed stretched and expanded in this way, accommodat-
ing and accepting more and more Otherness, its hegemony may well increase as a 
result, like the way Hinduism survived and spread by tolerating and adapting all 
kinds of other beliefs. 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
27
Another later manifestation of the Logos meme is to be found in the work of 
Heidegger ([1957] 1963), who also entertained quasi-mystical ideas of translation 
as a mode of access to true Being, a way of escaping the constraints of a language 
by returning to “originary” Language. We are on similar ground in Foucault (e.g. 
1971), with his stress on the way discourse moulds its users, the autonomy of lan-
guage, and the value of translation as a way of reaching the Other; and of course 
also in Derrida (1985), playing with the slippage between languages. 
In fact, Derrida and other deconstructionists at times come surprisingly close 
to the kind of memetic view of translation (i.e., translations as survival machines 
for memes) that was introduced in the previous chapter. One point that comes 
up repeatedly in deconstructionist texts on translation is the questioning of the 
status of the original: suppose the original text is not primary, but secondary, 
dependent on the translation? Memetically, this is of course true: a text will not 
gain readship, will not “live”, outside the language of its birth unless it is granted 
a translation. The cross-cultural, international survival of a text indeed depends 
upon its translation. In keeping with the anti-positivist thinking associated with 
the Logos meme-complex, Derrida denies that translation can “transfer” some 
objectively existing “meaning”, denies the existence of any such meaning in the 
first place, and denies any kind of equivalence; rather, he sees the process more 
as a perpetual modification of the original, what we might call a kind of memetic 
mutation. Translations give life, life both beyond that of the original text itself and 
beyond that of the original author. Translations propagate memes through both 
space and time. (See also A. Benjamin 1989; Koskinen 1994a, b; Arrojo 1996.) 
The general status of meaning within the Logos meme is thus very different 
from what it had been earlier. Meanings are no longer seen as primarily con-
ventional, objective, stable, existing “out there”; rather, they are ever-shifting, 
ever-slippery, never original, always relative. Where the Rhetoric meme stressed 
adaptation to the target culture and hence the desired familiarity of the transla-
tion, the Logos meme stresses its Otherness. 
On this view, the death of the author serves to usher in the age of the trans-
lator. Oittinen (1995) celebrates the “translator’s carnival”, a space-time during 
which established statuses are overturned and the translator wears the crown. 
2.5	
Linguistic science
It is obvious that the ideas discussed in the foregoing section pertain primarily to 
literary translation: they can have little relevance to the wide range of other kinds 
of translation covering everything from legal and technical documents to tourist 

28	
Memes of Translation
brochures and advertisements. It is indeed unfortunate that the theory of trans-
lation often continues to be equated, entirely without justification, with theories 
of literary translation only – see the anthology edited by Schulte and Biguenet 
(1992), for instance. 
This limited scope naturally provoked historical reactions, too. When it led 
to the artificially archaistic translations favoured by some of the Victorian trans-
lators, calls began to be made for a different approach. Matthew Arnold ([1924] 
1992) advocated a more scholarly approach, translations that would be appreci-
ated by scholars who also had access to the original source texts; but he too was 
thinking of literary translation only, specifically of the Greek classics. 
A more irritated response to the Logos stage is expressed in the early 20th 
century by Willamowitz-Moellendorff, who criticizes the German Romantic ap-
proach to translation (and the hybrid texts it produced), which was bound to a 
certain period in German history and culture and was unable to provide a basis 
for a more general theory of translation ([1925] 1963). In place of such naive am-
ateurs, he exclaims, what we need are professional philologists, linguists. 
Interestingly enough, a scientific, linguistic view of translation is also fore-
shadowed (and rejected) in Schleiermacher’s essay on translation, referred to 
above, where Schleiermacher writes scornfully of those who merely paraphrase 
the original, who succeed only in laboriously rendering the content but irrevoca-
bly killing the spirit of the original. And it is Schleiermacher who introduces what 
we can take as the dominant metaphor of this linguistic focus: the paraphasing 
translator treats the elements of the two languages as if they were mathematical 
signs, which simply by means of addition and subtraction can be reduced to the 
same value (1963: 46). In other words, on this view to translate is to decode and 
then recode: translating is transcoding. 
It is surely significant that the famous letter from Weaver to Wiener, at the 
dawn of the great project in machine translation, couches translation in exactly 
the same terms. Weaver writes (1955: 18): “One naturally wonders if the problem 
of translation could conceivably be treated as a problem in cryptography. When I 
look at an article in Russian, I say: This is really written in English, but it has been 
coded in some strange symbols. I will now proceed to decode.” 
The linguistic reaction thus meant a return to the positivistic tradition after 
the romantic excursion. Modern linguistic influences in translation theory are 
associated with the general pursuit of objectivity and explicitness, with more pri-
ority given to the equivalence supermeme, and with a concern for a true scientific 
method. It is during this stage that in the German-speaking world the term Über-
setzungswissenschaft begins to be current, symbolizing the wish of translation 
scholars that their subject should be granted genuine scientific status. 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
29
The prototypical manifestation of what I will call the Linguistics meme in 
translation theory is seen in early machine translation, for which strict equiva-
lence is a sine qua non. Instead of waffling about mystical energy, practitioners of 
machine translation are concerned with the practical rules of language use. They 
have to believe that these rules exist, and that they are as stable as those of gravity; 
if there were no rules, “everyone would speak his own version of the language, 
and no one would understand anyone else” (Toma [1976] 1989: 168). Further, it 
must also be possible to formulate explicit algorithms for transferring signs of 
one language into signs of another. (Only up to a point, say the critics; but I shall 
not enter further into machine translation here, except to point out that the most 
recent machine translation systems, such as Google Translate, are not rule-based 
but statistical and corpus-based.) 
With respect to human translation, Catford’s A Linguistic Theory of Transla-
tion (1965) marks another central version of this meme. I refer in particular to his 
notion of unconditioned (= regardless of context) and conditioned (= in context) 
equivalence probabilities which specify how likely it is that a given source item 
X will be translated as a target item Y: invaluable information for the translat-
ing computer, of course. Catford’s analysis of shifts has also been influential in 
classifying the various kinds of formal difference that can be observed between 
a source item and its translation: differences of structure, grammatical class etc. 
More complex analyses of shifts are discussed by Malone (1988) and Leuven-­
Zwart (1989–1990). (See also Chapter 4, below.) 
Within this same meme we can also place the work on contrastive stylistics 
by Vinay and Darbelnet ([1958] 1969), contrasting English and French. Although 
they claim to be “following the mind” as it moves from one language to another, 
Vinay and Darbelnet are in fact primarily concerned with developing an extensive 
taxonomy of differences, both formal, semantic and stylistic, between their two 
languages. Some of these differences are, however, formulated as dynamic trans-
fer procedures, and we shall return to them in Chapter 4. 
Contrastive analysis as a whole is of great relevance to this meme (see for 
instance Hartmann 1980, 1981; Chesterman 1998). To do a contrastive analy-
sis you need a third term, a tertium comparationis, i.e. something that remains 
invariant across the comparison (or at least something whose variance is rele-
vantly constrained). In translation theory the name given to this invariance has 
been equivalence, and this becomes a central concern at this stage in the overall 
development of the theory. What remains invariant in translation, if anything? 
Throughout this stage this illusive invariance is pursued from the purely formal, 
through the semantic, stylistic and textual to the pragmatic. (The last two were 
favoured domains of the influential Leipzig school: see e.g. Neubert and Shreve 
1992.) It gradually becomes clear that at none of these levels can we expect to be 

30	
Memes of Translation
able to define a total identity, absolute equivalence. Not only is total formal equiv-
alence a chimera, but no two meanings are ever absolutely the same, and no two 
styles or situations or even functions either. 
Where the Logos-stage translators believed in a universal pure language, ma-
chine translation scholars have often posited some kind of mathematical neutral 
plane, perhaps stated in the universal language of logic, and other linguists have 
talked of a universal deep structure. In the theory of human translation, Nida (e.g. 
1964) posited a “kernel level” which served a similar purpose: analysing a source 
text down to its simpler kernels made for easier transfer to the target language, 
because at this level languages were claimed to differ less than at the surface level. 
Nida’s view of equivalence illustrates the tendency of translation theorists to 
extrapolate from particular text-types. (Both the Linguistics stage and the fol-
lowing Communication stage tend to be represented by translation-theoretical 
ideas that are not so readily applicable to literary translation, for instance.) Nida’s 
concern is biblical translation, but he rejects the formal equivalence assumed by 
the Word-of-God stage because this so often leads to stylistic awkwardness or 
downright unintelligibility. In its emphasis on the naturalness of the target text, 
on readability, on ease of decoding, on translation as exegesis, Nida’s work reflects 
the ideas of the Rhetoric stage; but his insistence on sameness of effect (dynamic 
equivalence) is a clear symptom of this Linguistics stage. It is as if the sameness 
simply must be somewhere: since it cannot be located at the formal level, and since 
the function of a sacred text is assumed to be constant across different readers (i.e. 
to convert to, or confirm in, the faith), equivalence must lie precisely in the effect 
of such a text. This position tends to be not so much argued, with evidence, as 
assumed: it seems a statement of belief. (Recall Pym’s view: see 1.5 above.)
The linguistic problem of translational equivalence has been a major con-
cern also in the East European and Russian traditions of translation studies. One 
example of how this supermeme continues to survive is Shveitser (1993). This 
is a critical discussion of “equivalence” and “adequacy” (both terms are confus-
ingly used in a number of different senses in the literature). He points out that 
equivalence is a notion within parole, not langue; that equivalence of higher units 
(such as whole texts) should take precedence over that of lower units (such as 
sentences); that equivalence between sender’s intention and target-text effect is 
paramount. Moreover, it appears that if equivalence holds on various levels of 
form, semantics and function, then two texts are “fully equivalent” (51). This “full 
equivalence” is then said to be “an idealized construct”, although “[t]his does not 
mean that full equivalence does not exist in reality at all” (51): it may only exist 
under “relatively simple communicative conditions”. 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
31
2.6	
Communication
In this stage the dominant metaphor for translation is sending a message to 
someone: I will call this the Communication meme. In reaction to previous 
over-­emphases on either source or target, work coming within the scope of this 
meme-­complex seeks a balance between the two: the translator is in the middle, a 
mediator between original writer and ultimate reader, owing loyalty to both sides. 
The stage represents a broadening of focus to cover the whole sociological process 
of translation, including a range of non-linguistic factors. 
Some aspects of this approach can be seen already in Nida (e.g. 1964; Nida 
and Taber 1969), with his focus on the overall communicative situation of the 
translator and his use of notions from communication and information theory, 
such as channel, noise, redundancy, information load and the like. 
The meme is taken further e.g. by Wilss (1977, 1982). Wilss shares the her-
meneutic view of translation as a universal process of interpretation; as such it is 
only partly formalizable. Wilss’ general theory, however, is not philosophical but 
linguistic, and linguistics is seen first and foremost as a communication disci-
pline. His translation theory is an empirical one, encompassing both the transla-
tion process and the final product: translated texts are to be evaluated primarily 
in terms of communicative efficacy. 
For Reiß and Vermeer (e.g. 1984) the communicative efficacy of a translation 
is primarily determined by the degree to which it fulfils its skopos, its aim or goal. 
They give the skopos concept a major theoretical status: translation is a form of 
action, and all action is governed by its purpose. They stress that it is the skopos of 
the translation that matters, not that of the original: these two skopoi may be the 
same (or may be assumed to be so), but this is not necessarily the case. The skopos 
of a text, its intended function or effect, is thus distinguished from its actual effect 
on its recipients. Furthermore, this view allows the concept of translation to be 
extended to various forms of adaptation and the like, with target texts that overtly 
have different functions from the original (e.g. literary adaptations for children, 
linguistic-gloss translations, summary translations). “Equivalence” is no longer at 
a premium. 
Holz-Mänttäri (1984) widens the focus still further, also placing translation 
within a general theory of social action: the translator here stands at the centre 
of a communicative chain running from the initial commissioner (requester) of 
the translation to the ultimate receivers. The translator is regarded as an inde-
pendent expert, a cultural mediator who has the authority to carry responsibility 
for the target text. (We are a long way now from the image of the humble copi-
er.) Translatorial skills are not purely linguistic, either; they include the ability to 
find necessary background information, evaluate the relation between text and  

32	
Memes of Translation
illustrations, estimate the degree of cultural adaptation needed, and so on. Trans-
lation is a cross-cultural event, as Snell-Hornby (1988) also stresses: translation 
theory cannot rely on linguistics, even contrastive linguistics, alone. 
A central image for Holz-Mänttäri is that of the translator as text-­designer. 
The text-to-be-designed is in the target language, of course, and one of the factors 
affecting the design is the source text. But many other factors are also relevant, 
such as time, money, readership, writer’s intention, commissioner’s intention, 
text-­type, and so on. The relative weights attached to these various input factors 
will vary according to the particular translation task; some tasks assign a high 
priority to the source text itself, for instance (legal texts…), whereas in other tasks 
it may have a lower priority (advertisements…). 
A sociological approach is also taken by Pym (1992a, b), who proposes a 
broad socio-politico-economic framework for the physical and semiotic transfer 
of texts. Additional issues here include those of what gets translated when, and 
who decides, and why. Pym too stresses the ethical accountability of translators. 
Nord (1991) further illustrates this mode of research on translation theory. 
Her model of translation-oriented text analysis includes both extratextual fac-
tors (sender identity and intention, recipient identity, medium, place and time of 
communication, motive of communication, text function) as well as textual ones. 
A philosophical framework which seems conducive to the continuing rele-
vance of this Communication meme in translation theory is that developed by 
Malmkjær (1993), which draws on Davidson’s response (see e.g. 1986; and be-
low, Section 3.3) to Quine. Quine (1960) had argued against the possibility of 
translation in the sense of a determinate relation of equivalence between source 
and target utterances: translation is necessarily indeterminate, because no two 
people necessarily interpret a given utterance in the same way, even within the 
same language community, let alone across language boundaries. Quine’s view 
thus implies that all communication is indeterminate: talk of absolute transla-
tional equivalence becomes meaningless (compare Keenan’s argument against the 
Effability Principle, 1.2.3). 
Against this view, Malmkjær builds a model of translation based on the con-
vergence, in translational communication, of writer’s and reader’s beliefs about 
what the other knows and believes: translation is successful to the extent that 
the reader interprets the target text in the way the translator believed he would, 
and to the extent that the translator has interpreted the source text in the way its 
writer had intended. Note: a convergence or similarity of beliefs, not an identity; 
communication is something relative, not absolute. The model is a complex one: 
in simplified summary, factors influencing the translator’s decisions are based on 
the translator’s knowledge of the requester’s aims, original readers, prospective 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
33
target readers, original writer, use of the target text, context of source and target; 
and also on the influence of the source text itself (a realistic acknowledgement 
of the possibility of interference). Translational success is relative to the degree 
of convergence between the relevant factors. The crucial factors that differenti-
ate translation from other kinds of communication are (a) the influence of the 
source-text language on the target-text language, and (b) the translator’s knowl-
edge of the aims of the requester (commissioner) of the translation. 
It seems to me that this kind is argument is conclusive with respect to the em-
pirical reality of translation and indeed other communication. It runs parallel to 
other work that also comes within this general approach: work in discourse anal-
ysis (see e.g. Hatim and Mason 1990). For instance, Gutt (1991) has argued that 
the fundamental principle governing translation is none other than relevance, 
the same relevance that governs any kind of discourse; a successful translation 
resembles the original in a way which is relevant to the aim of the writer/requester 
and the needs and cognitive environment of the reader. A similar point is made by 
Hönig and Kußmaul (1982: 58f.), who propose the guiding principle of “sufficient 
degree of precision” – relevance in another guise. Such views place translation 
theory firmly within the domain of pragmatics. 
Gutt and others have moreover pointed out the fundamental fallacy in the 
assumption of “same effect” or “same function”, that hangover from the equiv-
alence debate. (In literary translation, the hangover appears as “same literary or 
artistic effect”, as e.g. in Levý 1969.) Since any language-user interprets any utter-
ance partly in terms of his or her previous experience of the language and of life, 
no two readers ever come to a given text with exactly the same set of cognitive 
assumptions; if this is true even within the same language, how much more true 
must it be for readers of a different language and/or culture altogether. We might 
consequently call the belief in the possibility of exactly the “same effect” the ho-
mogeneous readership fallacy. It represents a kind of linguistic idealism, but rests 
on no tenable theoretical foundations beyond the trivial truth that all readers are 
members of the human race. 
The Communication meme is well represented in Zlateva (1993), a collection 
of Russian and Bulgarian papers. It is entitled “Translation as social action”, and 
the idea of translation as a natural social and cultural activity runs right through 
the book. This has perhaps been a fruitful result of the Marxist insight that formal 
structures are (at least partly) determined by economic and social structures. (See 
Update section below for more recent work in the sociology of translation.)

34	
Memes of Translation
2.7	
Target
The Communication stage has been marked by a gradual weakening of the status 
of the source text. Eventually, indeed, the idea arises that we could turn transla-
tion theory upside down and start not with the source but the target. That is, we 
could start by looking at the texts that the target culture itself designates as trans-
lations (on whatever criteria). We could examine their status as independent texts 
in the target culture, comparing them with non-translated texts in this culture. 
We might then, with hindsight as it were, look back to the source texts they derive 
from, and examine the decisions made by their translators; but the starting point 
will be the fait accompli of the translated text itself. It is perhaps significant that 
the texts thus examined have often been literary ones – yet again, the meme tends 
to be bound to a particular type of translation. 
Like the Rhetoric stage, this cluster of ideas thus gives priority to the target 
(the pendulum swings again). But whereas the Rhetoric meme highlighted imi-
tation of the source text as a way of enriching the target culture, the Target meme 
encompasses a broader range of translation functions and relegates the source to 
secondary status. (Predictably, this perception in turn will eventually give rise to 
further reactions, proposals to reinstate the source text etc.) 
This meme appears in the 1970s in the work of Even-Zohar (see e.g. his pa-
pers reprinted in 1990), and was influentially developed in translation theory by 
Toury, Holmes, Lefevere and others. This stage of translation thinking is surveyed 
e.g. by Gentzler (1993), who also explores its roots in Russian formalism and in 
Levý’s work on literary translation (1969). See also the papers in Leuven-Zwart and  
Naaijkens (1991) and the appropriately named journal Target. The term Trans-
lation Studies is often used to describe this general research approach (after an 
influential paper by Holmes, originally 1972, republished in his 1988 collection). 
One key aspect of this meme is its insistence on a descriptive approach rather 
than a prescriptive one. Whereas much previous thinking had focused on what a 
translation should look like – e.g. as determined by some kind of equivalence, by 
readership taste, by revelation of an underlying pure language, by optimal com-
municativeness – the Target meme on the contrary focuses on what translations 
actually are like, with no preconceptions about possible optimal versions. This 
means that this research has a strong empirical bias. It also provides access to 
research both on the actual end-products, i.e. the translations themselves, and on 
the processes that lead to these products. In other words, it is interested not only 
in what translations are but in what translators do, in a given culture at a given 
time and also more generally. (In this respect, too, it reinforces current interest in 
what I discuss under the following meme, below.) 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
35
A further consequence of this approach is its understanding of what actually 
constitutes a translation. In keeping with its general target orientation, the con-
cept of a translation is understood in whatever terms a given target culture hap-
pens to understand it at a given time. That is to say, a translation is any text that 
a given culture accepts as a translation, even a “bad” translation. A “sameness” 
concept of equivalence is thus by no means the only kind of relation that can exist 
between source and target texts. Indeed, the aim of Toury’s “discovery procedure” 
in translation research (1995: 36) is to find out what concept of equivalence a giv-
en translator actually had, with respect to a given translation task: the nature of 
this concept is what we set out to discover, it is not an already established fact 
from which we start. 
Some have thought this approach to equivalence to be somewhat cavalier 
(see e.g. Snell-Hornby 1988: 25), but it does have the advantages of being realis-
tic, pragmatic, and including a much wider range of texts under the translation 
umbrella. (This point will be elaborated in the following chapter.) It also allows 
for understandings and definitions of translation to change over time (as, indeed, 
I am illustrating myself through this exploration of a sequence of translation 
memes). 
Another central theoretical concept here is that of the polysystem. In its most 
general sense, the whole of a culture is seen as a network of systems. Some of these 
are semiotic, and some of these again are linguistic. And some of the linguistic 
systems are literary: these comprise the totality of texts accepted as “literary” in 
a given culture at a given time. Translated texts also form a subsystem of their 
own. The primary research interest here has been on literary translation, with 
research that sometimes borders on comparative literature; one theme has been 
the ways in which the subsystem of translated texts overlaps with that of literary 
texts. To enter the target culture as a literary text, a translation must not only enter 
the subsystem of translated texts but also that of literary texts. A given text may 
change its position in the polysystem over time. Non-literary source texts may 
become part of the literary target polysystem (letters, diaries perhaps), and other 
texts may shift out of it. Systems and polysystems, in other words, are not static 
but dynamic, ever shifting and developing as the culture itself changes. (For more 
detailed discussion of these points, see Toury 1995, 2012; and Even-Zohar 1990.) 
Some translations themselves may serve to shift the literary subsystem of the 
target culture: a classic example is the Authorized Version of the Bible in English 
(1611). Such texts become “primary” texts, introducing new norms and displac-
ing the more conservative, “secondary” ones. In this way this meme also incor-
porates the target-enrichment idea of the Rhetoric meme, and even something of 
the cultural-creation idea of the Logos meme. 

36	
Memes of Translation
A major object of research here is thus the concept of the norm. Toury and 
others have explored and extended norm theory in some detail, and examined 
the way in which norms of various kinds influence the translator’s decisions, and 
also influence the reactions of the target readership. Heylen (1993), for instance, 
studies in detail the development of theatrical translation norms in France over a 
200-year period, norms that prioritized adherence to target-culture usage rather 
than fidelity to the source text and its poetics: French translations of Hamlet tend-
ed to be strongly acculturated, and themselves influenced other translations in the 
French theatrical polysystem. To a large extent, too, it is norms that determine the 
kinds of texts that tend to get translated in the first place. We shall return to norms 
in the following chapter. 
In keeping with the dynamic concept of the polysystem, scholars working 
within this general approach have been interested in the literary interaction be-
tween cultures at different historical periods, and the way in which translations 
have played a part in this. As an activity, translating is lined up alongside other 
forms of rewriting such as anthologizing and historiography. Issues of ideolo-
gy and power are raised, and the notion of manipulation has become current, 
particularly after the publication of an influential collection of papers entitled 
The Manipulation of Literature. Studies in Literary Translation (Hermans 1985). 
This suggests the dominant metaphor for this meme: translation is manipulation. 
Whatever the equivalence advocates might argue in theory, in actual fact “all 
translation implies a degree of manipulation of the source text for a certain pur-
pose” (Hermans 1985: 9; see also Fawcett 1995). And translated texts, in turn, ma-
nipulate the target culture, including the target culture’s perception of the source 
culture. Compare the effects of dubbing versus subtitling, for example: dubbing 
tends to be the preferred policy in nationalistic cultures which resist the foreign, 
whereas subtitling is more used in cultures that are readier to accept the foreign 
(see e.g. Danan 1991). Central and peripheral cultures, moreover, see and affect 
each other differently. (Recall, in this respect, the Logos meme, too.) 
Some translation research within this general approach has been strongly ideo-
logical, and hence less purely descriptive. Cheyfitz (1991) argues that translation 
is always a form of foreign policy, always an act of violence, and often serves those 
in power at the expense of the underdogs. With respect to the history of transla-
tion between English and Native American languages, he shows how translations 
into English were designed to “civilize” the Native American culture, moulding it 
into the European norm, neglecting or suppressing what made the Indian cultures 
different, such as their lack of interest in material property and the value they 
gave to kinship. For Cheyfitz, this history constitutes a “poetics of imperialism”: 
“the translation of the Indians into proper English” (1991: 10). A similar over-
all argument is advanced by Niranjana (1992): translation (i.e. traditional, fluent 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
37
translation) inevitably involves repression of the Other, a cultural colonialization; 
translations are ways of “containing” the Other, of domesticating it, and hence of 
denying the validity of its Otherness. Robyns (1994) identifies various ways in 
which cultures react to the potential intrusion of the Other: whether Otherness is 
acknowledged at all, and whether it is permitted to intrude without being trans-
formed into the domestic. Robyns’ metaphor for translation is one of migration, 
the migration of discourse – here too we find the notion of spreading ideas (rather 
than transferring a meaning) highlighted by our meme metaphor. For later work 
on translation and ideology, see e.g. Calzada Pérez (2003) and Baker (2006). 
One fascinating case study of the manipulative influence of translation is that 
of Inoue (1991) on the making of the postwar Japanese constitution. Inoue shows 
how the English and Japanese texts of this constitution have different illocution-
ary forces, how the Japanese version deliberately introduced certain features that 
would make the text more compatible with traditional Japanese values, and how 
some concepts were left vague so as to allow different interpretations by each 
side. The English and Japanese versions, which arose as mutual translations more 
or less in parallel, reflect a tolerable marriage between Western and Confucian 
conceptual systems, one that was ultimately acceptable to both sides precisely be-
cause of the leeway of interpretation provided by inherently flexible terms. On 
one hand, the result was the successful selling of MacArthur’s constitution to the 
Japanese; on the other, it was the successful subtle moulding of American ideals 
to accord with the traditional values of Japanese society. 
Translators thus have manipulative power. But translators are not entirely free 
agents, of course: their own work, and indeed attitudes, are also subject to con-
straints, they themselves are manipulated. Lefevere (1992), for instance, explores 
a number of constraints that influence not only decisions about what is to be 
translated but also the translation process itself: these include ideology, the power 
of patronage (the requester or commissioner of the translation), target-language 
poetics norms, the universe of discourse (subject matter), and of course the na-
tures of the source and target languages themselves (see further below, 3.7). One 
of his innovative concepts is that of the “refracted text”, one that has been adapted, 
rewritten or translated with an ideological or artistic slant overtly different from 
that of the original. The work of some feminist translators is a good illustration of 
this (see e.g. von Flotow 1991). 
In addition to the main issues outlined above, descriptive research here has 
also looked at the phenomenon of secondary or indirect translation (translation 
via a third, mediating language), and even pseudo-translations (texts that are, or 
have been, claimed to be translations but in fact are not). Both these topics are ex-
plored e.g. by Toury (1995, 2012). There has also been a growing interest in such 
issues as translation copyright (Venuti 1995b), and the paratexts of translations 

38	
Memes of Translation
(i.e. subsidiary material surrounding a text, such as title pages, editorial prefaces, 
blurbs on the cover etc.: see e.g. Kovala 1996). 
All in all, the descriptive approach takes a highly pragmatic view of (mostly 
literary) translation, looking at it in a broad socio-cultural and ideological con-
text, rather like the way in which literary pragmatics has been exploring literary 
phenomena (see e.g. Sell 1990). A major project in this context is the Göttingen 
research group, which has undertaken an in-depth study of literary translation 
into German (see Schultze 1987; and subsequent volumes). 
In simple terms, then, Translation Studies of this kind deals with cultural data 
and investigates how such data can affect people’s lives (Bassnett and Lefevere 
1990: 12). (See Update section for further comments.)
2.8	
Cognition
I mentioned above that one of the interests of the Target meme is what transla-
tors actually do, what decisions they make and why. “Every descriptive study of 
translated texts involves the description of translational solutions along with their 
relationships to their counterparts in the source texts, with an intention of recon-
structing the considerations (or the decision processes) which yield them”, argued 
Toury (1980: 89; emphasis original). 
Expanding on this idea of the translator’s “considerations”, Toury later pro-
posed that one of the goals of Translation Studies should be to discover “transla-
tion laws”: the laws that govern translatorial behaviour (see e.g. Toury 1991). In 
Toury’s sense these laws would be behavioural rather than cognitive (and I re-
turn to them in the following chapter), but they do illustrate a growing interest in 
the translating process. Whereas the Target-culture meme stressed translation as 
something that people do, the Cognition meme stresses that people do it in their 
heads. The overall metaphor I propose for this meme is, therefore: translation is 
thinking. 
Typical issues here are: what goes on in the translator’s head? What do I, as 
a translator, experience as I translate? What is a translator’s self-awareness like? 
Indeed, does it help to be self-aware? How does the translator’s decision-making 
process work? 
Current research within this approach is influenced by ideas in cognitive lin-
guistics and cognition science, and is perhaps also inspired by the same fascina-
tion with the whole phenomenon of consciousness that has led to developments 
in brain research. (See, for instance, Dennett 1991.) More indirectly, we can also 
discern the long shadow of Chomskyan mentalistic linguistics, with its funda-
mental hypothesis of language being a window on the mind, with linguistics as a 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
39
branch of psychology. The ultimate goal of the questions raised by this meme is 
no less than an understanding of the mind itself. 
The meme has a surprisingly long ancestry. In 1685 we find the Earl of 
Roscommon writing as follows, in a verse essay of “good advice” to translators (in 
Lefevere (ed.) 1992: 43): 
	
	 The first great work (a Task perform’d by few) 
	
	 Is that your self may to your self be True: 
	
	 No Masque, no Tricks, no Favor, no Reserve; 
	
	 Dissect your Mind, examine ev’ry Nerve. 
In other words, a translator should, above all, be self-aware. 
There are a number of manifestations of this meme in later work. The idea of 
translation as a decision-making process appears in the works of several schol-
ars. Levý (1967), for instance, develops the application of game theory to this 
process: each decision is affected by the sum of all previous decisions; at each 
decision-point, the costs and benefits of each option can be weighed up and the 
best decision taken according to the Minimax principle: minimum effort, max-
imum effect. Similarly, Jumpelt (1961) called for a translation theory that would 
focus on the factors that affect the translator’s choices: the primary focus of such 
a theory would not be linguistic but psychological. There are also pedagogical 
applications of the notion of translating as problem solving, for instance Hervey 
and Higgins (1992), and Kiraly (1995). 
Some of Wilss’ work also relates to this approach, especially his later work 
(e.g. 1988). Classifications of translation procedures are psychological rather than 
linguistic, one important criterion being degree of habituation. The concepts of 
intuition and creativity also receive more attention. 
Gutt’s theory of translation and relevance (1991) looks at first sight like a 
pragmatic one, but his basic theoretical domain is in fact cognitive: the mental 
state of the translator. He says explicitly (20) that the domain of relevance theory, 
and by implication also the proper place of translation theory, is “mental faculties 
rather than texts or processes of text production”. His own study seeks to account 
for translation “in terms of the communicative competence assumed to be part of 
our minds” (20). 
Perhaps the most typical manifestations of this meme, however, are think-
aloud protocol (TAP) studies. Based on verbal reports by practising translators, 
recorded as they are actually translating, these studies have provided tentative but 
tantalizing insights into “what goes on in the translator’s head” (as Krings put it in 
the title of his book (1986), which helped to pioneer this line of research). Inter-
esting results of this research include information about the way translators pro-
ceed by alternating and spiralling between automatic processing and conscious 

40	
Memes of Translation
problem-­solving; the kinds of problem-solving strategies translators tend to use; 
the positive effect of the translator’s own subjective involvement in the text and 
its topic; the influence of the translator’s perception of his or her own role; and 
the cognitive processing differences between professionals and trainees or ama-
teurs. (See, for instance, Gerloff 1986; Faerch and Kasper 1987; Tirkkonen-Condit 
1990, 1991; Kußmaul 1991; Jääskeläinen 1993; Fraser 1993; Kiraly 1995. See also 
Update, below.) 
An important spur to this kind of empirical research has been the criticism of 
more speculative models of the translation process such as Nida’s three-stage one 
(analysis, transfer, restructuring). Lörscher (1989), in particular, pleaded pow-
erfully for a more empirical approach to the study of the translator’s decision-­
making process, and his own later work exemplified this (e.g. 1991). 
Another influence has been the computer. Tommola (1986), for instance, re-
ported on experiments in which the translator’s keyboard was linked to a com-
puter in such a way as to record each key-depression over time. The data can then 
be analysed for evidence of deletions, restructurings, pauses, etc. (See Update 
section.)
One of the most startling claims that have been made in this context is that 
of Gentzler (1993: 195), when he suggests that the study of translation may not 
only reveal insights about human consciousness but even about unconsciousness; 
that translation studies allow us some access to what is “out of sight”. Quite how 
such claims might be empirically justified is not clear to me, but the prospect is 
certainly an intriguing one. 
2.9	
Theory in the current meme pool
The current pool of translation memes is a highly heterogeneous one, containing 
traces of all the preceding memes or meme-complexes (and perhaps others too). 
These traces have roots in different historical periods: some seem to derive from 
what I have called the Linguistics stage, with its stress on formal equivalence and 
its underlying positivistic philosophy; others (which tend to equate translation 
theory with the theory of literary translation only) originate in the Logos stage, 
marked by a hermeneutic approach and an occasionally almost mystical belief in 
the powers of a pure language; and others again have a grounding in communica-
tion theory or cultural studies, or aspire to psychological realism. Moreover, some 
memes in the pool appear to be in the ascendant while others are fading. 
However, one fundamental reason for the heterogeneity seems to be a 
lack of agreement about what (if anything) a theory of translation should look 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
41
like, and it is this aspect of the current meme pool that I now turn to (cf. also  
Chesterman 2007). 
The diversity of views on this point might, of course, be taken as a positive 
sign of feverish intellectual activity; but it also recalls the old Indian tale of the 
blind men and the elephant: each touches a different part of the animal – the tail, 
the foot, the ear etc. – and believes that this particular part represents the whole. 
Consider the following quotations: 
Translation theory is a misnomer, a blanket term, a possible translation, therefore 
a translation label, for Übersetzungswissenschaft. In fact translation theory is nei-
ther a theory nor a science, but the body of knowledge that we have and have still 
to have about the process of translating.
 (Newmark 1981: 19)
Had translation depended for its survival on theory, it would have died out long 
before Cicero.
 (Kelly 1979: 219)
Traditional translation theory has been intensively investigated. 

(Snell-Hornby 1988: 8)
[T]he time is ripe (perhaps overripe) for a theory of translation to emerge.

 (Bell 1991: 4)
Translation theory goes hand in hand with translation methodology at every 
stage, so that it acts as a body of reference both for the translation process pro-
cedure and for translation criticism. […] It is an applied and interrelated disci-
pline… […] As I see it, any talk of a single translation theory […] is a waste of 
time.
 (Newmark 1981: 37)
Translation theory, like most Western sciences of language and other human 
behavior, is traditionally an immaterial business: an ideal model of the finished 
product to be striven for by the translator; an ideal map or flow chart of proce-
dures (to be) followed by the human translator and – ultimately – programmed 
into the computer.
 (Robinson 1991: ix)
[M]ost of the theoretical presentations [about translation] that we have had until 
now, although they have called themselves theories, are not really theories in the 
strict sense.
 (Holmes 1978: 57)
[T]he only endeavour approaching this “strict sense” [i.e. that of Holmes, in the 
preceding quotation here] could well turn out to be Quine’s theory of indeter-
minacy in translation, widely thought to be a theory not of translation but of 
untranslatability.
 (Pym 1992a: 181)
A Theoretical Account of Translation – Without a Translation Theory.

 (Gutt 1990: 135)
The contradictions here are striking: we have no theory of translation; we have 
a lot of theory of translation; translation theory is practical, applied; translation 

42	
Memes of Translation
theory is idealistic; translation theory is a theory of untranslatability; a theoretical 
account of translation does not need a translation theory. At bottom, these dis-
agreements reveal very different views about what actually constitutes a “theory”. 
Popper’s schema can be of use here, in disentangling this conceptual mess. 
Recall that, on Popper’s view, a theory is a tentative answer to a question, a hypo-
thetical solution to a problem. The nature of any theory will therefore be crucially 
determined by the nature of the question it is designed to answer. 
Through this chapter I have suggested metaphors to encapsulate the main 
theme of a particular translation meme. These metaphors have been of some ex-
pository use, but in some sense they also themselves represent theories, inasmuch 
as they are “views” of translation. Many of the traditional ideas about translation 
also had to do with the question of what translation (or translating) is, or what it is 
like, and the answers (i.e. tentative theories) were often in the form of metaphors 
or similes (see e.g. Koller 1972: 40f.). Some of the most common of these early 
answers were: 
–	
translating is like giving a musical performance of an original 
–	
a translation is a reproduction of a work of art, a copy 
–	
translating is giving something a change of dress 
–	
a translation is a struggle, a conflict between two languages 
–	
to translate is to betray the original 
A more recent one that we have already met is: 
–	
translating is transferring information, decoding and recoding; a translator is 
like a computer. 
Such metaphorical theories can be valuable conceptual tools; they may provide 
enlightenment, insight, understanding; yet they are not empirical theories in the 
scientific sense (on Popper’s criterion) because they cannot be falsified, being ba-
sically interpretations. 
Translation theory has of course also posed many other, more specific ques-
tions, in addition to the basic one of what translation is. Many variants of Popper’s 
initial problem, P1, have been investigated and answers proposed. Some of the 
general questions that have received attention are: 
–	
What is the best way to translate? 
–	
What is untranslatable? 
–	
What is equivalence? 
–	
How does translation affect culture? 
–	
How could we programme a machine to translate? 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
43
–	
How should translations be assessed? 
–	
How can translation best be taught? 
–	
What counts as a translation? 
–	
What are the general laws of translation behaviour? 
–	
What goes on in the translator’s head? 
Let us now return to the conflicting views on theory that were cited above, and 
see whether they can be reconciled in the light of Popper’s view of how theory 
develops, as a progression from the initial problem (P1) to Tentative Theory (TT) 
to Error Elimination (EE). I will suggest glosses for them, adding some comments 
in brackets, in the same order, without repeating the quotes themselves. 
Newmark: Translation theory is the accumulation of all the TTs that have so far 
survived the EE process. (To the extent that this set of tentative theories is in 
principle falsifiable, this body of knowledge is empirical and hence scientific.) 
Kelly: Pre-Ciceronian theory was metaphorical, not empirical. 
Snell-Hornby: There are a great many P1s, and corresponding TTs, and we know 
a great deal about them. 
Bell: We have no final, all-embracing truths about translation (true, but trivially 
so). And/or: there is no one answer, or closed set of axiom-like answers, that can 
be satisfactorily given to all the questions we want to ask about translation, i.e. no 
translation Theory Of Everything (true, but trivially so, again). 
Newmark: TT goes hand in hand with EE. There is no translation Theory Of 
Everything. 
Robinson: “Ideal translations” serve as a regulative idea in theory formulation. 
Some tentative theories answer questions about how to programme computers 
to translate. 
Holmes: Most TTs about translation are not formalized; the various mini-theories 
(TTs) do not relate systematically into a well-defined set. 
Pym: It is widely thought that the most rigorously corroborated TT so far has en-
abled us to distinguish a fundamental P (about translatability) from its negation 
(and thus to define this P more precisely). (Pym summarizes Quine’s point as 
being that translators may “legitimately disagree” about how something should 
be translated: there can be no one translation that is necessarily predetermined 
to be correct. In other words: for any given P1 “how to translate X?” there will be 
more than one possible TT.) 
Gutt: The P1 “what is a translation theory?” can be seen as a specific instance of 
a more general P2. (Gutt argues that the problems of translation theory can be 
subsumed under those dealt with by Relevance Theory.) 

44	
Memes of Translation
I think this kind of analysis reveals something of the current state of the art in 
translation theory. In terms of Popper’s schema, differences of opinion seem to 
stem from three main sources. First, scholars vary in what they take as their initial 
problem, P1. Second, they vary in their criteria for an acceptable answer to a P1. 
And third, they vary in respect to their point of focus on Popper’s schema: some 
focus on the problem itself, others on TT and others on EE. It is largely because 
of all these differences that “translation theory” as a whole still remains somewhat 
incoherent. 
The main strength of the theoretical knowledge that we have is the wide range 
of questions dealt with (P1s). One main weakness is the lack of empirical EE, so 
that TTs often remain on a metaphorical level. Another is the lack of an overall 
framework which would relate lower-level TTs in some consistent manner with-
out denying their relevance. To argue as Gutt does that translation is subject to the 
same principles that govern any other form of communication is (trivially) true; 
nevertheless, translation theorists are interested precisely in what makes trans-
lation different from other forms of communication. An awareness that P1 is a 
subtype of P2 is conceptually helpful, but it does not necessarily sweep P1 away. 
2.10	 Update
At the end of this chapter in the original edition, I made a few predictions about 
where Translation Studies seemed to be heading at that time. I thought there 
would be more empirical and experimental research, and more interest in socio-­
cultural issues, ideology and ethics. I looked forward to more work proposing and 
testing explanations of various kinds, both reasons (internal to the translator) and 
causes (external). If all of the eight meme-complexes presented continued to be 
influential in guiding research, I thought there would be a need for some kind of 
overall theoretical framework that would relate them.
Although those particular predictions have turned out to be reasonably good, 
not much progress has been made in the search for a unified general theory of 
translation. Indeed, one of the outcomes of the Forum debate in Target that was 
initiated by Rosemary Arrojo and myself (Chesterman and Arrojo 2000) was the 
widely felt view that our understanding of translation is best enhanced by using 
a multitude of different theories and approaches; not everyone is looking for an 
overall theory. And not everyone feels at home in an empirical framework like 
the descriptive-explanatory framework that underlies the approach taken by this 
book. Some scholars are more inspired by a hermeneutic view, and others by the 
needs of translator training and the development of translation aids. (See Target 
issues 12.1 to 14.1, 2000–2002.) 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
45
However, it still seems that there is a general consensus on the current goals 
of translation research, regardless of the methodologies chosen. In general terms, 
we are all trying to better understand the object of our research. More specifically, 
research has the following general aims:
a.	 to describe what translation is and what translators do;
b.	 to explain why translations are the way they are and why translators do what 
they do, and to make predictions about translatorial behaviour;
c.	 to assess the effects and consequences of translations.
Working toward these goals means investing in textual analysis, sociological 
and cultural analysis, historical analysis, cognitive research on translators’ deci-
sion-making, ethical and ideological analysis, and so on: Translation Studies is a 
huge field. Some research also brings in a quality variable: what translation pro-
cedures etc. tend to have the best effects (on which readers)? (And what is meant 
by “best”?)
One of the criticisms I received on my eight stages of the evolution of trans-
lation memes was that I had not paid enough attention to the social background 
of the ideas I was discussing; my Popperian view of the theoretical development 
was oversimplified. Translation theories do not emerge only from the context of 
previous theories, but also from socio-cultural contexts (as Kuhn argued against  
Popper: see Fuller [2003] 2006). Pym (2011) is one scholar who has since helped 
to fill this gap, pointing out for instance how skopos theory served an institu-
tional need to raise the academic status of translator training in Germany and 
distinguish it from traditional language teaching, and how Descriptive Transla-
tion Studies evolved mainly in small cultures where translation was highly valued, 
stimulated by meetings of key scholars at particular conferences. Other views of 
the development of translation theory that have appeared during the last decade 
or so include Snell-Hornby (2006) and Munday (2012); and see also several gen-
eral handbooks such as Handbuch Translation (Snell-Hornby et al. 2004), the 
Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies (Millán and Bartrina 2012), and the 
Benjamins Handbook of Translation Studies (Gambier and Doorslaer, four vol-
umes 2010–2013).
With respect to the Linguistics meme (cf. 2.5), one major new development 
has been corpus studies and the search for so-called universals of translation. 
Borrowed from linguistics, the corpus studies methodology has inspired a good 
deal of empirical and statistical work on translations. Pym (2011) suggests that 
the popularity of this approach, which originated in the UK, had to do with the 
influx of foreign students to British universities and their translation depart-
ments, bringing with them enticing possibilities of contrastive research between 

46	
Memes of Translation
English and other languages. One of the pioneers was Mona Baker, whose seminal 
paper (1993) popularized the term “universals”, borrowed from linguistics. The 
term “universal” itself was perhaps somewhat misleading, because scholars were 
looking for probabilistic tendencies. Other terms were also used, such as Toury’s 
“laws” of interference and standardization (1995). 
Looking for translation universals meant setting up large computer corpora 
of translations and comparable non-translations, and/or translations plus their 
source texts, and doing statistical analyses on the relative frequencies of items of 
different kinds, with the aim of discovering linguistic patterns that make transla-
tions different from other texts. Various hypotheses concerning general transla-
tion tendencies have been proposed and tested, and this work is continuing, with 
corpora being set up in different languages and unversities. Comparing transla-
tions with their source texts, many studies have examined claims e.g. about trans-
lators’ tendencies to explicitate, to normalize style and dialect, and to translate 
more closely when a given (literary) text has already been translated before into 
the same language (the so-called retranslation hypothesis). Comparing transla-
tions with non-translated texts in the same target language, studies suggest e.g. 
that translations tend to use simpler language yet also untypical collocations, and 
to under-­represent items that are special to the target language (this latter claim 
is known as the unique items hypothesis: see e.g. Tirkkonen-Condit 2004). This 
search for so-called universals has not gone uncriticized. Critics have pointed out, 
for instance, that the corpora used in these studies are not representative of all 
translations – e.g. they do not include obviously bad translations – and that we 
do not even have an agreed definition of what constitutes a translation in the first 
place. Others have argued, rather differently, that these tendencies are just signs of 
poor quality. For further discussion and references, see especially Mauranen and 
Kujamäki (2004), and relevant entries in the handbooks mentioned above.
The search for possible universals has also been relevant to a very different 
issue in translation research. This is the feeling, among some scholars, that trans-
lation theory is too dominated by western ideas: we should take more account 
of concepts and research coming from other parts of the world: only in this way, 
the argument goes, can we gain an understanding of what translation means 
and has meant universally. This debate is illustrated in the discussion on uni-
versalism in issues 7(1) and 7(3) of the journal Translation Studies, starting with  
Chesterman (2014).
What I called the Communication meme in translation research has expanded 
enormously over the past two decades, in what we have experienced as a “socio-
logical turn”. Here, the central focus is no longer on texts as such but on people: 
translators of course, but also editors, revisers, clients and readers of different 

	
Chapter 2.  The evolution of translation memes	
47
kinds, translation company managers, and so on. Scholars have borrowed from 
sociology both theories (such as Bourdieu, Actor Network Theory) and methods 
(such as questionnaires, interviews). This new turn has investigated the sociology 
of translations as products (translation flows between cultures, market and eco-
nomic issues, etc.); the sociology of translators themselves (e.g. their power – or 
lack of it – as agents, the role of their professional associations); and the sociology 
of the translation process (e.g. revision procedures, and translation policies in 
organizations and institutions). One trend of this kind of research has been an in-
terest in different kinds of processes, illustrating a distinction originally made by 
Toury, between the translation act and the translation event. The translation act is 
defined as taking place at the cognitive level; as such, it is not directly observable, 
but we can make inferences on the basis of what we observe. The translation event, 
on the other hand, is defined as taking place at the behavioural level, e.g. from the 
first commissioning of a work (or selection of a translator) to the final delivery, 
payment, and even reader reactions. (See Toury 1995: 249, and his expanded dis-
cussion in 2012: 67). For examples of work on the sociology of translation, see e.g. 
Pym at al. (2006), and Wolf and Fukari (2007), and for a programmatic outline 
see Chesterman (2009). The journal Translation Studies has a special focus on 
sociological approaches.
The empirical descriptive view introduced under the Target meme has contin-
ued to expand, for instance in the direction of the sociological studies mentioned 
above, and also in historical studies (see e.g. vol. 20, no. 1, 2014, of The Transla-
tor, a special issue on translation and history). A key work in the methodology 
of translation history is Pym (1998). Increasing attention – both descriptive and 
applied – has also been given to audiovisual translation, in its various forms. For a 
brief survey, see e.g. Gambier (2012). Some of the enormous influence of Toury’s 
work in Descriptive Translation Studies can be seen in Pym et al. (2008).
Research on translation and cognition has also flourished, with the use of 
new technical tools such as the Translog keystroke logging program developed 
at the Copenhagen Business School, which has later also incorporated data from 
eye-tracking (see Jakobsen 2011 for an introduction to this kind of research, 
and Carl et al. 2016 for some of the newest work). The interest in the cognitive 
processes that are inferred to underlie translation has also brought translation 
research closer to the study of interpreting (e.g. Ferreira and Schwieter 2015). 
There have been a number of special journal issues on this theme. Examples 
are: Describing Cognitive Processes in Translation: Acts and Events (vol. 8 no. 2 of 
Translation and Interpreting Studies, 2013); Interdisciplinarity in Translation and 
Interpreting Process Research (special issue of Target, 2013, vol. 25 no. 1); Minding 
translation (special issue of MonTI, 2014, no. 1, available online at http://dti.ua.es/

48	
Memes of Translation
es/documentos/monti/monti-especial-1-portada-indice.pdf). See also the papers 
on process research published in the journal Translation & Interpreting (vol. 7, 
no. 1, 2015), with a useful survey of the state of the art in this area. 

Chapter 3
From memes to norms
What happens to translation memes when they survive for some time in the 
meme pool? If a meme comes to dominate (for any reason: practical, political, 
cultural, aesthetic…), and competing memes fade, one course of development 
is that such a meme becomes regarded as a norm – whether imposed by an au-
thority or simply accepted as such. For instance, at certain periods of history the 
translation traditions introduced in the preceding chapter became de facto norms. 
Perhaps the most extreme example is the Word-of-God meme: when and where 
this dominated, translations carried out within the framework of other, compet-
ing memes would simply have been declared wrong, or “not translations” at all; 
the translator might even have been penalized: recall the fate of Dolet, who lost 
his life for translating too freely, for breaking the prevalent norm. 
At their strongest, these norms seem like memes that have been set in con-
crete, rigidly determining both the theory and the practice of translation. We 
might indeed define norms, preliminarily and pre-theoretically, as memes which 
are accepted (for whatever reasons – even threats) by a community as being con-
ducive to behaviour perceived as useful: behaviour that favours the survival of 
the individuals concerned, for instance. They thus become dominant by gradual 
emergence or via antagonistic struggle, or both, and highly influential on thought 
and behaviour (cf. Zalan 1990). 
This chapter offers an account of translation norms. It is based partly on norm 
theory and partly on work that has been done by other scholars on translation 
norms. The aim is not to offer explanations of why certain memes seem to have 
become norms: see some of the general historical and political factors mentioned 
in the preceding chapter, and the references cited there. Rather, the aim is to pres-
ent an analysis of the concept of a translation norm, and to suggest a way of clas-
sifying the main kinds of norms that seem to be relevant to translation theory. 
In order to avoid misunderstandings, we must start with some conceptual 
clarifications, especially regarding the term “normative”. 

50	
Memes of Translation
3.1	
Normative vs. prescriptive 
It has become customary in Translation Studies to make a clear distinction be-
tween prescriptive and descriptive approaches to the subject. This is a point asso-
ciated particularly with the Target-culture meme-complex, as mentioned in the 
previous chapter. The distinction is well motivated. Research on what translations 
and translators actually are (or have been) is by definition descriptive. Applied 
research, or translator training, naturally focuses on what translators should do, 
on what translations should be like, prescriptively; but this is not the task of trans-
lation theory itself. 
The problem arises, however, when the term “normative” is thrown into this 
distinction. For some scholars, “normative” seems to be identical with, and no 
more than, “prescriptive”. To take just one example: Bell (1991: 10) writes: 
Translation theory finds itself today seriously out of step with the mainstream 
of intellectual endeavour in the human sciences and in particular in the study of 
human communication; to our mutual impoverishment. The fundamental cause 
of this state of affairs is, we firmly believe, the normative approach – the setting 
up of a series of maxims consisting of do’s and don’ts… 
(Emphasis added) 
For other scholars, “normative” seems to be both prescriptive and descriptive, at 
the same time. Komissarov (1993: 64) begins a paper on translation norms by ask-
ing to what extent translation theory should be normative, “to what extent should 
it strive to formulate some principles, rules and recommendations?” Principles 
and rules can be formulated descriptively, as one can describe the principles of 
orienteering or the rules of chess, for instance; but recommendations are some-
thing different: prescriptive. 
Both these examples illustrate unfortunate usages: the first because it appears 
to deny the term “normative” any legitimate scientific sense – the kind of perfectly 
standard sense it has in norm theory, for instance; and the second because it con-
fuses a descriptive sense with a prescriptive one. 
The point is, of course, that “normative” is an ambiguous term. The Collins 
English Dictionary offers the following definitions: 
	
	 1. implying, creating or prescribing a norm or standard, as in language: nor-
mative grammar. 
	
	 2. of, relating to, or based on norms. 
The first of these senses is prescriptive, the second descriptive. In its perfectly 
ordinary descriptive sense, then, “normative” means simply “having to do with 
norms”. Descriptively, we can try to state what the norms seem to be within a 
given field of behaviour. True, this often means no more than making inferences 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
51
from the evidence provided by people’s actual practice. Strictly speaking, descrip-
tive statements of norms are thus causal hypotheses: I submit that people tend to 
stand on the right on escalators (in countries where they do) because they accept 
the existence of a norm to this effect. Whether or not an individual person follows 
these norms, what attitude one might have towards them, what consequences one 
might personally draw from their existence – these are quite different questions. 
True, a descriptive statement of a norm may sometimes be intended prescriptive-
ly, as in indirect speech acts (“Excuse me, but people normally stand on the right 
here in Helsinki, you know…”), and also interpreted prescriptively; but the two 
senses can still be kept apart. 
Even more unfortunately (at least for norm theory), the term “norm” itself 
also tends to be misunderstood. For some, norms appear to become bogeys set up 
by nasty theoreticians to humiliate hard-working translators. Here is Robinson’s 
view, for instance (1991: xi; emphasis original, underlining added): 
It is instructive to note, for example, what has happened when translation theo-
rists have insisted that translation is fundamentally a cognitive process governed 
systematically by abstract structures or normative rules: they have, almost by 
definition, situated themselves methodologically at an Archimedes point above 
or beyond the complexity of translation practice and then convinced themselves 
that practical translation typically fails because it cannot lift itself up out of the 
muck and mire of specific cases. Translators traduce, in this view, because they 
translate intuitively. They translate now this way, now that, however feels right 
in each isolated situation, without organizing their intuitive decisions into a co-
herent system of norms – or else, worse, they intuitively organize their decisions 
into the wrong system of norms (word-for-word instead of sense-for-sense, say). 
“We could help them!” these theorists cry. “We have considered the matter at a 
more comprehensive general level and could guide them to the right decision in 
every situation.” 
This looks like parody; but I think it is not. It genuinely represents the view that 
any attempt to state norms is an encroachment on the free intuition of the transla-
tor, a view based on an exclusively prescriptive concept of norms. Such a view has 
no bearing on the arguments and analysis proposed in this book. In the preceding 
chapter, for instance, I have outlined some of the ways in which often prescriptive 
ideas about translation have developed, but my own overall approach has been 
descriptive, albeit argumentative in places. 
Henceforth, throughout this book, I shall use the terms “normative” and 
“norm” in a purely descriptive sense. I am thus taking translation theory to be 
(among other things) a normative discipline, so that its object is the description, 
understanding and explanation of translation norms. We shall return to other 

52	
Memes of Translation
aspects of this point below. But before we come to norms of translation, we need 
to set the scene with a look at norm theory itself. 
3.2	
Norm theory
This is not the place for a detailed excursion into norm theory, but there are a 
number of norm-theoretical points that should be clarified before we proceed. 
Like translation theory, norm theory too has been split between prescriptive ap-
proaches (“imperative theories”) and descriptive ones (“practice theories”). I shall 
take the latter view, strongly endorsed by Bartsch (1987): that is, norms are here 
understood not to be “orders or prescriptions which are issued by a superior to 
a subordinate” (Bartsch 1987: 76), but rather descriptive of particular practices 
within a given community. 
Bartsch defines norms as the “social reality of correctness notions” (xiv). On 
this view, people in a given community inevitably share certain ideas about the 
“correctness” of a particular act of behaviour (or indeed a particular entity or 
artefact): there is a degree of agreement as to whether the act is “correct” in some 
sense. To take my example again: in some cultures people tend to keep to the right 
when standing on escalators: this is “the norm”, this is “correct behaviour”, and 
is agreed to be such. One does not break this norm with impunity: standing on 
the left (if there is a crowd) can justifably arouse comments, “excuse me’s”, even 
criticism (“You should be on the other side, this side is supposed to be kept free”). 
As “social reality”, norms exist intersubjectively. Individuals have individu-
al knowledge of norms, but norms are only recognized by virtue of their social 
existence. Norms reside in the social consciousness, but they must be (at least 
potentially) accessible to individual consciousness, for, as Itkonen (1983: 73) puts 
it, “norms not known to exist do not exist”. 
More technically, a norm may be defined as follows (adapted from Bartsch 
1987: 76): 
Let S = a given society, C = a given set of conditions, X = any individual belonging 
to S, A = a given act. 
Then: there exists a norm governing A if and only if all the following conditions 
hold: 
1.	
Most members of S regularly do A under C. 
2.	
If X does not do A, members of S may criticize X and other members of S will 
regard such criticism as justified. 
3.	
Members of S use such expressions as “X ought to do A under C” or “it is the 
rule that under C, people in S do A” or “the right thing to do under C is A” in 
order to justify their own or others’ actions or criticisms. 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
53
Note that all these conditions must hold in order for us to postulate the existence 
of a norm. Condition (1) alone merely states a common practice, condition (2) 
adds the point that the practice is accepted as being valid and desirable, and con-
dition (3) the point that norms are accessible to intersubjective consciousness: we 
know them and can talk about them. 
Norms thus stand midway between judicial laws and conventions. Mandato-
ry laws are absolute, objective; they are established by an authority and enforced 
by an authority; law-breakers (when caught) are penalized by an authority. True, 
all these authorities act in the name of society, but it is their nature qua authori-
ties that makes a law a law. Conventions, on the other hand, represent practices 
that are “weaker” than norms: breaking a convention is merely “unconvention-
al”, and does not provoke generally justified criticism (see, on this distinction, 
D. Lewis 1969). Conventions, in other words, are not binding: they are arbitrary 
regularities of behaviour, arbitrary in the sense that they do not necessarily have 
any external motivation. At their weakest, conventions are merely fashions: they 
embody statistical preferences only. 
We have so far been considering norms in a rather general, behavioural sense, 
as guiding actions such as standing on an escalator: these are in fact social norms. 
But there are other types too: in particular, there are ethical norms and technical 
norms (see Bartsch 1987: 170f.). Ethical norms have also been studied descriptive-
ly. Indeed, entire ethical theories have been based on objective descriptions of the 
ethical norms existing in a given society at a given time; these can be compared 
with the norms of other times and places, attempts can be made to set up “univer-
sal norms”, and the like. (One classic example is Jodl 1918; see Chesterman 1993.) 
Technical norms may be further subdivided into process norms and product 
norms. Process (or production) norms regulate processes, specifying correct or 
good methods for doing something. Product norms define what counts as a “cor-
rect” product. 
I shall argue below that translation theory needs all these types of norms: 
social, ethical and technical. 
What about the function of norms? Ultimately, norms have an evolutionary 
function: they make life easier (for the majority at least). They do this, ideally, by 
regulating behaviour in such a way that it is optimally beneficial to all parties, by 
creating and maintaining social order, by facilitating material and social interac-
tion, even by facilitating cognitive processing. In brief, norms save both time and 
effort. They “reduce the complexity of perceiving and evaluating states of affairs 
and behaviour and thus make effective action possible” (Bartsch 1987: 173). 
More specifically, we can say that norms have this contributory effect by vir-
tue of their function as expectations: reasonable expectations make it easier to 
predict the future and hence act rationally. Bartsch puts it this way (1987: 173): 

54	
Memes of Translation
Successful ways of perceiving and acting become persistent and thus ‘frozen pat-
terns’ of orientation. They are more than social habits as they acquire a normative 
force in the population. As norm kernels [i.e. the actual contents of norms], the 
regularities in these patterns provide the individuals in [a population] P with an 
orientation towards reality (facts, possible states of affairs) and action; this ori-
entation is coordinated for the members of P. It consists basically of expectations 
about socially relevant things and events, of expectations about the behaviour 
and intentions of others, and of expectations about others’ expectations about 
one’s own behaviour and intentions. 
We shall also return to this crucial notion of expectation below. 
Thus far we have been looking at norms as positive phenomena, serving a 
useful purpose. The concept of regime discussed by Pym (e.g. 1992a: 140–141) 
stresses this positive aspect: a regime is defined as a set of principles, norms and 
regulations based on participants’ expectations, the purpose of which is to facil-
itate international relations in a particular field. Yet norms may also be felt more 
negatively as constraints, as restrictions to be challenged or overruled. I shall take 
up this more critical point of view at various points in subsequent chapters. 
One further preliminary point needs to be made about norms at this stage, 
and that concerns their validation. How do we know that a norm is valid? There 
are two basic views on this. One (the imperative theory) argues that norms are 
validated by a norm authority, from above, and are sometimes even imposed by 
such an authority. The other (the practice theory: cf. the conditions for norms 
specified above) argues that norms are validated by their very existence: in other 
words, if a norm is acknowledged to exist, it is automatically acknowledged to 
be valid. There are no non-valid norms, although there might of course be “ex-
norms” that are no longer valid and hence no longer current norms. On this view, 
then, one could fairly say “N used to be a norm but most people don’t follow it 
nowadays”, but it would be contradictory to say “N is a norm but most people 
don’t follow it”. By contrast, note, it would not be contradictory to say “L is a law 
but most people don’t obey it”. It would not be contradictory, of course, to say 
“there are two clashing norms here, N and M, in two different subsections of the 
population; some people follow N and others M”. 
I think translation norms have both kinds of validation, both by authority and 
by practice, as we shall see in due course. 
3.3	
Norms of language 
Before turning to translation norms, however, it will be useful to recall certain 
key concepts regarding norms of language as a whole. At the most general level, 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
55
norms of language fall into three main types. In the first place, there are product 
norms describing the notions of “correct” phonology, morphology, syntax, se-
mantics, lexis etc. in a given speech community. Recall that “correct” means no 
more than “accepted as being correct by (most of) the members of this commu-
nity”. These norms are, in the view of many linguists at least, the object of study of 
linguistics (see Itkonen 1983). 
But these product norms, these expectancies of the speech community, are in 
turn based on two higher-order norms, in fact process norms. One of these is the 
communication norm. Informally stated, this norm requires us (as speakers) to 
communicate in such a way that others recognize our intention, and (as hearers) 
to interpret in accordance with the speaker’s intention. To do this is to behave 
rationally: to behave in such a way that an action is adequate to its goal, the goal 
here being the achievement of understanding. 
This communication norm is given a more explicit philosophical treatment 
by Davidson (1986). In Davidson’s account, when we set out to communicate with 
a hearer we already have some idea about how the other party is likely in gener-
al to interpret whatever we say: this expectation is the speaker’s “prior theory”. 
(Writing this book in English, I implicitly expect you to understand the general 
norms of standard English.) But on a given speech occasion, we may wish the 
hearer to interpret slightly differently: this is the speaker’s “passing theory”, the 
one I want you, the hearer, to use now. (In this book I want you, for instance, to 
understand “normative” in an exclusively descriptive sense.) The hearer also has a 
prior theory (general expectations pertaining to the interpreting of certain kinds 
of utterances) and a passing theory (the one the hearer actually uses to interpret 
a given utterance). Communication is successful to the extent that hearer’s and 
speaker’s passing theories converge: to the extent that you actually do interpret 
me the way I intend you to interpret me. 
The communication norm is obviously a pragmatic one, and has much to 
do with Gricean notions of co-operation and relevance (Grice 1975), and other 
social norms governing interaction between people. Grice has been criticized for 
extrapolating Anglo-American or Western European norms into universals (see 
e.g. Wierzbicka 1991), and his maxims must evidently be interpreted with respect 
to particular cultures, but I do not think this detracts from their universal appli-
cability. For example, with respect to his maxim of manner (be clear, etc.), the 
normative degree of indirectness or ambiguity may vary from culture to culture. 
The actual interpretation of the communication norm, for instance in terms of 
how much information should be given, or even with what degree of truthfulness, 
must surely be culture-bound. 
The second higher-order norm of language is an ethical one: Bartsch calls it 
the norm of honesty, or sincerity, and formulates it thus: “Conform to the norms 

56	
Memes of Translation
of communication (interaction) as long as you must assume that the hearer (part-
ner) cannot directly recognize the breaching of the norms!” (1987: 61). In other 
words, if you do breach norms, e.g. in ironic usage, do so in such a way that 
your hearer recognizes that you are breaching them. Compare Grice’s maxims of 
quality (do not say things you believe to be false, or for which you lack adequate 
evidence) and manner (be clear, unambiguous, etc.). Obviously, not to follow this 
norm would be to distort the communication. This might, of course, indeed be 
the intention, as in propaganda, lying, disinformation and the like. 
Two further points need to be made on norms of language. The first one re-
turns to the distinction made above between norms and conventions. From the 
phylogenetic point of view, norms of language are conventions, to the extent that 
any language structure or usage is “arbitrary”: these norms originate in conven-
tions (conventions being one example of memes, as I suggested earlier). But on-
togenetically, that is, from the point of view of any individual entering a speech 
community and indeed any individual already in such a community, norms 
of language are experienced not as mere conventions but as being prescriptive 
(Bartsch 1987: 110). If I wish to communicate rationally in English, there is a limit 
to the amount of deviance which my English-speaking hearers will accept; and 
it is precisely the norms of language that set the boundaries to this permissible 
deviance. 
The second point concerns the fuzziness of norms. Snell-Hornby, for instance 
(1988: 49f.), follows Coseriu (1970) in placing norms midway between abstract 
langue and concrete texts. The langue or language system exerts a more-­or-­less 
absolute prescriptive force but actual texts are fairly idiosyncratic realizations.  
Coseriu also saw norms as being prescriptive, but Snell-Hornby feels them to be 
“not entirely” prescriptive: for her they seem to be akin to conventions, proto-
types. She stresses that linguistic norms are not rigid lines of demarcation be-
tween permitted and non-­permitted usage: norms have fuzzy boundaries, and 
some seem stronger than others. Stylistic norms, for instance, can sometimes be 
broken with more impunity than grammatical norms. In my discussion of norms 
I would like to maintain the distinction between norms and conventions (as de-
fined above). However, I take the point about the inherent fuzziness of norms, 
ranging from “obligatory” to “preferred”, and will assume it as self-evident in what 
follows. 
3.4	
What counts as a translation? 
One further preliminary point still needs to be discussed: what counts as a trans-
lation? What, in fact, shall we be postulating translation norms about? The point 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
57
I wish to stress here is a very simple one, and has also been made forcefully by 
others (such as Toury 1985; 1995: 23–39). In brief, a translation is any text that is 
accepted in the target culture as being a translation. i.e. as falling within the ac-
cepted range of deviance defined by the target-culture product norm “translation”. 
(The word “translation” is English, of course, so I am assuming here that there are 
words in other languages that can be translated as “translation”. However, I am not 
assuming that all the various words that can be translated into English as “trans-
lation” are strict synonyms. There is wide and documented variation between lan-
guages on how the general idea of translation is conceptualized and lexicalized. 
See e.g. Chesterman 2006.)
This culture-bound definition has implications. First, as Toury stresses, a 
translation is a translation in the target culture, not the source culture, and so the 
norms defining its acceptable range are primarily target-culture norms. However, 
other parties are also involved in the attribution of translation status: the client (in 
whichever culture) may set explicit norms governing what counts as a translation 
and what does not count, such as the conditions imposed on legal translators; and 
other attributors are of course translators themselves. Indeed, the translator of X is 
actually the first to propose Y as a translation of X. Translation norms thus do not 
exist exclusively in the target culture: some may have their origin in the source cul-
ture, and some in the intercultural state inhabited by the translator (as Pym stress-
es, 1992: 163f.). It is the target culture which neverthess confirms translation status. 
Second, the target culture designates certain texts as translations largely on 
the implicit say-so of their translators: the relation between the target culture and 
its translators is therefore fundamentally one of trust – a culture must trust those 
who translate into it, and also out of it. It may assign such “translation status”, of 
course, according to the authoritative decisions of only certain members of the 
target culture, such as bilinguals or other experts. A translator who claimed that 
text T was a translation and was later discovered to have lied would lose this trust. 
Further, just as a target culture grants or accepts translation status, so it may also 
withdraw such status at a later date, for some reason or other. Classical examples 
are “pseudotranslations”, texts which were originally accepted as translations but 
later turned out to be fakes: Macpherson’s Ossian, for example, or Chatterton’s 
“medieval” poems. It follows, then, that there is nothing which is theoretically 
absolute or permanent about translation status. In principle, even a text quite sin-
cerely claimed and accepted as a translation could be criticized and even rejected 
as such by the same culture, perhaps centuries later, as expectations change. 
Third, it is by no means the case that a translation has to be “perfect”, or to 
conform to one particular type only, in order to be accepted as a translation. Even 
normal linguistic usage shows this: a “bad translation” is still a translation, still 
a member of the category “translation”, albeit not a desirable one. There is an  

58	
Memes of Translation
important theoretical difference, then, between saying that a text (or a segment or 
item in a text) is “a bad translation” and saying that it is “not a translation at all”. 
One corollary of this, of course, is that translation theory should not neglect “bad 
translations”. 
In particular, it is not the case that a translation must meet the demands of 
some kind of “absolute equivalence” or “adequacy” before it can be granted trans-
lation status. Indeed, the literature is full of examples of translations which are 
far from being “equivalent” to their source texts in any customary sense. Much-­
quoted examples are the experimental symbolist translations of phonetic form 
alone, such as those of the Zukovskys from Catullus or Jandl from English (see 
Toury 1980: 44), or the volume-length spoof entitled Mots d’heures: gousses, rames 
which purports to be the D’Antin manuscript. This latter is a collection of pho-
netic translations into French of “Mother Goose Rhymes” by van Rooten (1967). 
An example: 
	
	 Un petit d’un petit 
	
	 S’etonne aux Halles 
	
	 Un petit d’un petit 
	
	 Ah! degres te fallent 
	
	 Indolent qui ne sort cesse 
	
	 Indolent qui ne se mene 
	
	 Qu’importe un petit d’un petit 
	
	 Tout Gai de Reguennes. 
Compare the English: 
	
	 Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall, 
	
	 Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. 
	
	 All the king’s horses and all the king’s men 
	
	 Couldn’t put Humpty together again. 
The most extreme example I have so far come across, of what counts as a transla-
tion, is the following Finnish translation, in a concert programme, of a German 
poem by Morgenstern (1969). Note that it is overtly claimed by the translator to 
be a translation and is accepted by the target readership to be one, albeit a most 
eccentric one. But even eccentric translations are translations. The title of the 
poem may be glossed (from both the German and the Finnish) as “Night-song of 
a/the fish”. The original German is as follows: 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
59
Fisches Nachtgesang
—
9 9
— — —
9 9 9 9
— — —
9 9 9 9
— — —
9 9 9 9
— — —
9 9 9 9
— — —
9 9
—
The Finnish translation runs: 
Kalan yölaulu
—
= =
— — —
= = = =
— — —
= = = =
— — —
= = = =
— — —
= = = =
— — —
= =
—
Suom. Reijo Ollinen
What is going on here, and why is this a translation? The title has been translated 
conventionally, but in order to get the point of the translation of the poem itself 
the reader must know that the Finnish verb kääntää, which means ‘to translate’, 
also has the literal meaning ‘to turn’. The translator, Reijo Ollinen, has in effect 
“turned” (some of) the elements of the poem upside down. Yet the point is actual-
ly made more subtle because the Finnish rubric Suom. Reijo Ollinen (‘Trans. Reijo 
Ollinen’) does not use this verb but another, suomentaa, meaning literally “to put 

60	
Memes of Translation
into Finnish”. The wit and validification of the translation thus turn on the reader’s 
awareness of an ambiguous word that is not actually present in the text at all. 
Further analysis of this playful translation might point out that the Finnish 
verb kääntää also has the slang sense ‘to steal’, so that the translator can be thought 
of as having ‘stolen’ the original poem (recall that Hermes, god of translators, was 
also the god of thieves…). And perhaps the Finnish fish looks sadder than the 
German one, but I will leave it at that. The point of the example is simply to illus-
trate how far the boundaries of “what-is-a-translation” may extend. 
Are there any boundaries at all, in fact? Can anything be a translation? Surely 
not. Toury (1995: 33f.) suggests three conditions or “postulates” which must be 
met if we are to reasonably assume that a given text is a translation: (a) there exists 
or has existed a source text, i.e. another product, normally in another language; 
(b) the assumed translation has been derived from this source text via a trans-
fer process; and (c) there is an intertextual relationship between the two texts. 
The most problematic condition is the last one: what kinds of intertextual rela-
tionships count as translational ones? Answers to this question have varied enor-
mously across cultures and periods. At the most general level, we can perhaps say 
that the required relation must be one of relevant similarity; but this then raises 
the question of what we mean by ‘relevant’, and indeed what we mean by ‘similar-
ity’ (see Chesterman 1996b, 1998). In a discussion of the limits of interpretation, 
Nouss (1994) follows Eco in underlining the role of the community consensus, or 
Gadamer’s interpretative tradition, in establishing a minimum range of accept-
able interpretation. Semiosis is theoretically infinite, but in practice it is limited by 
what the community concerned will accept – in other words, by norms. 
A key point in Toury’s argument here, with which I would agree, is that dis-
covering the precise nature of the realized intertextual relationship is a valid goal 
in one kind of translation research (cf. his “discovery procedure”), not a definition 
from which this research starts. That is, one reason for studying translations is to 
discover the concept of “equivalence” or “relevant similarity” held by a particular 
translator or a particular culture at a given time, for a given kind of text, etc. The 
minimum requirement is simply that a text is claimed to be a translation, and 
that it is accepted by the client and/or the readers as a translation in the target 
culture: it is accepted as conforming to the prevalent translation norms. On this 
view, then, the boundaries of the concept “translation” are ultimately not set by 
something intrinsic to the concept itself, but by the ways in which members of a 
culture use the concept. 
This view of translation thus makes a clear distinction between category 
judgements (is this or is it not a translation?) and evaluative judgements (is this 
a good/acceptable etc. translation?). Category judgements need not be seen as 
black-­and-white, of course: there can be prototypical instances, less typical ones, 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
61
eccentric ones, peripheral ones etc. But there is no necessary correlation between 
prototypicality and quality, as the examples above have suggested. We shall return 
to questions of quality in Chapter 5, and see also the Update below. 
3.5	
Translation norms
3.5.1	
Toury’s norms
Some norms function as “solutions to problems posed by certain interaction 
situations” (Ullmann-Margalit 1977: 9, cited by Bartsch 1987: 104). Translation 
norms are of this type, for they exist to regulate the process whereby communi-
cation can take place in a situation where it would otherwise be impossible. The 
applicability of norm theory to translation studies has been pioneered by Toury, 
and I shall outline his ideas first. (See also Hermans 1991.) 
Toury’s original interest in the late 1970s (see e.g. 1980, and also 1995, 2012) 
was in literary translation, and his initial framework of norms was set up with 
that in mind. This framework starts with preliminary norms: these have to do with 
translation policy in a given culture, concerning for instance what works of litera-
ture are deemed by publishers and others to be worth translating, and whether or 
not these can be translated through an intermediate language (“secondary trans-
lation”, also known as indirect translation). These are questions of social, cultural 
and economic policy, perhaps also political policy, and fall outside the main focus 
of this book. The norms that interest me here are those that come into play after a 
client has commissioned a translation, those that guide the translator’s work itself. 
These norms, which “direct actual decisions made during the translation pro-
cess” (1980: 54), Toury calls operational norms. Here he includes all the norms that 
affect the “matrix” of the text, its segmentation and verbal formulation (cf. Toury 
1995: 58f.). They are “textual norms”, either generally linguistic/stylistic or specif-
ically literary (determining appropriate genres etc.). In norm-theoretical terms, 
Toury’s operational norms are primarily product norms, regulating the form of 
a translation as a final product. As such, of course, they also affect the decision-­
making process, although Toury gives less emphasis to process norms. He does, 
however, postulate one additional type of norm which he calls the initial norm. 
This has to do with “the translator’s basic choice between two polar alternatives” 
(1980: 54), subjecting himself “either to the original text, with its textual relations 
and the norms expressed by it and contained in it, or to the linguistic and literary 
norms active in TL [the target language] and in the target literary polysystem, or a 
certain section of it” (1980: 54). The choice of the source language as initial norm 
leads to a translation that is “adequate”, and the choice of target language norms 

62	
Memes of Translation
to one that is “acceptable”. (This use of the term “adequate” has been adopted by 
some scholars but is avoided by others on account of its ambiguity; still others use 
“adequate” to mean what Toury means by “acceptable”. I shall henceforth avoid 
the term.) 
3.5.2	
Expectancy norms
The following analysis of translation norms concerns the area covered by Toury’s 
operational and initial norms, but from a different angle. I start by positing two 
kinds of translation norms, corresponding quite conventionally to product norms 
and process norms. I will take the product ones first. Because, as argued above, 
these product norms are ultimately constituted by the expectations of the target 
language readership, I shall call these expectancy norms. 
Expectancy norms are established by the expectations of readers of a transla-
tion (of a given type) concerning what a translation (of this type) should be like. 
These expectations are partly governed by the prevalent translation tradition in 
the target culture, and partly by the form of parallel texts (of a similar text-type) 
in the target language (cf. Hermans 1991), i.e. by the prevalent scenes and frames 
in the target culture. They can also be influenced by economic or ideological fac-
tors, power relations within and between cultures and the like. They cover a wide 
range of phenomena. Readers (who may or may not include the client) may have 
expectations about text-type and discourse conventions, about style and register, 
about the appropriate degree of grammaticality, about the statistical distribution 
of text features of all kinds, about collocations, lexical choice, and so on. Hermans 
(1991: 166) puts it this way: 
[T]he “correct” translation … is the one that fits the correctness notions prevail-
ing in a particular system, i.e. that adopts the solutions regarded as correct for a 
given communicative situation, as a result of which it is accepted as correct. In 
other words: when translators do what is expected of them, they will be seen to 
have done well. 
Agreed. However, note that “correct” here does not need to imply the existence of 
a single correct translation; rather, as “correctness notions”, norms can be met in 
a variety of ways. There is usually more than one way in which translators can do 
what is expected of them. We might therefore prefer to speak of translations being 
more or less “appropriate” or “acceptable” or the like. In this way we can define a 
range of possible translations, within which several may be “appropriate”, even if 
some are felt to be better than others. 
Expectancy norms thus also allow us to make evaluative judgements about 
translations. Some translations may conform to expectancy norms more closely 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
63
than others. In theory, we can distinguish, within the total set of translations in a 
culture, a fuzzy subset of texts which are felt to conform very closely, prototypical-
ly as it were, to the relevant expectancy norms: such translations tend to assume 
the status of “norm-models” which in fact embody the norms in question. Other 
translations, felt to be outside this subset, are still accepted as being translations, 
albeit not norm-embodying ones. (This distinction will be relevant to the peda-
gogical aspect of translation studies: see Chapter 6.) 
For some translations, “covert” ones (House 1981), readers in a given culture at 
a given time may expect them to be indistinguishable from native, non-­translated 
texts: a covert translation that is recognized to be “different” from non-translated, 
similar (parallel) target-language texts can thus be judged unsatisfactory in some 
way. (At least, this would be the default judgement on such a translation; there 
may, of course, be additional factors that would override this judgement – see 
Chapter 5.) Examples of such covert translations might include business letters, 
advertisements, technical manuals etc.: translations of such texts typically do not 
form a category separate from non-translated target texts of the same type, within 
the target polysystem. 
For other, “overt” translations (in a given culture, at a given time), the target-­
language expectancies might be different: translations of this type might be felt 
to occupy a different category or sub-category in the target polysystem, one spe-
cifically reserved for translations. Literary translations are one example: when I 
read Tolstoy in English, I cannot overlook the fact that I know he did not write in 
English originally; I expect “local colour”, Russian forms of address, etc. Another 
example is interlinear glosses in linguistics texts, which are not even supposed to 
be fluent or natural but to illustrate the structure of the original. A third would be 
certain kinds of legal texts, such as those dealing with company law in country A 
but translated into the language of country B. In short, overt translations tend to 
be the norm for any text that is particularly closely bound in one way or another 
to the source culture. 
Whether a translation is expected to be overt or covert will also depend partly 
on the cultural tradition in the target language, including the translation tradition 
itself. In some cultures, for instance, successfully covert translations may even be 
treated with suspicion, because readers have come to expect that translations are 
always overt (i.e. “unnatural”) in some way. A translation that is really natural 
may even raise doubts about its accuracy, suspicions that the translator must have 
been too free. 
Expectancy norms are primarily validated in terms of their very existence 
in the target language community: people do have these expectations about cer-
tain kinds of texts, and therefore the norms embodied in these expectations are 
de facto valid. But in some situations these norms are also validated by a norm  

64	
Memes of Translation
authority of some kind, such as a teacher, an examiner, a literary critic reviewing a 
translation, a reviser, a publisher’s reader or editor, and so on. Within any society, 
there is usually a subset of members (“experts”) who are believed by the rest of the 
society to have the competence to validate such norms. This authority-validation 
may do no more than confirm a norm that is already acknowledged to exist in the 
society at large: in this sense, the norm authorities genuinely “represent” the rest 
of the society and are presumably trusted by the other members to do so. 
There may be situations where there seems to be a clash between the norms 
sanctioned by these norm authorities and the norms accepted and current in the 
society at large. For instance, the general public may have rather low expectations 
about the readability of bureaucratic texts (whether translated or not), simply be-
cause they have become accustomed to such a quality. But these expectations ac-
tually relate to what typical translations of this kind are like, not what they should 
be like. Moreover, norm authorities might claim that the readability level of such 
badly written texts do not meet some higher requirement of clarity; further, such 
criticism might be agreed with by other members of the society when brought 
to their attention, and pressure might even be brought to bear on writers and/or 
translators to conform to these higher requirements. 
What about translations that deliberately seem to go against expectancy 
norms? Some literary translators might claim that their intention is precisely to 
break these norms – recall the discussion of the Logos meme in the previous chap-
ter. And translations of advertisements sometimes appear deliberately to flout the 
expectancy norms of the target culture. In such cases, the expectancy norms are 
broken because of some higher priority: loyalty to some aspect of the form of the 
source text, for instance, or a particular ideological conviction about the best way 
to represent the source culture, or the desire to produce a more persuasive text. 
For instance: there is an advert often seen here in Helsinki in December, go-
ing around town on the side of a tram, by a Finnish company offering cruises on 
the Baltic Sea. It reads: Meri Christmas. Note: this is an advert aimed primarily at 
Finns; they are thus expected to know what the English word Christmas means; 
they obviously know what meri means (‘sea’); and they are expected to know the 
English expression Merry Christmas. The wit and the effect of the advertisement 
thus depend on the English-language proficiency of a Finnish audience, who are 
not being addressed exclusively in the mother tongue. The bilingual appeal of 
the ad suggests also that it is directed particularly at educated Finns; and the fact 
that it appears on a Helsinki tram indicates that the primary target audience is an 
urban one. The ad can thus exploit the fashionable glamour of being, and going, 
“international”. 
The effect of such norm-breaking only works because it goes against the ex-
pectations of the readers: here, that Finnish speakers should be addressed by other 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
65
Finns in Finnish. Norm-breaking usages, including norm-breaking translations, 
can thus indicate the existence of the norms that are being thus broken. However, 
if, in time, people come to expect that norms actually should be broken in certain 
kinds of texts or translations – e.g. that certain kinds of adverts for Finnish con-
sumers will be more effective if they use some English words – this expectancy 
may itself become a norm: an expectancy norm for that kind of text. 
Expectancy norms, then, are not static or permanent, nor are they mono-
lithic. They are highly sensitive to text-type – not all text-types are necessarily 
expected to conform consistently to fluent standard usage – and they are open to 
modification and change. In this respect, translation theory could benefit by some 
of the work done in critical linguistics on language awareness: I shall come back 
to this later (7.8). 
3.5.3	
Professional norms
The second major category of translation norms is that of process norms: these 
regulate the translation process itself. From the translator’s point of view, these 
norms are subordinate to the expectancy norms, because they are themselves de-
termined by the expectancy norms: any process norm is determined by the nature 
of the end-product which it is designed to lead to. 
Where lies the source of these process norms for translation? Recall the point 
made above, about the existence of norm authorities in a society. With respect 
to translation, the norm authorities par excellence are perhaps those members of 
society who are deemed to be competent professional translators, whom society 
trusts as having this status, and who may further be recognized as competent pro-
fessionals by other societies also. “Competence” and “professionalism” are thus 
understood here to be intersubjectively defined: you are competent if you are rec-
ognized to be so by people who in turn are recognized by others to be competent 
to make this judgement; and so on. Henceforth I shall disregard the existence 
of non-competent professionals: for “professional” read “competent professional”. 
And I shall assume that a “professional” is simply a full-time translator whose sole 
or at least main livelihood is indeed translation. (I know this assumption simpli-
fies the situation!)
Professionals are the people who are largely responsible for the original es-
tablishment of the expectancy norms, in fact, for the products of their work nat-
urally become the yardsticks by which subsequent translations are assessed by 
the receiving society. Their translation behaviour, in other words, is accepted to 
be norm-setting. Conversely, if a translation is accepted as conforming to the rel-
evant expectancy norms, the translator of that text is (qua translator of that text, 

66	
Memes of Translation
at least) accepted as being a competent professional. That is what final diploma 
exams and the like are about, after all. 
Just as it is possible to distinguish a fuzzy subset of translations which are 
recognized as conforming especially closely to the expectancy norms (as argued 
above), so it is equally possible to distinguish (among the total set of people who 
translate literary or non-literary texts in a given culture) an equally fuzzy subset 
of translators who are recognized to be competent professionals. It is, then, the 
translational behaviour of this professional subset from which we derive the pro-
cess norms of translation. For this reason, I shall call these translation process 
norms professional norms. 
All professional translation norms can, I think, be subsumed under three 
general higher-order norms. They can be stated in an absolute form, but in real 
life they naturally tend to be followed only “as far as possible”; moreover, dif-
ferent translation tasks may require balancing acts between different priorities, 
a point that I overlook here. Note that the following formulations are not pre-
scriptive in the sense that I would be laying down laws for translators to follow. 
They are descriptive: I hypothesize simply that these are kinds of norms that exist 
in the culture to which any translator belongs, and that insofar as the transla-
tor has internalized them, they help to account for translatorial behaviour. The 
norms themselves exert a prescriptive pressure – as any norms do. In other words, 
translators tend to behave as they think they ought to behave, and these norms 
represent an attempt to capture the nature of this “ought”. True, a translator may 
also have reasons to disregard these norms or to set up particular priorities be-
tween them; such translators will feel they “ought” to translate in some different 
way, they interpret the norms in a way that is different from the majority view. 
Different interpretations may remain a minority opinion, or they may eventually 
become the majority view. – I formulate the basic process norms as follows (fol-
lowing Chesterman 1993). 
	 (1)	 The accountability norm: a translator should act in such a way that the 
demands of loyalty are appropriately met with regard to the original writer, 
the commissioner of the translation, the translator himself or herself, the 
prospective readership and any other relevant parties. 
This is thus an ethical norm, concerning professional standards of integrity and 
thoroughness. Compare the general language norm of sincerity, mentioned above 
(3.3). Translators behave in such a way as to be able to accept responsibility for 
their translations. A similar point has been made by Nord (e.g. 1991): she speaks 
of the translator being “committed” and “responsible”, and of loyalty as a moral 
principle which is indispensable in human communication. (Compare also the 
ethical norm of the “true interpreter” in Harris 1990.) Formulated in this way, 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
67
the norm nevertheless allows for various interpretations concerning which party 
should be given the primary loyalty in cases of conflict. 
	 (2)	 The communication norm: a translator should act in such a way as to optimize 
communication, as required by the situation, between all the parties involved. 
This is a social norm, which specifies the translator’s role as a communication 
expert, both as a mediator of the intentions of others and as a communicator in 
his/her own right. Compare the general communication norm of language, men-
tioned above (3.3). Note that the norm does not necessarily presuppose a belief in 
an objectively fixed message, a signified, that must be communicated; the situa-
tion may be such that the intended communication is more like a shared sense of 
lingustic play, or an aesthetic experience. Communication is, after all, a sharing. 
Neither the accountability norm nor the communication norm are specific 
to the translation process: translation theory merely applies them. But the third 
higher-­order process norm is specific to translation and other rewriting process-
es: it in fact highlights the difference between these kinds of processes and other 
communication processes. It can be stated as follows: 
	 (3)	 The relation norm: a translator should act in such a way that an appropriate 
relation of relevant similarity is established and maintained between the 
source text and the target text. 
Defined in this way, in terms of a relation between texts, this is therefore a lin-
guistic norm. It accounts for the assumption (argued for above) that equivalence 
as sameness is too narrow a concept, because of the wide variety of relations that 
actually exist between source and target texts. It is up to the translator to decide 
what kind of relation is appropriate in any given case, according to the text-type, 
the wishes of the commissioner, the intentions of the original writer, and the as-
sumed needs of the prospective readers. One kind of relation might of course be 
“equivalence” or “optimal similarity” of some sort. One translation task might re-
quire a translation which gave priority to a close formal similarity to the original: 
legal contracts, for instance, which must correspond sentence to sentence. Anoth-
er might prioritize stylistic similarity: a short story, perhaps a poem. Yet another 
might highlight the importance of semantic closeness: a scientific or technical 
article. And another might value similarity of effect above all these: a tourist bro-
chure, an advertisement. Every translation task sets its own profile of “equivalence 
priorities”, and it is part of the translator’s job to assess the overall profile that 
would be appropriate. Simplified binary distinctions (form vs. meaning etc.) are 
only of limited use in this respect. 

68	
Memes of Translation
But, fundamentally, the question at issue here is broader and more complex. 
“Equivalence” (albeit inevitably partial) is only one kind of possible relation: re-
call the Wittgensteinian idea of family resemblance, with its infinite variation. In 
translation, such variation would also cover such parameters as degree of target-­
culture adaptation considered appropriate, addition or omission of information, 
relation to accompanying channels (lip movements etc. in film dubbing, melody 
and pitch in song translations), and so on. The above formulation of the relation 
norm seeks to capture precisely this potential range of valid resemblances be-
tween source and target text. 
These three professional norms are partly validated by norm authorities: oth-
er professionals, teachers, critics etc., who are accepted as having norm-giving 
competence. But, like the expectancy norms, they are also validated by their very 
existence: that is, to the extent that they are accepted as governing the practice 
actually followed by such professionals. Furthermore, behaviour which breaks 
these norms is usually deemed deserving of criticism. This criticism might then 
be firmly rejected by the translator in question, and thus mark the beginning of 
an argument about how the appropriate norm should be interpreteted. Norms 
can always be argued about. The point of this chapter is to suggest what the main 
translation norms are, not to define how they should be universally interpreted. 
A final comment: professional norms of course also govern the way a compe-
tent translator reads the source text, before actually translating anything, and the 
translator’s own expectancy norms regarding the source language will affect the 
comprehension of the source text (cf. Dancette 1994). However, I shall not discuss 
this aspect of the overall translation process. 
3.6	
General translation laws and normative laws
3.6.1	
Translation laws
We have seen that norms lie between judicial laws and conventions, in terms of 
their deontic force. At this point it will be helpful to clarify the distinction between 
norms and another type of law: empirical laws. In particular, what is the differ-
ence between professional norms (of translation behaviour) and behavioural laws 
(of the translation process)? 
Let us call the latter type of behavioural laws “general translation laws”. In 
keeping with the increasing current emphasis on translation as a process, Toury 
has argued in many contexts (e.g. 1991, 1995, 2012) that one ultimate aim of trans-
lation theory should in fact be to establish these laws of translation behaviour. We 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
69
can gloss “law” in this sense as “observable behavioural regularity”. Such transla-
tion laws are purely descriptive, and have the following general form: 
	
	 Under conditions X, translators tend to do (or refrain from doing) Y. 
Or as Toury puts it (1991: 186): 
	
	 If X, then the greater/the smaller the likelihood that Y. 
Provided that conditions X can be specified, such general descriptive laws of trans-
lation behaviour could in principle be set up at many different levels of generality: 
for all translators universally at all times, for translators in a given culture at a 
given time, for translators going from a given source to a given target language, 
for translators of certain text-types, for translators of a given degree of compe-
tence, etc. – In fact, at their most general, laws could be established to describe 
any behaviour (not necessarily “desirable” behaviour) which leads to something 
that is accepted as being a translation (but not necessarily a good translation). 
Translation laws as thus defined are, of course, probabilistic rather than absolute. 
But they are empirical, and falsifiable in the standard sense: they can be used as 
the basis for predictions, they can be tested, confirmed or disconfirmed. (See the 
comment on translation universals, in 2.10 above.)
Let us take some general examples. Perhaps the most pervasive of all transla-
tion laws is the law of interference (cf. Toury 1995: 274f.). This states that trans-
lators universally tend to be influenced by the language of the source text, in a 
wide variety of ways. Evidence for this law is particularly found in translated texts 
which purport to be covert translations but which are immediately recognized 
to be translations, for one reason or another. Such reasons include not only the 
occurrence of “grammatical errors” or “clumsy language”, but also more subtly 
distinguishing marks such as the statistical distribution of grammatical or stylistic 
features. An early example of such work is Vehmas-Lehto (1989) on the quality 
of Finnish translations from Russian. The fact that this law is also applicable (to 
some extent) to the behaviour of competent professional translators merely un-
derlines its pervasiveness. 
Another tendency that has long been recognized is explicitation: translators 
tend to produce texts that are more explicit than the originals (see e.g. Toury 
1980: 60; Blum-Kulka 1986: 19; Séguinot 1988; Toury 1991; Klaudy 1996; and  
Becher 2010 for a more recent critical view). 
Closely related is the law proposed by Toury to account for a certain sty-
listic flattening that is particularly typical of literary translation. He formulates 
the law as follows (1991: 187): “textemes tend to be converted into repertoremes”. 
A “texteme” is any sign which carries a textual function, and a “repertoreme” is 

70	
Memes of Translation
any sign that forms part of an institutionalized repertoire. In other words, trans-
lators tend to replace text-specific items with institutionalized items: transla-
tions tend to be less idiosyncractic, more conventionalized, than their originals.  
Lefevere (1992: 107) refers to a similar phenomenon as “flattening”: “the illo-
cutionary power of the original is sacrificed in favor of mere locutionary com-
munication”. Toury’s later formulation (1995: 267) calls this the law of growing 
standardization. 
Interestingly, this law seems to run counter to the law of interference: whereas 
interference points to the dominance of the source language, the law of growing 
standardization points to the dominance of the target-language system at the ex-
pense of specifically source-text features. The two laws exert opposite pulls, and 
the translator can be swayed either way. The standardization law suggests that 
translators (at a certain level of competence, perhaps) tend to overreact to the risk 
of interference. 
Some manifestations of the standardization law are purely statistical, and 
readily suggest hypotheses that can be empirically tested. To take a simple exam-
ple: the occurrence of many textual features approximately follows a statistically 
normal distribution, a bell curve. If we plot the variation of sentence length in a 
text, for instance, we typically end up with a distribution showing a higher fre-
quency of average-length sentences and a lower frequency of very short or very 
long ones. Such curves will of course vary somewhat depending on text-type. If 
the normal target-language distribution of this feature is then compared with its 
distribution in translated texts of the same type, we might hypothesize that vari-
ous differences would emerge. Instead of a symmetrical bell curve the translations 
might show a skewed curve, showing an over-use of short or long sentences. But a 
more likely hypothesis is that we would find instances of normalization, showing 
over-­use of the central, average range, and under-use of the two extremes. The 
translator would thus be “playing safe”, making more use of the prototypical part 
of the range of distribution. The result would be a kind of “rhetorical flattening” 
similar to that observed by Toury. (We shall return to related matters of transla-
tion assessment in Chapter 5.) 
At a lower level of generality, any teacher of translation will be familiar with 
the typical tendencies of translator trainees at different levels, both regarding their 
translation products and their translation process. One aspect of the process that 
has received attention is trainees’ use of dictionaries and reference works, as com-
pared to the practice of experienced professionals (see e.g. Jääskeläinen 1989): 
professionals use a wider range of reference works, and rely less on bilingual dic-
tionaries, for instance. All such observations and research pertain to descriptive 
translation laws. 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
71
3.6.2	
Normative laws 
Within these general translation laws I would like to posit the existence of a sub-
set of laws I will call normative translation laws. They are also descriptive, in ac-
cordance with the sense in which I am using “normative” throughout this book; 
however, they are not descriptive of the behaviour of all translators but only of 
some. They are only descriptive of the behaviour of competent professionals, of 
the same subset of all translators that is the source of professional norms. Norma-
tive laws, as thus understood, describe the behaviour of translators who conform 
to translation norms, and who actually set the professional norms. (Strictly speak-
ing, of course, we are dealing with a continuum here, not an absolute distinction 
between “conforming” and “not conforming”.) 
A simple hypothetical example will illustrate the difference between general 
translation laws and normative laws. Assume that, in a given culture at a given 
time, there exists a communicative norm to the effect that, in a given text-type, 
source-language culture-bound terms are expanded or explained in translation, 
rather than preserved to add local colour or the like. We might discover a general 
translation law which revealed that, say, 70% of all translators (in this culture etc.) 
do indeed tend to explain such terms, but 30% do not. The 70% that do are thus 
following the norm. It may well be that the remaining 30%, by not conforming to 
this norm, expose themselves to criticism, if the opinion of their readers is that 
they should be conforming to it. But as we have seen, general translation laws are 
not sensitive to evaluative judgements, for they merely describe what is done, by 
good and less good translators alike. 
Alongside this general law, however, we might also discover that, of all the 
competent professional translators studied, as many as 99% followed the norm; 
indeed, this would be evidence for our taking it to be a norm in the first place. If 
supported by subsequent research, this would suggest the existence of a norma-
tive law: that is, a law describing the typical behaviour of competent professional, 
norm-abiding translators, as opposed to all translators in the culture. 
Again, we are not really looking at a binary distinction here, between com-
petent professionals and “other translators”: I have set up such an opposition for 
expository reasons only. What we expect to find is a correlation between “ac-
knowledged translational competence”, measured perhaps partly in years of ex-
perience, and the use of certain translation strategies such as, in this example, 
“explain culture-bound terms”. It is partly by extrapolation from such an observed 
trend that we postulate the existence of the norm in question: good translators 
behave in such and such a way, which implies that they seem to follow guidelines 
of such and such a kind, i.e. norms. 

72	
Memes of Translation
One definition of “good translators”, then, would be those who tend to follow 
normative laws, i.e. those who translate “like competent professionals”. If we then 
ask by what criteria these professionals are to be defined, the answer is: not on 
intrinsic grounds but on extrinsic ones. That is, translators belong to the subset of 
“competent professionals” if they are acknowledged to do so by other members of 
their culture (or perhaps, more specifically, by members who are themselves ac-
knowledged by yet other members as having the ability to make this evaluation). 
In other words, translator competence (on this view) is defined socially, not lin-
guistically, in the same way as we have earlier defined what counts as a translation 
in the first place. Power relationships in society are thus also involved, inevitably. 
It may be argued at this point that I am committing the naturalistic falla-
cy of deriving “ought” from “is”. I question this fallacy, however (see further  
Chesterman 1993). With respect to translation behaviour, I think the “ought” 
does already exist in a perfectly genuine sense, in the translational behaviour of 
people who are acknowledged to be competent professionals, and in the social 
consciousness of norms. “Phylogenetically”, within the community of translators, 
norms and translation laws (including normative laws) may change over time, 
they may differ between cultures, and even conflict within a given culture; but 
they certainly exist. Trainees entering the community of translators (ontogenet-
ically, as it were) will naturally experience normative translation laws as being 
prescriptive (as “ought”) vis-a-vis their own translation behaviour (cf. the similar 
point made in 3.3 on norms of language in general); but we can describe and in-
vestigate them as descriptive, empirical laws just as we can study any other laws 
of human behaviour. 
3.6.3	
Explanations
One function of scientific laws is to explain. Accordingly, we can expect trans-
lation laws to offer explanations to product questions such as “why does this 
translation, manifest the feature X?” or “why do translations of this type into this 
language tend to have the feature X?” or “why did certain kinds of translations 
at that time in that culture look like that?”; and also to process questions such as 
“why did this translator write X?” or “why do translators tend to do X?” or even 
“why do professional translators, faced with this sort of problem, tend to make 
decisions of such-and-such a kind?”. The answers which general translation and 
normative laws offer represent various types of explanation. Any act, including 
acts of translation, may well have several explanations. 
We might start by distinguishing causal from teleological explanations. Caus-
al explanations explain by reference to a previously occurring phenomenon, such 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
73
as the existence of the source text, whereas teleological explanations refer to in-
tended final goals subsequent to the phenomenon being explained, such as the 
aim of the translation. Causal explanations here would include reasons, although 
reasons are usually defined as being agent-internal: for example, a translator’s 
knowledge of P (e.g. knowledge of the client’s aim) might be a reason for a trans-
lation decision Q. 
A different account of various possible kinds of explanation is offered by Pym 
(1997: 85f.), who links them to Aristotle’s four causes, approximately as follows: 
	
	 Material cause: the target language itself, out of which the translation is con-
structed; plus the source text; plus a computer and other aids. 
	
	 Formal cause: the translation norms which determine the ultimate form of a 
given translation, the appropriate relation with the source text. 
	
	 Efficient cause: the mind and body of the translator, including personal expe-
rience, emotional state etc.; plus the person of the client who initiates the act 
of translation. 
	
	 Final cause: the goal of the translation, as determined by the client and 
accepted or refined by the translator; plus perhaps the general aim of the 
translator to earn a living. 
Pym’s point is that acts of translation do indeed have more than one cause, and 
that a theory of translation must incorporate at least these types. Functional the-
ories such as skopos theory, for instance, tend to give high priority to final causes 
at the expense of others. Some other theories, such as early linguistic ones, tend-
ed to focus exclusively on material (source-text) causes. Material causes concern 
the intertextual aspect of translation; formal and final causes the socio-cultural 
aspect; efficient causes the cognitive aspect; and formal, efficient and final causes 
the ethical aspect. 
Another way of analysing potential explanations is to do so according to the 
normative laws describing the kind of translation behaviour which tends to con-
form to the various translation norms discussed above. The general form of the 
explanations runs as follows: 
	
	 A translator performs act A 
	
	 	
or: translators tend to perform act A 
	
	 	
or: a translation contains feature X 
	
	 	
or: translations of a certain type and time tend to contain feature X 
	
	 because of 
	
	 	
a particular normative law (or laws) of translation 
	
	 	
or: a particular general law (or laws) of translation. 

74	
Memes of Translation
Normative laws of translation can be conveniently grouped under the various 
translation norms which give rise to them: normative laws, after all, describe be-
haviour that conforms to translation norms. Explanations which refer to these 
norms are in principle only formal causes, but if the translator is indeed aware 
of the norms they also suggest efficient causes, in that this awareness is part of 
the translator’s state of knowledge. The translator conforms to these norms (a) 
because he/she knows what they are, and because (b) he/she wishes and intends 
to conform to them. (Alternatively, of course, a translator may decide not to con-
form to them: we are talking about tendencies, not universal truths or prescriptive 
commands. If enough translators decide not to conform, a new, competing norm 
may arise.) From the definitions of the general norms we can thus derive norma-
tive laws which offer explanations for translational acts, as follows. 
1.	 Professional translators tend to conform to expectancy norms. 
	
A translator performs act A (or: a translation contains feature X, etc.) because 
of the target language expectancy norms regarding grammaticality, accept-
ability, appropriateness etc. for certain sorts of texts. 
	
Example: when translating journalistic texts from English to Finnish, trans-
lators currently tend to add titles and Christian names of international 
politicians. 
2.	 Professional translators tend to conform to the accountability norm. 
	
A translator performs act A (etc.) because this act conforms to ethical princi-
ples which the translator accepts. 
	
Example: translators tend to check names or dates which appear suspect, 
double-­check final drafts, ask other professionals for their opinion on a tricky 
point, stick to deadlines, etc. An appeal to ethical principles may also be of-
fered for translations which go against prevailing expectancy norms (cf. e.g. 
Venuti 1995a). 
3.	 Professional translators tend to conform to the communication norm. 
	
A translator performs act A (etc.) because this act conforms to overall com-
municative maxims, principles that are accepted as valid for any type of com-
munication, not just translation. These would include readability, clarity and 
the like: the familiar Gricean maxims of quantity, quality, relevance and man-
ner, in fact. In the case of literary texts, of course, the aim of the communi-
cation might be the creation of a particular aesthetic effect rather than (or in 
addition to) a given “message”; this might then justify apparent violations of 
communicative maxims. Nevertheless, the overall goal of the translation act 
is still to share an experience with the reader. (We shall return to the notion 
of clarity in Chapter 7.) 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
75
	
Example: for many kinds of texts, translators tend to clarify and improve awk-
wardly written originals. 
4.	 Professional translators tend to conform to the relation norm. 
	
A translator performs act A (etc.) because of the desired relation between the 
resulting target-text item or feature X and the source-text item or feature Y. In 
other words, a translator performs act A because the source text contained Y. 
	
Example: translating from German to English I write seven per cent – not 
“eight” or “seventeen per cent” – because the source text has sieben Prozent. 
In accordance with our definition of normative laws, the above four are defined 
in terms of professional translation behaviour. This is not to say that they do not 
apply to non-professionals, but that they are truer of professionals as a subset than 
of all translators as a whole. Other sources of explanation, in turn, may be truer of 
translators as a whole than of the subset of professionals, and truer of trainees and 
non-­professionals than of professionals. 
One example would be the general translation law of interference: a translator 
performs act A (or: a translation contains feature X, etc.) because of interference 
from the source text or the source language. The result of such an act is sometimes 
a feature in the target text that can fairly be criticized, if it breaks some norm. Yet 
another source of explanation would be Toury’s standardization law discussed 
above, describing how translators tend to be unduly influenced by conventional-
ized forms in the target language. And another would be the general tendency to 
explicitate, also mentioned earlier. 
All the types of explanation outlined in this section are of course extremely 
general. In order to make them more concrete, and more applicable, we shall need 
the concept of the translation strategy: this will be the subject of Chapter 4. (For a 
more detailed discussion of the notion of explanation in translation research, see 
Chesterman 2008.)
3.7	
Norms as constraints
As was mentioned above, norms serve to delimit the scope of acceptable devi-
ance (of a process or product). In other words, they act not only as guidelines but 
also as constraints: constraints on freedom of action. In Popper’s terms (recall 
Section 1.3), these constraints exist in World 3, and exert a “plastic control” on 
World 2 (subjective thinking and feeling) and consequently on the physical prod-
ucts existing in World 1. 
In polysystem theory these constraints are seen as operating together as 
part of a system. Research here has tended to focus on literary translation, and  

76	
Memes of Translation
consequently on the literary system of a culture, but the insights this research 
offers can also be applied to translation more generally. 
I would now like to look at the work of André Lefevere (1992) in this respect, 
and relate the constraints he analyses to the kinds of norms we have been dis-
cussing above. Lefevere distinguishes five constraints which determine the way 
translators (specifically, literary translators) manipulate texts. These are: 
1.	 Patronage: “the powers (persons, institutions) that can further or hinder the 
reading, writing, and rewriting of literature” (15). 
2.	 Poetics: “an inventory of literary devices, genres, motifs, prototypical charac-
ters and situations, and symbols” plus “a concept of what the role of literature 
is, or should be, in the social system as a whole” (26). 
3.	 The universe of discourse: this refers to the subject matter of the source text, 
the objects, customs and beliefs it describes (87). The point is that translators 
may feel some of these are unacceptable to the target readership, and hence 
adapt or bowdlerize passages thought to be “offensive” or the like. 
4.	 The source and target languages themselves, and the differences between these 
(99). 
5.	 The translator’s ideology: this refers to the translator’s personal set of values 
and attitudes, including his/her attitudes to the other constraints, e.g. whether 
he/she accepts them or not (41). 
Let us consider first how these constraints relate to the translation norms. Pa-
tronage – which would include the influence of publishers and commissioners 
of translations – falls mainly outside the norms I have focused on, but would be 
covered by Toury’s “preliminary norms” (see 3.5.1). To the extent that patrons are 
also readers of the target texts, however, their expectations will contribute to the 
expectancy norms. 
The poetics constraint is also an obvious constituent of the expectancy norms, 
corresponding in literary translation to the expectancy norms for discourse pat-
terns and text-types in non-literary translation. 
The universe-of-discourse constraint has to do partly with the expectancy 
norms (what target readers will deem acceptable subject matter in a given situ-
ation), and partly with the accountability norm (the translator’s own ethics: one 
might simply refuse to translate certain kinds of texts). 
The language constraint affects the relation norm: the translator’s choice of 
the appropriate relation between source and target is obviously restricted by the 
range of relations that are possible – and this range is defined partly by the intrin-
sic natures of the languages themselves. 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
77
The translator’s own ideology is bound up with the accountability norm, and 
also with the communication norm, in that the ideology will affect what and how 
the translator chooses to communicate. 
I suggested earlier that of these norms, the only one which is exclusive to 
translation is the relation norm: mutatis mutandis, the other norms apply to all 
modes of communication. That is, one normally purports to communicate effec-
tively, relevantly, with integrity, in a manner broadly compatible with other peo-
ple’s expectations. (I say “normally”, because one may of course wish to surprise or 
disrupt expectations…) The same point holds for Lefevere’s constraints. Almost 
all writing, whether translation or not, is constrained by patrons (publishers, ed-
itors…), poetics (discourse conventions…), universe of discourse (what can be 
acceptably written about, to given addressees), and the writer’s personal ideol-
ogy (what do I want to say, what should I say, what do I believe I have the right 
to say…). The only constraint that seems exclusive to translation is the language 
constraint, the differences between the source and target languages. 
However, even this constraint is less translation-specific than it might seem, 
and so is my relation norm, for both these actually apply more generally to any 
form of rewriting, whether across languages or within the same language, such as 
editing or paraphrasing, even summarizing. It is no coincidence that Lefevere’s 
book on this subject is entitled Translation, rewriting, and the manipulation of 
literary fame. As this suggests, he looks at translation in the wider context of re-
writing as a whole. 
This observation raises two points that are worth stressing, both of which run 
counter to some current thinking on translation. The first concerns the relevance 
of contrastive analysis to translation theory. Supporters of the communicative 
approach to translation (cf. 2.6, above) tend to be highly critical of contrastive 
analysis (cf. 2.5): it is argued that contrastive analysis sees language as langue, 
whereas translation theory ought to look at language as parole. Yet it is obvious 
that a translator, when making parole decisions, can only choose from what is 
available, i.e. from langue. And the more the translator knows about what is avail-
able, the better the decisions are likely to be. Further, this knowledge of what is 
available must include a knowledge of how the possible choices relate not only to 
each other but also to the point of departure in the source text. In other words, 
the translator needs to know the relevance of each possible choice to his/her in-
tentions, in order to be able to decide on an optimal version. This weighing up of 
the relative relevances of different options relies heavily on contrastive analysis, 
on the translator’s knowledge of the differences and similarities between the two 
languages. Through the translator’s mind there runs something like the follow-
ing: given that (a) a source-text item means / carries the message / is interpreted 
as X; and that (b) I am aiming at a relation R between source and target; then: 

78	
Memes of Translation
(c) what options does the target language offer as possible translation solutions?; 
and (d) what would be the best / an optimal solution in this particular case, bear-
ing in mind the prospective readership etc.? A knowledge of the similarities and 
contrasts between the two languages is an essential part of a translator’s compe-
tence (see also Chesterman 1998). 
The second point is often overlooked by scholars who focus on literary trans-
lation. Literary translators normally translate into the mother tongue; so do 
many non-literary translators, of course, but many non-literary translators actu-
ally translate out of their native language into one that they typically command 
somewhat less proficiently. (The fact that such non-native translations may sub-
sequently be revised by target-language native speakers is beside the point here.) 
It would therefore be of interest to translation theory to study, rather more than 
has been the case to date, the relations between texts translated by non-natives 
and texts (in the same target language) not translated but written by similar non-­
native speakers. For English, for instance, we could be looking at “near-native” 
written English (see e.g. Ringbom 1993), and comparing it to English translations 
produced by non-native speakers of English (at equivalent levels of proficiency 
in English, of course). Do Finns writing English produce the same kind of En-
glish as Finns translating into English? After all, both groups are working under 
the same non-­native-proficiency constraint; the distinguishing variable would be 
that the translators are additionally bound by the language-difference constraint 
(or the relation norm). It would be interesting to see what effect this had. Would 
there be interference differences, for instance, which could be explained by the 
fact that translators had an original Finnish source text in front of them whereas 
the other group (the free writers) had no such text, although they might also 
be expected to think in Finnish to some extent or be otherwise influenced by 
their native tongue? Free writers in a foreign language can exploit the “avoidance 
strategy” – avoid items they feel unsure about – and one might hypothesize that 
translators are allowed less leeway in this respect, being required to use a wider 
range of target items. 
Moreover, although the much-maligned non-native translator presumably 
has, by definition, less proficiency in the target language itself, and thus tends to 
be less successful in conforming to the expectancy norms, there is no reason why 
non-natives should be any less proficient than natives with respect to other aspects 
of the translation process, in particular with respect to the communication and 
accountability norms. And if they are translating out of their native language they 
may be assumed to have a higher comprehension proficiency, which would be 
important for meeting the relation norm. This view is of relevance to the formu-
lation of realistic standards in translator training and the granting of professional 
status. It may also go some way towards counterbalancing the pessimistic view 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
79
that translators, and especially non-native translators, inevitably “make mistakes”. 
(See e.g. Rydning 1991 and Pokorn 2005 for discussions of the special status of 
translation into a non-native language.) 
3.8	
On expectancy norms for English
This section will do no more than illustrate the kind of research that is relevant 
to the analysis of expectancy norms. The strictest English expectancy norms are 
“rules of English grammar” which are not normally expected to be broken: this is 
an obvious point. 
Beyond these, and probably of more interest to the translator, are norms that 
are determined not by grammaticality but by acceptability and appropriateness: 
norms of usage, in other words. Some of these are qualitative, others quantita-
tive. Both types are increasingly studied with the help of computerized parallel 
corpora. 
Qualitative expectancy norms 
Qualitative norms of usage, over and above grammaticality, incorporate what we 
might call “good style” (within a given text-type, as always). We could usefully 
distinguish here between “general” expectancy norms and “higher” expectancy 
norms: the latter would be embodied by texts that were acknowledged to be not 
only “native” but also “well written”. Acknowledged by whom? For instance by a 
subset of readers who see themselves, or are seen by others, as norm authorities in 
this respect. Writers of style guides on good writing, or compilers of dictionaries 
for language learners, for example. Some readers, in other words, have higher 
expectations than others. Clear evidence of this is the very existence of books and 
courses (for native speakers) on how to write better, etc. These higher expectancy 
norms could be called “recommendable norms” (Vehmas-Lehto 1989: 22): rec-
ommended, because they make processing easier for the receiver. 
These recommendable norms manifest at the textual level, in a variety of 
ways, the general pragmatic principles of co-operation. Examples of such norms 
for English are the following: 
	
	 End weight: heavier items tend to occur after lighter items (see e.g. Quirk et 
al. 1985). 
	
	 End focus: more informative or newsworthy items tend to occur towards the 
end of a structure (ibid.) 
	
	 Iconicity: structures where the form somehow reflects the content tend to be 
thought easier to process (see e.g. Haiman 1985; Enkvist 1991). 

80	
Memes of Translation
	
	 Cohesion: there is an expectation that (in written English) sentences should be 
linked cohesively to those around them, often explicitly (see e.g. Beaugrande 
and Dressler 1981). In this connection, Hinds (1987) has argued that written 
English manifests “writer responsibility” rather than “reader responsibility”: 
the onus is on the writer to ensure clarity and fluent readability (as compared 
with e.g. Japanese). 
More specifically, English expectancy norms (in certain text-types) might include 
the avoidance of stigmatized usage, i.e. such prescriptive-grammar chestnuts as 
the split infinitive (to carefully observe that…), dangling participles (Using a tele-
scope the stars seem pinker), due to instead of owing to, and the like. Some dictio-
naries draw overt attention to such usage. Under due to, for instance, the Collins 
Cobuild Dictionary notes (among other points) the following: 
	
	 You can say due to to introduce the reason for something happening. Some 
speakers of English believe that it is not correct to use due to in this way. EG 
Due to repairs, the garage will be closed next Saturday. 
In other words, this dictionary entry mentions the existence of a usage that (for 
some speakers at least) breaks a norm. 
Quantitative expectancy norms 
Quantitative expectancy norms fall into two large classes. First, there are expec-
tancy norms for the distribution of features in a given type of text. Such features 
can be lexical, syntactic, or textlinguistic/discoursal. Computer corpora have 
made the study of these features fairly straighforward (see e.g. Kučera and Francis 
1967; Ellegård 1978; Johansson 1978a; Francis and Kučera 1982). 
Lexical features whose distributional norms have been studied include lex-
ical density (ratio of lexical words to function words) and lexical variety (ratio 
of types to tokens), and word length (see e.g. Linnarud 1988 and the studies  
mentioned above). 
Syntactic features include things like average sentence length, typical dis-
tribution of clause types, clause structures, structural complexity, noun phrase 
structures, word-classes, stative vs. dynamic verbs. The whole area of readability 
research is obviously relevant here, too. 
From the computer-corpus studies mentioned above, for instance, we can de-
rive information such as the following: 
–	
the average length of an English sentence ranges from about 25 words for 
government documents to about 13 words for detective fiction, with an over-
all mean of about 19 words; 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
81
–	
the overall proportion of common nouns in informative prose is around 25% 
of all word-tokens; 
–	
in scientific texts, relative clauses account for about 20% of all clauses; in more 
popular text-types, this proportion drops to about 9%; 
–	
the overall frequency of the definite article the is about 6.9% of all word-tokens; 
slightly higher in scientific English and slightly lower in adventure stories. 
Textlinguistic and discourse features include degree and kind of cohesion, use of 
metatext (Mauranen 1993), markers of involvement (Chafe 1982), distribution 
of thematization structures, scheme and trope density – in fact, macrostructural 
features in general (e.g. van Dijk 1988). Additionally, there will be norms for such 
things as illocutionary structure (e.g. Riley 1979), formality markers, closeness 
to the spoken language, etc. Such norms have mainly been studied for particular 
genres, such as the genre of academic or scientific English (e.g. Swales 1991). And 
much of the research interest here has been contrastive, coming from contrastive 
rhetoric (see e.g. Connor and Kaplan 1987; Purves 1988; Mauranen 1993; Connor 
1996). For instance, these studies suggest that academic English tends to conform 
to norms such as the following: 
–	
linear presentation; 
–	
in contrast to some other languages, the main point is mentioned early in an 
article, rather than being kept to the end as a climax; 
–	
in contrast to some other languages, academic English makes great use of 
metatext (markers of transitions, cohesion, textual signposts etc.); recall the 
point about “writer responsibility”, above; 
–	
wide and varied use is made of explicit markers of modality (hedges, signs of 
academic modesty); 
–	
at least in some fields, as compared to certain other languages such as Ger-
man, the general level of formality is lower in English academic writing (there 
is a growing acceptance of the first person singular, for example). 
A brief caveat is in order here. Norms such as those mentioned above may appear 
at first sight to be loose tendencies rather than norms proper. However, recall that 
the crucial feature of a norm, as opposed to a convention or indeed a mere ten-
dency, is that instances of non-conformation can be fairly criticized. A text (trans-
lated or otherwise) which had noticeably more relative clauses than the expected 
norm for that text-type, for instance, might raise irritated eyebrows among some 
readers – unless this deviation was somehow motivated. English scientific arti-
cles submitted to a journal for publication will indeed be criticized by the editor 
if they manifestly fail to conform to the appropriate discourse norms; they may 
even be returned for further rewriting. 

82	
Memes of Translation
The second class of quantitative expectancy norms has to do not with the 
absolute frequency of given items but their relative frequency, their distribution 
relative to that of other items. In other words, collocation. Here again, studies of 
computer corpora can provide a great detail of information about co-­occurrence 
probabilities, about the adjectives that tend to occur before a given noun, etc. 
Such research can often be of relevance to a translator wondering which to choose 
from a set of near-synonyms: the preferred co-occurrence patterns may be differ-
ent from those which might be expected on the basis of the apparent translation 
equivalents of individual items. For instance, in English “coffee” can collocate 
with “weak”, but not in Finnish, where it is “thin” (laihaa kahvia). 
Unlikely collocations are, of course, a well-known cause of irritation to read-
ers of a translated text – unless they are persuaded that such deviation is motivat-
ed, e.g. in a literary text. 
3.9	
Update
This chapter originally ended with a brief look at some of the implications of a 
norm-based approach to translation. One was the relevance of contrastive stud-
ies, particularly in different genres, as a way of finding out more about the possi-
bilities from which translators can choose. Such work has indeed continued, for 
instance in the series of conferences on contrastive research at the University of 
Ghent (e.g. Willems and Defrancq 2004), and the UCCTS series (Using Corpora 
in Contrastive and Translation Studies) based at the University of Lancaster (see 
e.g. Xiao 2010).
A second implication concerns the way norms are actually attained in prac-
tice, a topic to be taken up in the next chapter on strategies. But a third issue was 
also raised, concerning translators’ attitudes to norms. A translator may choose 
not to follow a norm, and accept the risk of not doing so, perhaps with the inten-
tion of changing the norm. There may also be a gap between what a translator 
says about his/her attitude to a norm and what he/she actually does. This has been 
interestingly demonstrated for instance by Brownlie (2003), who also drew atten-
tion to the effects of translators’ personal preferences on the way they translate. 
Norms are only one of the potential causal factors, after all.
Toury’s revised version of his classic Descriptive Translation Studies and Be-
yond appeared in 2012. With respect to his proposals for what he calls translation 
“laws” (interference, and increasing standardization), some scholars have been 
reluctant to follow Toury’s terminology and have preferred to speak of universals, 
or general tendencies (see the Update of Chapter 2). In retrospect, I think my own 

	
Chapter 3.  From memes to norms	
83
use of “law” in 3.6 above was not optimal. It would probably have been better to 
refer to these generalizations simply as tendencies or behaviour patterns.
Like Toury, I see norms as explanatory hypotheses. But finding evidence for 
the existence of norms is not a simple matter. We can start with an observed textu-
al regularity, but this in itself does not prove the existence of an underlying norm, 
as it may have other causes, such as cognitive constraints over which the transla-
tor has no influence, such as lack of knowledge or particular task conditions. We 
also need text-external indicators of normative force, such as belief statements by 
the translator (“I think I should do this”), criticism of breaches of the assumed 
norm, perhaps even norm statements by relevant authorities (“Translators of such 
texts must do this”). Further, hypotheses about norms need to be tested, like any 
hypothesis. We can deliberately break a norm and see how people react. We can 
look for counter-evidence. We can elicit belief statements (“What do you think 
you should do in such cases?”) or ask norm authorities or clients for an explicit 
norm statement. Appeals to such external evidence and test results will then be 
more or less convincing. Alternative explanations also need to be weighed up, 
such as personal preferences, cognitive constraints, and of course chance.
This chapter has highlighted the special status of competent professional 
translators. However, it is worth recalling that most translators throughout history 
have been non-professionals, in the sense that translation has not been their main 
source of income and they have not been professionally trained. One major devel-
opment in translation practice over the past two decades has been the increasing 
appearance of new kinds of non-professional work, sometimes of high quality. 
Practices such as fansubbing and crowdsourced translation have spread, and so 
has the use of volunteer activist translators (who may of course also be profession-
ally trained). Translation scholars are now paying more attention to this phenom-
enon, which also raises interesting questions about the role of translator training. 
(See e.g. the special issue of The Translator, vol. 18 no. 2, 2012, on non-profession-
al translation and interpreting.) Perhaps professionally trained translators of the 
future will need to specialize in more demanding work such as literary, legal or 
medical translation – and also in postediting, in the light of the improving quality 
of machine translation for common text-types and language pairs. 
The point that translation itself is a fuzzy notion has come in for further atten-
tion since 1997. There have been important contributions by Halverson (1999 and 
several subsequent publications), arguing that translation is a prototype concept, 
and Tymoczko (2006), who argues that it is a cluster concept, like Wittgenstein’s 
family resemblances between different kinds of games. However one conceptu-
alizes it, it is evident that the notion of translation has fuzzy borders; that these 

84	
Memes of Translation
borders vary to some extent according to time and place; and that we have some-
times found it hard to separate the idea of a translation per se from the narrower, 
evaluative idea of a good translation.
Claims about general features of translations may turn out to hold only for 
certain types of translations, and thus be less general than first assumed. Fur-
thermore, in 3.7 above I raised the issue of whether some of the claims made 
about translation tendencies might be not specific to translation but also shared 
by other forms of discourse such as rewriting, and thus be more general than first 
assumed. This line of inquiry has been continuing. Ulrych (2009), for instance, 
found many common features (e.g. explicitation) between translation and other 
kinds of mediated discourse, such as transcriptions from oral to written. And 
Lanstyák and Heltai (2012) have argued that so-called translation and language 
contact universals are only a subset of a more general class of features of “con-
strained communication”, similar to those found in the speech of bilinguals and 
in language contact situations. It has thus become important to be clear about the 
level of generality that is claimed for the tendencies we investigate, so that these 
claims can be tested appropriately. 

Chapter 4
Translation strategies
4.1	
General characteristics of strategies
I have suggested that some memes of translation become norms. But there are 
other kinds of translation memes, too: translation strategies are also memes. They 
are memes, that is, insofar as they are widely used by translators and recognized 
to be standard conceptual tools of the trade. Trainee translators learn them, and 
they are thus passed on from generation to generation as a meme pool: not fixed 
for all time, however, but open-ended and amenable to adaptation, variation and 
mutation. This chapter looks at some of the main strategies in the current pool. 
The term “strategy” has many different senses in psychology, sociology, lin-
guistics and applied linguistics, and translation theory. Different kinds of distinc-
tions have been made between strategies, tactics, plans, methods, rules, processes, 
procedures and principles etc. (see e.g. Lörscher 1991): the result has been consid-
erable terminological confusion. (And see Update below…)
Within applied linguistics, there have been studies on language learning 
strategies and on communication strategies. Language learning strategies are un-
derstood as being typical of good language learners: they include metacognitive, 
cognitive and social strategies such as self-monitoring, self-talk, inference-testing, 
co-operation etc. (see O’Malley and Chamot 1990). Communication strategies 
are ways of solving communication problems: the two main classes are reduction 
strategies (changing or reducing the message in some way, such as topic avoid-
ance) and achievement strategies (attempts to preserve the messsage but change 
the means, such the use of paraphrase, approximation, restructuring, mime etc.). 
(See e.g. Faerch and Kasper 1983.) Both these areas of research are relevant to 
translation theory. Translators are, after all, people who specialize in solving par-
ticular kinds of communication problems; and translator trainees are interested 
in learning how to become good translators. In both cases, there are kinds of 
problems to be solved. 
This chapter is less concerned with strategies as theoretical concepts than 
with their practical application; I shall not, therefore, give much space here to an 
exploration of the debate on their theoretical status and definition (for a review of 
this, see Jääskeläinen 1993, and the Update below). Instead, I shall first outline the 

86	
Memes of Translation
points that seem most relevant to the way I shall use the term in this book, before 
shifting the discussion to a more practical level. 
A process 
Let us start with the idea that strategies are ways in which translators seek to react 
to norms: primarily, but not necessarily always, to try to conform to them. Note: 
not necessarily to achieve maximum equivalence, but simply to arrive at the best 
version they can think of, what they regard as the optimal translation. A strategy 
is understood here first of all as a planned way of doing something. To speak of 
translation strategies is to look at translation as an action, to place it in the wider 
context of action theory. This is precisely what a number of scholars have been 
doing over the past decade or so, particularly those associated with what I called 
the Communication stage of translation theory (see 2.6, above). 
One such analysis is that of E. Steiner (1988). Steiner is concerned not just 
with translation but with language use more widely. He sets out to place language 
activity as a whole in the context of a general description of any human activity. 
In his model, any human activity has a hierarchical structure. General activities 
(such as translating) are composed of smaller actions, and these in turn are made 
up of smaller operations still. Some of the things we would like to say about trans-
lating apply to translation practice at a general level, but other things – such as, 
precisely, strategies – concern lower levels. 
Textual manipulation 
It should be stressed that the overall framework here is behavioural rather than 
neural. I make no claims about psychological reality, beyond the observation that 
strategies (in the sense used here) do appear to have the prima facie validity of 
being useful conceptual tools. 
Furthermore, strategies (in the present sense) describe types of linguistic be-
haviour: specifically, text-linguistic behaviour. That is, they refer to operations 
which a translator may carry out during the formulation of the target text (the 
“texting” process), operations that may have to do with the desired relation be-
tween this text and the source text, or with the desired relation between this text 
and other target texts of the same type. These relations in turn are of course deter-
mined by other factors, such as the intended relation with the prospective readers, 
social and ideological factors etc.
Strategies, in the sense I shall use the term, are thus forms of explicitly textual 
manipulation. They are directly observable from the translation product itself, in 
comparison with the source text. I am therefore excluding here such translatorial 
actions as looking something up, accessing a database, checking a reference, reach-
ing for the phone, going for a walk… (For a discussion of strategies from the more 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
87
general point of view of creativity and problem-solving in translation, such as the 
use of divergent and convergent thinking, see Kußmaul 1995; also Lörscher 1991.) 
Goal-oriented 
Steiner stresses the teleological nature of human activity: actions of different 
kinds have objectives, goals. In this chapter, the kinds of goals we are interested 
in have to do with translation norms, of all kinds. So one criterion of a strategy is 
that it is goal-oriented. 
Problem-centred 
If a goal is the end-point of a strategy, what is the starting point? The simple an-
swer is: a problem. A strategy offers a solution to a problem, and is thus problem-­ 
centred. 
One of the results of think-aloud protocol research on translation has been 
that translators of all kinds tend to proceed in jerks: there are smooth, “automatic” 
patches of activity, interrupted by pauses, problem points where the translator ap-
pears to have to think in a non-routine manner: this is Lörscher’s (1991) distinc-
tion between “non-strategic” and “strategic” behaviour. Further, these jerks do 
not proceed linearly, from beginning to end of a text; the process is more of a spi-
ral one, with constant switching back and forth in the text, going back to an earlier 
problem again, and so on. It seems reasonable to assume that it is mainly at the 
problem points that translators have recourse to strategies, as ways of overcom-
ing temporary hitches in the translation process. Kiraly (1995) draws on experi-
mental evidence to arrive at a similar conclusion. He distinguishes between more 
controlled (more aware, “strategic”) and less controlled (less conscious, more 
intuitive) processing. In Kiraly’s model, tentative translation solutions emerge 
from the “intuitive workspace” (104f.) and are then monitored by the “Relatively 
Controlled Processing Center” for target-language acceptability and source-text 
relation; any problems arising are also processed by the same centre. 
Jääskeläinen (1993) makes a similar distinction between “unmarked process-
ing” and instances of “marked processing” indicated by “attention units”, where the 
translator’s conscious focus of attention shifts to a particular task. Apart from ver-
bal protocols, eye-movement studies can also show the existence and location of 
such problem-points (see e.g. Tommola 1986, and more recently Jakobsen 2011). 
However, Jääskeläinen prefers to extend the concept “strategy” to cover very 
general principles (such as “texts need not be translated word-for-word”) which 
also govern unmarked processing, or which pertain to the translation task as a 
whole (such as the requirements set by the translation skopos). A similar approach 
is taken by Hönig and Kußmaul (1982), who use the term “strategic” to describe a 
translator’s higher-level decisions concerning general reader-orientation and the 
like: these decisions determine both how and what the translator translates, in 

88	
Memes of Translation
the attempt to convey as much of the original information as is relevant to the 
function of the text and to the needs of the reader. Jääskeläinen’s definition of 
translation strategies reflects this broader conception: “they are a set of (loosely 
formulated) rules or principles which a translator uses to reach the goals deter-
mined by the translating situation in the most effective way” (1993: 116). 
It therefore seems helpful to distinguish between two levels of strategy, as 
Jääskeläinen does (116), following Séguinot (1989). At the more general level, 
where the problem to be solved is something like “how to translate this text or this 
kind of text”, we have “global strategies”. An obvious example of a global strategy is 
the translator’s initial decision about the general nature of the appropriate relation 
between target and source texts, about how freely to translate, about what kinds 
of intertextual resemblance should be given priority. Another example might be 
the general issue of dialect choice: whether (and how) to represent source-text 
dialects. And another might concern decisions about whether an older source 
text should be modernized or historicized in translation (see e.g. Hochel 1991). 
At the more specific level, on the other hand, the problem to be solved is 
something like “how to translate this structure / this idea / this item”; here we 
have “local strategies”. Henceforth, my concern in this chapter will be with local 
strategies, and thus with local problems. 
Potentially conscious 
A further characteristic of strategies that is relevant to the distinction between 
global and local ones is that they are conscious, or at least potentially conscious; 
although deciding what is or is not conscious, and explicating possible degrees of 
consciousness, is a tricky business. One might suppose that global strategies are 
normally less conscious, to an individual translator at a given moment in translat-
ing, than local ones. On the other hand, many things can be made conscious, for 
instance in response to a question. 
Lörscher’s definition of a translation strategy takes explicit account of this: 
“a translation strategy is a potentially conscious procedure for the solution of a 
problem which an individual is faced with when translating a text segment from 
one language into another” (1991: 76). This requirement – that a strategy should 
be potentially conscious – will be of particular relevance to Chapter 6, below. 
In Steiner’s analysis mentioned above, higher-level actions are defined as be-
ing conscious, in the sense that “the actor can report on [them]” (1988: 148). For 
example, I can report to a friend that I am currently writing a book. But lower-­
level operations (fast typing, say) are mostly non-conscious; however, they may 
be consciously planned, for instance in less routine situations requiring explicit 
conscious attention (when I need to type in German I go more slowly and make 
more mistakes, which then need to be corrected). Conversely, conscious actions 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
89
can become automatized and thus unconscious “as a consequence of ‘facilitation’ 
or practice” (148). Accordingly, we can think of strategies as problem-solving pro-
cesses which are potentially conscious. Whether a given strategy is in fact con-
scious or unconscious, to an individual translator at a given moment, might have 
quite a bit to do with that translator’s degree of professionalism: an argument we 
shall come back to later (6.1). 
Intersubjective 
As Jääskeläinen also argues, strategies tend to be “loosely formulated” rather than 
given explicit formal definitions. This is largely because of their intersubjective 
character: like other memes, strategies (as shared concepts) exist in Popper’s 
World 3. As they spread through the community of translators – which they in-
deed tend to do, partly as a result of formal translator training – and thus continue 
their existence, strategies are typically formulated in non-formal, rule-of-thumb 
mode. This makes them learnable, and hence “portable” and readily accessible. 
They are, in effect, intersubjectively known to be “tried and tested procedures” 
(Lörscher 1991: 68) for achieving particular goals: proven conceptual tools. 
In other words, strategies constitute easily accessible descriptive knowledge 
concerning a certain kind of procedural knowledge. 
4.2	
A classification
In the first place we need to distinguish between comprehension strategies and 
production strategies (cf. Gile 1992, 1995). Comprehension strategies have to do 
with the analysis of the source text and the whole nature of the translation com-
mission; they are inferencing strategies, and they are temporally primary in the 
translation process. Production strategies are the results of various comprehen-
sion strategies: they have to do with how the translator manipulates the linguistic 
material in order to produce an appropriate target text. I shall be concerned here 
with production strategies only. 
Given the nature of strategies as operationally defined above, it will be appar-
ent that the kind of classification we can set up for production strategies must be a 
linguistic or text-linguistic one (rather than, say, a cognitive one, which would be 
more appropriate for comprehension strategies). At its simplest, such a taxonomy 
might consist of a single strategy only: 
	
	 Change something. 
This would well illustrate the domain in which strategies operate: the space be-
tween source and target texts. “Change something” could be informally glossed 

90	
Memes of Translation
as follows: if you are not satisfied with the target version that comes immediately 
to mind – because it seems ungrammatical, or semantically odd, or pragmatically 
weak, or whatever – then change something in it. The “being not satisfied” is thus 
evidence of the existence of a translation problem. (I shall not take up here the 
point that different translators may thus experience different problems; but see 
Chapter 6.) 
This grand overall strategy also suggests that one way to look at strategies in 
more detail is in fact to see them as kinds of changes. Of course, the source text is 
“changed” anyway in an obvious sense when it is translated into another language; 
but change as a strategy begins to apply beyond the scope of this obvious change 
from one language to another. The changes in focus here are those that involve a 
choice between possibilities. This means we are not concerned with changes that 
are obligatory for obvious grammatical reasons, like adding a definite article in 
English when translating from a language which does not use one.
Such a view has led to a number of classifications of changes which have 
traditionally been thought of as various kinds of transfer operations or formal 
shifts from source to target text. Among many sources, probably the most in-
fluential has been that proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958), despite much 
criticism. Their “procedures” were: borrowing, calque, literal (but grammatical) 
translation, transposition (change of word-class), modulation (change of point 
of view), “équivalence” (total structural change), and adaptation. Other sources 
from which I have drawn are Catford (1965), Nida (1964), Malone (1988) and 
Leuven-­Zwart (1989/1990). (See also Update.)
Some of the classifications proposed have been extremely simple, such as  
Nida’s with four classes only: change of order, omission, change of structure, ad-
dition. Nida then refines these by assigning different weightings, but his scales 
seem very ad hoc. Others are more complex, even dauntingly so, and hence less 
“portable”: Malone’s approach in particular, which uses a highly idiosyncratic ter-
minology, would seem difficult to use in practice without a long apprenticeship. 
The classification I shall propose is a heuristic one. It seems to work in prac-
tice; it uses accessible terminology; it seems to differentiate enough, but does not 
get bogged down in “unportable” detail; and it is flexible and open-ended. It com-
prises three primary groups of strategy: mainly syntactic/grammatical (coded 
as G), mainly semantic (S) and mainly pragmatic (Pr). (The point of the codes 
will become evident in Chapter 6.) It acknowledges that these groups overlap to 
some extent; that pragmatic ones usually involve semantic and syntactic ones as 
well, etc.; and that strategies of different types often co-occur. It also acknowledg-
es that the strategies listed can themselves be broken down into sub-groups in a 
variety of ways. But no claims are being made here about the formal or theoretical 
status of these strategies or their grouping. In this context, if the strategies provide 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
91
useful conceptual tools for talking about translation, for focusing on particular 
things that translators seem to do, and for improving translation skills, then that 
is justification enough. 
The classification does, however, also represent an attempt to structure var-
ious proposals made by other scholars into an overall framework. Many of the 
strategies listed have obvious subtypes, but I shall not develop these in any detail 
here. I would also like to stress that the point of this chapter is not to explore 
particular translations in any detail, but simply to present a set of strategies that 
professionals tend to use. The level of analysis is thus fairly superficial: we are 
displaying a set of linguistic tools, not pondering here on exactly why they are 
used, nor on their various possible effects. Yet an analysis of this kind represents 
a necessary first stage towards further research that would dig deeper into the 
reasons why particular translators choose particular strategies under particular 
circumstances. 
In principle, these strategies are not language-pair-specific, although many of 
them can be readily adapted to yield prototypical rules-of-thumb along the lines 
of “if the German source text has feature X, try Y in the English translation”. I will 
use German-to-English translations to illustrate the strategies, mostly from an 
Austrian Airlines flight magazine. (The full texts used from this magazine are giv-
en in the Appendix.) The examples are therefore limited, and often rather simple. 
4.2.1	
Syntactic strategies
These may be thought of as involving purely syntactic changes of one kind or an-
other. Larger changes obviously tend to involve smaller ones too. Syntactic strat-
egies primarily manipulate form. The main ones are these:
G1:		 Literal translation
G2:		 Loan, calque
G3:		 Transposition
G4:		 Unit shift
G5:		 Phrase structure change
G6:		 Clause structure change
G7:		 Sentence structure change
G8:		 Cohesion change
G9:		 Level shift
G10:	 Scheme change
G1: Literal translation 
I define this rather loosely, as meaning “maximally close to the SL form, but nev-
ertheless grammatical”. For some theorists (such as Newmark, and also Vinay and 

92	
Memes of Translation
Darbelnet), this strategy has the status of a default value. On this view, one only 
needs to deviate from literal translation if for some reason or other it does not 
work (recall the previous section). Example: 
	
	 ST:	 Wir wünschen Ihnen einen guten Flug mit Austrian Airlines. 
	
	 TT:	We wish you a pleasant flight with Austrian Airlines. 
	
	 [I disregard here the slight semantic difference between guten and pleasant.]
G2: Loan, calque 
This strategy covers both the borrowing of individual items and the borrowing of 
syntagma. Like the other strategies, it refers to a deliberate choice, not the uncon-
scious influence of undesired interference. 
In the above example, the English term Austrian Airlines has actually been 
adopted as the official name of this Austrian company. It therefore already rep-
resents a loan in the German. 
Standard examples of calques are German Übermensch → English Super-
man; and English the man in the street → French l’homme dans la rue. Newmark 
(1988: 84) points out that calques are frequently used in the translation of the 
names of international organizations: Communauté Économique Éuropéenne be-
came European Economic Community.
The German term Check-in-Bereich for English check-in area combines both 
forms of loan. 
One variant of this strategy is what Pym (1992a: 76) calls “double presenta-
tion”. This means including both SL and TL versions in the target text, so that one 
acts as a gloss of the other. This strategy has interesting ideological implications, 
as Pym discusses: the SL form tends to be attributed a higher value, inherent in 
the SL words themselves. A classic example, also involving transcription, is to 
be found in sentences like: This is the true sense of logos, the Word. An example 
analysed in detail by Pym is … the phenomenon known as ‘La Movida’ (‘The Hap-
pening’) from a Newsweek article. The late 1980s saw similar examples in texts 
dealing with perestroika (or restructuring) and glasnost (literally ‘openness’) and the 
like: the form of the double presentation varies. 
Another variant is the introduction of a loan-based neologism as a translation 
solution. The first time a loan-word appears in a target language, it is in fact a ne-
ologism in that language. Others are created afresh from the target language itself, 
perhaps even by the democratic vote of language users. In Finland in the 1990s a 
weekly magazine held a competition to find a good Finnish term for the CD-­ROM, 
so that people would no longer have to refer to a CD-rom, a loan translation. The 
most popular suggestion for a Finnish term turned out to be romppu, obviously 
based on the translation loan but given a natural Finnish form (neatly related to 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
93
the earlier word denoting a floppy disk, lerppu). This neologism was adopted in 
informal use, but it did not displace CD-rom in formal contexts. 
G3: Transposition 
I use this term (from Vinay and Darbelnet) to mean any change of word-class, e.g. 
from noun to verb, adjective to adverb. Normally, this strategy obviously involves 
structural changes as well, but it is often useful to isolate the word-class change as 
being of interest in itself. Examples: 
	
	 ST:	 Es sind dies informativ gestaltete Hinweise auf …	 [adverb] 
	
	 TT:	Both deal in a highly informative way with …	 	 	  [adjective] 
	
	 ST:	 Durch Einbeziehung von Mietwagenfirmen …		 	  [noun] 
	
	 TT:	Car rental companies have been incorporated …		  [verb] 
G4: Unit shift 
This is a term from Catford (1965). The units are: morpheme, word, phrase, clause, 
sentence, paragraph. A unit shift occurs when a ST unit is translated as a different 
unit in the TT: this happens very frequently, of course, and subclassifications can 
be set up for unit shifts of different types. Examples:
	
ST:	 Wir akzeptieren folgende Kreditkarten und ersuchen Sie, jene, mit der 
Sie Ihre Rechnung begleichen wollen, anzukreuzen. 
	
TT:	We accept the following credit cards. Please mark the one which you 
would like to have charged. 
	
[One sentence to two; German clause becomes English sentence.] 
	
ST:	 … eine Dienstleistung, die wir gemeinsam mit Swissair anbieten 
	
TT:	… a service which we are offering in conjunction with Swissair 
	
	 [German word to English phrase; this also incorporates a transposition, from 
adverb to noun.] 
	
ST:	 … eine Dienstleistung, die wir gemeisam mit Swissair anbieten. Es han-
delt sich um das Vielflieger-Programm “Qualiflyer”. 
	
TT:	… a service which we are offering in conjunction with Swissair: the 
frequent-­flyer program “Qualiflyer” 
	
[German sentence to English phrase.] 
G5: Phrase structure change 
This strategy, or rather group of strategies, comprises a number of changes at the 
level of the phrase, including number, definiteness and modification in the noun 
phrase, and person, tense and mood in the verb phrase. The unit itself may remain 
unchanged, i.e. an ST phrase may still correspond to a TT phrase, but its internal 
structure changes. Examples: 

94	
Memes of Translation
	
ST:	 Die Produkte auf den JET SHOP Seiten sind … 
	
TT:	The merchandise depicted on the JET SHOP pages is … 
	
[Plural to singular, count to non-count.] 
	
ST:	 Dies Ausgabe von SKY LINES enthalt… 
	
TT:	In the present issue of SKY LINES you will find … 
	
	 [German third-person verb phrase to English second-person, involving 
a change of subject. Also, English adds the premodifier present whereas 
German has a demonstrative.] 
	
ST:	 Details über “Qualiflyer” finden Sie auf Seite 97… 
	
TT:	For details of the “Qualiflyer” program, turn to page 97… 
	
[German indicative to English imperative mood.] 
G6: Clause structure change 
Under this heading I group changes that have to do with the structure of the clause 
in terms of its constituent phrases. Various subclasses include constituent order 
(analysed simply as Subject, Verb, Object, Complement, Adverbial), active vs. 
passive voice, finite vs. non-finite structure, transitive vs. intransitive. Examples: 
	
ST:	 Zu den Neuheiten im Produkt kommen weitere Verbesserungen unserer 
Dienstleistungen. 
	
TT:	The enlargement of our destinations list is supplemented by further 
improvements in our range of passenger services. 
	
[German active intransitive to English passive voice.] 
	
ST:	 Diese Ausgabe … enthalt… 
	
TT:	In the present issue … you will find… 
	
	 [The semantically locative item (i.e. what a Case Grammar would mark as 
Locative) appears as subject in German and as an adverbial in English; this 
entails a change of clause structure from S+V… to A+S+V…] 
	
ST:	 “Qualiflyer” ist auf den kombinierten Streckennetzen von Austrian Air-
lines and Swissair gültig. 
	
TT:	“Qualiflyer” is valid on the route networks of both Austrian Airlines and 
Swissair. 
	
[The German clause structure S+V+A+C goes to English S+V+C+A.] 
	
ST:	 … und die Versandspesen dadurch relativ hoch sein können. 
	
TT:	… which makes overall dispatching costs relatively high. 
	
[The italicized change is from intransitive to transitive.] 
	
ST:	 Artikel- und Preisänderungen vorbehalten. 
	
TT:	We reserve the right to make alterations to articles and prices. 
	
[German non-finite (finite verb ellipted) to English finite.] 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
95
G7: Sentence structure change 
This group of strategies affects the structure of the sentence unit, insofar as it 
is made up of clause units. Included are changes between main-clause and sub-
clause status, changes of sub-clause types etc. Examples: 
	
ST:	 Schon der Name signalisiert ein sorgfältig durchdachtes Qualitätspro-
gramm… 
	
TT:	As its name suggests, this is a painstakingly devised quality program… 
	
[German main clause to English sub-clause plus main clause.] 
	
ST:	 Durch Einbeziehung von Mietwagenfirmen und First-class-Hotels kön-
nen Qualiflyer-Mitglieder auch am Boden Dienstleistungen zu besonde-
ren Konditionen in Anspruch nehmen und zugleich Meilen-­Guthaben 
buchen.
	
TT:	Car rental companies and first-class hotels have been incorporated into 
the “Qualiflyer” program, so that members can take advantage of its 
money-­saving services on the ground too – and at the same time add 
more miles to their total. 
	
	 [The German is a single main clause, with one finite auxiliary verb and two co-­
ordinated infinitives; this is changed to English main verb + two co-­ordinated 
sub-clauses.] 
	
ST:	 Wir möchten Sie weiters darauf aufmerksam machen, daß in einigen 
Ländern zusätzlich Zölle eingehoben werden und die Versandspesen 
dadurch relativ hoch sein können. 
	
TT:	We should also like to remind you that some countries levy import tariffs, 
which makes overall dispatching costs relatively high. 
	
	 [The German has main clause + nominal sub-clause + co-ordinated nominal 
sub-clause; this changes to English main clause + nominal sub-clause + rela-
tive sub-clause.] 
	
ST:	 Denn wir sagen unseren Fluggästen gerne “Dankeschön”. 
	
TT:	Because we are happy for any opportunity to say “Thank you”. 
	
	 [The German is a main clause; this is changed to a “free-standing” sub-clause 
in English.] 
G8: Cohesion change 
A cohesion change is something that affects intra-textual reference, ellipsis, sub-
stitution, pronominalization and repetition, or the use of connectors of various 
kinds. Examples: 
	
ST:	 Diese Ausgabe… 
	
TT:	In the present issue… 
	
	 [The German reference to “proximity” is made through a demonstrative; this 
changes to definite article + adjective.] 

96	
Memes of Translation
	
ST:	 Hamburg wird im Linienverkehr angeflogen. Ebenso mit Beginn des 
Winterflugplanes werden die Kurse nach Amman … und Minsk … auf-
genommen. 
	
TT:	The Vienna-Hamburg route will be one of our new scheduled services. 
Other innovations in the winter timetable will be … 
	
	 [German inter-sentence cohesion is via an adverb; this changes to English 
cohesion via the ordinal other plus the semantic repetition of new and 
innovation.] 
	
ST:	 Zu den Neuheiten im Produkt kommen weitere Verbesserungen unserer 
Dienstleistungen. Besonders erwähnenswert ist der neue Terminal 1…
	
TT:	The enlargement of our destinations list is supplemented by further 
improvements in our range of passenger services. The most notable of 
these is the new Terminal 1… 
	
	 [The German uses no explicit connector between the two sentences; English 
adds a demonstrative.] 
	
ST:	 Es sind dies informativ gestaltete Hinweise auf neue Ziele von Austrian 
Airlines im Winterflugplan 1992/93. 
	
TT:	Both deal in a highly informative way with Austrian Airlines destinations 
which will be making their debut in the airline’s 1992/93 winter timetable. 
	
	 [The German does not repeat Austrian Airlines in the premodification of 
Winterflugplan, presumably because the previous mention of the Airlines is so 
close and the definite article in im is considered sufficient to clarify the refer-
ence. In the English version, there is more of a gap between the mention of the 
Austrian Airlines and that of the winter timetable, and the translator perhaps 
thought that merely writing the winter timetable would be insufficiently clear, 
and chose to repeat airline.] 
G9: Level shift 
By levels I mean phonology, morphology, syntax and lexis. In a level shift, the 
mode of expression of a particular item is shifted from one level to another. An 
obviously influential factor here is the types of languages concerned, whether they 
are more analytic or more agglutinative, for instance. Another factor is the role 
of intonation: in some languages (e.g. English) this can express meaning (such 
as “interrogativeness”) which other languages express through morphology (e.g. 
Finnish), or wholly or partly through word order (e.g. German). Examples: 
	
ST:	 Wir … ersuchen Sie, … anzukreuzen. 
	
TT:	Please mark … 
	
	 [German expresses the sense of “polite request” here via lexis (a particular 
verb) plus syntax (main verb plus infinitive); English uses only the lexical item 
please.] 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
97
	
ST:	 … nur eine kleine Auswahl unserer JET SHOP Produktpalette 
	
TT:	… only a small selection of the JET SHOP articles available 
	
	 [Compound nouns are one kind of lexical item; the English here chooses an 
ellipted relative clause instead.] 
G10: Scheme change 
This refers to the kinds of changes that translators incorporate in the translation 
of rhetorical schemes such as parallelism, repetition, alliteration, metrical rhythm 
etc. Initially, the translator can choose between three basic alternatives here (a–c). 
(a)  ST scheme X → TT scheme X. That is, if the ST scheme is judged to be relevant 
to the translation task, it can be (to some extent) preserved (e.g. ST alliteration → 
TT alliteration): in fact, no change. 
In the airline texts referred to above, one rhetorical scheme that seems to be 
used deliberately is the repetition of key words such as Austrian Airlines, JET 
SHOP, Qualiflyer. For obvious reasons, the translator has chosen to preserve these 
unchanged. 
For a literary example of alternative (a), consider these lines from Goethe’s 
Römische Elegien 1.5): 
	
	 Oftmals hab’ ich auch schon in ihren Armen gedichtet, 
	
	 Und des Hexameters Mass leise mit fingernder Hand 
	
	 Ihr auf dem Rücken gezählt. 
The hexameter metre here is obviously intended iconically, since it manifests 
the very rhythm that is being described. A translation might thus seek to pre-
serve this if possible, as being an intrinsic feature of the text. A suggestion (from  
Chesterman, ed. 1989: 178): 
	
	 Often have I composed poems even in her arms, 
	
	 Counting the hexameter’s beat softly with fingering hand 
	
	 There on the back of the beloved. 
(b)  ST scheme X → TT scheme Y. That is, the ST scheme can be changed to another 
scheme that is deemed to serve an appropriate or similar function in the TL (e.g. 
ST parallelism → TT chiasmus). The following example comes from a Vienna City 
Guide. 
	
ST:	 Es gibt ein Wien fur jedermann. Ein Wien für Kulturfans, die die welt-
berühmten Philharmoniker hören wollen; für Architekturliebhaber, die 
Wiens Jugendstilbauten oder das Hollein-Haus bestaunen können. Ein 
Wien für Gourmets, die sich an Wiener Schnitzel und Sachertorte gütlich 
tun, und eines für Souvenir-jäger, die Trachtenmode und Augarten-­
Porzellan mitnehmen wollen. 

98	
Memes of Translation
	
TT:	There’s a Vienna for every taste. Culture vultures will long rave about hear-
ing the famous Philharmonic, and architecture buffs will stand enthralled 
before the Jugendstil buildings or Hollein’s house on Stephansplatz. 
Gourmets will relish the legendary “Schnitzels” and “Sachertorte”, while 
souvenir hunters will snap up costume fashions and Augarten porcelain.
	
	 [The basic rhetorical device used in the ST is that of a single main verb fol-
lowed by a list, a series of postmodified noun phrases some of which func-
tion as independent clauses; the items of the list are arranged in pairs. The 
translator has foregrounded the notion of rhetorical pairs and opted for a 
parallelistic pattern. The second and third sentences have a parallel structure, 
and the two finite clauses in each sentence are also parallelled.] 
(c)  ST scheme X → TT scheme Ø. That is, the scheme is dropped altogether. For 
instance, in the previously quoted example the German ST makes some use also 
of asyndeton: note the lack of any connector between the sentences, and between 
the two parts of the second sentence. The translator has dropped this rhetorical 
feature. 
To these three basic alternatives, we can also add a fourth possibility: 
(d)  ST scheme Ø → TT scheme X. Here, the translator opts to use a rhetorical 
scheme of some kind, although not prompted directly to do so by the ST. E.g.: 
	
ST:	 Kulturfans 
	
TT:	Culture vultures 
	
	 [The TT could have selected e.g. “culture lovers”, but has preferred to add the 
rhetorical element of phonological similarity in this established collocation; 
from the Vienna City Guide, see above.] 
4.2.2	
Semantic strategies 
Under semantic strategies I group kinds of changes which mainly have to do with 
lexical semantics, but also include aspects of clause meaning such as emphasis. 
Semantic strategies manipulate nuances of meaning. Several of these strategies 
derive from Vinay and Darbelnet’s concept of modulation. We will look at:
S1:	 	 Synonymy
S2:	 	 Antonymy
S3:	 	 Hyponymy
S4:	 	 Converses
S5:	 	 Abstraction change
S6:	 	 Distribution change
S7:	 	 Emphasis change

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
99
S8:	 	 Paraphrase
S9:	 	 Trope change
S10:	 Other semantic changes
S1: Synonymy 
This strategy selects not the “obvious” equivalent but a synonym or near-synonym 
for it, e.g. to avoid repetition. Example: 
	
ST:	 Diese Ausgabe von SKY LINES… 
	
TT:	… the present issue of SKY LINES 
	
ST:	 … auf Seite 97 dieser SKY LINES Ausgabe. 
	
TT:	… page 97 of this magazine. 
	
	 [The English uses two near-synonyms for the single German term, within the 
same text.] 
S2: Antonymy 
The translator selects an antonym and combines this with a negation element. 
Example: 
	
ST:	 Alle Preise inklusive MWSt., jedoch exklusive Nachnahmegebühr und 
Porto. 
	
TT:	All prices include V.A.T. (value added tax) but do not include the C.O.D. 
(cash on delivery) fee and mail charges. 
S3: Hyponymy 
Shifts within the hyponymy relation are common. In principle, this strategy 
comes in three subclasses: 
(a)  ST superordinate → TT hyponym, i.e. specification. Example: 
	
ST:	 zahlreicher anderer Gesellschaften 
	
TT:	numerous other airlines 
	
[The translator chooses a hyponym of the superordinate companies.] 
(b)  ST hyponym → TT superordinate, i.e. generalization. Example: 
	
ST:	 das mitteleuropäische Luftdrehkreuz Wien 
	
TT:	Vienna … a Central European interchange 
	
	 [A Luftdrehkreuz is a kind, a hyponym, of Drehkreuz: the translator has moved 
up to the corresponding superordinate.] 
(c)  ST hyponym X → TT hyponym Y (of the same superordinate). To see how this 
subclass (c) strategy works, consider what Austrian Airlines actually sells. We 
might roughly divide its products (the superordinate) into two (hyponyms): actual 

100	 Memes of Translation
flights, and the various subsidiary services attached to these. In the ST we are using, 
the term Verkehr is used to describe the flight routes, as in the compound Nach-
barschaftsverkehr, which is translated routes linking… Some near-­synonymous 
expressions are also used, such as Streckennetzen and Angebot translated as route 
network(s), and Kurse translated as scheduled flights. For the services concept, the 
German uses Dienstleistung(en), or simply Leistung, which are translated as ser-
vices, passenger services. So far, the hyponym relation is clear, in both languages: 
two classes of product, consistently distinguished by different lexical hyponyms, 
route and service in the TT. But at one point the hyponyms are switched: 
	
ST:	 Linienverkehr 
	
TT:	scheduled services 
	
	 [Here, the translator has selected to shift from the “route” hyponym to the 
“service” hyponym.] 
S4: Converses 
Converses are pairs of (usually) verbal structures which express the same state 
of affairs from opposing viewpoints, such as buy and sell. An example from the 
Airlines text: 
	
ST:	 Bitte beachten Sie, daß zu den angegebenen Preisen noch Porto und 
Nachnahmegebühren verrechnet werden. 
	
TT:	Kindly note that the prices quoted are exclusive of postal charges and 
collection fee. 
	
	 [The German states that B is added to A, the translation that A is exclusive 
of B.]
S5: Abstraction change 
A different selection of abstraction level may either move from abstract to more 
concrete or from concrete to more abstract. 
	
ST:	 aus aller Welt 
	
TT:	from all corners of the globe 
	
	 [The TT is more concrete, both in the addition of corners and the choice of 
globe rather than world.] 
	
ST:	 Charter-Tochter 
	
TT:	charter subsidiary 
	
	 [Here the TT selects a more abstract term.]
S6: Distribution change 
This is a change in the distribution of the “same” semantic components over more 
items (expansion) or fewer items (compression). Expansion “dilutes” the text 
somewhat. Example: 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
101
	
ST:	 Selbstverständlich können wir Ihnen die Unterlagen auch zusenden. 
	
TT:	We can, of course, also forward the documentation to you by mail. 
Compression has the opposite effect, with a denser distribution: 
	
ST:	 … jene, mit der Sie Ihre Rechnung begleichen wollen 
	
TT:	… the one which you would like to have charged 
S7: Emphasis change 
This strategy adds to, reduces or alters the emphasis or thematic focus, for one 
reason or another. Examples: 
	
ST:	 informativ 
	
TT:	in a highly informative way [Emphasis added.] 
	
ST:	 … daß damit das mitteleuropäische Luftdrehkreuz Wien fur Gäste aus 
aller Welt noch interessanter und bequemer geworden ist. 
	
TT:	… that this added degree of convenience will make Vienna even more 
attractive as a Central European interchange to visitors from all corners 
of the globe. 
	
	 [The ST emphasizes the quality of the new interchange, syntactically the sub-
ject complement; the translator has chosen to emphasize the range of visitors. 
Other strategies too are in evidence here.] 
S8: Paraphrase 
The paraphrase strategy results in a TT version that can be described as loose, 
free, in some contexts even undertranslated. Semantic components at the lexeme 
level tend to be disregarded, in favour of the pragmatic sense of some higher unit 
such as a whole clause. An example from the airline text: 
	
ST:	 Wenn Sie sich entschließen, die Vorteile zu nutzen… 
	
TT:	If you decide to become a member of the scheme… 
This is a typical strategy for the translation of idioms, for instance, for which no 
corresponding idiomatic expression can be found in the TL.
S9: Trope change 
This strategy, or rather set of strategies, applies to the translation of rhetorical 
tropes (i.e. figurative expressions) in the same way as strategy G10 above applied 
to the translation of schemes. Correspondingly, we can first distinguish three 
main subclasses of strategy here (a–c): 
(a)  ST trope X → TT trope X. For instance, a ST metaphor is retained as a meta-
phor in the TT. Further subclasses can obviously be set up at this point (i)–(iii): 

102	 Memes of Translation
(i) The TT trope is the same trope in terms of its lexical semantics. In the case 
of a metaphor, for instance, both tenor and vehicle (in the sense of Richards 1936) 
would be preserved, as in: 
	
TT:	MD-81 / MD-82: Das Rückgrat der Austrian Airlines-Flotte 
	
ST:	 MD-81 / MD-82: The mainstay of the Austrian Airlines fleet 
	
	 [The naval metaphor of “fleet” is preserved, and is in fact strengthened by the 
choice of mainstay rather than backbone.] Other examples: 
	
ST:	 Qualiflyer 
	
TT:	Qualiflyer 
	
	 [This semi-pun, which is itself a loan into German, has been retained 
unchanged in the TT.] 
	
ST:	 Das Museum … dokumentiert die Stadtentwicklung 
	
TT:	The … Museum documents the city’s growth… 
	
	 [The TT retains the personification trope of the ST, in the same lexical form; 
example from a feature article on Hamburg.] 
(ii) The TT trope is of the same type as the one in the ST, but is not seman-
tically identical, only related. We might say that the image comes from the same 
source, the same general area of experience (cf. Rissanen 1971). E.g.: 
	
ST:	 … dessen einfacher Abwicklung wir uns von Mitbewerbern abheben 
wollen. 
	
TT:	… whose distinguishing features … should give it a clear edge over rival 
programs. 
	
	 [The translator has retained a metaphorical expression but changed it slightly: 
both texts have the image of something being higher than something else, but 
the viewpoint of each is different; the TT is also somewhat more concrete (cf. 
strategy S5).]
(iii) The TT trope is of the same type, but not related lexically to the ST one: 
the source of the image is different. 
	
ST:	 Als Kaiserin Elisabeth … Kaiser Franz Josephs ein und alles (war)… 
	
TT:	In the days [when] … the Empress Elizabeth … was still the apple of 
Emperor Franz Joseph’s eye… 
	
	 [Both versions (from a guide to Vienna) use metaphorical expressions, but 
these are lexically unrelated.] 
(b)  ST trope X → ST trope Y. Here, the general feature of figurativeness has been 
retained, but the realization of this feature is different, so that for instance an ST 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	 103
metaphor might be translated as one based on a different tenor, or as some other 
trope altogether. E.g.: 
	
ST:	 Ein komfortabler Europäer, der Kontinente verbindet. 
	
TT:	European comfort which spans continents. 
	
	 [This is a headline describing a class of airbus. The image underlying the ST 
is an equative metaphor: the airbus is a comfortable European which… The 
TT image is constructed differently: the underlying idea is that the airbus has 
a European comfort which…, and it is this comfort that is then personified. 
The strategy also affects the emphasis here.] 
(c)  ST trope X → TT trope Ø. Here the figurative element is dropped altogether. 
E.g.: 
	
ST:	 Herrliche Leihgaben aus öffentlichen und privaten Sammlungen machen 
das New Yorker Museum of Modern Art zu einem Mekka für alle Fans 
des Moderne-Klassikers Henri Matisse. 
	
TT:	Devotees of Henri Matisse won’t want to miss the current show at New 
York’s Museum of Modern Art, which is made up of magnificent items 
on loan from public and private collections. 
	
[The translator drops the metaphorical use of Mekka.] 
To these, as in G10, we can also add: 
(d)  ST trope Ø → TT trope X. That is, a trope is used in the TT but not in the ST, 
as in: 
	
ST:	 Damit können weltweit Meilen-Guthaben gesammelt… werden. 
	
TT:	This means that passengers can clock up “Qualiflyer” mileage worldwide… 
	
[The ST expression is not figurative; the TT uses a metaphor.]
The following example, from elsewhere in the same magazine, also adds a trope: 
	
ST:	 Paris im Picasso-Fieber. 
	
TT:	Picasso fever has seized Paris. 
	
	 [The German personifies Paris; the English translation does so too, but also 
personifies the fever.] 
(For detailed discussion of these and other options, see e.g. Newmark 1981; van 
den Broeck 1981; Königs 1990; Toury 1995: 81f.) 
S10: Other semantic changes 
These would include other modulations of various kinds, such as change of (phys-
ical) sense or of deictic direction, as in: 

104	 Memes of Translation
	
ST:	 besonders erwähnenswert 
	
TT:	the most notable 
	
[Change from oral to visual sense.] 
	
ST:	 Ihr besonderes Augenmerk dürfen wir auf eine Dienstleitung lenken 
	
TT:	We should also like to draw your attention to a service
	
	 [The German steers attention from “here” to “there”, the English beckons it 
from “there” to “here”.] 
4.2.3	
Pragmatic strategies
By pragmatic strategies I mean those which primarily have to do with the se-
lection of information in the TT, a selection that is governed by the translator’s 
knowledge of the prospective readership of the translation. I do not enter here 
into any wider discussion of the place of pragmatics in translation more general-
ly, but propose a set of strategies comparable to the syntactic and semantic ones 
mentioned above. Pragmatic strategies tend to involve bigger changes from the 
ST, and typically incorporate syntactic and/or semantic changes as well. If syn-
tactic strategies manipulate form, and semantic strategies manipulate meaning, 
pragmatic strategies can be said to manipulate the message itself. These strategies 
are often the result of a translator’s global decisions concerning the appropriate 
way to translate the text as a whole. My set is:
Pr1:	 Cultural filtering
Pr2:	 Explicitness change
Pr3:	 Information change
Pr4:	 Interpersonal change
Pr5:	 Illocutionary change
Pr6:	 Coherence change
Pr7:	 Partial translation
Pr8:	 Visibility change
Pr9:	 Transediting
Pr10:	Other pragmatic changes	
Pr1: Cultural filtering 
This strategy is also referred to as naturalization, domestication or adaptation; it 
describes the way in which SL items, particularly culture-specific items, are trans-
lated as TL cultural or functional equivalents, so that they conform to TL norms. 
The opposite procedure, whereby such items are not adapted in this way but e.g. 
borrowed or transferred directly, is thus exoticization, foreignization or estrange-
ment (see Jones 1989). House (1981) speaks of a “cultural filter” in this context. 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	 105
(See also Florin 1993, on ways of translating realia. The larger ideological issues 
involved in the selection of this strategy are discussed e.g. by Venuti 1995a; see 
also Chapter 7, below.) Examples: 
	
ST:	 Familienname 
	
TT:	Surname 
	
[On an order form; compare the exoticized “Family name”.] 
	
ST:	 Flughafen Wien 
	
TT:	Vienna International Airport 
	
	 [By adding International the translator has adapted to the name by which this 
airport is indeed officially known in English.] 
	
ST:	 Vorstandsdirektor / Vorstandsdirektor-Stv. 
	
TT:	President / Chief Executive Marketing & Sales 
	
	 [These titles, of the executives who have signed the airline magazine editorial, 
have been adapted to American-English norms.] 
Pr2: Explicitness change 
This change is either towards more explicitness (explicitation) or more implicit-
ness (implicitation). Explicitation is well known to be one of the most common 
translatorial strategies (cf. 3.6.1). It refers to the way in which translators add in-
ferrable information explicitly in the TT, information which is only implicit in the 
ST. Examples: 
	
ST:	 Bei Versand in das Ausland … 
	
TT:	… when merchandise is dispatched abroad 
	
[The translator makes explicit what is sent.] 
	
ST:	 … die bestellten Artikel werden Ihnen mit der Post per Nachnahme 
zugesandt. 
	
TT:	The articles which you order will be sent cash-on-delivery (COD) by post 
to your address. 
	
[Explicitation of Ihnen.] 
	
ST:	 Artikel- und Preisänderungen vorbehalten. 
	
TT:	We reserve the right to make alterations to articles and prices. 
	
[The italicized items are all explicitated.] 
	
ST:	 … dort in einem eigenem Check-in-Bereich 
	
TT:	… its own check-in area in the new terminal 
	
	 [Explicitation has the effect here of increasing the level of specificity; the TT 
version is also more concrete (cf. S5).] 

106	 Memes of Translation
Implicitation is the opposite change: bearing in mind what the readers can be 
reasonably expected to infer, the translator leaves some elements of the message 
implicit. Examples: 
	
ST:	 … so wenden Sie sich, bitte, … an unsere Mitarbeiter beim Check-in oder 
an unsere Flugbegleiter an Bord. 
	
TT:	… our check-in staff or the flight attendants will be glad to be of assis-
tance. 
	
[The translator opts to leave “on board” implicit.] 
	
ST:	 bei Redaktionsschluß dieses Bordmagazins 
	
TT:	At the time of going to press 
	
[The italicized element is left implicit.] 
Pr3: Information change 
By this I mean either the addition of new (non-inferrable) information which is 
deemed to be relevant to the TT readership but which is not present in the ST, or 
the omission of ST information deemed to be irrelevant (this latter might involve 
summarizing, for instance). An example of addition:
	
ST:	 Hamburg wird im Linienverkehr angeflogen. 
	
TT:	The Vienna-Hamburg route will be one of our new scheduled services. 
	
	 [We are flying Austrian Airlines, but at this point in the text we have not yet 
had any mention of the fact that the company is based in Vienna. For some 
readers, this might be relevant information, and the translator adds it here.] 
Omission is the opposite process. Strictly speaking, omitted information in this 
sense cannot be subsequently inferred: it is this that distinguishes this strategy 
from that of implicitation. Elsewhere in the same magazine, for instance, we find 
a list of the mail-order merchandise, which includes the following item: 
	
ST:	 Spielesammlung (Dame, Mühle etc.) 
	
TT:	Games compendium (checkers etc.) 
	
	 [The translator has omitted the second game, presumably because it is not 
commonly played in the English-speaking world.] 
Pr4: Interpersonal change 
This strategy operates at the level of the overall style: it alters the formality level, 
the degree of emotiveness and involvement, the level of technical lexis and the 
like: anything that involves a change in the relationship between text/author and 
reader. In our main source text here, the second person plural is used, and this 
in itself is a syntactic indicator of formality that English lacks: in this respect, the 
translator had no choice. But in other respects interpersonal changes seem to be 
chosen deliberately. An example: 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	 107
	
ST:	 Damit können … Meilen-Guthaben gesammelt … werden. 
	
TT:	This means that passengers can clock up “Qualiflyer” mileage… 
	
	 [The choice of a phrasal verb, rather than “collected” or “registered”, makes 
the TT slightly less formal.] 
Or compare the two forms of address: 
	
ST:	 Sehr geehrte Fluggäste! 
	
TT:	Dear passengers, 
	
	 [The German norm here stresses the high status of the addressee, while the 
English one rather expresses solidarity.] 
Pr5: Illocutionary change 
Illocutionary changes (changes of speech act) are usually linked with other strat-
egies too. For instance, changing the mood of the verb from indicative to im-
perative (cf. G5 above) also involves an illocutionary change from statement to 
request. 
Other such changes might involve, for instance, the use of rhetorical ques-
tions and exclamations in texts, such as the following example from a magazine 
text on why Dr Zamenhof invented Esperanto: 
	
ST:	 Beweggrund war seine Sorge über der Unfrieden zwischen Polen, Russen, 
Deutschen und Juden in seinem Geburtsort Byalistok. 
	
TT:	His motive? The unrest between Poles, Russians, Germans and Jews in his 
native town of Bialystok. 
	
	 [The translation introduces a rhetorical question, to produce a more dialogic 
text.] 
There can also be changes within particular classes of speech acts. For example, 
within the class of acts known as representatives (such as stating, telling, report-
ing), a translator may choose to shift from direct to indirect speech. 
Pr6: Coherence change 
Whereas the cohesion change strategy listed under G8 has to do with formal 
markers of textual cohesion, coherence changes have to do with the logical ar-
rangement of information in the text, at the ideational level. (See e.g. Blum-­ 
Kulka 1986.) 
An example: the original German of the airline text starts with an introducto-
ry paragraph of a couple of sentences, and the second paragraph then focuses on 
the route innovations (see the Appendix). But the translation has no paragraph 
break here, after the introductory sentences. In other respects the translation fol-
lows the overall information structure of the original. The effect of this strategic 
change is to link the introductory sentences with the route innovations into one 

108	 Memes of Translation
whole information unit, separate from the services innovations that follow in the 
next paragraph. The change also affects the status of Hamburg, which is given 
subject-position at the beginning of the second paragraph in the ST but receives 
less emphasis (as a mid-paragraph modifier) in the TT. 
Pr7: Partial translation 
This covers any kind of partial translation, such as summary translation, tran-
scription, translation of the sounds only, and the like. Classical examples are, for 
instance, the “symbolist” translations of literary texts, such as: 
	
ST:	 My heart leaps up when I behold 
	
	
A rainbow in the sky. 	 	
	
	
	
(Wordsworth)
	
TT:	Mai hart lieb zapfen eibe hold 
	
	
er renn bohr in sees kai.	 	
	
	
(Jandl) 
Pr8: Visibility change 
This refers to a change in the status of the authorial presence, or to the overt in-
trusion or foregrounding of the translatorial presence. For instance, translator’s 
footnotes, bracketed comments (such as explanations of puns) or added glosses 
explicitly draw the reader’s attention to the presence of the translator, who is no 
longer “transparent” (see Venuti 1995a). The translator is thus visibly interposed 
between original author and reader, and the author is accordingly backgrounded 
(temporarily). (See Schiavi 1996; Hermans 1996.) 
A curious and extreme example of this change in translator’s transparency is 
furnished by a postmodern Russian novel by Jevgeni Popov, translated into Finn-
ish as Aaton aattona (literally, ‘On the eve of the eve’) by Jukka Mallinen, himself 
a well-known literary figure in St. Petersburg circles. At one point in the novel, 
the hero travels from Russia to Helsinki, which is portrayed as a haven of peace 
and opportunity and personified in the figure of one “Uncle Jukka”. The point is 
that this Uncle Jukka is without a doubt Jukka Mallinen, the translator, whom 
Popov has thus incorporated as a character in the very novel which Mallinen will 
translate. To many of the original Russian readers, this postmodern role-play is 
presumably absent; but to many Finnish readers the translator is most obviously 
“present”, “visible”, not transparent. (The novel is reviewed by Pesonen, 1993.) 
Pr9: Transediting 
This is a term suggested by Stetting (1989) to designate the sometimes radical 
re-editing that translators have to do on badly written original texts: it includes 
drastic re-ordering, rewriting, at a more general level than the kinds of changes 
covered by the strategies so far mentioned. 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	 109
Pr10: Other pragmatic changes 
One example would be layout: in the original of the first airline text (text A, see 
Appendix), the layout was in two parallel columns on a single page, with the Ger-
man on the left. The German signature was right-justified and the English one 
left-justified, so that the page ended with both signatures aligned in the centre. 
Another example here is the choice of dialect, in particular British vs. Ameri-
can English: the translator of the airline texts opts for American, perhaps because 
of official company policy. This counts as a pragmatic change in that the source 
text is not readership-specified in this way.
4.3	
Motivation
The motivation underlying a translator’s choice of strategy derives ultimately 
from the norms of translation discussed earlier. Consider how a translator might 
answer the question: why did you use that strategy here, why did you write X? 
Following Section 3.6.3, the possible answers can be initially outlined thus: 
1.	 Desire to conform to the expectancy norms of the target-language community. 
2.	 Desire to conform to the accountability norm. 
3.	 Desire to conform to the communication norm. 
4.	 Desire to conform to the relation norm. 
Underlying these first-level explanations we can of course suggest others: a trans-
lator wishes to conform to a given norm because of various political or cultural 
or social pressures, because of personal ideological reasons, instinct, and so on. 
For instance, Lefevere (1992: 59f.) discusses examples where translators of Anne 
Frank’s diary tended to omit or change information which was considered to 
breach certain target-culture norms of propriety, certain political or sexual ta-
boos. This use of what I would call information-change or implicitation strategies 
is presumably motivated by the translators’ understanding of the expectations of 
the readers and of the client; by the cultural and political climate of the time of 
translation; by the influence exerted over their choices by the client; and perhaps 
by the translators’ own ideology insofar as this is in agreement with the expectan-
cy norms: if they are members of the target culture, they themselves may not have 
wished to go against these norms. 
Another example: when Faulkner’s novels were first translated into Finnish 
it was at a time when modernist techniques in Finnish literature were still in 
their infancy. The early translations tended to conform to the prevailing stylistic 
norms of Finnish, which meant that they split up Faulkner’s long sentences (strat-
egy G7), made much use of paraphrases (S8), little use of literal translation (Gl), 

110	 Memes of Translation
and very little use of stream-of-consciousness and free indirect speech, which 
were not yet current in Finnish prose (illocutionary changes, Pr5), etc. (Randell 
1986). The reasons for these choices are to be found in the prevailing interpre-
tation of translation norms (priority given to expectations of fluent target style, 
the duty of the translator to make necessary changes in order to achieve this, 
etc.), and also in the state of poetics and literary development in Finland at the 
time. Later, Saarikoski’s norm-breaking translation of Salinger’s Catcher in the Rye 
helped to loosen the dominant poetic constraints and open up other choices for 
subsequent translators, who were thus able to select a different range of strategies 
(e.g. Robinson 1987).
As already noted, therefore, the overriding motivation is not inevitably “in 
order to achieve equivalence”, or at least “maximum equivalence”. The overriding 
motivation is the intention to arrive at the best possible translation in the giv-
en circumstances. This general motivation obviously covers a multitude of more 
specific reasons, most of which have been mentioned or implied in the preceding 
chapter; but some additional comments can be made here. 
4.3.1	
The significance threshold
To a large extent, expectancy norms are straightforward matters concerning the 
grammaticality and acceptability of the target text, at all levels from morphology 
and syntax to text and discourse. As argued above (3.8), some of these expectancy 
norms are qualitative and others quantitative. One additional aspect that has not 
so far been mentioned is what I call the significance threshold: this varies from 
culture to culture, and can have quite an effect on the choice of pragmatic strategy. 
(I do not refer here to the strict statistical sense of this term.) 
The concept of the significance threshold arises by analogy from that of the 
silence threshold, which is a well-known phenomenon in contrastive research: 
some cultures have a higher tolerance of silence, a higher silence threshold, than 
others (see e.g. Tannen and Saville-Troike 1985). We can define the silence thresh-
old as follows: the silence threshold marks the point above which speakers feel it 
necessary to say something. The significance threshold is defined thus: 
	
	 The significance threshold marks the point above which something is felt to 
be worth saying. 
Whereas the silence threshold marks the lower edge of the felt need to say any-
thing at all, the significance threshold marks the point at which a given message 
or meaning is felt to be worth uttering. The higher the significance threshold, the 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
111
more meaningful something must be in order to get uttered. Things below the 
significance threshold are deemed “insignificant”, not worth saying. 
If this significance threshold is at a different level between source and target 
culture, translators need to exploit strategies to take account of this difference. 
Going from Finnish to English, for example, translators occasionally seem to feel 
a need to “strengthen” the English text in some way, to add emphasis, emotive-
ness, concreteness, even colloquialness, in order for the target text to meet the 
expectancies of the readership. In Finnish, a little seems to go a long way, as it 
were; in English, you need more to achieve the “same” effect, the “same” distance 
above the significance threshold. (Compare the notions of “global preference” and 
“global recrescence” in Malone 1988: 50.)
There is an example which seems to illustrate a similar difference between 
German and English in the airline text we have been looking at: 
	
ST:	 Es sind dies informativ gestaltete Hinweise auf neue Ziele von Austrian 
Airlines im Winterflugplan 1992/1993. 
	
TT:	Both deal in a highly informative way with Austrian Airlines destinations 
which will be making their debut in the airline’s 1992/93 winter timetable. 
The translator has used the pragmatic strategy of addition (Pr3), adding an ele-
ment which increases the emphasis (strategy S8), and I suggest that the motive 
has been precisely this felt difference in the significance threshold: the translator 
evidently thought that without the addition, the English would appear to have 
been “written too quietly”, as it were. 
In a study of the way translators edit journalistic texts from French to En-
glish, Séguinot (1982) found that the overwhelmingly most frequent motivation 
mentioned (accounting for 50% of all editorial changes) was the desire to increase 
readability. This would fall under our communication norm, together with values 
such as clarity and explicitness. Séguinot’s results are also interesting in the light 
of the significance threshold. The second most frequent motivations (21% each) 
were the desire to adapt the text to the target audience (cf. my pragmatic strate-
gy Prl), and the felt need to reduce emotive and figurative language. This suggests 
that, on the basis of her data at least, the significance threshold of English is per-
haps lower than it is for French: the texts needed to be “toned down” somewhat 
to meet the target culture’s different tolerance of rhetorical display. Interestingly, a 
similar conclusion is reached by Vehmas-Lehto (1989) with respect to journalistic 
translations from Russian to Finnish: the Finnish also needed to be toned down, 
in order to meet the appropriate conditions of its higher significance threshold, 
otherwise the translations were felt to be “over-written”. 

112	 Memes of Translation
4.3.2	
Compensation
A final additional point concerns the notion of compensation. This is a well-known 
motive underlying many strategies. Its validity rests on the understanding that 
what is translated is a whole text, not any smaller unit of language. If, therefore, 
the translator chooses to do something (add, omit, change etc.) at one point in the 
text, this action in itself may be sufficient justification for a compensatory strategy 
at some other point in the text. Further, such compensation may even work retro-
spectively: a choice made at a later point in a text may then prompt the translator 
to back-track to an earlier point and make a compensatory change there.
The idea has long been a commonplace meme among translators. Dryden 
([1680] 1975) thus justified his own translation method, claiming that he had 
dared to add new touches of stylistic elegance at some places in the text, in order 
to make up for those he had lost elsewhere. 
Of the examples we have looked at so far, the strategies concerning scheme 
and trope changes (G10 and S9) can also illustrate compensation. The loss of a 
scheme or trope, or the impossibility of an identical one, can often be compen-
sated for by adding another type, perhaps even elsewhere in the text. (For an 
extended discussion of compensation as a strategy rather than as motivation, see 
Harvey 1995.)
4.4	
Update
Arguments about how best to conceptualize translation strategies seem never-­
ending. Gambier (2008) gives a critical analysis of several proposals, including my 
own in this chapter and a later article (2005b), others mentioned in this chapter, 
and also those by Newmark (1988) and by Molina and Hurtado Albir (2002). 
He reminds us of the military origin of the term “strategy”, meaning a general 
plan to reach a defined objective, comparing it with “tactic”, meaning a specific 
action carried out in accordance with a given strategy. He shows the terminolog-
ical confusion around this topic, with some terms having several senses (such 
as adaptation) and other senses having several near-synonymous terms (such as 
paraphrase, descriptive equivalence, explicitation). He points out that the criteria 
for many of the categories proposed are unclear. Gambier’s own proposal is that 
we keep “strategy” for general, global decisions about how to translate a whole 

	
Chapter 4.  Translation strategies	
113
text, i.e. a synonym of, or replacement for, “method”. “Tactics” are then the ways 
of local problem-solving that this chapter has discussed, either conscious or au-
tomatized. He suggests using “solutions” (replacing Catford’s “shifts”) for the clas-
sification of the resulting differences and similarities between source and target 
texts. In my own later paper (2005b) I proposed using “techniques” for the local 
textual changes I have in this chapter called “strategies”, so that “strategy” could 
be kept for the global sense of a problem-solving plan. Apologies for contributing 
to the confusion!
One later contribution not mentioned by Gambier is the work of Schreiber 
(e.g. 1998); it is, however, discussed in Pym (2016). Schreiber relates his pro-
posed procedures (Verfahren) to what he sees as the main translation methods: 
text-­restricted (a method that preserves relevant features of form and content), 
context-­sensitive (preserving intended meaning and function), and adaptation 
(translating more freely, with bigger changes of form and content). His listed 
procedures are partly versions of those by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958), but also 
include change of word order, explicitation, addition and omission, and helping 
procedures (Hilfsverfahren) such as translator’s notes, forewords, glossaries. As 
Pym notes, Scheiber’s list includes obligatory and routine changes (like adding a 
necessary definite article) as well as problem-solving options.
The latest proposal I am aware of is Pym’s new monograph entitled Transla-
tion Solutions for Many Languages – Histories of a Flawed Dream (2016). This is 
an impressively broad historical and critical survey of many proposals, showing 
how concepts and terms have spread and become adapted under different con-
ditions (like memes, in fact!). There are telling criticisms of typical and specific 
weaknesses in the various taxonomies discussed (including mine), concerning 
the ways categories are often set up and illustrated, and about the lack of adequate 
organizing principles. It concludes with Pym’s own proposal, for what he calls 
“solution types” (following Zabalbeascoa 2000). These concern problem-solving, 
not routine or obligatory changes. They fall into three groups: Copying, Expres-
sion Change, and Content Change. The number of actual “solution types” is only 
seven, which Pym argues is a teachable and memorizable set. But each solution 
type can be realized in many ways. Pym’s list is as follows:

114	 Memes of Translation
	
	 Copying: 
	
	 	
Copying words 		 	 	 	 	 	 	 (or sounds, morphology…)
	
	 	
Copying structure		 	 	 	 	 (fixed phrases, text structure…)
	
	 Expression Change:
	
	 	
Perspective change		 	 	 	 	 (focus, voice, word-class…)
	
	 	
Density change		 	 	 	 	 	 	 (generalization/specification, 
	
	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 explicitation/implicitation,
	
	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 multiple translation,
	
	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 resegmentation…)
	
	 	
Compensation	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (new place in text, e.g. note,
	
	 	
	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 shift of level between lexis and syntax…)
	
	 	
Cultural correspondence		 (corresponding culture-specific terms…)
	
	 Content change:
	
	 	
Text tailoring		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 (correction, omission, addition…)
Pym comments that all these solution types are potentially possible for all prob-
lem types. I’m not sure about this: as he points out himself, Text Tailoring (cf. 
transediting, Pr9 above) is not likely to solve translation problems in legal texts, 
for instance. He also notes that the top-down order of his solutions represents 
increasing effort by the translator (as did the classic list by Vinay and Darbelnet, 
who also had seven categories). But he adds that this effort must be related to risk: 
in cases of high risk, which threaten loss of trust or breakdown of communica-
tion, more effort is obviously justified. On compensation, his view differs from 
mine: as illustrated above in 4.3.2, I see the wish to compensate as a motivation 
for making a change, whereas Pym takes compensation as a kind of change in 
itself. Pym has tested the applicability of his categories in translation classes and 
seminars in different countries and between different language pairs, and refined 
his taxonomy accordingly, which is greatly to his credit. Although he states that 
the aim of his classification is pedagogical, not as an aid to descriptive research, it 
will no doubt also be used and tested by researchers in descriptive analysis. 

Chapter 5
Translation as theory
5.1	
Tentative Theory, Error Elimination and translational competence
Recall the Popperian schema introduced in Chapter 1: 
	
	 P1 → TT → EE → P2 
We have so far (in Chapter 2) used this schema as a way of structuring the his-
tory of translation theory, but we can now use it to illustrate the nature of the 
translation process itself. For the translator, the initial problem (P1) is “how to 
translate this text / this sentence / this stylistic feature / this item?” The Tentative 
Theory then corresponds to the first draft of the translation. It is convenient that 
TT stands not only for Tentative Theory but also Target Text: the two coincide 
here. Translation strategies (both comprehension and production) are used in the 
process which derives TT from P1. They thus contribute to hypothesis-creation. 
A translation is therefore a theory: the translator’s theory, posed as a tenta-
tive solution to the initial question of how to translate the source text (cf. Toury 
1995: 77). In accordance with the etymology of the word, too, the translator’s the-
ory thus represents a view of the source text, the translator’s view. The translation 
is a representation of how the translator sees the source text: “sees” also in the 
sense of “understands, interprets”. Discussing the different translations of Proust 
into English, Craig (1993: 24) remarks revealingly: 
The translator’s choices, despairing or triumphant, may shock us, but not only 
because they are crass or leaden. In the best, they are nothing of the kind, but 
they still shock because they are other ways of seeing, of hearing the original: new 
beams of light into a partly dark ground. 
Popper’s schema was originally proposed to represent the growth of scientific 
knowledge. After a Tentative Theory has been proposed, there then occurs the 
phase that is crucial to science, that of Error Elimination. The theory is subject to 
critical examination, tested in various ways, checked out by peers, refined etc. As 
pointed out above (1.4), a theory does not become “true” by virtue of having its 
possible errors eliminated: it may become more “truthlike”, it may approximate 
closer to “the truth”, but at bottom it remains a hypothesis, however well support-
ed or corroborated it may be. The evolution of scientific knowledge leads not to 

116	 Memes of Translation
ultimate truth, but to new problems, and these in turn to new theories. Knowl-
edge is never final, on this view. 
There is a sense in which a translation is never final, either. Like any other 
theory, a translation of a given source text has the status of a hypothesis, to be 
tested and refined as long as anyone is interested in doing so. It is thus quite natu-
ral that certain texts (usually canonized ones) should be translated over and over 
again, as new generations have different views and different expectations of what 
a translation should be. Recall Goethe’s notion of the various stages a translation 
goes through (see 2.4). 
This is a view that coincides exactly with Popper’s idea of scientific progress. 
Other theorists, too, evidently have this kind of conception of the translation pro-
cess: to take just one example, compare Delisle (1988), who distinguishes the pro-
cesses of comprehension, reformulation, and verification of tentative translation 
solutions. A classic example of this approach is to be found in Bly (1984), who 
demonstrates “from the inside”, as it were, as many as eight stages in the trans-
lation of a single Rilke poem: seven drafts and seven revision processes before a 
final version is arrived at. 
This chapter focuses on how translations are assessed as tentative theories. To 
assess something is to examine its quality, and “quality” is a usefully ambiguous 
term. In one sense it can mean ‘nature, characteristics’, and in this sense assess-
ment is purely descriptive: a statement is made to the effect that a given translation 
is of such-and-such a type, that it has such-and-such features, that it has such-
and-such an effect on the target culture or on intercultural relations more gener-
ally, etc. In Toury’s view, for instance, the aim of a descriptive translation analysis 
is to infer the translator’s concept of equivalence by looking at the kinds of deci-
sions made during the translation process (1995: 36f.); alternatively, one can start 
with a concept of equivalence that is assumed or known to have been prevailing 
at the time of the translation, for this kind of text etc., and then use this to justify 
a translator’s decisions. The focus of interest is on describing what the translator 
has decided to do and why. Segments of the target text (solutions) are paired with 
segments of the source text (problems) – i.e. various textual correspondences are 
defined – and then the relationships between the pairs of corresponding segments 
are examined. 
In terms of Popper’s schema, this kind of descriptive analysis looks at the re-
lation between P1 and TT, at the way the Tentative Theory (Target Text) comes to 
be justified and proposed as a solution for the initial problem. This aspect of the 
translation process has become a major focus of attention for scholars working in 
the tradition of culture studies. It leads to an examination of the social and cultural 
conditions under which translations are produced, of the ideological and other val-
ues which motivate a translator’s decisions, and of the effects which these decisions 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
117
then have on texts, readers and cultures. A further step taken by some scholars is 
then to compare the values apparently held by a given translator or group of trans-
lators with those held by the scholar himself or herself. A discussion then ensues 
about whose values are better, such as the argument about the merits and demerits 
of the value of target-language fluency (see e.g. Venuti 1995a; Pym 1996). Purely 
descriptive analysis merges here into social or cultural criticism, or even into pre-
scriptive pronouncements about what translators should do. There is a shift to the 
second sense of “quality” as an evaluative term, not just a descriptive one. 
In this evaluative sense of “quality”, assessment is made in terms of how good 
or bad the translation is, whether it conforms to required standards, particular 
values etc. This is of course the way the term is used in quality assurance systems 
in a translation agency, and in the translation industry as a whole. Such evaluative 
assessment can obviously be either negative or positive. In terms of the Popperian 
schema, we are now looking at the Tentative Theory from the Error Elimination 
perspective. Both descriptive and evaluative assessment will be relevant to the 
discussion in this chapter. In critical practice, both types of assessment tend to 
co-occur. 
Before examining various ways of actually carrying out translation assess-
ment, let us first consider how the whole process of theory production and error 
elimination is part of a translator’s competence. 
Pym (1992a: 175ff.) comes very close to Popper in this respect. Pym argues 
strongly that translators inevitably theorize, and that this theorization is an in-
trinsic part of translational competence. His definition of this competence can be 
summarized as follows. Translational competence consists of two skills: 
a.	 The ability to generate a series of possible translations for a given source text 
or item. 
b.	 The ability to select from this series, “quickly and with justified (ethical) con-
fidence” (175), one version considered to be optimally appropriate. 
The first ability (a) is a generative one: the more possible translations you can 
come up with, the more competence you have (divergent creativity). Popper’s ini-
tial schema can thus be expanded as follows: 
	
	 P1 →	 TT1 → EE → P2
	
	 	
	 TT2…
	
	 	
	 TTn 
Pym points out that this definition explicitly incorporates a recognition “that 
there is more than one way to translate” and a refusal of “any notion of exclusive 
correctness” (175). 

118	 Memes of Translation
The second ability (b) is a critical, selective one. It pertains exactly to the Error 
Elimination process: it is the ability to assess each of the proposed possibilities 
and select the one which appears (at that moment) to be the best, given the over-
all nature of the translation commission, prospective readership etc. (convergent 
creativity). 
The definition thus also incorporates the ability to improve a translation: in 
the first place, to improve one’s own proposals, the tentative theories that come to 
mind. The picture it gives is of a series of possible versions, each of which is sub-
mitted to examination and rejected or refined until an appropriate one is arrived 
at. (As mentioned above, the process is not a simple linear one: previous decisions 
can be altered later, etc.) This overall ability to generate, manipulate and assess 
tentative hypotheses is, as Pym says, something fundamentally theoretical. 
The critical ability to assess alternatives is not only a requirement for individu-
al translators, of course. It is – or should be – also the basis of translation criticism. 
On this view, one which Pym endorses too, if a proposed translation is rejected, 
the critic should suggest something better in turn, a better Tentative Theory. It 
is thus not only translators who inevitably theorize; translation critics do so too. 
Pym’s model of translational competence (and my Popperian adaptation of it) 
is primarily a model of a translator’s linguistic competence. However, during the 
production of a tentative target text and also during the Error Elimination process 
a translator will naturally resort to other activities as well, such as documentation 
research, consultation with the client or other experts, and so on. A similar overall 
model is proposed by Gile (e.g. 1992, 1995). Gile starts with the comprehension 
phase: the translator generates hypotheses about the meaning of the source text, 
and then tests these for plausibility. A TL draft version is then proposed, and this 
in turn is tested, both against the source text for fidelity and against target norms 
for acceptability. The process is repeated for each item translated, each translation 
unit, and then for the text as a whole. Gile stresses that the testing process involves 
not only instinct, language proficiency etc., but also documentary research and 
knowledge of the world. Sager’s (1994: 237f.) model of translation also highlights 
the revision process. Gile’s “testing” corresponds to Popper’s Error Elimination, 
as do several of Sager’s algorithmic questions (Sager 1994: 219). The picture that 
emerges is of a repeated, cyclical process, switching back and forth constantly 
from hypothesis-generation to hypothesis-testing. Gile argues that a model of this 
kind can be usefully applied in translator training – cf. Chapter 6, below. 
The Error Elimination process typically starts with a recognition of “errors” 
that thus need to be eliminated. During the translation process itself, this elim-
ination takes place within the translator’s head as part of normal text-process-
ing and revision. The moment at which a translation is submitted or published  

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
119
represents a cut-off point that is imposed by external circumstances, deadlines 
etc. In the best case, it may coincide with the point at which the translator can 
find no more errors to eliminate, no more refinements to make. The Tentative 
Theory is then submitted to public scrutiny. But there is nothing theoretically fi-
nal about this stage: it may well be that other people can still find errors or suggest 
improvements, or even that the translator can too, some weeks later. From this 
point of view, evaluative translation assessment is no more than a continuation of 
the overall translation process but involving more people. 
Problem: what is a translation error? Nord (1991: 169f.) argues for a func-
tional view according to which errors are not defined on intrinsic criteria such as 
correctness. Instead, a recipient classifies as errors those features of the translation 
that do not meet a given norm or standard, which frustrate the recipient’s expec-
tations for instance because the translator has failed to follow the task instructions 
in some way. (However, features that exceed expectations are naturally not regard-
ed as erroneous.) 
Nord’s definition is broad enough to be applied in different methodologi-
cal approaches. We can add that the translator him/herself is the first “process-­
internal” recipient, and thus the first to react to prospective target versions. 
Generalizing slightly, let us say that an error is anything in the form of the trans-
lated text that triggers a critical reaction in a reader. This definition can cover 
anything from grammatical mistakes or the mistranslation of technical terms, to 
a translator’s choice of overall approach (e.g. target-language fluency rather than 
non-fluency, or vice versa). The definition is also a relative one: errors are relative 
to readers and readers’ expectations. But readers are different: some have access 
to the source text, others do not; some may be familiar with the source culture, 
others not; readers may read with different purposes; and so on. Readers in one 
culture may respond differently from readers in another culture to one and the 
same translation. The definition is also relative in the sense that recognition of 
errors, as thus defined, may well vary over time, so that features considered as 
erroneous or non-erroneous at one point in time may be differently received at 
some other point. Indeed, even at the same point in time, one reader’s criticism 
may be another reader’s praise: this raises the important question of which read-
ers count more in the overall assessment. And this in turn leads to questions of 
authority, status and power, and to questions about competing values within and 
between cultures. All this goes to show that, like translations themselves, evalua-
tive assessments too are ultimately not final or absolute but relative to particular 
people and places and times. 
A functional definition such as the one suggested above also has some peda-
gogical use, as I will try to show. 

120	 Memes of Translation
Reactions that are intended to be negative or critical, i.e. going against and/
or falling below the expectations of the translator or the critic, take many forms. 
Here are some examples: 
–	
X doesn’t mean the same as the corresponding source text item. 
–	
X is the wrong term for this concept. 
–	
The style seems quite different from the original. 
–	
Compared with the original, it’s too emotive / too marked / too flat… 
–	
X doesn’t sound right. 
–	
There is something strange about the style which I don’t like, but I can’t quite 
put my finger on it. 
–	
It sounds old-fashioned. 
–	
X is ungrammatical; it could never have been written by a native speaker. 
–	
I think the client would reject this. 
–	
I am the client, and I do reject this. 
–	
This text could never be published in this form: there are far too many signs 
of carelessness, misprints etc. 
–	
This reads like a translation, it’s full of interference from the original. 
–	
This reads very naturally, but it thereby hides the otherness of the original, 
which I would like to have seen. 
–	
The language is unnatural, clumsy, irritating, difficult to read. 
–	
I wouldn’t say it like that. 
–	
I wonder what this bit means? It doesn’t make sense. 
–	
This sounds amusing, but I guess it isn’t supposed to be. 
–	
You mean this is supposed to be funny? 
–	
You mean this is meant for children?? 
–	
Well, I followed these translated instructions, but the machine still didn’t work. 
–	
I wonder what on earth the translator was thinking of when he/she wrote that.
–	
The translator has acted unethically in translating in this way : he/she is sim-
ply serving the ideological needs of the target/source culture, with no respect 
for the autonomy of the source/target culture. 
Such are the symptoms that may betray the presence of an error, a weakness (they 
may not do so, of course, if the expectations are different – e.g. that a translation of 
this kind of text should indeed read like a translation). These reactions also reveal 
different kinds of assessment, different kinds of expectation about how transla-
tions can or should be assessed. The rest of this chapter will examine five such 
assessment models. These rarely occur in isolation, but they do provide a concep-
tual framework in which different emphases in assessment can be specified and 
compared. 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
121
5.2	
Retrospective assessment
I call the first approach retrospective because it focuses on the relation between the 
target text and its source text: on the relation norm, in fact. This relation has been 
given various technical terms in the literature, some of which are unfortunately 
used in quite other senses by other scholars (a good example is the polysemy 
of the term “adequacy”). Perhaps the most common one is simply “equivalence”, 
insofar as practitioners of this mode of assessment typically praise the TT for 
being “equivalent” or criticize it for not being “equivalent” enough (but recall the 
critical discussion of equivalence in 1.2.2). Such practitioners, by definition, form 
a subset of those readers who also have access to the source text. Most readers of 
the target text, of course, do not have this access. 
A descriptive assessment of the source-target relation will simply state what 
this relation is, typically in terms of such parameters as free-vs-literal, degree 
of preservation of various aspects of the original text (meaning, form, style…), 
whether the relation meets the expectations of the readership or not. An evalu-
ative assessment will pronounce judgement on the relation. If this assessment is 
negative, the translation is declared to be e.g. too free, or not free enough, or the 
features of the original that have been preserved are argued not to be the features 
that should have been preserved. See for instance Kundera’s critical response to 
various French translations of a sentence from Kafka, which he compares neg-
atively to his own proposal (in Kundera 1993: Part Four). Kundera’s initial ex-
pectation is that a literary translation should be as close as possible to the form 
and style of the original, preserving every element possible. Strategies other than 
literal translation are therefore criticized. 
In other words, we can start by distinguishing between a relationship that 
appears to be as expected – it is as it should be, i.e. conforms to the norm – and 
one that is not as expected. Thus far, such assessment is descriptive. If the relation 
is not as expected, we can then evaluate it as being better or worse than our expec-
tations. These expectations, for instance, may incorporate certain requirements, 
which may or may not be met. In keeping with the relativistic definition of “error” 
introduced above, this kind of assessment is thus relative to the expectations of a 
given reader or group of readers, or to the requirements of a given client or com-
munication situation. The assessment of the relation between TT and ST is thus 
subjective insofar as it is based on the opinions and expectations of the readers; 
but it is intersubjective insofar as such expectations and requirements exist as 
observable norms in a given society, and are recognized to exist as such. However, 
the assessment is not objective in the sense that there is assumed to be some kind 
of objective, absolute standard to which all translations must conform, such as 
“equivalence”, for instance. 

122	 Memes of Translation
Perhaps the most influential exposition of this kind of assessment has been 
House (1981), although she is not concerned only with this viewpoint. Starting 
with the assumption that the goal of a translation is functional and interpersonal 
equivalence, she sets up a series of functional-stylistic categories based on Crystal 
and Davy (1969): geographical origin, social class, time, medium, participation, 
social role relationship, social attitude, province. ST textual correlates are estab-
lished for these, and the resulting ST text profile is then compared with that of the 
TT. House explicitly states that this ST profile is the “yardstick” against which the 
translation is measured. Mismatches between the two profiles are designated as 
“covertly erroneous”; breaches of the target-language system – ungrammaticality 
etc. – are “overtly erroneous”, as are mismatches of denotative meanings (i.e. obvi-
ous semantic mistranslations). After applying this model to a number of test cas-
es (German-English), House concludes that functional equivalence only makes 
sense as a desirable criterion when the text to be translated is not “linked” to the 
source culture and can thus be translated “covertly”. “Overt translation”, where the 
translation is indeed transparently a translation and quite validly so, cannot be 
assigned functional equivalence as a goal. 
Against this latter argument we might claim, however, that literary texts are 
normally translated “overtly”, and yet stylistic and functional equivalence is often 
expected of literary translations. In fairness to House, though, it must be add-
ed that she is not primarily concerned with literary translation. In fact, her ap-
proach to style is made rather narrower than a study of literary translations would 
warrant, by her exclusion of Crystal and Davy’s dimensions of “singularity” and 
“individuality”, i.e. features which represent an author’s personal style, whether 
deliberately or unconsciously used. 
Furthermore, one typical arena where this retrospective model of assessment 
is practised is precisely the translation criticism of works of literature. Where the 
translation exhibits a TT-ST relationship which is as the critic expects, comments 
are not usually made. But if the relationship is felt to be either “better” than ex-
pected, “not” as expected or even “worse” than expected, comments are felt to be 
in order. 
Here is a typical example: in a Times Literary Supplement review, Roger 
Huss (1993) is comparing two English translations (by Francis Steegmuller and  
Geoffrey Wall) of Flaubert’s Madame Bovary:
Steegmuller sometimes has the edge on Wall in his understanding of the original 
(“jeunes gens” are “young men” not “young people, the “lampion” Emma wears 
at the carnival is not a paper lantern but a cocked hat). […] Yet Steegmuller’s 
impressive ability to communicate a sense of naturalness in English pulls him to-
wards lexical and syntactic normalization even where the original is deviant. […] 
Steegmuller often supplies links absent in Flaubert and collapses isolated clauses 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
123
into the flow of a longer sentence. […] Although always intelligent, Steegmuller’s 
drawing out of implicit meaning also makes for a more digestible and subtly affa-
ble text than Flaubert’s original. […] By contrast, Wall’s greater literalness makes 
him rather more successful in rendering Flaubert’s meticulous verbal patterning. 
Huss draws attention here to several aspects of the TT-ST relationship: the seman-
tics of ST and TT items (i.e. House’s overt mismatches), the degree of markedness 
of the syntax, and the overall style (cf. singularity). The assessment is made more 
complex, of course, by the fact that Huss also wishes to gauge the quality of the 
two translations vis-a-vis each other, not only vis-a-vis his own expectations of 
what an optimal translation of the novel ought to look like. Rather than making 
overall value judgements, Huss rather seeks to characterize the different strategies 
that each translator seems to prefer, and shows what the results of these strategies 
are: i.e. the assessment is primarily descriptive. Judging by this review, one trans-
lator has evidently placed more priority on literal translation and the preservation 
of rhetorical schemes etc.; the other has given more weight to the pragmatic strat-
egies of explicitation and perhaps even adaptation. The two translations will thus 
relate differently to the current English literary polysystem and its subsystem of 
translated works. Huss does not prefer one above the other in general, but recom-
mends the Steegmuller version for first-time readers and the Wall version for a 
second reading. Huss’s assumption thus seems to be that initial readers will expect 
a more fluent rendering, one that makes the original more accessible. (Compare 
Goethe’s first two stages as opposed to his final one, mentioned above in 2.4.) 
Translation strategies can thus be useful and relevant to translation assess-
ment. Another example is an analysis by Nylander-Tuominen (1992) of French 
and English translations of some traditional Finnish folk lyrical poems (from the 
Kanteletar). Her analysis is a semiotic one, but her argument returns again and 
again to the fact that the French version uses more hyperonyms than the English, 
and both use more than the original. In effect, she is criticizing the French trans-
lator for giving too much weight to one kind of semantic hyponymy strategy (my 
strategy S3b). 
Similarly, a review of a translated biography of Václav Havel (Rosenberg 
1993) comments that: 
The book is often hard to follow – it has been well-translated from the Czech 
language but not from the Czech milieu. Kriseova [the author] throws in names, 
places and events without explaining them and focuses on issues perhaps more 
interesting to Czechs and Slovaks than to foreigners. 
In other words, the translator is criticized for not making more use of cultur-
al filtering (Prl), explicitation (Pr2) and information change (Pr3). The reviewer 
has expected a more domesticating rendering, one that would make the reading  

124	 Memes of Translation
easier for a less knowledgeable target audience. This expectation may of course 
clash with the conscious aims of the translator, who may have deliberately chosen 
a different overall method. 
I will now illustrate this assessment model in more detail, with a comparative 
(descriptive) analysis of three English translations of a Latvian poem. The origi-
nal poem is a daina, a traditional folksong in regular trochaic metre, and runs as 
follows: 
	
	 Dziedot dzimu, dziedot augu, 
	
	 [sing+PRES.P. born+PAST+lSG sing+PRES.P. grow-up+PAST+1SG] 
	
	 Dziedot mūžu nodzīvoju; 
	
	 [sing+PRES.P. life+ACC live+PAST+lSG] 
	
	 Dziedot gāja dvēselīte 
	
	 [sing+PRES.P. go+PAST+3SG soul+DIMINUTIVE+NOM] 
	
	 Dieva dēla dārziņā. 
	
	 [God+GEN son+GEN garden+DIMINUTIVE+LOCATIVE] 
The translations are: 
	 (a)	 Singing, I was born; singing, I grew up; 
	
	 Singing, I passed through life; 
	
	 Singing, my soul entered 
	
	 The garden of the Son of God. 
	
	 (Trans. Ruth Spears, in J. Andrups and V. Kalve (1954) Latvian Literature. 
Stockholm: Goppers, p. 17.) 
	 (b)	 I was born singing, I grew up singing, 
	
	 I passed through life singing; 
	
	 And, singing, my soul ascended 
	
	 Into the garden of the Son of God. 
	
	 (Trans. Aleksis Rubelis, in A. Rubelis (1970) Baltic Literature. Notre Dame, 
Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press, p. 107.) 
	 (c)	 I was born singing, I grew up singing, 
	
	 I lived my life singing. 
	
	 My soul will go singing 
	
	 Into the garden of God’s sons. 
	
	 (Trans. Pauls Raudseps, in A. Lieven (1993) The Baltic Revolution. New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press, p. 109.) 
The retrospective kind of assessment prompts a number of comments on what 
has been preserved and what has been changed. The ones I will mention relate to 
points where the translator had a genuine choice, not those where the grammati-
cal norms of English force a change.

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
125
With respect to the form of the poem, none of the translations preserve a 
regular trochaic metre, although the first half of (a) comes closest (cf. the scheme 
change strategy, G10). Version (b) is the only one that preserves the punctuation 
and hence the relative strength of the break between the two couplets: (a) down-
grades this break by introducing two semi-colons and three extra commas earlier; 
and (c) upgrades the same break into a full stop, thus separating the two halves 
of the poem more clearly (cf. the sentence structure change, strategy G7). On the 
other hand, all three versions preserve the line divisions, the repetition of singing 
(dziedot), and the enjambement at the end of the third line. Translation (c) has 
changed the tense of the verb in line 3 (strategy G5), and the number of sons in 
line 4. The tense change also affects the speech act (strategy Pr5), since the future 
tense suggests more a prophesy than a report. 
On the semantic and pragmatic levels, versions (b) and (c) choose an un-
marked word order in the first two lines and thus change the emphasis somewhat 
(S7). Version (b) chooses the rather formal ascended (line 3) in contrast to the 
plainer verbs in the original and the other two translations (cf. strategy Pr4); this 
could also be seen as a hyponym of the more general concept go (cf. strategy S3). 
None of the versions preserves the diminutive aspects of soul and garden. 
Perhaps the most striking choice is the one that affects the capitalizing of 
Son in translations (a) and (b). The original poem has a pagan background, not 
a Christian one. The decision to capitalize the son thus serves to adapt the poem 
to a Christian culture (naturalization: cf. strategy Prl). It is perhaps the desire to 
preserve a pagan reading and obviate a Christian one that has motivated the third 
translator to use the plural sons, with no capital. 
To look forward to another assessment model we shall examine below, the 
overall effects of these three translations are thus somewhat different, as a result of 
the different strategies chosen. Translation (a) seems to me to celebrate the actual 
act of singing most strongly, and is in fact the closest to the original in this respect; 
(b) comes across as a statement of joyous belief in a Christian heaven to which 
souls biblically ascend; and (c) seems an expression of jubilant pagan confidence 
in life. 
5.3	
Prospective assessment
The retrospective approach was heavily criticized by Nida (1964) and Nida and 
Taber (1969), who argued that it laid too much emphasis on the assumption of 
formal equivalence. They (and others) also pointed out that in real life, few read-
ers of translations actually have access to the original text. 

126	 Memes of Translation
In place of the retrospective mode, Nida proposed a model of assessment 
based on “dynamic equivalence”, i.e. not sameness of form but sameness of effect. 
I call this “prospective” assessment, because it looks forward from the target text 
to the effect this has, or is designed to have, on its readers, rather than back to 
the source text. The centre of attention becomes the communication norm rather 
than the relation norm. 
The origins of this model of assessment lie largely in one tradition of biblical 
translation. Here, after all, the effect that the translation is supposed to have (i.e. 
its skopos: see 2.6) is relatively easy to define: to convert the readers to Christiani-
ty, or to confirm them in their faith, or the like. Further, in this kind of translation 
it is relatively easy to see that the intended effect of the translation is indeed “the 
same” as the effect of the original. The effects of the text are thus fairly well cir-
cumscribed, in principle at least (but see further, below). 
In the review of the two translations of Flaubert I referred to above, there are 
several points which illustrate this kind of assessment, which thus occurs here in 
conjunction with the retrospective model. Huss writes (1993): 
Searching for an equivalence of effect, Wall also makes one glaringly unhappy 
choice: when Homais quotes English (“That is the question” and, more batheti-
cally, “Yes”), most existing translations make the fact explicit. Wall, however, sup-
plies an arbitrary sense of foreignness by putting “Yes” into German (“Jawohl”). 
Desired effects, then, do not always turn out to be actual effects. Again: 
[When Steegmuller adds cohesive links] [t]he effect is more often than not flu-
ently elegant, but it attenuates the various moods suggested by Flaubert’s lacon-
ic manner and respected by Wall: melancholy, perplexity, dismissiveness, or the 
bruised inability to articulate pain. 
Huss’s comments on the effects of a translation are, of course, primarily the effects 
the translation had on him. Let me take another personal example. On the bath-
room door of a hotel room in Vienna I find the following bilingual text: 
	
	 Liebe Gäste! 
	
	 Täglich werden in Hotels zahllose Handtücher unnötigerweise gewaschen. 
	
	 	
Wenn Sie neue Handtücher benötigen, werfen Sie bitte die Gebrauchten in 
die Badwanne. Wenn nicht, dann lassen Sie sie bitte auf dem Handtuchhalter 
hängen. 
	
	 	
Mit dieser einfachen Massnahme helfen Sie dabei, Wasser und 
Waschmittel zu sparen und dadurch unsere Umwelt wesentlich zu entlasten.
	
	 	
Vielen Dank fur ihre Mithilfe! 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
127
	
	 Dear guests! 
	
	 Every day, numerous towels are being washed in hotels without the real need. 
	
	 	
If you need a fresh towel, please throw the used one into the bathtub; if 
you don’t, please leave it hanging on the hook, or on the towel-rack. 
	
	 	
With those simple measures, you contribute greatly to the rational use of 
water and washing powder, and actively help preserving the nature. 
	
	 	
We thank you for your co-operation! 
It is often difficult to define a translation’s intended effect or skopos adequately. 
But here the skopos of the source (German) text is clear: the immediate intended 
effect is stated explicitly within the text itself, readers are asked to behave in a 
specific way, to perform certain actions. (A longer-term effect is also suggested: 
that the text should influence readers’ attitudes in a particular way.) And it is rea-
sonable to assume that the skopos of the translation is the same here. 
What actual effect is this translation likely to have on its readers? My own 
first subjective reaction was to respond in the manner desired, and not throw the 
towels out unnecessarily. The intended effect was achieved perfectly satisfactorily. 
From the point of view of a prospective assessment, then, I can say that this trans-
lation worked fine, for this one reader at least. 
But of course my overall reaction is more complex. As a native speaker of 
English, I note almost unawares that the English is a bit odd in places, clearly 
not written by a native (without the real need, those simple measures, actively help 
preserving the nature, we thank you a lot for your co-operation). I admit, further, 
to being even slightly amused by the somewhat naive touch in the English style, 
and by the syntactic oddities. Why didn’t they get a native speaker to edit it? This 
reaction is then followed by one of linguistic curiosity: this would be a good il-
lustrative text for my chapter on translation assessment, I’ll copy it down. Such 
mixed reactions are no doubt common among native readers of non-native texts 
around the world; I would guess, too, that some of them at least would be shared 
by other native readers of this particular translation. 
In other words, part of my reaction is indeed the desired one: my reaction 
to the message content. But part of my reaction is to the form of the message, 
and these secondary reactions were scarcely part of the skopos of the transla-
tion. What we seem to have is an intended effect (achieved, in this case), plus a 
number of unintended side-effects. A descriptive assessment would state what 
these side-effects are. An evaluative one would have to say that, because they are 
unintended, they point to weaknesses in the translation: as a piece of English, the 
translation obviously falls short of native norms in several places. 
Notice that even this kind of simple analysis nevertheless implies high de-
mands on the standard of a translation: not only must the effect be the intended 

128	 Memes of Translation
one, but also there must be no unintended side-effects. In particular, we might 
claim that if a translation is not intended to draw the attention of its readers to 
the form of the target text, and if it in fact does do so, then the translation is less 
than optimal. (“Readers”, here, must of course be construed as excluding trans-
lation scholars, who tend to subject any translation they come across to a formal 
examination.) 
My examples of prospective assessment have so far been subjective ones. For 
a more objective view we must turn to different methodologies within this ap-
proach. Several methods of assessing effect have been suggested e.g. by Nida and 
Taber (1969) and used by them and other scholars. Vehmas-Lehto (1989: 42–44) 
calls them “response-based” methods. They include the following: 
	 (a)	 The use of Cloze tests on source and target readers, as a test of comprehensibility. 
	 (b)	 Explicit elicitation of target-reader reactions to various alternatives: subjective 
assessment. (The examples above have illustrated this method for one alter-
native and one reader.) 
	 (c)	 Reporting tests: the translation is read aloud to TL speakers, who are required 
to relate what they heard to a third person (the idea being to see what speakers 
tended to change in the retelling). 
	 (d)	 Speakability tests: having TL speakers read the translation aloud and observ-
ing where they tend to stumble or hesitate. 
	 (e)	 Comprehension tests: matched bilingual subjects answer questions either on 
the source text or on the target text, and the answers are compared. 
	 (f)	 Performance tests (such as following instructions in the source and target 
languages) to see whether the performance varies with the language). 
	 (g)	 Comprehensibility experiments based on reading time, comparing results for 
source and target texts. 
	 (h)	 Identifying texts as either original or translated. 
	 (i)	 Readability tests (other than Cloze tests). 
Many of these methods have also been criticized. They only measure part of the 
overall effect of a text, and not always very validly at that. It is often exceedingly 
difficult to specify precisely what is meant by the “effect” of a text. Another prob-
lematic issue is whether we mean the author’s intended effect or the actual effect. 
If we mean the intended effect, can this always be determined? If we mean the 
actual effect, actual effect on whom? All readers? Impossible. Typical readers? 
Who are the typical readers? Native speakers of the target language, or not? And 
besides, the same text may affect people in very different ways. 
Yet such observations also point to one strength of this mode of assessment: 
its sensitivity to the reader, to who the reader is. After all, native speakers of the 
target language will react differently from non-native speakers, they will notice 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	 129
different things about the translation. Both native and non-native readers will no 
doubt react to a text’s function, but non-native readers (naive, non-professionals, 
that is) are obviously less likely than natives to react to its form. Some readers will 
be speakers of both the languages concerned and others not, and this too may af-
fect reactions. Some may even have access to the source text and make their own 
evaluations accordingly. And readers even react differently according to whether 
they know if the translation was by a TL native speaker or not: judgements may be 
made differently according to the kind of translator, in other words. 
Criticism has also focused on weaknesses in the experimental design of these 
methods: too few subjects are often used, non-relevant variables are not excluded, 
reliability is poor, key concepts such as comprehensibility are too loosely defined. 
Interestingly, these methods of assessment have also been criticized for lack-
ing all reference to the source text (e.g. by House 1977) – a criticism that rather 
misses the point of this whole assessment model. (It has not, I think, been sug-
gested that this model – or any other, for that matter – can suffice alone for an 
adequate overall assessment.) 
Insofar as the prospective approach rests upon the assumption that the effect 
of the translation is expected to be the same as that of the original (as evidently in 
Nida’s work), the approach is also open to the counter-argument presented most 
cogently by Gutt (1991): if the receivers of a message vary, the effect cannot be 
exactly the same on all of them. This is basically because receivers interpret any 
utterance in terms of their own knowledge of the world, their own current cog-
nitive state; and since no two people, even within the same language community, 
have exactly the same knowledge of the world, no two interpretations can ever be 
absolutely identical. 
A better foundation for this assessment type might therefore be the looser 
notion of the skopos of the translation. Although effects cannot be identical, sko-
poi of course may be; on the other hand, the skopos of a translation may well be 
different from that of the source text. Whatever the skopos, it can be compared to 
the actual reactions of a number of readers – to the extent that both skopos and 
reactions can be defined and described. 
Perhaps the most effective use of the prospective model is therefore to com-
bine several of the methods proposed above in a carefully designed empirical 
analysis, one that is aware of its own limitations but nevertheless able to pro-
vide interesting information about the kinds of effects translations have on their 
readers. 
Puurtinen (1995), for instance, used a variety of methods in her assessment 
of two Finnish translations (both published in 1977) of Frank Baum’s The Wizard 
of Oz. She used a Cloze test of readability, a speakability test and a subjective 
assessment of style, all designed to capture various differences between the two 

130	 Memes of Translation
translations. It turned out that one is more formal than the other, with more com-
plex, non-­finite and left-branching constructions and a style characterized as stat-
ic. The other translation prefers a simpler, more dynamic style, which seems easier 
to process and sounds more like contemporary spoken language; this translation 
scored higher on the Cloze test. 
However, the speakability tests showed no significant difference between the 
two translations, and the subjective assessments indicated a great deal of individ-
ual variation. This last is an interesting result: it actually furnishes further evi-
dence against the idea of a homogeneous readership in terms of which some ideal 
“effect” can be defined. People react to texts in very different ways, even when 
they are sociologically matched to some extent (Puurtinen’s 28 subjects were all 
trainee translators). In Puurtinen’s experiment some subjects reacted positively to 
colloquial, everyday style, others preferred a more literary style and even relished 
the occasional archaism. Some gave readability a high priority, others placed it 
below aesthetic values. There was no significant difference in the overall evalua-
tive assessment of the two translations, but Puurtinen concluded that the whole 
concept of acceptability is a slippery one. Individual judgements of acceptability 
are of course influenced by each person’s personal experience of the text-type in 
question, personal life history, family values, and so on ad infinitum: cf. Gutt’s 
argument, above. 
5.4	
Lateral assessment
In view of the criticisms directed against the concept of dynamic equivalence, and 
the difficulty of defining and measuring effects, some scholars have advocated a 
different model of assessment which we can call lateral. The label denotes that 
the point of view here is sideways, towards other texts already existing in the 
target culture; the emphasis is on the extent to which the translation fits into the 
appropriate set of texts in the receiving language, whether it bears an adequate 
family resemblance to them. Where the retrospective model focuses on the re-
lation norm, and the prospective model primarily on the communication norm, 
the lateral model thus focuses mainly on the expectancy norms. In lateral assess-
ment, the translation is lined up not alongside the source text, nor alongside aims, 
effects or reactions, but alongside authentic (untranslated) texts in the target lan-
guage that are of a similar type: texts that have come to be called “parallel texts” 
(see e.g. Neubert 1981), or comparable texts. Lateral assessment avoids some of 
the limitations of the previous two models and is more objective than either, be-
ing strictly text-based. 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
131
A major influence on this mode of assessment has been Toury’s work (cf. 
above, 2.7 and 3.5), particularly his distinction between source-oriented and 
target-­oriented translation. Lateral assessment is obviously target-oriented. 
As discussed earlier (3.8), expectancy norms are both qualitative and quan-
titative. When qualitative norms are broken, the result is typically an ungram-
matical form, a non-native expression, or other such “overt error”. If quantitative 
norms are broken, this is manifested in “covert errors” such as non-typical distri-
bution or frequencies of items, differences which may only become evident after 
statistical analysis. (Recall the normalization hypothesis mentioned in 3.6.1.) This 
statistical approach is not a new one: it was advocated long ago by Grimes (1963), 
for instance, as a method for measuring the naturalness of Bible translations. 
Here is an example of a statement implicitly based on a lateral type of assess-
ment, from a review of a translation of Fima by Amos Oz (Rawson 1993: 28): 
The translation of Fima is by Nicholas de Lange. I know no Hebrew, but the best 
compliment I can pay to his many translations of Oz is that they don’t read like 
translations. When one reads one of his other translators, decent though they are, 
one knows it. 
The example illustrates the close relation between this model and the prospective 
one: a breaking of expectancy norms leads (or may lead) to unwanted side-effects. 
The reviewer makes his own assumptions about the expected translation quality 
quite clear here. 
As we have pointed out before, norms (both qualitative and quantitative) are 
relative concepts. They represent a range of acceptability, from “preferred usage” 
through “unusual but acceptable” to “disturbingly deviant” and “definitely un-
acceptable”. In empirical research, expectancy norms must therefore be defined 
operationally, as covering a specified range of variation. Quantitative differences 
(between a translation and an expectancy norm) can then be stated in terms of 
their statistical significance. 
Let us take a simple example (based on Chesterman 1994b): a study of the 
relative distribution of the English article the and the use of “no article” with com-
mon nouns, in translations from Finnish and in parallel texts. (By “no article” is 
meant the use of zero before indefinite plural and mass nouns like papers, ink, 
plus the lack of an article before singular count nouns in expressions such as hand 
in hand.) 
Before looking at translations we first need to establish what the expectancy 
norm is. In the Brown corpus (Francis and Kučera 1982; Ellegård 1978) the over-
all percentage (i.e. of all word-tokens) of the is 6.9%; the equivalent figure for the 
LOB corpus (Johansson and Hofland 1989) is 6.7%. Corresponding figures for 
“no article” are not directly accessible from these corpora. 

132	 Memes of Translation
But expectancy norms are of course largely genre-specific. And the relative 
occurrence of the does indeed vary to some extent according to genre, because of 
the variation in noun and pronoun distribution overall and the syntax of the noun 
phrase in particular (Brainerd 1972; Johansson 1978a). Ellegård (1978) reports 
that the average frequency of the in learned and scientific writing is 8.4%, com-
pared with 7.6% for belles lettres, 7.5% for press reporting and 6.4% for adventure 
stories. 
The data for this particular mini-study came from a quarterly English-­
language magazine issued by the University of Helsinki entitled Universitatis Hel-
singiensis (hereafter HEL), and the equivalent Cambridge University magazine 
CAM. Both are very similar in layout, content and readership, except that HEL 
is of course for the minority of non-Finnish-speaking members of Helsinki Uni-
versity whereas CAM has a larger readership. The articles in HEL are translated 
by professional Finnish translators and then checked and edited by native English 
speakers before publication. One would expect, then, that the relative distribu-
tions of the and “no article” would be very close in the two magazines. 
However, it turned out that there was a surprising (and, at the .005 level, statis-
tically significant) difference between the two. On the basis of admittedly limited 
data (2500 words from each magazine, spread across five extracts with matched 
subject matter), the overall frequency of the in HEL (9.8%) was noticeably higher 
than it was in CAM (7.5%). The CAM figure is close to the expected norm (cf. 
above), but the HEL figure is higher even than that for rather more formal, aca-
demic texts. The figures for “no article” were the reverse: CAM 8.3%, HEL 7.3%. 
Both sets of data had approximately the same overall percentage of nouns 
(CAM 21.4%, HEL 22.5%), and when the occurrence of the and “no article” is 
calculated as a percentage of the total number of nouns the difference becomes 
very clear: 
	
	 CAM:	 the 35%, “no article” 39% 
	
	 HEL:		 the 44%, “no article” 33% 
These Finnish translators thus appear to overuse the definite article and underuse 
“no article”. They tend to “overspecify”, whereas native writers are content to leave 
more of the specification to the reader to infer. Perhaps this is an instance of the 
general translation law of explicitation (cf. 3.6.1). There may also be other reasons 
for this difference, of course, but further discussion will not be relevant in this 
context. 
A much more comprehensive application of the lateral type of assessment is 
illustrated by Vehmas-Lehto (1989), who combined it with methods in the pro-
spective mode as well. Her material was journalistic texts translated from Russian 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
133
to Finnish. Finnish readers usually recognized the translated texts to be transla-
tions (they were grammatically correct but felt to be clumsy or obscure etc.), and 
Vehmas-­Lehto explored the reasons for this. Using a combination of reaction tests 
and lateral comparisons with parallel texts, she pinpointed a variety of quanti-
tative features in the translations which break expectancy norms; these include 
the relative frequency of co-ordinated constructions, emotive words and clichés, 
sentence length, clause length, noun phrase length, noun and adjective frequency, 
and connective frequency. The study shows clearly that Finnish journalism had 
different discourse norms from those of Russian journalism (at the end of the 
Soviet period), and that translators did not take adequate account of these norm 
differences. 
There are of course problems with this method of assessment. One is the 
difficulty of holding all other variables constant apart from translated vs. non-­
translated text. Texts that are exactly parallel are hard – sometimes even impossi-
ble – to find. And even if one finds some, it is not always easy to show that they are 
themselves “typical” and therefore can reasonably be taken to represent a norm. 
Computer corpora can provide data on the quantitative distribution of morpho-
logical, lexical and syntatic features, but tagging is often less sensitive to textual or 
discourse features, which makes it more difficult to establish norms in these areas. 
(See also above Update, 2.10.)
On the other hand, norms are not laws, they are not absolute. We are con-
cerned with relative differences only. In most cases, a translator’s aim should pre-
sumably be to produce a text that is perceived to bear at least a Wittgensteinian 
family resemblance to the set of target-language texts into which it is designed 
to fit. 
5.5	
Introspective assessment
All the methods of assessment mentioned so far share one characteristic: the cri-
teria upon which they are based lie outside the translator’s own mind. We have 
assessed by looking at the source text, at target-reader reactions, at parallel texts, 
but we have not yet delved into the translator’s own decision-making processes. 
In keeping with some recent developments in translation theory more generally 
(see 2.8), translation assessment too has turned its attention to introspective data. 
It has even been suggested (e.g. by Wilss 1977) that the only way to assess 
a translation fairly is to take account of the translator’s own internal decision-­
making process – not in isolation, admittedly, but in combination with other 
models of assessment. In other words, we need to know why a translator has made 

134	 Memes of Translation
certain decisions before we can reasonably assess the results of these decisions. 
Ideally, in fact, we need to reconstruct the whole translation process. 
Although we cannot actually enter the translator’s head directly, there are 
various situations that can be set up from which at least some inferences can be 
made. One is the think-aloud protocol method, where translators are asked to 
give a verbal commentary on what is in their minds as they translate. One refine-
ment of this approach (suggested e.g. by House 1988) is to have subjects in pairs, 
giving running commentaries to each other: this has the advantage of being a 
more natural situation. Yet another is to interview translators immediately after 
the translation task, asking them why they wrote this, why they rejected that, 
what options occurred to them at this point, and so on. A further variant is to ask 
translators to write notes on their own translation process, as they translate. And 
there are also a number of computer applications that have been experimented 
with (e.g. Tommola 1986, and above, Update 2.10). 
Such methods allow only indirect access to mental processes, and oral pro-
tocols in particular have come in for some sharp criticism (discussed e.g. in 
Lörscher 1991). But in what way can the results of such research be relevant to 
translation assessment? 
I think we need to return here to the distinction made above between de-
scriptive and evaluative assessment. Insofar as protocol studies of various kinds 
do provide information about mental processes, they may well be relevant to a 
purely descriptive assessment. This, then, would not only state what a translator 
does textually, but also what he or she does mentally. Such an assessment would 
seek to trace the mental decisions which precede and accompany “texting”. In 
this sense, all protocol research into translation is relevant to descriptive trans-
lation assessment in the introspective mode. We can thus describe, for instance, 
the way in which professionals think about and use reference material, in com-
parison to the attitudes and practices of trainee translators (Jääskeläinen 1989); or 
look at the different decision criteria used by professionals and non-professionals 
(Tirkkonen-­Condit 1990); or analyse what is felt by different translators to be a 
translation problem (e.g. Krings 1986). 
However, this research does not directly constitute evaluative assessment. Re-
gardless of how a translator arrives at a final product, regardless of the decisions 
made or the attitudes held, the final product will be judged evaluatively on its 
own merits. Good translations may (in theory, at least) come from quite misguid-
ed decisions, by chance, as it were. What matters in the long run – evaluatively 
speaking – is whether the translation works for the readers it was intended for. By 
their fruits you shall know them, surely. 
This said, it must be added that protocol research nevertheless does have 
obvious evaluative applications: if non-professionals know what professionals 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
135
do, they can learn to imitate them and perhaps improve the quality of their own 
work – see the section below on pedagogical assessment. 
In terms of translation norms, the introspective mode of assessment is most 
closely associated with the accountability norm. In looking at the ways translators 
make decisions, in getting them to describe, explain or justify their choices, we 
are implicitly focusing also on ethical aspects of translatorial behaviour. We are 
stressing that translators are responsible for what they do. From this point of view 
alone, the introspective assessment model has a significant role to play in trans-
lation research. 
5.6	
Pedagogical assessment
In real life, much translation assessment is pedagogical. It is carried out by teach-
ers or professionals, and is applied to translations produced by translation train-
ees or language students (or perhaps other professionals). It typically takes place 
as part of translator training, and differs from the previous approaches (although 
it may incorporate and apply any of them) in that its main purpose is not descrip-
tive but evaluative. Its aim is to provide feedback that will enable the translator to 
improve the quality of future translations. A related aim is accreditation, to certify 
whether the translator in question has reached a predetermined standard. 
Both these kinds of evaluation start with a diagnosis, either implicitly or ex-
plicitly. This typically focuses on an analysis of what are felt to be errors in the 
translation. As argued above, errors are deviations from norms: strictly speak-
ing, they are unwanted deviations – we can exclude for the moment instances of 
norm-breaking that exceed expectations. In pedagogical assessment, what consti-
tutes a deviation that is “unwanted” will depend partly on the level of competence 
of the translator: assessors may well “accept” deviations in the work of beginners 
that they would not accept from more advanced trainees, for instance. “Unwant-
edness” also partly depends on who is doing the wanting: in my experience of 
professional pedagogical assessment, target-language native assessors often tend 
to be more tolerant of deviance than non-native assessors, because they naturally 
have a wider range of language competence in terms of which translations can 
be evaluated. Here too, we see that errors are relative, not absolute. The relevant 
norms are also relative: elastic, as it were. 
All the translation norms are relevant here. Perhaps the ones most frequently 
appealed to in this respect are the expectancy norms: when these are broken, or 
deviated from, the result is what Wilss (1977) calls errors of expression. When the 
relation norm is broken the result is either an error of comprehension manifested 
as “wrong meaning” in some sense, or a translation that is felt to be “too free” or 

136	 Memes of Translation
“too literal”, etc. When the communication norm is broken we get poor readabil-
ity, inappropriate effects, puzzled reader-responses and the like. And when the 
accountability norm is broken we have a translation that is manifestly careless, 
inaccurate or deceptive. 
In all pedagogical translation assessment, furthermore, one problem that can-
not be avoided is that of error gravity. There has to be some reason for saying that 
this error is worse than that one, that the general level of error in this translation 
places it above or below a given standard, and so on. Let us look at briefly some 
of the approaches here. 
Wilss (1977) focuses on the concept of the norm itself, drawing attention to 
its relative nature. He distinguishes between various levels of norms: (a) norms 
of the language system (langue), (b) usage norms in a given speech community, 
(c) usage norms with respect to appropriateness and social roles, and (d) usage 
with respect to individual parole. A similar view, with some variation of emphasis 
and terminology, is offered by Vehmas-Lehto (1989: 17f.): at the most basic level 
she places (a) conformity with the target-language system – i.e. grammaticality; 
this is followed by (b) conformity with the norms of acceptability, (c) with the 
functional style of the target language (appropriateness), and finally (d) with “the 
recommendable norms”, having to do with official sanction and readability, with 
“well-­written texts” rather than just any native target-language texts. 
Both these views presuppose a notion of “norms” that could be pictured as 
a series of concentric circles of target-language usage. Deviations occurring to-
wards the centre are implied to be “more serious” than those occurring more to-
wards the outer perimeter, although the actual definition of this perimeter varies. 
Both these views place the highest value on grammaticality as such; alternative 
priorities, however, might also be suggested, perhaps with acceptability or appro-
priateness at the centre. 
With respect to expectancy norms, several criteria of error gravity can be pro-
posed; but the trouble with these is that they often conflict with each other. One 
is: errors affecting a higher unit are worse than those affecting a lower unit. (Units 
are here understood as paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word, morpheme.) 
For instance, an incorrect clause structure is more serious than an incorrect 
phrase structure. An alternative formulation of this point is that global errors are 
worse than local ones. Another possible criterion is generality: if a grammatical 
rule is broken, is this rule one that applies very generally (such as verb concord in 
English), or does it apply only in a few or exceptional cases (such as the structures 
following particular verbs, e.g. the ing-form after avoid)? The breaking of more 
general rules is more serious. A third criterion might be frequency: breaking 
norms applying to frequent items (English articles, for instance) would be more 
serious than those applying to less-used items. A fourth could be the degree of 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
137
systematicity: repeated occurrences of the same deviation would be more serious 
than isolated occurrences. Fifth, generative grammarians might argue that errors 
traceable to earlier derivational stages should be worse than those traceable to 
later stages (such as inflections). And a sixth might be rule-boundness: all errors 
of grammar would be worse than errors of lexis, on this count, since grammar is 
more amenable to description by systematic rules; but some areas of grammar 
(articles?) seem less explicitly rule-bound than others (e.g. concord). Similarly, 
all deviations of grammar might be felt to be worse than deviations of style, since 
stylistic features are presumably outside the central core of norms and allow for 
more variation. 
With respect to the relation norm, we can usefully apply some of the pro-
posals scholars have made concerning various types of equivalence (cf. 1.2.2). 
Our interest here is not in equivalence as such, but in aspects of the source-target 
relation. One approach is to evaluate various aspects of the source-target relation 
separately, and evaluate the extent to which each relational aspect is in accordance 
with the expectations or requirements for the text-type in question. Such aspects 
can be defined as (a) the formal relation, (b) the semantic/stylistic relation, and 
(c) the pragmatic relation. Error gravity also enters the picture when this assess-
ment takes into account the expected relative priorities of these various relational 
aspects, for the translation in question. For many text-types, pragmatic and se-
mantic considerations are paramount; in such texts, therefore, deviation from the 
expected pragmatic and/or semantic relation would be more serious than devia-
tion from the expected formal relation. In other text-types, such as legal contracts 
for instance, the formal relation might have a higher priority. 
With respect to the communication norm, we can make use of research into 
the effects of various types of errors. Johansson (1978b) reports a series of exper-
iments testing the way in which different error-types affect the comprehensibility 
of the text and the degree of irritation of the reader. This research suggests, for 
instance, that (for English) errors in verb complementation are more disturb-
ing than those of concord, but that concord errors are worse than some types 
of word-order errors. Lexical errors disturb communication more than syntactic 
ones, as one might expect. Kußmaul (1995: 128f.) agrees that error assessment in 
professional translator training should focus on the communicative function of 
the item in question, but he points out that this should be related to the transla-
tion specification and its overall purpose. 
It might well be argued, however, that the most serious errors of all are those 
that break the accountability norm: cases where the translator has falsely repre-
sented the message, confused technical terms, miscopied figures or names, failed 
to check things that don’t seem to make sense, etc. 

138	 Memes of Translation
What the assessor can do, then, is to indicate the points in the text where 
some norm seems to have been broken, and note further which norm this is. In 
a feedback situation, the translator can then either propose a revised version or 
defend the original proposal. 
Whatever system of error gradation is used in pedagogical assessment, one 
further element still needs to be added: explanation. Ideally, when feedback is 
given to a translator, an attempt should be made to discover why the translator 
wrote the unwanted form in the first place. And it is at this point that the rele-
vance of the introspective model of assessment becomes clear. Translators should 
be encouraged to introspect, to justify their choices, to state objectively what their 
motivation had been for the strategies selected, why other possible strategies or 
alternatives had been rejected, and so on. 
What we end up with, then, is a picture of pedagogical assessment that involves 
all kinds of translation norms, and also all the other types of assessment. Further-
more, in addition to drawing attention to points where these norms have been 
broken, it is of course also encouraging to give feedback on places where reader 
expectations have been exceeded, where the translation is unexpectedly good. 
In this way, the feedback process becomes a continuous loop: drafts are pro-
duced, tested, perhaps rejected or reconsidered, new proposals are made and re-
fined in their turn, and so the process continues. If a translation product is a 
theory, literally a view, of the source text, the translating process does not end 
there: first views are followed by revisions, in a (theoretically) endless process 
inspired by the ideal of the “perfect translation” (i.e. optimal in a given situation). 
As we have seen, this conforms exactly to Popper’s schema of the evolution of 
scientific knowledge, inspired by the ideal goal of “truth”. The ultimate unattain-
ability of both truth and perfection is irrelevant: both are what Popper (1972: 237; 
following Kant) calls “regulative ideas”; they serve as guiding lights in these forms 
of human endeavour, and without them we should be floundering around even 
more in the dark than we are. 
5.7	
Mind the gap!
Any mode of translation assessment, then, is normative, in that it examines the 
extent to which translations conform to norms and values. However, not all in-
stances of norm-breaking are equally important, and some might even be desir-
able. We can set up three basic categories of norm-breaking, according to different 
relations between form and function. 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
139
(a) Function-enhancing. Some norm-breaking is done deliberately, to enhance the 
function (skopos) of the translation. Translations of advertisements or poetry, for 
instance, may deliberately exploit deviant spellings or structures or word orders 
(indeed, this happens so often that we might even see such deviations as the norm 
for such text-types, and so in this sense the norms would not in fact be broken; a 
translation might then become deviant by returning to the previous non-norm-
breaking norm…). Recall the marked, phonetic translation of Humpty Dumpty 
into French (cited in 3.4), for instance. 
Another way in which norm-breaking can enhance the function of a text is 
when the translator deliberately improves the text (e.g. via transediting) in order 
to make it better than the expected norm: one might cite certain types of bureau-
cratic or academic texts, for instance, which tend to come fairly low down on the 
reader-friendly scale in many languages. If translators then decide not to follow 
the perhaps clumsy style in which such texts are often written in the target lan-
guage, this shows that they have given priority to other norms than expectancy 
ones: to the communication and accountability norms, in fact. In other words, 
there is a conflict of norms. We shall return to this point in the last chapter. 
(b) Function-preserving. Translations which break norms but nevertheless pre-
serve functions (i.e. preserve the skopos) are often the work of non-native 
speakers of the target language. Formal expectations are not always met, but the 
message is generally clear enough. A good example is the Vienna hotel text cited 
above, which communicates clearly and well despite the signs of non-nativeness. 
(c) Function-changing. This refers to unintended changes of function, not to 
changes that form part of the translation commission. Instances of norm-­breaking 
that fall into this category are of course more serious. They crop up in the work of 
both native and non-native translators, for different reasons. 
Non-native translators may produce texts that are so far away from expectan-
cy norms that they cause laughter or scorn, or some other totally inappropriate 
reaction. A badly translated advertisement or company brochure obviously gives 
the impression that the company itself is inefficient and its products below stan-
dard. Here are some extracts from an English advertisement by a Finnish publish-
er, whose face we will save by calling it X: 
X has its customers now in whole Scandinavia… Children are familiar with 
our teaching materials throughout their school years. We also publish illustrat-
ed guides and other books for hobby and leisure… X is a reputed publisher of 
business and management books which deal with actual topics… Now X has 
its audience in other Scandinavian countries too. In the summer of 1992 we ac-
quired company Y, which enables X to deliver its books to an increasingly large 
marget [sic]. 

140	 Memes of Translation
Such a text, with its non-native word orders, ungrammaticalities (whole Scan-
dinavia, books for hobby), mistranslations (actual is intended to mean ‘topical, 
current’) and misprints, gives a sloppy image of a careless company: far from the 
intended function of the advertisement. 
Native speakers of the target language also occasionally produce translations 
which change the intended function in quite unacceptable ways. The reason here 
is often a misunderstanding of the source text. A delightful example comes from 
the published translation of a Finnish short story (“Hilda Husso”) by Maria Jotuni 
(let the translator remain anonymous). The text is a monologue, one side of a tele-
phone conversation between Hilda Husso, a middle-aged cleaning lady, and her 
ex-lover, now a head waiter. She tells him that she is thinking of getting married 
to a Swede and moving to Sweden, and asks him to keep an eye on their son, who 
is being brought up by foster parents in the country. At one point in the conversa-
tion, the lady explains why she has apparently decided to take the Swede’s offer of 
marriage, although it is clear that she still has a soft spot for her ex-lover. She says, 
in rather colloquial Finnish: 
	
ST:	 Arvelin ottaa miehen, kun on sopiva. On asioita, jotka puhuvat sen 
puolesta. Jalat ja vanhuus. 
	
	 Literal translation: I thought to take the man, since he is suitable. There are 
things which speak in favour of it. Legs and old age. 
In other words, she feels that because she is getting on a bit and her legs are giving 
her problems, she might not get a better offer. An appropriately colloquial transla-
tion, with some explicitation, might therefore be: “I thought I’d take him, he’ll do 
all right. There are other reasons, too – my legs are beginning to play me up, and 
I’m not as young as I was.” Jotuni’s underlying point is that people get married for 
many reasons, that there are many forms of love apart from the romantic one, that 
romantic love is not the only good relationship between people. 
Unfortunately, the published translation misses this point entirely and substi-
tutes another, totally inappropriate one. It reads: 
	
TT:	I’ve been thinking of saying yes to him. He will do. There are a few things 
to be said for him. His legs and his oldness. 
This raises roars of laughter in most readers: as if anyone – let alone the kind of 
person Hilda Husso is – would marry a man because of his legs! The error comes 
about because two syntactic features have been misread: in the second sentence, 
sen can mean either ‘him’ or ‘it’, but pragmatically it must mean ‘it’ here, i.e. the 
getting married; and (as is common in colloquial Finnish) the possessive suffix 
has been omitted from the two nouns in the last sentence because the possessor 
can be inferred to be the speaker, an inference that the translator has missed. 

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
141
The published translation has thus broken the relation norm at these points; it 
has also broken the communication norm, in that the message and effect are not 
what was intended; and it has broken the accountability norm, in that one won-
ders why the translator did not get his text checked by anyone before going into 
print, to guard against possible misreadings of the original: where was the Error 
Elimination stage? Furthermore, although the translator is a native speaker of En-
glish, even the expectancy norm seems to have been disturbed a bit, in the choice 
of the lexical item oldness. All in all, it is undesirable and in fact irresponsible to 
break norms in such a way that functions are also unacceptably altered. 
Some stations on the London Underground are built on a curve, so that the 
platforms do not line up precisely parallel with the trains. When a train arrives at 
one of these stations, a voice over the loudspeakers intones: Mind the gap! This is 
a good image for translators who are subjecting their Tentative Theories to Error 
Elimination. Compare Hervey and Higgins (1992: 24): translators seek to “mini-
mize dissimilarities”. 
There are several gaps to mind. One is that between source and target text. 
There must be, and remain, something of a gap: no train can actually touch the 
platform, but the usefulness of platforms is that they make it easier for people to 
get on and off trains. The nature of the inevitable gap must therefore be such as 
to optimize the flow. In information-theory terms, minding the gap thus corre-
sponds to reducing “noise”. There will also be an inevitable gap between the trans-
lation and its readers, just as there is one between any text and its readers. Here 
again, the point is obviously to minimize it, so that people do not fall through. 
And there are gaps too between translated texts and authentic non-translated TL 
texts, again to be minimized in many kinds of translation. There are even gaps 
between translators’ own aims and their achievements, between the ideal and the 
real, between what I know I ought to do and what I actually do. Finally, there 
may be ideological gaps between the values that have governed the translator’s 
work and those that govern the assessor’s; no translation criticism is, after, all, 
value-free. Interestingly enough, there are also serious ethical and philosophical 
reasons for focusing on gaps; we shall return to these in Chapter 7. 
We assess texts; implictly, we also thereby assess those responsible for the 
texts, we asses the translator’s expertise. The following chapter discusses how this 
expertise develops, and how it can be developed. 
5.8	
Update
One clear gap in this chapter has been the lack of any discussion of revision pro-
cedures, which by definition are concerned with Error Eradication, although 

142	 Memes of Translation
mention was made of Bly (1984). One reason might be that a wider interest in 
this topic is a relatively recent phenomenon. During the past two decades many 
important empirical studies have been published. Some of these focus on textual 
studies of what Toury calls “interim solutions” (e.g. Toury 1995: 181f.), i.e. the 
series of drafts which translators make, and the various changes made at each 
stage. Others take a more sociological view of the revision process as part of the 
workplace procedures of a team. The growing interest in revision was further en-
couraged by the publication in 2006 of the first official EU standard on translation 
services, CEN 15038. This has since been superseded (in 2015) by the internation-
al standard ISO 17100. One of the most influential scholars on this topic has been 
Brian Mossop, whose handbook on revision and editing gained a wide readership 
(Mossop 2007a). Mossop also published a useful summary of the main empirical 
research on revision up to that date (2007b).
Some of the research has been purely descriptive. For instance, Englund  
Dimitrova (2005) is interested in testing the literal translation hypothesis, accord-
ing to which translators tend to come up first with a more literal version, and then 
move to less literal versions as they correct their drafts. The hypothesis was large-
ly supported in her study. But many of the studies have taken an applied view, 
looking for the optimum revision system. (See e.g. Horguelin and Brunette 1998; 
Breedveld 2002; Brunette 2000; Brunette et al. 2005; Robert and Van Waes 2014.) 
There has also been recent work on applying usability heuristics to translation, as 
a way of improving quality (e.g. Suojanen et al. 2015).
Among the questions that have been investigated are the following. Is other-­
revision (i.e. revision by others) better than self-revision? Is revision on paper 
more reliable than revision on screen? Is it financially worth investing in two stag-
es of revision: first with relation to the source text, and then with relation to target 
function? On this point, the CEN and ISO standards mentioned above seem to 
assume that a double revision is sometimes better. They make a terminological 
distinction between the reviser, who checks the translation against the source, and 
the reviewer, who does a monolingual check on the translation, looking e.g. at ter-
minology and adherence to the conventions of the relevant domain. Translation 
scholars have noted that the CEN standard (on which the ISO standard is based) 
has evidently been influenced by the work of Christiane Nord (especially Nord 
1991): a good example of the way academic work can have useful practical effects!
Attention has also been paid to the problems that can arise in revision. Over-
keen revisers may provide instances of hyper-revision (unnecessary changes), 
under-­revision (where errors are not corrected) or even over-revision (the revi-
sion itself can introduce a new error). These terms are from the work of Künzli 
(e.g. 2007).

	
Chapter 5.  Translation as theory	
143
The question of how descriptive scholars should deal with what look like er-
rors has also received attention. If a descriptive scholar says of an item in a trans-
lation “X is an error, it should be Y”, it sounds as if they have changed hats and are 
now acting in the role of a translation critic, prescriptively. So they might just be 
content to say “this is indeed a puzzling solution…” A descriptive scholar might 
of course contact the translator (if this is possible), and draw his attention to the 
item in question. The translator might then say “oops, that’s a slip, it should of 
course be Y”, and this is then good descriptive evidence of a mistake. But if the 
translator sticks by the original translation, are we left only with a difference of 
opinion between the translator and the critic? And what if the translator cannot be 
contacted? This issue is discussed, with some interesting evidence, by Malmkjær 
(2004), who proposes a way of distinguishing between deliberate choices and er-
rors by investigating the systemacity of the assumed error in question. A system-
atic use of a given word, for instance, looks more like a deliberate choice than if it 
is used only once. But, one wants to add, couldn’t the systematic use of the word 
perhaps also indicate a systematic gap in the translator’s knowledge, rather than a 
deliberate choice? 
A very different line of research has been the revision, by human translators, of 
texts translated by machine: what is known as post-editing. The first major mono-
graph on this topic was Krings (2001), and the Internet now shows ever more 
seminars and guidelines on the topic, particularly with respect to localization. 
The website of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (http://
www.amtaweb.org/mt-for-translators/) says post-editing is now “one of the hot-
test most discussed topics in the translation industry”. (I feel I want to revise that 
quote and insert a comma after “hottest”…) See also O’Brien and Simard (2014).
The concept of translation quality has also been expanded to include the eth-
ical quality of the working conditions of the translators themselves (see especially 
Abdallah 2012). This will be discussed in the Update to Chapter 7. 


Chapter 6
The development of translational competence
6.1	
Stages of expertise
The contemporary conception of the professional translator’s role is that of an 
expert, someone with expertise, i.e. with translational competence. The focus of 
this chapter is on how this expertise is acquired. We shall first look at a theory of 
how human expertise develops, and then apply this to how people grow as trans-
lators, both by being taught and by learning on their own. A parallel will also be 
suggested with the growth of translation theory itself. 
In their critique of artificial intelligence, Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1986) set out 
five steps defining the process from “novice” to “expert” in the acquisition of any 
skill. (Their fundamental purpose is to argue that human expertise has features 
that can never be imitated by computers, but this particular argument is not rele-
vant to our present concern.) The steps are the following. 
Stage one: novice. The trainee learns “to recognize various objective facts and 
features relevant to the skill [in our case, the skill of translation] and acquires 
rules for determining actions based upon those facts and features” (1986: 21). The 
key points here are “recognition” and “rules”. Features which are to be recognized 
are defined so explicitly that they appear to the trainee to be “context-free”, and 
the rules to be applied to these features are therefore context-free rules. The au-
thors call the manipulation of such rules “information processing”. An example is 
the way a novice driver learns to change gear at given speeds: the relevant speeds 
are defined free of context, and the appropriate gear-changing rule is applied ac-
cordingly. At this level, say the authors, the trainee lacks a overall sense of the 
task at hand, and judges performance mainly by reference to these explicit rules. 
Behaviour is thus fully conscious, easily verbalized, and atomistic. 
Stage two: advanced beginner. After more experience of real situations, train-
ees begin to recognize not only relevant situational features that have been previ-
ously defined but also ones that have not been so defined; these may even be such 
that neither instructor nor learner can in fact define them explicitly, although they 
are mainfestly relevant to the task at hand. This more advanced kind of recogni-
tion is based on the trainee’s ability to perceive similarity with prior examples. 
Features thus recognized are “situational” as opposed to context-free (22–23). 
Drivers at this level, for instance, learn how to change gear in accordance with 

146	 Memes of Translation
the way they hear the engine noise, albeit not in any way that they could define 
explicitly, acoustically as it were. Behaviour is conscious, but less easily verbalized 
and less atomistic. 
Stage three: competence. As experience grows, and as the number of recog-
nized relevant features of the situation therefore also grows, it becomes increas-
ingly difficult to retain all the features in consciousness. It thus becomes necessary 
to develop a sense of priorities, and this is the crucial aspect of this phase. People 
learn “a hierarchical procedure of decision-making” (24). This entails the ability 
to see the situation more as a whole, to formulate a plan, and select the set of fac-
tors which are most important for the realization of the plan. A competent trainee 
has a conscious sense of the goal of the task, and it is this goal-awareness that 
determines the selection and prioritizing of the situational features deemed to be 
relevant. At this level, the learner is more of a “subject” than earlier, actively re-
viewing an array of situational facts and selecting from them in accordance with a 
conscious goal. The picture, therefore, is not one of information processing alone; 
it also involves problem-solving. One of their examples is of someone driving 
fast in an emergency, choosing the shortest possible routes, deliberately breaking 
norms or traffic rules wherever possible, driving with a very specific goal in mind. 
The authors stress that this stage involves the conscious choosing of an appro-
priate plan of action, and this necessity to choose affects the learner’s behaviour in 
that it introduces an element of personal responsibility. The learner is no longer 
simply reacting to a defined or undefined set of situational features, but overtly 
ranking these features and drawing conclusions about requisite action: in a word, 
solving a problem. Moreover, although the mental attitude during the process of 
recognition and selection is still what the Dreyfuses call “detached”, analytical, 
learners do feel responsible for the outcome of their actions, and emotional in-
volvement thus enters the picture at this stage. 
Rational problem-solving is one recognized form of intelligence; but much of 
our behaviour manifests still higher levels of expertise. 
Stage four: proficiency. Up to this point, argue the Drefuses, learners have 
been consciously following rules, processing information and making choices. 
At the level of proficiency, however, decisions are made less because of objective 
rules etc. and more because of personal experience. The recognition of certain 
situational features as being more salient than others is based on experience, on 
perceived similarities between the current situation and previous ones. The au-
thors call this “know-how” or “intuition”, not in any irrational or mystical sense 
but to describe “the sort of ability we all use all the time as we go about our ev-
eryday tasks” (29). They speak of “the intuitive ability to use patterns without 
decomposing them into component features” (28). In other words, this kind of 
understanding is not atomistic but holistic. 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	 147
But analytical thinking is still involved. “The proficient performer, while intu-
itively organizing and understanding his task, will still find himself thinking ana-
lytically about what to do” (29). It is as if the proficient performer wavers between 
intuitive understanding and rational, deliberative action, alternately involved in 
“the world of the skill” (29) and detached from it. Their example is of an experi-
enced driver approaching a curve on a rainy day, intuitively realizing he is going 
too fast, and then rationally deciding whether and when to remove his foot from 
the accelerator or apply the brakes. 
Stage five: expertise. At this final level, intuition takes over. Conscious delib-
eration is superseded, and nonreflective involvement is dominant. “An expert’s 
skill has become so much a part of him that he need be no more aware of it than 
he is of his own body” (30). “The expert driver becomes one with his car” (30). If 
any deliberation does occur, the authors say, it is not a matter of problem-solving 
but rather “critically reflecting on one’s intuitions” (32). Expert performance is 
beyond analytical, “calculative” rationality. It is “arational” (36) in that it gives pri-
ority to intuition, but it is also said to be characterized by “deliberative rationality”, 
which involves the testing and improving of intuitions. 
As described by the authors, this kind of rationality seems close to our Poppe-
rian paradigm: examination of the salient features of a situation, and observation 
of differences and similarities with past experience, lead intuitively to tentative 
solutions, and these are then submitted where necessary to scrutiny by delibera-
tive rationality. This is not a simple question of following rules or algorithms, but 
a process of self-reflection, a kind of monitoring which can be switched on at will, 
the aim being the overall improvement of the performance of the task. 
To sum up: “[i]nvolvement is essential for the holistic similarity recognition 
of proficient and expert performers. But if learning is to occur, some part of the 
mind must remain aloof and detached” (40). What the Dreyfuses call a “moni-
toring mind” is responsible for “fine tuning” in order to ensure “more effective 
guidance of future behavior” (40). Yet in between such moments of deliberative 
monitoring, expert performance proceeds as a “flow”, accompanied by a feeling 
of “euphoria”. 
This “flow” describes what happens “when things are proceeding normally” 
(30). Yet the range of what is normal is experienced differently by different people. 
We are all experts at breathing, and do it perfectly fluently most of the time, with-
out thinking about it and without euphoria; but in less usual situations we may 
well become conscious of it, and deliberately seek to control it, for instance when 
swimming, or in a very hot sauna (when one may deliberately try to breathe slowly, 
through cupped hands, to avoid scorching one’s throat). For experts in a particular 
field, of course, such situations are not unusual, not “problems”, and unlike the rest 
of us they will react appropriately without thinking. As the Dreyfuses put it (156): 

148	 Memes of Translation
“skill in any domain is measured by the performer’s ability to act appropriately in 
situations that might once have been problems but are no longer problems and so 
do not require analytic reflection.” Within a given field, then, we might say that the 
wider the range that is felt to be normal and problem-free, the greater the expertise. 
This view of the overall process of skill acquisition is thus one of gradual au-
tomatization: it goes from atomistic to holistic recognition, from conscious to 
unconscious responses, from analytical to intuitive decision-making, from cal-
culative to deliberative rationality, from detached to involved commitment. Stage 
by stage, we have: 
1.	 recognition of predefined features and rules 
2.	 recognition of non-defined but relevant features 
3.	 hierarchical and goal-oriented decision-making 
4.	 intuitive understanding plus deliberative action 
5.	 fluid performance plus deliberative rationality 
Let us now see how this view of learning can be applied to the acquisition of trans-
lational competence. 
6.2	
The significance of memes
Many practising translators may feel that translation theory is a waste of time and 
only hinders fluent access to intuition. Theory, it is commonly thought, exists 
solely in order to help practice, and if it doesn’t do this we are better off with-
out it. (See e.g. the opening debate in Chesterman and Wagner 2002.) I think 
such a reaction reveals a rather narrow view of theory, and also a reluctance to 
introspect, a mistrust of deliberative rationality, and perhaps a suspicion about 
consciousness-raising as a pedagogical principle. Those who reject theory would 
claim that we learn best through developing procedural knowledge, not declara-
tive knowledge. 
But consider this claim in the light of the Dreyfuses’ five stages in the growth 
of expertise. If the Dreyfuses’ argument holds good, conscious awareness plays 
a crucial role at two points. First, in the early stages of novice, advanced begin-
ner and competent performer, where task situations are analysed for specific fea-
tures and explicit “rules of behaviour” are learned and applied. And second, in 
the higher stages of proficiency and expertise, when performance results or be-
haviour need to be monitored and fine-tuned. In the earlier stages, consciousness 
is “switched on” all the time, but in the later stages recourse is made to conscious 
deliberative reflection only intermittently. 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	 149
Recall, too, Steiner’s distinction (1988; see 4.1 above) between conscious ac-
tions, readily accessible to verbal report, and more automatic ones. In Dreyfusian 
terms, behavioural or cognitive procedures at the early stages of performance skill 
are conscious, but they typically become unconscious at higher levels of expertise, 
and normally unconscious procedures can be made conscious at these higher lev-
els if the situation requires. An expert performer, by this definition, has the abil-
ity to manipulate the monitoring mind at will, to switch between automatic and 
deliberative actions as the occasion demands (cf. also Kiraly’s model, 1995: 99f.). 
Insofar as translating is seen as a skill, an expert translator is thus someone 
who works largely on intuition, who has automatized a set of basic routines, and 
who can draw on deliberative rationality when the need arises, in the solving of 
unusual problems or in the comparison and justification of possible solutions. 
Translation tasks will naturally vary in the degree to which they require delibera-
tive rationality. Translating poetry, for instance, may involve the monitoring mind 
from start to finish, with no possibility to exploit ready routines. A translator 
who is deliberately setting out to break a prevailing norm, to surprise readers (for 
whatever reason), is in a similar situation: critical conscious engagement may be 
required throughout. At this end of the continuum, indeed, we can query whether 
translation can properly be called a “skill” at all. At the other extreme, a translator 
of routine documents or certificates may be able to operate automatically for most 
of the time. One mark of the expert professional is presumably the ability to judge 
precisely when deliberative rationality is needed and how it should be used. 
What does this have to do with memes? Precisely this: memes are concep-
tual tools. Useful memes are aids to thought. And as such they are also aids to 
skilled performance. This book has discussed various kinds of memes. We first 
introduced some universal supermemes of translation theory, and then looked at 
certain historical memes illustrating how concepts of translation and of the trans-
lator’s role have changed over the centuries. I pointed out that translation norms 
are also kinds of memes, insofar as they are indeed recognized to be norms. Trans-
lation laws are also memes of a kind, to the extent that they are known. And so are 
widely-used translation strategies. All such memes constitute a pool of concepts 
at the disposal of translators who wish to improve their expertise. 
In the Dreyfus model, during the beginning stages, these memes will be per-
ceived and used consciously; but when translators grow in expertise memes sink 
below the threshold of awareness, yet remain accessible to deliberative rationality 
when required. Their relevance is thus fourfold: to the novice and beginner be-
coming aware for the first time of the wide range of thinking about translation; to 
the competent or proficient practitioner needing to explain or justify choices and 
decisions made; to the expert wishing to fine-tune tentative intuitive solutions; 
and finally to the teacher, critic or assessor of translation skills. 

150	 Memes of Translation
An awareness of what I called supermemes stakes out the basic co-ordinates 
of the whole business of translation. Awareness of the historical memes enables 
translators to see their own social role in a historical context, and perhaps clar-
ify their own attitudes towards this role. Awareness of those memes that have 
become translation norms establishes “regulative ideas” which then guide trans-
lational behaviour. Awareness of general translation laws can also regulate trans-
lational behaviour, in a different sense: if one is aware that translators tend to 
explicitate, or to succumb to interference or stylistic flattening or normalizing, 
one can guard against this. And awareness of common strategies can help to au-
tomatize frequently used translation routines, as the following section illustrates. 
Indeed, awareness of theory in general, of the explanatory power of theoretical 
concepts, is widely accepted as an important part of professional training in any 
field, and scarcely needs to be justified separately in translator training (but see 
Gile 1995: 13f., nevertheless). 
It is not, then, that a declarative knowledge of memes is an obstacle to fluent 
procedural knowledge. On the contrary: such declarative knowledge is surely a 
necessary prerequisite to expertise. Once acquired, such knowledge does not need 
to be retained constantly in consciousness, as the Dreyfuses’ stages of expertise 
illustrate; yet even experts can profit by having access to it when required. This is 
not a particularly original point, of course. Arguing along similar lines, Kußmaul 
(1995: passim) also gives great prominence to a translator’s self-awareness and the 
need to cultivate this. 
We can also note in passing that the importance of awareness, of reflectivity 
in learning, of learning to learn, is a crucial element in pedagogical approaches 
such as experiential learning (Kolb 1984) and applications of action research (e.g. 
Kemmis and McTaggart 1988). 
6.3	
Suggestions for teaching
This section is addresssed primarily to teachers and trainers of translation skills. 
If the Dreyfuses are right in their understanding of how expertise grows, the 
process is one that starts with an explicit focus on salient aspects of the transla-
tion situation, a focus on consciousness-raising, in fact (see Shlesinger 1992, for  
an interesting report on a consciousness-raising exercise that seemed to have a 
clear effect on the translation process). But it does not stop there: the ability to 
recognize relevant situational features and to choose appropriate response strate-
gies becomes increasingly automated and intuitive as expertise grows, until con-
scious awareness itself becomes a tool which an expert can resort to at will, via 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
151
deliberative rationality. Consider now how this approach can be applied in devel-
oping an awareness of translation strategies and norms. 
Exercises with strategies 
Exercises one can do with translation strategies can follow the Dreyfuses’ stages 
of expertise quite closely. At the novice stage, typical strategies such as those dis-
cussed in Chapter 4 can be introduced and defined, and students can be taught 
to recognize certain predefined strategies when comparing source texts with 
their published translations. The strategies are thus learned as concepts, as rules 
of thumb. A typical instruction might be: find three examples of a transposition 
strategy in this paragraph. 
At the advanced beginner stage, students can be asked to examine a trans-
lation alongside its original and list the strategies they observe. The assumption 
here is that the basic strategies will be familiar concepts by this time, and that 
students now have the ability to recognize them in context, situationally. Practice 
can also be given in the use of specific strategies: students can be asked to use a 
given strategy in translating certain marked passages of a text (or a number of 
separate sentences). The rubric could be: translate the following sections using 
the converses strategy. Or: translate the following sentences in such a way that the 
clause structure changes from passive to active. Or: translate the following, for 
such-and-such a readership, adding whatever information you think necessary. 
Another type of exercise is to mark a source text right through with code num-
bers indicating certain strategies, as guidelines for the students. A mark G8 in 
the text, for instance, would suggest: think about making a cohesion change here. 
One such practice text might focus exclusively on syntactic strategies, another on 
semantic ones and a third on pragmatic ones. 
At the competence stage, with its focus on analytic decision-making, a pri-
mary focus is on the question “why?” Students can be asked to analyse published 
translations, and suggest reasons why the translator used certain strategies, what 
priorities or goals the translator has evidently had in mind at this point. Alterna-
tively, as a pretranslation exercise, they might be asked to state what strategy they 
would use at a particular point, and why. 
At the proficiency stage, the aim is to move away from analytical thought and 
towards intuition. Students can be asked to translate a text under some time pres-
sure, following their intuition about the appropriate strategies and not stopping 
too much for detached thought. When the task is completed, time can then be 
given to a rational analysis, comparison and evaluation of the strategies selected. 
Group discussion might also be based on comments each member makes about 
the intuitive work of other members. Practice of this sort might also bring to light 
new strategies that the group had not yet considered, deriving from spontaneous 

152	 Memes of Translation
translating activity. Alternatively, students could be explicitly encouraged to in-
vent new strategies from their own experience. Another way to underline the 
intuitive element is to use texts the students have written themselves (see below). 
It has also been pointed out (e.g. by Séguinot 1991) that translators who have 
got beyond the analytic decision-making stage tend more to be guided by higher-­
level factors such as the overall nature of the translation commission. Lower-­level 
decisions are then made more automatically, unconsciously even, leaving the 
mental monitor free to focus on more global aspects of the task. This point might 
also be made use of in teaching at this stage: explicit attention can be drawn to the 
way in which higher-level goals affect lower-level choices. (See also below.) 
At the stage of true expertise, teaching is scarcely necessary, by definition. 
Exercises on accountability 
The accountability norm is something that can be drawn attention to early in 
translation training: an awareness of the ethical responsibility of a translator is 
fundamental. A number of practical exercises seem useful in this respect. 
One is “personal translation” into the non-native language. This is an exercise 
designed to trigger emotional, subjective feelings about one’s own writing, to see 
how one is answerable for one’s own text. Trainees write a short essay in their 
native language; this can be on any topic, but ones that involve some subjective, 
impressionistic element generally work best. They are not told at this stage how 
the exercise will proceed, so that they can write “naively”, naturally. Pairs are then 
asked to translate each other’s texts into the target language. These translations are 
then returned to their original writers, who are given the task of evaluating the 
translation of their own text, giving feedback direct to the translator. Seeing one’s 
own text in another language arouses powerful subjective responses, and these in 
turn lead to fruitful discussions. The whole exercise thus stresses the importance 
of being personally involved in the translation process. Receiving immediate 
feedback from a real authority – the original writer, who is just as bilingual as the 
translator in this case – enhances this effect. 
Another exercise focusing on accountability is summary translation. This 
stresses the translator’s responsibility for selecting what needs to be translated and 
structuring it appropriately. A summary translation is naturally more like the trans-
lator’s “own” text than an “ordinary” translation is, since in some sense the trans-
lator is also producing (mentally, or in the form of notes) the source. This exercise 
also overtly stresses the way in which translators do indeed “manipulate” texts. 
Both these exercises are thus useful at the beginning stages of expertise, when 
the emphasis is on the raising-to-consciousness of crucial concepts and behaviour 
patterns. 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
153
An additional technique that underlines accountability for one’s text is pro-
cess writing. Because this underlines not the end-product but the process which 
leads to it, writers are forced to take the responsibility for constantly moulding 
and manipulating their texts; the texts remain “alive”, responsive and dynamic, 
not static. Process-writing methods can obviously be used in translation teaching 
as well as composition teaching: time can be given for drafting and redrafting, re-
sponding to feedback, final revision etc., in a heuristic process that exactly match-
es our Popperian schema. 
Gile (1994) makes a similar point, stressing the usefulness of focusing on the 
translation process rather than the product, both in training and in feedback or 
assessment, particularly during the early phases of training. Gile further notes 
that providing feedback in the form of questions rather than criticism can help 
to stimulate students to improve their own working methods. Questions provoke 
introspection, and hence relate to accountability too. 
Exercises on the communication norm 
Similarly, there are a number of ways of focusing on the communication norm. 
One is discussed by Jakobsen (1994b) under the rubric of “starting from the (oth-
er) end”. The idea here is that students should be given more practice in writing 
texts in the target language before they get round to actual translating. They will 
then have a better view of what the desired end-product of a translation should 
look like, and avoid the pitfalls of interference or translationese. Practice in orig-
inal text production, argues Jakobsen, also emphasizes that both writing and 
translating start with the need for a text, and thus underlines the importance of 
the extra-textual factors creating this need. Such work also stresses how the sko-
pos of any text affects the way it is put together. 
An obvious application of this idea is to exploit the use of target-language 
parallel texts as models when constructing a text of a given type: students are thus 
sensitized to the idea of matching texts against a text-type template. 
Another application is to vary the way in which background information texts 
are introduced to support the writing of original texts. These background texts 
can be first in the target language, but then increasingly in the source language as 
well, so that students need to process more and more from one language to the 
other. Original target-language writing gradually merges into actual translation. 
Furthermore, a text that is being written for a genuine communicative purpose 
is experienced as being “warm”, in that the writer feels “involved” in its produc-
tion. In this respect, “starting from the other end” also focuses on accountability. 
The communication norm can also be the main focus in exercises that start 
from the source-text end. One form of practice here is source-text rewriting. This 
is a kind of pretranslation exercise that focuses on the importance of transediting 

154	 Memes of Translation
when necessary. A badly-written source text is rewritten over and over again, for 
instance by successive members of a group, until the whole group is satisfied with 
it as a source text, satisfied that it meets agreed criteria of clarity, logic, readability 
etc. If the source text is in fact in the native language of the trainees, this sensitiz-
ing to style will perhaps develop more easily. 
Source-text rewriting also prepares translators to cope with the frustrations of 
being faced with source texts in real life that are indeed clumsy or obscure. Such 
rewriting (mentally or physically) is all too often a normal part of the translator’s 
work, and should not come as a surprise. After all, not everyone is a language 
expert. 
Building on this, students can then be given target-language texts (not nec-
essarily translations) which could also be “cleaned up” and edited in a similar 
way. This exercise has the further advantage of representing the kind of work that 
translation-trained language experts often have to do: polishing target-language 
texts written by someone else. 
Such exercises thus emphasize that the translator should be an expert in com-
munication, not in theory but in practice. A declarative knowledge of the kind of 
editorial changes one often needs to make should then transfer into procedural 
knowledge, along the lines outlined by the Dreyfuses. 
Exercises on the relation norm 
As regards the relation norm, the main problem seems to be a question of attitude. 
After secondary school, students and trainees typically have a very narrow view of 
what the relation between source and target should be. They perhaps have some 
idea of equivalence, based on the kind of translation work they did at school. This 
idea is often couched in terms of absolute “sameness” in some way or other: there 
is an assumption that the translation must have the “same meaning”, “same con-
tent” or “same style” as the original, that it should convey the “same message” or 
have the “same form”. It usually goes hand in hand with an undifferentiated ten-
dency to translate rather literally. This assumption often continues to be held even 
in some professional circles: a good example of an unusually persistent meme! 
However, as I have argued earlier, I do not believe it is a useful notion, nor even a 
theoretically tenable one. 
In my view, the aim of translation training in this respect should therefore 
be to broaden trainees’ concepts of what a translation can be; in other words to 
increase trainees’ awareness of the wide variety of relations that can legitimately 
hold between a source text and its legitimate translation. Such exposure should 
develop a flexibility of attitude and response, and this in turn should enhance the 
“fluid” performance that is characteristic of expertise. 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
155
Several general teaching procedures seem to be applicable here. One is to pres-
ent trainees with a wide variety of texts that are fairly claimed to be translations 
and to study the kinds of source-target relations which they manifest, comparing 
originals with their translations. These text-pairs should be of all possible types. 
Attention could then be focused on possible correlations between relation-type 
and text-type, or between relation-type and translation-skopos. This is actually 
another kind of pretranslation exercise, in that the focus is entirely analytical, 
looking only at existing translations as products. 
A second procedure is to focus more on translation as a process: to take a 
single source text and examine how it either has been, or would be, translated in 
different ways depending on the audience, skopos etc., in order to see in practice 
how the source-target relation does actually vary. This variation is different from 
the purely idiosyncratic differences between one translator and another translat-
ing the same text for the same readership. To take a very brief example: in my own 
translation of Karlsson’s textbook on Finnish Grammar (1983), I gave very literal 
(but not morphemic) glosses of the various example sentences, following the ba-
sic constituent order as far as possible, sometimes even resorting to ungrammati-
cal English, in order to illustrate the Finnish structure. So for instance 
	
ST:	 Mistään maasta ei tule enemmän edustajia kuin Suomesta. 
was translated as 
	
TT:	From no country are there coming more representatives than from 
Finland. 
I claim that, for the skopos of this particular translation commission, this is a 
legitimate translation (not the only one, granted: some readers might prefer a 
morpheme-­by-morpheme version). But I would of course translate the same sen-
tence rather differently in a different target context. 
A third approach is to examine stated assumptions about the desired source-­
target relation that are clearly inappropriate in certain cases. One such is provoc-
atively discussed by Vuorinen (1994), who criticizes the blanket statement in the 
guidelines laid down by the Finnish Association of Translators and Interpreters, 
to the effect that translators should seek to preserve the content and style of the 
original. Vuorinen sets this injunction against a text containing a number of sty-
listic obscurities, and where the author made a claim – that patents are not subject 
to strict discourse norms – which any translator would presumably reject. Most 
professional translators commissioned to translate such a text, argues Vuorinen, 
would feel free to tidy up the argument; furthermore, they would perhaps either 
check with the original writer whether the claim about patents was really what 

156	 Memes of Translation
was intended, or even omit this item from the text’s list of “freer” kinds of texts, 
and thereby save the original writer from an embarrassing slip. To make such 
changes, and hence to manipulate and alter the relation between source and tar-
get, is to take true responsibility for the translation. Translatorial accountability 
thus means balancing the interests of all the various parties involved, not simply 
giving priority to source-text content without question. 
Exercises on expectancy norms 
Expectancy norms are of course taught anyway, via attention to grammaticality, 
acceptability and appropriateness. In addition, students can be made aware of 
many of the basic text and discourse norms of the target language by comparing 
distributions of features in their own translations with distributions in parallel 
texts. Parallel texts are obviously worth studying in detail as pretranslation exer-
cises, too. 
There is a further pedagogical point to be made here, which derives from our 
earlier discussion of norm validation (cf. 3.5.2 and 3.8). It was pointed out there 
that some texts conform to general expectancy norms in the sense that they do 
indeed meet the expectations of most of their readers, but that a subgroup of these 
readers (norm authorities, for example) might still feel that these texts are open 
to criticism in terms of their lack of clarity, readability or the like: they would not 
conform to higher, “recommendable norms”. 
These recommendable norms will surely form part of any curriculum de-
signed to train language experts, including translators. (If this sounds unneces-
sarily elitist or purist, recall that we can all breathe, but some people learn to 
breathe “better” than others – opera singers, for instance, or competitive swim-
mers – and that there are experts in breathing who give instruction in this skill.) 
One example of a concept worth teaching from this point of view is iconicity, the 
optimal structuring of form as a mirror of meaning. 
6.4	
Ontogenetic = phylogenetic?
One of Darwin’s most provocative ideas was that the ontogenetic development of 
the individual parallels the phylogenetic development of the species. If we apply 
this metaphorically to the acquisition of translational expertise, we can ask the 
following question: does the ontogenetic development of an individual transla-
tor tend to follow the “phylogenetic” development of translation theory? That is, 
might the changing attitudes and ideas of individual translator trainees reflect 
the development of general translation memes through history? (A caveat: I do 
not wish to imply here that modern translations are somehow “better” or “more 
developed” than earlier ones!)

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
157
A pedagogical corollary of this question would be to wonder whether the 
training process could be enhanced by deliberately exploiting this similarity. Fur-
thermore, it would provide a good (and highly motivating) reason why trainees 
should also be taught something of the history of translation theory: in so doing, 
trainees would also be acquiring the conceptual tools to observe their own prog-
ress. A degree of self-awareness would thus be built in to the training process right 
from the start, and trainees would see themselves quite naturally as participating 
in a historical process. (There are also emancipatory aspects to such an approach, 
which we shall return to in the following chapter.)
The idea fits well into the general Popperian view of the evolution of knowl-
edge that I have been following. Popper applies the same heuristic schema to both 
phylogenetic and ontogenetic development. 
Let us look at what this idea might imply in practice. Recall that, for Popper, 
historical development takes place via trial and error, heuristic problem-solving: 
proposed solutions are found wanting, they lead to new problems or reformula-
tions of old ones, and so on. In Chapter 2, I suggested that the history of trans-
lation theory could be seen as an approximate succession of eight broad stages, 
each focusing on a different problem or set of problems. Suppose now that these 
“phylogenetic” stages represent a similar succession of “sensitive periods” in a 
translator’s ontogenetic development. Perhaps translator training could react 
accordingly. Imagine, for instance, that ontogenetically each stage represents 
an academic term… By swinging from one viewpoint to another, in an ordered 
succession, trainees may even acquire a sense of the complementarity, of the co-­
existence of differences, which lies at the very heart of translation. 
I suggested that the first stage was that of Words. Surely this is where the indi-
vidual translator starts, too, e.g. deciphering an item on a menu. Or one wonders 
what the word for X is in language Y. Beginning translators – real novices – surely 
tend to translate “word for word”. Indeed, teachers often complain that their stu-
dents spend too much time on purely lexical problems, that they think at the word 
level only (cf. Séguinot 1991). A common pedagogical reaction, I think, is irrita-
tion, and an urge to get on to the next stage. But imagine possible alternatives: if 
it is acknowledged that this is indeed where translators start, why not exploit this 
tendency? 
At this very first stage, trainees could be introduced to dictionaries and 
thesauruses, and also central theoretical concepts such as denotation and con-
notation, aspects of lexical semantics, componential analysis, lexicography, the 
translation of technical terms – in short, any significant aspects of overall transla-
tion competence that pertain specifically to lexis. At this point, too, the big debate 
on translatability can be opened: can words of different languages ever “mean the 
same”? 

158	 Memes of Translation
My second stage was the Word of God, marked by a focus on grammatical 
form and literal translation. In my experience, students entering university train-
ing are usually at this stage, largely because of their school experience of trans-
lation. Here again, one often hears criticism of the school tradition, but why not 
rather acknowledge it as one necessary stage in the overall process? This would 
be the point to introduce literal translation as only one variant – a perfectly valid 
one as such, but only one among several others. Overt attention might be given 
to Nida’s minimal transfer (1964; Nida and Taber 1969) as compared to his literal 
(ungrammatical) and literary (stylistically more polished) transfers. Or one could 
start by introducing Newmark’s distinction (1981) between semantic and com-
municative translation, together with a discussion on when one method might be 
more appropriate than the other. One focus at this stage could be on text-types 
that are indeed normally translated with priority given to the form of the original, 
such as some kinds of philosophical or legal texts. Another could be on technical 
translation, with its high requirement of factual accuracy. 
Stage three was that of Rhetoric. This introduces criteria of stylistic natural-
ness and flexibility in the target language. Particularly when trainees are working 
out of their native language, the control of the target language needs to be broad-
ened and deepened at this stage. This is where Jakobsen’s suggestion (1994b, men-
tioned above) comes in: introduce more practice in original writing in the target 
language, including creative writing in particular. Any writing practice not linked 
to a source text would be relevant here. 
One proposal that does involve source texts but still seems to fit this stage 
exactly is the variational method advocated by Hewson and Martin (1991). Their 
approach to translation is based on two sets of paraphrased variants: paraphrases 
are first elicited for a sentence or section of the source text, and then a second set 
of similar paraphrases is elicited in the target language. (The emphasis is realisti-
cally on similarity, not sameness.) Differences between the variants are analysed, 
for both languages. Then the optimal target version is selected from this set, in ac-
cordance with the relevant target-situation constraints and norms. This approach 
thus stresses the ability to produce as many variants as possible in both languages, 
and then to filter out the most appropriate target one – precisely corresponding 
to Pym’s double concept of translational competence outlined above (5.1). The 
whole method seems an excellent way to practice proficiency-­stretching, in both 
source and target languages. 
As regards the associated theoretical concepts that seem pertinent here, ob-
vious areas are stylistics, textlinguistics and rhetoric. Other more practical skills 
that relate to this stage are those of editing and proof-reading. 
Stage four I called Logos, centring on language as a creative force and (hence) 
on literary translation. A central concept from this stage was the notion of the 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
159
deliberately “hybrid” translation, where the original still shone through the trans-
lation and a foreign touch was retained. What this often meant in practice was 
that the translation preserved the same order of sememes as the original, the same 
information order (see Kelly 1979: 224). One pedagogical application is thus to 
explore the distinction between information order (given – new) and grammat-
ical order: with many text-types, preserving information order in translation is 
more important than preserving grammatical order. This distinction can then 
lead to an examination of the whole field of thematization, emphasis, marked vs: 
unmarked expression and the like. 
A further application here comes from the distinction between overt and co-
vert translation (House 1981): some source texts are so source-culture-bound that 
their translations must be overt translations; other kinds of translation can be 
submitted as being truly parallel to non-translated target-language texts. Practice 
work can exploit this distinction. Examples of overt translations include “hybrid-­
type” literary translations, political speeches, books about source-culture realia 
(such as the Finnish grammar mentioned above), etc. After the freer stylistic play 
of the Rhetoric stage which demoted the status of the source text, this Logos stage 
pulls trainees back to the source again, reminding them that certain kinds of texts 
must be translated overtly, manifesting the translator’s presence quite openly. It 
thus underlines the importance of the text-type as a factor determining the trans-
lator’s decisions. It also reminds us that the translator’s task is not always to be 
an invisible window between source text and target reader, but a good deal more 
complex and varied – and this in turn emphasizes the translator’s responsibility. 
Work might be done on the various ways in which translators do responsibly 
signal their presence, by footnotes, glosses, additions in brackets, deliberately 
marked style, or whatever. 
Trainees might also find it of interest to look at deconstructionist ideas of trans-
lation at this point: see e.g. Gentzler (1993), Koskinen (1994a, b), Vieira (1994). 
Stage five, Linguistic science, obviously underlines the usefulness of a basic 
linguistic literacy, particularly as an aid to detailed analysis of the source text: 
see for instance Nord (1991). The superordinate science of semiotics, too, might 
usefully enter the curriculum at this point, as a discipline offering a general con-
ceptual framework in which matters translatorial can be pondered. (See for in-
stance Gorlée 1994, and more recently Hartama-Heinonen’s work, e.g. 2008.) 
Translators, after all, are one kind of signing animal. Both linguistics (in the broad 
sense, including semantics and pragmatics) and semiotics can provide concep-
tual tools which make it easier to assess alternative versions during the Error 
Elimination phase. 
Contrastive analysis also becomes relevant at this stage, as a way of specify-
ing the range of choice available in both source and target languages. It stresses 

160	 Memes of Translation
the importance of being able to stand back and take an analytical view of the 
two langues. The more translators are aware of what is available, what the system 
offers (Catford’s unconditioned equivalents), the more reliable their judgements 
ought to be about which variant to select (as parole) in any given case (Catford’s 
conditioned equivalents). 
At this stage, too, trainees could begin to explore the translation proce-
dures discussed by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958) or the various shifts classified by  
Catford (1965), or the set of strategies suggested above, Chapter 4. 
Stage six, emerging from the wider semiotic and pragmatic concerns of stage 
five, was Communication. At this stage the trainees clarify their own social im-
ages, their social roles as translators, as expert communicators. They need to take 
account of the overall nature of the translation commission, who requires the 
translation, who pays, who will publish it, who will read it, and so on. (There is an 
extensive discussion of such questions in Nord 1991.) After the close linguistic fo-
cus of the previous stage, the Communication stage centres not on the text but on 
the situation. The matters at issue here thus concern communication in general. 
From the teaching point of view, several topics become particularly relevant 
at this stage. One would be the theory of communication itself, perhaps based on 
Grice’s (1975) co-operative maxims of quality, quantity, relevance and manner, 
together with other general pragmatic principles such as those of politeness. An-
other, more practical topic would be readability: trainees could measure the read-
ability of their own translations, for example, using a standard formula. A third 
teaching point might be a critique of the concept of equivalence, based perhaps 
on a reading of Gutt (1991): no communication will be interpreted by any two 
people in exactly the same way. 
Stage seven moves out from the communicative situation to the cultural level, 
and in particular to the target culture. Translated texts must be embedded in the 
target culture, in whatever way is deemed appropriate. With this in mind, students 
might be introduced to the polysystem theory of culture at this stage (see 2.7). 
Specific attention might be paid to culture-bound terms in the source language, 
and to translation strategies that can be resorted to in dealing with these. (See e.g. 
Florin 1993, and for a later overview Leppihalme 2011.) And yet another is the 
translation of allusions (Leppihalme 1997, and see 7.6 below). 
Such topics also illustrate that translators inevitably manipulate their texts, 
and manipulation is something that has ideological overtones; at this fairly ad-
vanced stage, translators would do well to be aware of this aspect of their work, 
and take responsibility accordingly. In order to see this, students might study the 
different ways in which texts are translated from dominant to peripheral cultures 
and vice versa. They might study how translation norms change from period to 
period and from culture to culture. They might be asked to specify some of the 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
161
expectancy norms currently prevailing in a particular target culture. And they 
might even be asked to state their own beliefs about the way a translator should 
behave. 
My final stage I called Cognition. This represented the growing interest in 
probing into the translator’s black box, in using a variety of means to infer some-
thing about the decision-making process. Ontogenetically, too, it comes as an ap-
propriate final stage, symbolizing a translator’s self-awareness. If translators do 
indeed grow in expertise in something like the way I have suggested here, this 
self-­awareness will also include an awareness of the “phylogenetic” development 
of the profession itself, and of ideas about it. To progress without such awareness 
is, I think, to progress blind, and also to translate blind. If a theory is a way of see-
ing, theories can indeed bring insight: hence, as I have mentioned before, the ul-
timate motivation for teaching translation theory alongside translation practice. 
Self-awareness as a translator can also free one from inappropriate dogmas. 
And in so doing, it reinforces a translator’s status as an emancipated subject rath-
er than a submissive object, a subject who takes full responsibility for his or her 
actions. 
It is instructive to compare this Translator’s Progress with another account 
of the translator’s ontological path towards emancipation. Building on Bloom’s 
([1975] 1980) chart of the evolution of the “strong poet”, Robinson (1991: 109f.) 
offers a poetico-theological framework of six stages whereby the translator is 
gradually released from “instrumentalization” (i.e. the belief that a translator is a 
mere instrument, totally subservient to the source text). Robinson’s stages may be 
paraphrased as follows: 
1.	 Idealized instrumentality. This is said to represent the translator’s infancy, 
which the translator must “learn to grow out of’ (110). The translator is “in 
love” with the source text, but is entirely passive, brings no “fire” of his/her 
own to the relationship. In some quarters, suggests Robinson, considerable 
pressure is exerted upon translators to remain in this infantile state. 
2.	 Self-conscious submission. The translator still surrenders all initiative to the 
source text, but does so consciously, as an act of will, and with an increasing 
sense of what this submission actually entails. This awareness then begins to 
undermine the submissiveness. The translator consciously dons a mask, and 
knows that it is a mask, and knows that masks can be changed. 
3.	 Chosen instrumentality. Although the translator at this stage is no longer un-
der the sway of the source writer’s authority, “when the translator looks inside 
for a personal response, some unknown “force” takes over and guides him or 
her back to instrumentality. And it feels like his or her own desire! I want to 

162	 Memes of Translation
be the instrument of the SL [source-language] writer: I choose instrumental-
ity!” (112) 
4.	 A word of his or her own. This stage represents the beginning of the finding of 
one’s own voice, a breaking through the “ideosomatic programming” at last, 
to a word of one’s own. Citing Bloom, Robinson explicates this “word” as a 
kind of driving force, a moral act: recall my interpretation of the logos idea in 
Chapter 2. 
5.	 Total interpretation. This denotes a “fullness of response” on the part of the 
translator. Robinson glosses this as a tolerance of contradictions and incon-
sistencies; I take it to represent a kind of response to the text as an organic 
whole. 
6.	 Dialogical engagement. This marks “the strong translation as act, the act of 
translation as a dialogical engagement with both the SL writer and the TL 
[target-language] receptor” (115). This Bakhtinian view Robinson then de-
velops at length in the remainder of his book. He emphasizes the translator’s 
status as equal partner in the dialogic interaction, non-subservient, non-­
instrumental, able to respond flexibly in a wide variety of ways, free to edit, 
adapt or improve the text in any way he or she thinks fit, supremely confident 
in his or her own competence. For: “the dialogical richness of real life […] 
allows for all kinds of relationships, including some where the SL author feels 
inferior to the translator and a good many where author and translator feel 
like equals, collaborators” (116–117). 
Robinson’s overall framework is very different from mine, but he too seems to see 
parallels between an individual translator’s emancipation and the historical devel-
opment of the translator’s status. There is also a striking similarity in the way in 
which the translator’s progress is seen to move from submission to emancipation, 
from servility to self-confidence, and from unthinkingness to self-awareness. 
Both outlines expand from a text-bound focus to a wider, communicative one. 
Finally, I append a curious piece of anecdotal evidence in support of the on-
tological reality of the sort of process I have been outlining. Baker (1992: 3) cites 
an essay by Lanna Castellano (1988) recommending an optimum life-path for 
would-­be translators. I will quote part of this, and add my own comments in 
italics. To be a translator, says Castellano, you should first ensure that you have 
grandparents of different nationalities, a good school education in which you 
learn to read, write, spell, construe and love your own language. [This approxi-
mately corresponds to my stages 1 to 3: acquire a good linguistic competence in your 
own language and (via grandparents!) familiarity with another too.] Then roam 
the world, make friends, see life. Go back to education, but to take a technical 
or commercial degree, not a language degree. Spend the rest of your twenties 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
163
and your early thirties in the countries whose languages you speak, working in 
industry or commerce but not directly in languages. Never marry into your own 
nationality. Have your children. [Compare my stage 4: experience language in ac-
tion.] Then back to a postgraduate translation course. [In other words, begin to 
look objectively, scientifically at language and how it is used: stage 5.] A staff job 
as a translator… [i.e. discover the communicative role a translator plays in real 
life, in mediation between cultures: cf. stages 6 and 7], and then go freelance. By 
which time you are forty and ready to begin. [The idea being that by this time you 
will have acquired the necessary expertise, a knowledge of the history and theory of 
translation, and also the necessary self-awareness – stage 8.] 
6.5	
Bootstraps
Gary Larson has a cartoon with a man walking along thinking to himself “left foot, 
right foot, left foot, right foot”; a bird flies by flapping its wings carefully, thinking 
“up, down, up, down”; a dog looks over the fence thinking “bark, don’t bark, bark, 
don’t bark”; and down at the bottom a frog hops along thinking “hop, rest, hop, 
rest rest… dang!” Was the unhappy frog once a proficient translator, now trans-
formed into lowly incompetence by a wicked theorist advocating self-awareness? 
Not, I would argue, if the Dreyfuses are right about the way expertise grows. 
Nor if Popper is right about the way both biological and epistemological evolu-
tion has proceeded. Let me recap briefly on the bare bones of my argument here, 
and reduce this to five claims. 
1.	 Memes, including translation memes (theoretical concepts, laws, norms, 
strategies…) exist primarily in Popper’s World 3, the world of objective 
knowledge. 
2.	 Popper’s three worlds all affect each other. In particular, World 3 exerts 
a plastic control over World 2 (the world of mental states and behavioural 
dispositions). 
3.	 The translator’s World 2 can be influenced by his or her awareness of the 
translation (and other) memes in World 3. 
4.	 The biological, phylogenetic evolution of World-1 entities can be described in 
terms of Popper’s schema P1 → TT → EE → P2. 
5.	 The same schema also describes an individual’s ontogenetic growth, i.e. the 
evolution of an individual’s World 2 (including expertise). 
The final step in the argument is then this: Popper’s schema also explains how, 
as he himself puts it, “we can lift ourselves by our own bootstraps” (1972: 119). 
Crucially, this is possible because of the role of language. 

164	 Memes of Translation
Popper’s theory of language is a functional one (cf. Popper 1972: 119f.), and 
I outline it briefly here in order to demonstrate its relevance to this idea of evo-
lutionary bootstraps. Partly following Bühler, Popper distinguishes a number of 
language functions, the most important of which are these: (a) self-expression, 
(b) signalling, (c) descriptive, and (d) argumentative. The first two – expression 
and communication – we share with the animal kingdom, and they are always 
present in any utterance. The descriptive function is “regulated” by ideas of truth, 
content and verisimilitude: in using language to describe something, we (normal-
ly) aim at a description which fits the facts (cf. Grice’s maxim of quality). 
It is the argumentative function that is central to Popper’s theory. It presup-
poses not only the functions of expression and communication, but also that of 
description, since “arguments are, fundamentally, about descriptions: they criti-
cize descriptions from the point of view of the regulative ideas of truth; content; 
and verisimilitude” (120). Further, it is precisely the development of a descriptive 
language that allows a linguistic World 3 to exist (and World 3 is largely linguis-
tic); and this in turn allows the emergence of rational criticism, one of Popper’s 
most central themes. (We have already met this as Error Elimination.) 
Popper makes high claims for the development of this higher argumentative 
function: it is to this function, he says, “that we owe our humanity, our reason. For 
our powers of reasoning are nothing but powers of critical judgement” (121). This 
rational criticism, he argues, is the main instrument of evolutional and episte-
mological growth, as illustrated by his schema. The schema thus “gives a rational 
description of evolutionary emergence, and of our self-transcendence by means of 
selection and rational criticism” (121; emphasis original). 
Hence, then, the bootstraps. World-3 entities created and given linguistic 
form by other people or by ourselves exert a plastic control, a feedback effect, on 
our brains, beliefs and actions. As this World 3 evolves, so do we, both individu-
ally and collectively: “if anybody were to start where Adam started, he would not 
get further than Adam did” (122). If this view is correct, by exploring the World 3 
of translation memes in a systematic way we can further the evolution of our own 
translation expertise. 
6.6	
Update
This chapter focuses on the training of professional translators, and I have already 
commented on the fact that more translation is being done by non-­professionals 
these days (see 3.9). However, competence is not restricted to professionals, and 

	
Chapter 6.  The development of translational competence	
165
amateurs too may gain expertise as their experience grows. Moreover, the border-
line between professional competence and expertise is a fuzzy one, drawn differ-
ently by different people. Englund Dimitrova (2005: 230) singles out some aspects 
of expertise that have come to the fore in her own research. One is the time aspect: 
professionals work faster. And another is initial planning: in her study, the profes-
sionals gave more attention to this, enabling them to work more efficiently. Pro-
fessionals also worked in terms of larger text segments, they were more holistic. 
In retrospect, the foregoing chapter now seems rather speculative. But since 
the time it was originally written both conceptual and empirical research on 
translation competence has flourished, and scholars are also beginning to investi-
gate the acquisition and development of this competence in longitudinal studies, 
sometimes along lines that are similar to those outlined in this chapter. Current 
models of translation competence see it as a set of sub-competences (e.g. Risku 
1998; PACTE 2005). For Göpferich (2009), for instance, these comprise bilin-
gual language competence, domain competence, tools and research competence, 
competence in using translation routines (such as what I have called strategies), 
psychomotor competence (e.g. typing skills) and an overall strategic competence 
which monitors cooperation across the whole set of sub-competences. 
Longitudinal studies hope to plot the sequence in which these various sub-­
competences are acquired. Göpferich (2013) discusses some of the first results of 
her longitudinal project. She found that her subjects (students at different stages) 
unsurprisingly showed evidence of increasing competence on various measures, 
such as a growing awareness of when there was a need to switch from routine 
behaviour to strategic behaviour. But she also found apparent evidence of “stag-
nation”. This, she suggests, may have been because the subjects remained too 
equivalence-­oriented, whereas the project was using more professional, function-
al criteria of quality. Research on competence and its development inevitably rests 
on assumptions about the nature of human cognition, and needs input from that 
field. And this is indeed the direction in which research is moving. Risku and 
Windhager (2013), for instance, discuss the relevance of so-called situated cogni-
tion theory, which aims to relate cognitive and sociological factors.
The non-professional development of translation skills has been given some 
attention in the context of the study of so-called natural translation, e.g. that done 
by bilingual children or other untrained people. This line of research originates 
with Brian Harris (1977), whose continuing blog on Unprofessional Translation 
is at http://unprofessionaltranslation.blogspot.fi/. See also Toury (1995: 241f. or 
2012: 277f.). The third NPIT conference on Non-Professional Interpreting and 
Translation is scheduled for 2016. See also Antonini (in press).

166	 Memes of Translation
Another recent development in applied research has been the attention given 
to the use of translation corpora of different kinds, as part of translator training. 
This would be relevant to my stage five, Linguistic science. Some of these cor-
pora are contrastive (texts in matched genres in different languages), others are 
comparable (translations plus non-translations in the same language) or paral-
lel (translations plus their source texts). Corpora have proved particularly use-
ful in domains of specialized language. See e.g. Bowker and Pearson (2002), and  
Zanettin et al. (2003). 

Chapter 7
On translation ethics
7.1	
Background issues
Traditional discussions of translation ethics have tended to revolve round a rather 
limited set of recurring issues (memes, again), often focusing on one to the exclu-
sion of others. The concept of loyalty, for instance, has been a central one: loyalty 
to what or to whom? What to do if loyalties clash? How to steer an ethical path 
between different loyalties? As we have seen earlier, different views on primary 
loyalty have been prevalent at different times and in different cultures, and they 
also vary according to text-type. Another recurring theme has been whether a 
translator has the right to make improvements or corrections in a text or not (see 
the debate in Picken 1994). Making improvements implies a higher loyalty to the 
reader than to the text itself; perhaps also a higher loyalty to the intention of the 
writer than to his actual words. This is another form of the old argument about 
how freely translators should translate. Here again, opinions differ on whether or 
when a translator should improve the original. 
A related debate concerns the translator’s visibility or invisibility (e.g. Venuti 
1995a; Pym 1996). A translator who gives primary loyalty to ease of readability 
will probably opt for a fluent target style which hides the Otherness of the origi-
nal; a translator who prioritizes loyalty to the original text and the original culture 
will choose other strategies. Berman (1984), for instance, argued that bad trans-
lation negates the strangeness of the foreign and hence makes all texts equally 
familiar and communicable. This choice of primary loyalty, about whether and 
how to acculturate, thus involves ideological choices as well. Indeed, scholars such 
as Cheyfitz (1991) and Venuti analyse these choices in terms of theories of impe-
rialism, colonization, nationalism, economic issues, power struggles between cul-
tures, and the global domination of European or Anglo-American cultural values. 
The visibility issue also concerns the translator’s role in society, the transla-
tor’s status and power, the translator’s rights. Invisible translators, who seek to 
efface themselves textually, also tend to get effaced socially. Hence the interest in 
translator’s copyright, the rights of multiple authors, conditions of work and pay, 
the requirement that a translator’s name be duly mentioned in a work’s paratext, 
etc.; and also the interest in promoting translation studies as a discipline in its 
own right, with proper academic status as well. 

168	 Memes of Translation
We also find discussions of the translator’s role in initiating translations, se-
lecting source texts, acting as “patrons” themselves and thus exercising power, as 
well as being subject to the power of others, to the financial interests of clients, to 
all kinds of external constraints (Lefevere 1992). An associated question is wheth-
er translators have the right to refuse to translate texts they feel are unethical. 
A comprehensive study of many aspects of translation ethics is to be found in 
Pym (1997, 2012; see also below, 7.5). Pym’s own proposal starts with the obser-
vation that translators are typical “Blendlinge”, half-castes, social actors inhabiting 
an intercultural space. (Compare the illuminating discussion of intermediaries 
in Zeldin [1994] 1995: 147f.) For Pym, a translator’s primary loyalty is neither to 
the source culture nor the target culture, but to others inhabiting this space, i.e. 
to other intercultural mediators, to the translating profession as a whole: in short, 
the primary loyalty is to something intercultural. An ethical translator then in-
vests a translation effort that is proportionate to the value of the resulting transla-
tion. The value of a translation (beyond its immediate financial cost) is ultimately 
the degree to which it contributes to intercultural relations, to mutual benefit, to 
co-operation leading to an increase in social wellbeing. Pym stresses the transla-
tor’s responsibility for the translation, as soon as he/she has agreed to translate it, 
and the utilitarian importance of translations in contributing to stable and mutu-
ally beneficial intercultural relations. 
These background issues give rise to three preliminary points. First, there 
seems to be a basic division between what we could call macro-ethical matters 
and micro-ethical ones. Macro-ethical matters concern broad social questions 
such as the role and rights of translators in society, conditions of work, financial 
rewards and the client’s profit motive, the general aims of translation as intercul-
tural action, power relations between translators and clients, the relation between 
translation and state politics: in short, the relation between the translator and the 
world. Micro-ethical matters, on the other hand, concern the translator’s action 
during the translation process itself, questions dealing with specific textual mat-
ters, translation strategies and the like: in short, the relation between the transla-
tor and the words on the page. Of course, macro issues impinge on micro ones, 
affecting the translator’s individual decisions; and micro-level decisions eventual-
ly have a wider effect on intercultural relations. But we can reasonably choose to 
examine translation ethics from one perspective or the other. In the discussion to 
follow, we shall be taking mostly the micro perspective. 
Second, ideas about translation ethics seem to derive from two different kinds 
of ethical theory: contractual and utilitarian (see e.g. Williams [1985] 1993). Con-
tractual theories are based on consensual agreements about what is a right or a 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	 169
wrong act, and thus incorporate notions of obligation, rights, duty and norms. 
Here, ethical considerations are “retrospective”, in the sense that they concern 
obligations etc. that are already in existence at the time of the act in question, for 
instance because of the actor’s status, a promise or contract made, and so on. A 
utilitarian theory of ethics, on the other hand, looks forward to the outcome of 
a given act. Here, an ethical act is one that is for the best result, e.g. in terms of 
maximum welfare, and the act itself is judged ethically by its consequences. In this 
second case, the focus is more on values than on norms. True, there already exists 
a belief in certain values at the time of a particular act, but an act is deemed to be 
ethical by virtue of its ability to promote or enhance these values in the future. 
There is obviously a good deal of overlap between the two types of theory, but the 
distinction does reveal a basic difference of emphasis. The discussion below draws 
on both contractual and utilitarian ethics, both norms and values. 
Third, in the literature on translation ethics we find some scholars who take a 
descriptive approach and others who take a prescriptive one. Descriptive research 
on ethics seeks to uncover the ethical principles governing particular kinds of 
actions, ethical concepts that appear to be believed in by particular groups of 
actors. Like descriptive research on norms, descriptive research on ethics simply 
aims to describe what appears to be the case; no stand is taken about what the 
scholar thinks should be the case. For instance, we can state that when translating 
certain kinds of texts, translators at a particular time in a particular culture tend 
to behave as if they held (or were required to hold) such-and-such values; or that 
the role of translators in a particular situation suggests that the target or source 
culture entertain such-and-such values. In prescriptive ethical studies, on the oth-
er hand, the scholar makes no secret of his/her own ideological values, and seeks 
to establish reasons why translators should translate in certain ways rather than 
in other ways. For instance, I referred above to Venuti’s argument that we should 
avoid fluent or conservative translation strategies and prefer resistant, transgres-
sive ones, because in this way we would do more justice to the ethos of the foreign 
culture; by translating transgressively, using foreignizing strategies, we can best 
promote the true value of the foreign. Schleiermacher argued for a similar kind 
of translation strategy but with a very different prescriptive aim: a nationalistic 
one. Both Venuti and Schleiermacher want change, cultural innovation, but their 
ideological aims are very different: one wants more recognition of the source, the 
other wants to promote the target language (as noted in 2.4). For a descriptivist, 
it is interesting that the same kind of strategy can be advocated for such different 
reasons. With respect to this descriptive/prescriptive opposition, the following 
discussion takes a descriptive viewpoint. 

170	 Memes of Translation
7.2	
Norms, actions and values
The theoretical concepts that have so far been central to my discussion of transla-
tion theory have been meme, norm and strategy. I have been developing the view 
that translation is a form of action, describable in terms of strategies, which are 
themselves governed by norms. The norms themselves, I have suggested, become 
crystallized from particularly favoured memes. 
We are now in a position to ask a different kind of question. If the objective 
of strategies is to conform to norms, what then is the objective of norms? In a 
nutshell, I think the answer is: to promote certain values. (Favoured memes, after 
all, are favoured precisely because they are felt to represent or promote favoured 
values, to a greater degree than competing memes.) 
I shall argue (cf. Chesterman 1997) in this chapter that translation ethics can 
be explicated in terms of four fundamental values, each relating to one of the 
main types of norms. (Recall that the word ethics goes back etymologically to 
the notion of a custom, customary “normal” behaviour.) My initial framework 
comes from deontic logic: this is the branch of philosophy that deals with nor-
mative concepts, and it makes a fundamental distinction between normative con-
cepts and axiological (value) concepts. (See for instance von Wright 1968.) Value 
concepts can be seen as existing prior to normative concepts, in that norms are 
governed by values. A norm is a norm because it embodies, or tends towards, a 
certain value. Norms, as von Wright puts it (1968: 12), are “instrumental towards 
the realization of some values.” Values, in other words, are examples of the regu-
lative ideas discussed by Popper (and others). Thus, “absolute truth” and “perfect 
communication” are values that regulate the normative behaviour of, say, scien-
tists and communicators. 
A third group of concepts are what von Wright calls praxeological: having to do 
with action, with man as an agent. Praxeological concepts include those of choice, 
decision, desire, freedom and will. Deontic logic seeks to build normative, axiolog-
ical and praxeological concepts into a general theory of action, which has already 
had some influence on translation theory, as we have seen. The notion of the trans-
lation skopos, for instance, is a central part of the theory of translational action (see 
e.g. Vermeer 1989); and recall the discussion of translation strategies, 4.1. 
All actions have to do with changes in states of affairs. (I am largely following 
von Wright 1968 here.) If p denotes a state of affairs, and A denotes an action 
within or pertaining to p, then, after the occurrence of A, p changes to not-p, 
symbolized as -p. 
On the analogy of the standard logical quantifiers of existence or universal-
ity, we can now introduce the normative operator O, for ‘obligation’ or ‘ought’. It 
marks the existence of a norm. 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
171
Assume that it is not the case that p, i.e. that the present situation is -p. The 
formula Op then means that there is an obligation to act in such a way that the 
state of affairs described by p comes about. On the other hand, the formula O-p 
means that there is an obligation to act in such a way that p does not come about, 
i.e. that the present situation of -p continues. In other words, there is here an ob-
ligation to forbear from an action that would change -p to p. 
Or: assume that it is the case that p. The formula Op then means that there is 
an obligation to see to it that the present state of affairs continues, to forbear from 
action which would change this state. On the other hand, the formula O-p then 
means that there is an obligation to change the current state of affairs. 
I shall not go further into the formalism of deontic logic. But note that at 
its roots there lies the recognition that there are essentially two kinds of action: 
(a) action to bring about a change (“productive action”), and (b) action to prevent 
a change (“preventive action”). There are thus two parallel kinds of forbearance 
or omission: (a) non-productive: leaving something unchanged, or (b) non-­
preventive: letting something happen. 
Action theory also needs an analysis of change itself. In general terms, von 
Wright (1968) bases such an analysis on three elements: (a) the initial state of 
affairs, which obtains before any action A; (b) the end state, or result state, ob-
taining after the completion of A; and (c) “the state in which the world would be 
had the agent not interfered with it but remained passive” (43). We could call this 
latter state the hypothetical state. 
Together, the initial and hypothetical states constitute the “acting-situation” 
of the agent at a given point in time, the agent’s “opportunity of action”. In von 
Wright’s words (43): 
If the world is initially in a certain state and will remain in this state, supposing 
that no agent interferes, then there is an opportunity for either destroying this 
state or letting it continue. If again the state in which the world initially is will 
vanish unless some agent interferes, then the situation offers an opportunity ei-
ther for preventing this state from vanishing or for letting it vanish. 
The three states together – initial, hypothetical and result – determine what von 
Wright calls the “nature” of the action. And it is this “nature” which can then be 
subjected to ethical analysis. 
However, at any point in time an agent is not only in a particular acting-situ-
ation with respect to a particular potential action, but also in a personal life-situ-
ation comprising his or her present life-state (including state of knowledge) plus 
all past actions and decisions, plus foreseeable potential states and actions in the 
future. Decisions made about whether or not to perform a given action are not 
only influenced by values and norms, but also by this life-situation. 

172	 Memes of Translation
Consider now how this applies to the action of translating. First of all: when 
translating, a translator is in a “life-situation” whereby all previous experiences 
and knowledge of the world must influence translational decisions: no-one trans-
lates in a vacuum. And, because no two translators have the same life experience 
or world knowledge, no two translators can ever be in the same life-situation. 
This is obvious, but it is a relevant point in the whole argument about sameness, 
equivalence, and/or “perfect” translations. 
The norms to which translators seek to conform (or to which they are re-
quired to conform) set them under obligations to act within a certain range of 
acceptable behaviour. Such action pertains to the production or prevention of 
change, in one way or another. It may be, for instance, that the translator will need 
to prevent change with respect to certain aspects of the source text, i.e. to preserve 
something, to leave it unchanged as far as possible. In other respects the translator 
needs to produce change – most obviously a change of language, for a start. Judge-
ments about what to change and what not to change depend on the translator’s 
assessment of the “opportunity of action” plus the desired end-state of the action. 
In action-theoretical terms, therefore, what a translator has to do, at every 
decision-point, can be defined as follows: 
a.	 Assess the initial state. This initial state includes the source text and its con-
text, the translator’s knowledge of the translation commission, the potential 
readership of the translation, its place of publication etc., and the translator’s 
linguistic and general knowledge of the world, which itself includes knowl-
edge of the readers’ expectations. 
b.	 Compare the hypothetical state (that would obtain were a given action not 
carried out) with the presumed end-state (that would obtain if the action were 
carried out). This comparison should (in theory) indicate which of these two 
states, the hypothetical one or the presumed end-state, better embodies a giv-
en value or set of values. 
c.	 Act in accordance with the above comparison: if the hypothetical state is as-
sessed to be “higher”, do not perform act A; if the presumed end-state is as-
sessed to be “higher”, perform A. 
Bearing this general framework in mind, we now turn to consider what the rele-
vant ethical values of translation appear to be. I suggest that the four fundamental 
translational values are clarity, truth, trust and understanding. I do not claim that 
these are exclusive to translation, of course: mutatis mutandis they also govern 
other modes of communication and other forms of human behaviour. Further-
more, I do not argue prescriptively that these should be the values; I claim, de-
scriptively, that these appear to be the values held explicitly or implicitly by most 
translators. 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
173
7.3	
Clarity
I suggest that the value governing the expectancy norms is that of clarity, simply 
because clarity facilitates processing. Popper ([1945] 1962) takes clarity to be the 
most important linguistic standard of all; this is simply because language is “one 
of the most important institutions of social life, and its clarity is a condition of its 
functioning as a means of rational communication” (308). To sacrifice clarity is to 
weaken the possibility of rational communication, and to do that is to undermine 
the possibility of a human society altogether. 
“Clarity” is a recurrent concept in stylistics and textlinguistics. It goes back 
even to Quintilian, who specified clarity to be one of the four qualities of style, 
together with correctness, elegance and appropriateness (see de Beaugrande and 
Dressler 1981: 15, for instance; and especially Rener 1989: 217f.). The value of clar-
ity was particularly central during French classicism and the regime of the belles 
infidèles. More recent mention of the value of clarity in translation theory has 
usually been in relation to Grice’s maxims, where it is subsumed under the max-
im of manner: be perspicuous. Expanding Grice’s maxim of manner somewhat, 
Leech (1983) proposes a Clarity Principle comprising a transparency maxim and 
an ambiguity-avoidance maxim. His transparency maxim runs (p. 66): “Retain a 
direct and transparent relationship between semantic and phonological structure 
(ie between message and text).” Perhaps under the influence of relevance theory, 
the value is sometimes relativized: be as perspicuous as you need to be (see e.g. 
Neubert and Shreve 1992: 82–83). There is one problem with this view: it ties 
“necessary degree of clarity”, inevitably, to writers’ (translators’) own perception 
of this need; with respect to translators, this perception is partly based on their 
knowledge of the target-culture norms and partly on their ability to predict the 
particular readership within the target culture. But suppose the readership cannot 
be completely predicted, as is surely often the case: the relativistic view seems to 
exclude the need to be clear for readers outside the predicted range. 
Clarity is thus primarily a linguistic value; it applies to any use of language, 
not just translation. (As the bumper sticker ironically puts it: ESCHEW OBFUS-
CATION!) However, it is a problematic concept. What is clear for me may not be 
clear for you; I may not even want to be clear, in some circumstances; or you may 
sometimes not want me to be too clear. Furthermore, the concept should not be 
taken to imply that the relation between language and the world can be a totally 
transparent one, unsullied by the discourse itself. Despite such difficulties, I think 
we can still claim that clarity is a universal value. True, there are exceptional cases; 
but the fact that they seem exceptional merely reinforces the existence of the un-
derlying principle. And true, the language-world relation is seldom transparent. 
But we nevertheless continue to use language as if it allowed us to represent the 

174	 Memes of Translation
world adequately, for our normal human purposes; we do continue to talk and 
write to each other. Most importantly, we continue to believe that, most of the 
time at least, speakers want hearers to “see what they mean”. An advertiser or a 
comedian or a diplomat can make use of multiple meanings etc., but only because 
they assume that their receivers (or the relevant, intended receivers) will never-
theless “get the point”. Poets may use complex imagery and ambiguous syntax, but 
they would surely hope that at least some readers somewhere will appreciate this, 
perceive their intention – even if this intention is none other than to play with 
language – and arrive at an interpretation. In Gricean terms: if hearers perceive 
a lack of clarity, if they think the clarity maxim is being broken, they will seek a 
reason why and interpret the message according to the perceived function of the 
text’s apparent non-clarity. 
We might therefore define linguistic clarity in terms of the hearer’s perception 
of the speaker’s intention: a message has clarity to the extent that the receiver can, 
within an appropriate time, perceive the speaker’s intended meaning, the speak-
er’s intention to say something about the world and/or to produce some effect in 
the hearer. (For further discussion of perception, meaning and intentionality, see 
Searle 1983.) Clarity is thus not the same as directness: in some cultures, conven-
tions may require indirect expressions of feelings, for instance; but hearers do not 
perceive such expressions as being unclear, because they know the conventions 
and can easily perceive the intended meaning. 
Recall now that we originally defined expectancy norms as linguistic norms, 
having to do with people’s expectations about what texts of certain types ought 
to look like. If we postulate clarity as the value underlying these norms, we can 
make an important point of some comfort to those who translate into a language 
other than their native one. Complete mastery of a non-native language is rare, 
but such mastery is only a means, not an end in itself. Grammaticality, for in-
stance, is a means to the achievement of clarity: in the last analysis, one does not 
write grammatically just in order to be grammatical, but to be clear, to get one’s 
meaning across with maximum efficiency, to help understanding. It follows that 
translators into the non-native language could well focus primarily on clarity, not 
mere grammaticality as such. And this is often a more realistic aim, too. A clear, 
readable translation with some grammatical errors is surely often to be preferred 
to one that is illogical, obscure or clumsy, albeit grammatical. 
The value of clarity has two general kinds of effect on the translator’s action: 
it may prompt both preventive and productive action. Preventively, a translator 
normally seeks to translate in such a way as to avoid the opposite of clarity: obscu-
rity, unintended ambiguity, illogicality, confusion etc. In most kinds of texts, these 
characteristics are reasons for changing and refining a tentative translation, for 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
175
selecting a transediting strategy etc. They also play an obvious role in translation 
assessment in all its modes. 
Productively, in the case of most text-types, a translator usually seeks to trans-
late in such a way as to attain optimum clarity. One major principle here is that of 
iconicity: other things being equal (i.e. in non-marked environments), a version 
that is iconic (in which form somehow matches meaning) will be clearer that one 
that is not iconic. By way of brief illustration, consider the following extract from 
a translated text about some environmental aspects of engineering: 
	
	 TT1:	 Man has an inborn desire for beauty. Aesthetic properties in our envi-
ronment are also tied to values which have developed in the course of 
history, agreement about the concept of beauty. 
As it stands, the syntax of agreement is unclear: at first sight, it seems to be par-
allel to “the course of history”, or perhaps to “history” alone. The intended inter-
pretation, however, is that agreement should be parallel to “values”, although the 
syntax does not help this connection. The semantic structure of the sentence is 
thus that the aesthetic properties are tied to (a) values… and (b) agreement… An 
iconic syntax would make this clear by reflecting the semantic structure, which 
can be done quite simply by repeating the preposition so that the parallelism is 
made overt: 
	
	 TT2:	 … Aesthetic properties in our environment are also tied to values which 
have developed in the course of history, and to agreement about the 
concept of beauty. 
The iconicity could be further strengthened by making agreement plural, so that 
we have to values and then to agreements. – Iconicity can also obtain between 
linguistic structure and extra-linguistic experience, as when cooking recipes or 
operating instructions are optimally arranged to follow the sequence of actions 
described. 
Clarity, on this view, is a value related to expectancy norms concerning lin-
guistic products. However, in cases of conflict I suggest that the values pertaining 
to process norms, to be discussed below, usually take precedence. 
7.4	
Truth
Of all the translation norms, it is the relation norm that has been most debated – 
understandably so, since this is the only norm that applies more specifically to 
translation itself: the others also apply to other kinds of communication. Recall 

176	 Memes of Translation
that the relation norm was defined as follows (3.5.3): a translator should act in 
such a way that an appropriate relation is established and maintained between the 
source text and the target text. Elsewhere (1.2.2) we have argued that this relation 
is best not thought of in terms of sameness, but rather as a similarity or family 
resemblance. 
Traditionally, the value governing this norm has been defined as fidelity, faith-
fulness to the source text. It was usually linked to the concept of equivalence, but 
since total equivalence is normally impossible the translator is therefore bound to 
be unfaithful. Traduttore traditore, and so on. In response to this rather unfortu-
nate position, the concept of fidelity was then enlarged somewhat, to encompass 
faithfulness to the original author’s intention: intentions being intrinsically some-
what more fuzzy than texts, this made it easier to relativize the notion of fidelity 
and thus present it as more attainable – to some extent, at least. 
In my view, however, fidelity is an inappropriate conceptualization of the val-
ue governing our relation norm. As defined above, this norm is a linguistic one: 
it concerns the nature of the relation between two texts, two linguistic entities. In 
other words, in addition to all the other constraints bearing upon the construc-
tion of a text, a translation is also subject to the constraint that it should have a 
certain kind of relation to some other, already existing text. I suggest that the 
value governing this relation is truth. 
Loosely speaking, we can say that something is true if it corresponds to reali-
ty. “Truth” (in this non-mystical sense) describes the quality of a relation between 
a proposition and a state of affairs. The proposition is not “the same as” the state 
of affairs: the statement this is a keyboard is not identical with the physical object 
upon which I am currently writing. But the one bears a recognizable relation to 
the other. The state of affairs to which a translation should be “true” is thus, in this 
sense, the source text. 
But there is more than one way of being “true”. British passport photos of-
ficially have to bear “a true likeness” to the person depicted. Or we talk about a 
report of an event being “true” or false. Or we certify that a photocopy is indeed “a 
true copy” of the original. These senses of truth obviously differ in the degree and 
kind of similarity denoted. The photo is two-dimensional, not made of flesh and 
blood, etc., but must still “truly represent” its bearer; many different photos may 
all be equally true resemblances of the same person. And many different reports 
of the same event may all be recognized to be true, as opposed to being false or de-
ceptive or partial. At the other extreme, a photocopy looks very similar indeed to 
its original, and yet it is still not the same, however close the paper and ink qual-
ity; significantly, however good the photocopy, bureaucrats sometimes explicitly 
require the original document: there is a difference. Holmes (1988) spoke of a 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
177
translation as being a map of the original: an original may have many true maps 
for different purposes, but it remains the case that the map is not the territory. 
This range of ways in which we understand the truth of a relation is, I think, 
most appropriate for translation theory. Translations relate to their source texts 
in a wide variety of acceptable ways, depending on a whole host of intratextual 
and extratextual reasons. The point is that all these relations must be “true” to the 
original, in one way or another, as required by the situation. 
Family resemblances, after all, are also of many different kinds, which was 
of course precisely Wittgenstein’s point. Some family resemblances may even be 
such that we would not want to describe the resembling text as a translation at all 
but as something else: think for instance of the literary fashion for texts that feed 
cannibalistically upon other texts, thriving on intertextuality, both within and 
across languages (cf. fanfiction). Or of the whole business of rewriting and adapt-
ing in one way or another. When is an interlingual resemblance one of transla-
tion and when not? Here we must return to the argument introduced above in 
Section 3.4: definitions of what counts as a translation are culture bound, and 
specifically target-culture bound. The answer to the question thus depends simply 
on what people choose to call translations at a given time in a given culture. There 
is no universally accepted borderline. 
How can we represent all this within action theory? First of all, if truth is 
agreed to be a regulative value, then the truth of the source-target relation is 
something that must be established and maintained. Minimally, in a state of af-
fairs p, something must be preserved, change must be prevented; the state of affairs 
after a given action should not have no relation to the state of affairs before the ac-
tion. Source-target relations are elastic, but the elastic must not be cut completely. 
After all, if we assume that a target-language text bears no relation whatsoever to 
a source text, we do not call this text a translation. There must, then, be a relation, 
and it must be a true one. What this true relation can be will depend on what the 
situational conditions deem to be relevant. 
Secondly, we might stress that actions have goals, and that if an action is in-
tended to result in a translation, one of the translating agent’s goals will indeed be 
to act in accordance with the value of truth, in the sense just explicated. (Compare 
the Gricean maxim of quality, that one should not say what one believes to be false.) 
Such action is both productive, creating a true relation, and preventive, avoid-
ing loss of truth. This is precisely the additional cross-language constraint which 
makes translational action different from other forms of communicative action. 
Truth, though, is only one value for translation, and the source text is only 
one of several factors impinging on the translator’s decision-making. It is not only 
the nature of the truth relation that will vary according to the nature of the overall 

178	 Memes of Translation
translation task, but also the very status of the source text itself, how much prior-
ity it will be accorded. (Cf. Newmark 2004.)
7.5	
Trust
George Steiner’s (1975) “hermeneutic motion” starts with the translator’s trust 
that there is “something there” in the source text, something to be understood, 
something worth translating. But there is more to translational trust than this. 
The translator also needs to trust the original writer, and also the commissioner 
of the translation: there must be a trust that the translation itself is worth doing. 
Translators must also trust that their readers will read the translation in good 
faith, that their readers in turn will trust that there is “something there” in the 
translation that makes it worth reading. It is, in fact, not only the translator who 
must trust, but also the other parties to the translating act: readers, plus of course 
the commissioner of the translation, the publisher, and also the original writer (if 
still alive, of course). Translational trust works both ways. 
Trust, I suggest, is the value governing the accountability norm, which was 
formulated above (3.5.3) as stating that a translator should act in such a way that 
the demands of loyalty are met with regard to the various parties concerned. 
“Loyalty” is the term used by Nord (1991) to denote the moral principle gov-
erning relationships between people in an act of communication. She speaks of 
the translator being “committed” to the target and source situations, “responsible” 
to ST sender and TT recipient. I have used “accountability”, but all these terms 
imply a relation to someone: one is not just “accountable”, but accountable to. The 
image is that of a network, with the translator-node linked accountably to a num-
ber of other nodes. 
Opinions differ to some extent on what these other nodes are. The ones men-
tioned earlier – writer, commissioner, readership – would no doubt be agreed 
on, but are there others too? Pym (1992a, 1997, 2012) extends the issue beyond 
questions of how to translate to others concerning who has the authority to decide 
how to translate. In other words, who may validate translation norms? Pym sug-
gests that one way in which translators have historically overcome the problem 
of where their primary loyalty lies (source or target community) is by positing a 
higher authority, such as a spiritual one in the case of biblical translation. More 
generally, however, Pym argues that translators in fact ground their accountability 
in each other; translators collectively check and assess each other’s work as a com-
munity (like the global community of scientists). They derive the authority for the 
norms they follow from the translators’ profession, collectively. As I mentioned 
earlier, Pym argues that translators work in an intercultural space, and so may 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	 179
not prioritize one culture above the other. Pym concludes: “Translators’ prime 
loyalty must be to their profession as an intercultural space” (1992a: 166, emphasis 
original). With this in mind, we could indeed add “the translators’ profession” to 
the list of nodes to which a translator’s accountability is due. A further aspect of 
the reciprocal relation between the translator and the profession appears in Pym’s 
comment that maybe we should simply translate as we would like to be translated 
ourselves, given similar circumstances. 
But why should translators be loyal to their profession, why should they be ac-
countable to these various other participants in the communication situation? My 
answer would be: because of the overriding value of trust. Translators, in order to 
survive as translators, must be trusted by all parties involved, both as a profession 
and individually. They must therefore work in such a way as to create and main-
tain this trust. The default position is perhaps that this trust is deemed to exist 
unless something happens to dispel it. Trust is typically lost rather than gained. 
In terms of action theory, therefore, we could once again say that the transla-
tor should act preventively, in order to prevent a change in this situation of trust. 
Initially, however, entry to the profession is gained by showing that one is indeed 
worthy of such trust, as judged by accreditation tests etc. which are assessed by 
other professionals whose judgement, in turn, is trusted – by the aspiring transla-
tor, by other professionals, and by society at large. Without this trust, the profes-
sion would collapse, and so would its practice. 
This notion of trust has a long pedigree, perhaps going back to the classical 
Greek idea of ethos in classical rhetoric: a speaker who patently lacks ethos – in-
tegrity, sincerity, authority, an acknowledged right to speak – will not be trusted; 
his rhetoric will be felt to be suspicious and thus prove ineffective. 
Trust is also an important concept in some hermeneutic theories of language. 
Steiner’s was mentioned above. Ebeling (1971) makes the right to speak (Ermäch-
tigung) the first element of his own hermeneutic approach to a theological theory 
of language. On this view, the first ethical duty of a speaker is to pose the question 
“do I have the right to speak?” Conversely, a hearer’s initial response is: does this 
person have the right to speak? The answer to this question will then determinine 
how the hearer reacts to what the speaker says. In terms of translational trust, 
the questions that arise are: do I, as a translator, believe that I have the right to 
translate this? Will my readers believe that I have this right, and hence trust me? 
(Presumably, the commissioner does have this trust, de facto.) And then, if the 
answers are affirmative: how do I prevent this trust from being lost? 
One key way of doing this is for the translator to be visible. The translator, that 
is, should at the very least be mentioned; but more importantly, and especially 
for literary works, there may also be a translator’s preface or the like, where the 
translator explains the main principles underlying the translation approach that 

180	 Memes of Translation
has been taken. If readers’ expectations are being challenged in some respect, for 
instance, it is the translator’s responsibility to explain why. This notion of visibility 
is also part of Nord’s concept of loyalty, mentioned above. 
Ebeling’s second element is responsibility (Verantwortung): speakers are re-
sponsible for saying the right word at the right time. They are also responsible 
for knowing when to keep silent. Applying this to translator-speakers, we can 
agree that translators are indeed accountable for what they write, and for what 
they decide to change, add or omit. To be seen to meet this responsibility is to 
maintain trust. 
Pym links the question of why translators should be primarily accountable to 
their profession to his understanding of the aim of translation as such: “[t]rans-
lators should presumably be attached to the rules and procedures of their profes-
sion, justifying their actions and decisions in terms of translation’s own ultimate 
aim” (1992a: 168). And this aim, he suggests, is “to improve the intercultural rela-
tions with which they are concerned” (169, emphasis original). This, then, is one 
answer to the question “why translate at all?” In terms of my own analysis here, 
improving intercultural relations is equivalent to creating more intercultural trust. 
Some objections may be raised here. After all, the value of trust can also be 
used to define the line between those you trust and those you don’t, creating a 
division between insiders and outsiders. In the extreme case, we end up with a 
closed establishment who all trust each other but no-one else, and then the ex-
istence of trust works to divide society, not unite it. Internationally, too, we have 
groups of trusted insiders who conclude mutual treaties of solidarity etc., such as 
the European Union, and these define themselves precisely in opposition to those 
who are not in the group, so that barriers are created between insider countries 
and outsider countries. However, the problem here is not so much the existence 
of trust in environment A but the lack of in it environment B, i.e. the difficulty of 
extending the trust to outsiders. 
Another objection concerns potential clashes between a translator’s belief in 
the importance of trust and the client’s possible belief in the importance of other 
things, such as making a profit. This is a good example of the ways in which mac-
ro-ethical issues may impinge on micro-ethical ones. In such cases, the transla-
tor’s own personal ethics, as distinct from his/her professional translation ethics, 
determine the course of action to be taken, as competing values are weighed and 
compared: recall the deontic model outlined in 7.2. 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
181
7.6	
Understanding
The other key concepts in Ebeling’s (1971) analysis are: the speaker’s need to 
challenge the hearer to understand, to speak in a way that positively demands 
understanding, that requires the hearer to make the effort to understand (Verste-
henszumutung); and finally the resulting understanding itself, as it emerges in the 
hearer’s mind in agreement with the speaker’s intention (Verständigung). Psycho-
linguistically, the initial goal of communication is understanding, and I suggest 
this is the value governing the communication norm. (Theologically, Ebeling ul-
timately interprets this as love.) 
Gadamer (1960 and later) spoke of the fusion of the horizons that takes place 
in understanding as being the proper achievement of language. This fusion, how-
ever, is not to be taken as something absolute, because understanding always in-
volves interpretation, and interpretation always involves difference, a subjective 
input; interpretation is always subject to particular conditions of time and place. 
We defined clarity earlier in terms of the perception of the speaker’s intention, but 
the perception does not necessarily coincide with the intention one hundred per 
cent. As hearers/readers, we perceive something, and we then try to interpret this 
something, to understand it. But the whole process is a relative one. Perfect un-
derstanding, like perfect clarity, is only a regulative idea. Communication exists – 
and society exists, built upon instances of communication – because we share a 
belief in the value of understanding. 
In terms of action theory, we could then say simply that the goal of transla-
tional action is to produce understanding: in other words, to produce a change 
of state from non-understanding to understanding. This may sound somewhat 
trivial when formulated thus as productive action, but the converse formulation 
as a kind of preventive action – preventing misunderstanding – raises a number 
of interesting issues. 
Let us first return to Popper. The whole movement of his thought is anti-­
utopian: perfect, absolute, static ideals can be no more than regulative ideas. In 
real life, argues Popper, it makes more sense to focus on manifest examples of 
non-­ideal states and try to do something about these. We proceed, we evolve, 
by trial and error. Science, objective knowledge, progresses via the elimination 
of false theories; society develops by gradually getting rid of obvious injustices, 
by “piecemeal engineering”, rather than by setting up some presumed ideal sys-
tem. Popper’s ethics are in fact an inverse utilitarianism. He proposes ([1945] 
1962: 235, 284–285) that the maxim of maximizing happiness be replaced by one 
of minimizing suffering. The promotion of happiness is not such an urgent mor-
al task as the prevention of suffering: there is no moral appeal to increase the 
happiness of someone who is quite happy anyway, but the existence of human 

182	 Memes of Translation
suffering does make a clear moral appeal for help. Instead of aiming at the greatest 
happiness for the greatest number, then, one should aim more modestly at the 
least amount of avoidable suffering. One should also demand that unavoidable 
suffering should be shared as fairly as possible. This view has the further advan-
tage that suffering is much easier to recognize and define than happiness: it adds 
to ethical clarity, says Popper, if we thus formulate both our philosophical and 
ethical demands negatively. 
I think there is a direct parallel between this view of ethics and the way trans-
lation can be conceived of in action theory. By the very act of translating we are 
of course producing change of a sort; but the traditional meme of equivalence re-
quirement has meant that the end-result of translation has in the past tended to be 
seen as some kind of unattainable ideal state, a Utopia, like perfect understanding. 
Popperians, however, would reply that insofar as it is absolute, this view is unre-
alistic, unhelpful and frustrating. In its place, they would advocate a focus on the 
aspect of preventive action in translation: the minimization of misunderstanding. 
Recall the slogan “Mind the gap” from Chapter 5 on assessment. Alternatively, we 
might speak of the avoidance of “communicative suffering”. 
This idea itself also seems to be acquiring the status of a meme in translation 
theory: several scholars have made similar points. For instance, discussing the ap-
plications of componential analysis in the translation of referential content, Nida 
(1969: 492) uses the image of words being like suitcases of clothes, containers for 
components of denotative meaning; what then matters is that the clothes should 
arrive at their destination “in the best possible condition, i.e. with the least dam-
age” (emphasis added). In a short section on prejudice and the translator’s moral 
responsibilities, Newmark (1988: 211) also refers to the translator’s job as being 
“to eliminate misunderstandings”. 
One concrete illustration of this attitude is to be found in the notion of the 
culture bump. This was originally used by Archer (1986) in the context of lan-
guage teaching, and has since been applied to translation studies by Leppihalme 
(1997). Culture bumps are features that hinder cross-cultural interaction, that 
prevent smooth communication. In translation studies, they are usefully defined 
as a source text’s source-culture-bound features that, if translated “unchanged”, 
are likely to interrupt the flow of comprehension, perhaps resulting in definite 
misunderstanding. Examples are culture-bound terms of all kinds, whether re-
lating to source-culture realia (in Popper’s World 1) or to the general cultural 
knowledge-­base (in World 3) which is widely shared by source-language speakers 
but perhaps less well known to target-language speakers. 
In translation research, the problem of what to do with culture bumps is well 
illustrated by the phenomenon of allusions. Allusions are often source-culture 
bound, referring either to World-1 entities in that culture or to World-3 entities 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
183
which are familiar in it. For instance, many of the latter type are intertextual: their 
understanding thus requires a familiarity with the original text referred to. If it 
can reasonably be assumed that the target readers do not share knowledge of the 
original text, the translator of such allusions normally needs to remove this cul-
ture bump, or at least endeavour to flatten it a bit. Leppihalme (1997) shows that 
if translators choose only a strategy of minimum change, e.g. when an English 
detective story’s allusory reference to people hurrying about with “White Rabbit 
expressions” is translated literally into Finnish (i.e. with my strategy Gl), Finnish 
readers often do not recognize the allusion and hence suffer from a culture bump: 
in short, they miss the point. On the other hand, translations that use some kind 
of explanatory strategy, such as adding a reference to Carroll’s Alice in Wonder-
land or otherwise signalling that there is indeed an allusion here, smooth the 
reader’s path to fuller comprehension. 
The extent of necessary translatorial manipulation will naturally depend on 
the translator’s assessment of the difference between the target readers’ likely 
knowledge-­base and that of the original source-language readership. (This assess-
ment would form part of the translator’s “prior theory”, in Davidson’s terms: see 
Section 3.3 above.) Similar observations apply to a wide range of intertextual fea-
tures – and not only in literary texts, either – which may cause culture bumps if 
the translator does not do something about them. 
Pym (1992a: 163) comments on the elimination of misunderstanding from a 
different angle, in his discussion of the need and right of translators to improve 
originals. In the first place, the very fact of translation itself incorporates an im-
provement, in that the text thereby reaches receivers “who would otherwise find 
that text unavailable or incomprehensible”. In this sense, to “read” a text in a lan-
guage one does not understand is to “misunderstand” it totally, and the translator 
thus diminishes this misunderstanding considerably. In so doing, the translator 
also extends the readership and thus diminishes the number of potential receiv-
ers who remain excluded from the communication, deprived of the chance to 
understand. 
This interpretation of “communicative suffering” in terms of reader exclusion 
is also discussed interestingly by Nystrand (1992), who argues along strikingly 
Popperian lines that writers should focus not on reaching all potential readers, i.e. 
on some kind of universal, ideal understanding, but rather, more realistically, on 
minimizing the exclusion of particular potential readers. One relevant corollary 
of this argument would be that translators need to be aware of whether they are 
translating for native or non-native readers of the target language – especially 
with a language such as English, which is so widely used as a second language. 
Excessive complexity, obscure vocabulary or unusual idioms, for instance, may 
unfairly exclude non-native readers from the circle of those who may understand, 

184	 Memes of Translation
the included readers. We might even go as far as to say that such excluded read-
ers are unjustly deprived of their right to understand (a point that of course ap-
plies just as well to obscurely written texts in the native language, too). (See Pym 
1992b, for a further distinction between excluded, observational and participative 
readers.) 
The value of understanding, then, can be construed in two ways of relevance 
to the translator: (a) minimizing misunderstanding of the text among included 
readers, and (b) minimizing the number of potential readers who are excluded 
from understanding. 
In the preceding sections I have done no more than sketch a descriptive out-
line for a translational micro-ethics, based on four values: clarity, truth, trust and 
understanding. Each of these values regulates one of the main kinds of transla-
tion norms: expectancy norms, the relation norm, the accountability norm and 
the communication norm. Clarity and truth have to do with texts and relations 
between them; trust and understanding have to do with relations between people. 
Translators are agents who interfere with the state of the world. What right 
do we have to do this? What ethical values do we appeal to? The questions are at 
least worth asking. 
7.7	
The Translator’s Charter
The Translator’s Charter is a document (approved 1963, amended 1994) drawn up 
by FIT, the Fédération Internationale des Traducteurs (International Federation 
of Translators). (It is available at the FIT website, http://www.fit-ift.org/?p=251) It 
specifies the Federation’s view of translators’ rights and duties, and seeks to lay the 
basis for a “translator’s code of ethics”. It also incorporates recommendations con-
cerning “lines of conduct” for translators – in other words, it explicitly sets out to 
formulate translation norms. It is therefore interesting to examine this document 
in the light of the points made so far in this chapter. 
The document has five sections: (I) General obligations of the translator, 
(II) Rights of the translator, (III) Economic and social position of the translator, 
(IV) Translators’ societies and unions, (V) National organizations and the Interna-
tional Federation of Translators. There are a total of 40 clauses, numbered consec-
utively through the sections. Sections (I) and (II) are of particular relevance here. 
Clause 1 assumes that translation (the process) is “an intellectual activity”, and 
clause 14 reaffirms that a translation (the product) is “a creation of the intellect”. 
The clause defines the object of translation as “the transfer of literary, scientific 
and technical texts from one language into another”. Why these text-types are 
chosen and others excluded is not stated. 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
185
Clause 2 stresses that a translation is always done “on the sole responsibility of 
the translator”, thus appealing implicitly to the accountability norm. 
Clause 3 states that the translator has an obligation (not a right, interestingly) 
to “refuse to give a text an interpretation of which he does not approve, or which 
would be contrary to the obligations of his profession”. I take this as an implicit 
reference to the relation norm and the value of truth: a translator may not trans-
late in such a way that the source-target relation is false. Fair enough; but the fol-
lowing clause (4) implies a very much narrower interpretation. It runs as follows: 
	
	 Every translation shall be faithful and render exactly the idea and form of the 
original – this fidelity constituting both a moral and legal obligation for the 
translator. 
We are reminded here of the argument discussed earlier concerning what a trans-
lator does in cases where the original is plainly false, clumsy etc. The FIT for-
mulation seems to be based on an implicit belief in the overruling priority of 
equivalence, formal and stylistic equivalence included (“the idea and form of the 
original”). However, the following clause (5) then counteracts this interpretation: 
	
	 A faithful translation, however, should not be confused with a literal trans-
lation, the fidelity of a translation not excluding an adaptation to make the 
form, the atmosphere and deeper meaning of the work felt in another lan-
guage and country. 
The contradiction between clauses 4 and 5 remains unresolved, so that we do not 
really know which has priority. A formulation in terms of the relation norm might 
resolve this lack of clarity. 
Clauses 6 and 7 state that the translator must have adequate linguistic profi-
ciency in both languages (but particularly the target language), general knowledge, 
and specific subject knowledge for the task in hand. We can add that otherwise 
expectancy norms will not be met. 
Clause 8 refers to reasonable fees (not undercutting the profession!), and 
clause 9 to the general conditions of the translation task, which must not be “hu-
miliating” either to the translator himself or to the profession as a whole. This last 
point thus stresses the translator’s accountability to the profession, as Pym argued 
(see above, 7.5). 
Clause 10 is about respecting professional secrets (accountability again). 
Clause 11 refers to the translator as a “secondary author”, who must therefore 
accept special obligations with respect to the right of the text’s original author. In 
particular, the translator must ensure that he has the right to translate the work in 
question (clause 12). This recalls the point Ebeling made about the speaker’s right 
to speak (above, 7.5). This clause concludes the section on obligations. 

186	 Memes of Translation
Most of the clauses in this section thus have to do with the accountability 
norm in one way or another. Aspects of translation having to do with the relation 
norm remain somewhat confusingly stated. As regards the communication norm, 
although the document’s preamble mentions “the social function of translation”, 
there is little mention of anything related to this norm and its associated value of 
understanding: it can be glimpsed in clauses 5 and 6, but that’s about it. Perhaps 
one reason is the definition of the object of translation given in clause 1: trans-
ferring texts. In this respect, the document seems somewhat dated: after all, texts 
are for people. It is surprising, too, that the translator’s obligations to the original 
writer are mentioned, and also to the translator profession at large, but obligations 
to the readers of a translation are not highlighted in the same way. If the commu-
nication norm and the achievement of understanding are agreed to be central to 
translational action, the Charter’s image of the translator’s role thus seems rather 
one-sided. 
Section II is about the translator’s rights. A translator is an “intellectual work-
er” with the same rights as other such (clauses 13, 14); he holds the copyright to 
his translations (15); and can thus enjoy moral and legal rights similar to those of 
the original author (16). Clause 17 specifies this point in terms of translator visi-
bility: the translator’s authorship of the translation is to be recognized. This means 
e.g. that the translator’s name must be mentioned “clearly and unambiguously” 
whenever the translation is used publicly, that the translation may not be subse-
quently altered without the translator’s permission, and that the translation may 
not be used improperly. Clause 18 is about broadcasting rights etc., and clause 19 
about fair remuneration. 
It is interesting that these rights are mainly rights of ownership: they concern 
the translator’s rights over the final product. There is no explicit mention here of 
any rights the translator may have which affect the translation process: the right 
to clarify where appropriate, the right to make changes where necessary, the right 
to justify his own translation decisions in terms of his own expertise, the right to 
make his own decisions. Perhaps these rights are not granted? Or perhaps only 
taken for granted? 
7.8	
Emancipatory translation
Work in critical linguistics has developed the idea of emancipatory discourse (e.g. 
Fairclough 1992). This means a discourse which liberates speakers from unnec-
essary constraints, which allows them to become genuinely participatory mem-
bers of society, which promotes true democracy and self-fulfilment: the idea has 
obvious ideological and prescriptive overtones. It also has obvious pedagogical 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
187
consequences for the way in which language awareness can be taught, and indeed 
why it should be taught. The basic pedagogical argument is that learners must be 
taught norms, but they must also be given the freedom to decide when they wish 
to break these norms, albeit in full awareness of what consequences this might 
have. Janks and Ivanič (1992: 317) put the point as follows: 
Learners need to understand that rules of accuracy and appropriacy are not fixed, 
but subject to social forces. Moving beyond passive awareness to action means 
learning to choose when to conform to the conventions as they are, or to chal-
lenge them, and so help to break new ground. Action involves knowing how to 
choose, when to choose and whether to choose. People have to choose between 
conventional language use on the one hand, and practising emancipatory dis-
course with its commitment to some sort of change on the other. 
I think this argument is of some relevance also to translation theory and transla-
tor training. Recall the historical evolution of the translator’s role, from humble 
slave to independent expert or equal partner, and the suggestion that this progress 
is also reflected in the individual translator’s development (6.4). In an important 
sense, this movement is indeed one of gradual emancipation. An emancipated 
translator assumes the right to break norms. But not irresponsibly: from the eth-
ical point of view, norm-breaking must be justified by an appeal to higher norms, 
which themselves are justified in terms of the values governing them. 
Let us look at some examples. For many kinds of texts many professional 
translators, as a matter of course, will consider it quite normal to transedit where 
necessary, to clarify obscurity, improve readability etc. They will be fully aware 
that, as translators, they are language experts, trained to be particularly sensitive 
to matters linguistic and therefore naturally authorized to improve an inelegant 
or unclear text where necessary, whereas the original writers may have expertise 
in quite different fields. It is a truism to point out that not all native speakers write 
their own language well; not all native speakers need to, after all. Transediting 
might be considered as norm-breaking activity by people who interpret the re-
lation norm to mean a maximally close similarity to the original style (as stated 
in the official code of conduct issued by the Finnish Association of Translators, 
for instance, and implied by clause 4 of the Translator’s Charter). Other people 
might not recognize such a formulation of the relation norm, and hence would 
not recognize any norm-breaking here. In any case, the translator’s action would 
be justified by appeal to the values of clarity and understanding. 
Or consider Newmark’s (1988: 211) advice that the translator always has the 
moral duty to ‘desex’ language, i.e. to avoid sexist formulations. Even if the orig-
inal persists in using the equivalent of he, etc., translators should always prefer a 
neutral or plural form of the pronoun. Here again, translators would be breaking 

188	 Memes of Translation
one version of the relation norm, but more radically this time, in that the transla-
tion would thus also present a different, less sexist image of the source writer than 
was really the case. More importantly, this manipulation would also break the 
expectancy norm to the extent that readers actually expect sexist language, as be-
ing something quite normal. In this sense, translators are being encouraged here 
to work towards the establishment of new expectancy norms: non-sexist ones. 
Newmark thinks of the underlying value as egalitarianism; we might see it as a 
manifestation of the trust value. 
Feminist translation, which overtly seeks to “hi-jack” the original (“mascu-
line”) text, goes further. Generic masculines, for instance, will not only be re-
moved but replaced by generic feminines (“the translator and her work…”). Other 
manipulations may be more radical: changing the spelling of “author” to auther, 
for instance (Lotbinière-Harwood 1991); the declared aim of such translators is 
thus to make the feminine as visible as possible. 
Other more extreme examples are provided by Robinson (1991), who ends 
up taking a position that could perhaps be non-trivially summarized as: “I can 
translate any way I feel”. I say “non-trivially” because Robinson’s understanding 
of translational action is explicitly somatic: he stresses the importance of initial 
gut-­reactions, of balancing rational discourse with an appreciation of the feeling 
of words, etc. In taking up the cudgels against traditional views of equivalence, of 
the translator as a mere instrument, of the metaphor (“X = Y”) as the dominant 
trope describing translation, Robinson advocates much greater freedom, a much 
wider space in which translators may legitimately act as they wish. This freedom 
includes the right to translate “ironically” or “subversively”, so that translators may 
even deliberately interpose themselves between original writer and target reader, 
manipulating the message in accordance with their own ends. Robinson quotes 
with evident approval, for instance (227–230), Jordan’s translation of parts of the 
New Testament (The Cotton Patch New Testament), in which the translator overt-
ly manipulates the Greek original in order to proclaim his own liberation theol-
ogy, to the extent of setting the whole narrative in the American South and even 
adding references to the oppression of black people. (See https://hopefaithprayer.
com/scriptures/cotton-patch-gospel-matthew-clarence-jordan/.)
Is this fair translation? One’s answer will depend largely on one’s own trans-
lational ideology. Insofar as Jordan replaces the original writers’ messages and 
meanings with his own, or gives the originals interpretations which they could 
not have had at the time they were written, he is breaking the customary relation 
norm and also the expectancy norms concerning biblical translation. On the oth-
er hand, he evidently adheres to the accountability norm by making his intentions 
visible and explicit in the introduction; and by seeking to make the text maximally 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	 189
relevant to modern times he is perhaps ultimately motivated by the values of trust 
and understanding. 
All these examples illustrate cases in which the translator assumes certain 
rights over the text, rights which are over and above those ascribable to the origi-
nal writer. With respect to the decisions mentioned, the translator is acting in an 
emancipated fashion, as a responsible agent exercising freedom of choice. 
However, this freedom is not absolute (although one sometimes gets the im-
pression that Robinson feels that it is). I think that emancipatory translation seeks 
a balance between freedom of action on the one hand and situational constraints 
on the other. It is fruitless to deny that the translator is subject to constraints: who 
isn’t? No action takes place in a vacuum, for every action has an initial state of 
affairs (7.2).
We seem to end up here with the knotty question of free will. Here again, one 
of Popper’s conceptual tools seems helpful. Popper describes the mutual influence 
between his three Worlds as one of “plastic control” (see above, 1.3). Our actions, 
and our will to act, are affected by circumstances of all kinds; yet not totally, not 
deterministically, only plastically, as influences of varying strength. Translation 
norms are not iron laws; as constraints, the control they exercise is plastic. More 
importantly, they themselves are subject to constant revision – and this is per-
haps the ultimate justification for breaking them: in order to replace them by 
better ones. 
A strikingly similar notion to what I have called emancipatory translation 
is put forward in a Peircean semiotic framework by Gorlée (1994). I shall move 
towards my own conclusion with some comments and quotations from Gorlée 
which both summarize and illuminate some of my main points. Gorlée’s main 
thesis is that translation is “contractual semiosis”, a rich and complex metaphor. 
Let me pick up three aspects of it. 
First, for Gorlée (building on Peirce), translation is “the sign- and-code-­
enriching confrontation between sameness and otherness” (171). This means that 
it is a process of genuine semiosis, as opposed to mere mimesis. As such, it is 
always open-ended, as signs can always be further interpreted and reinterpreted 
into other signs. A translation represents one hypothetical interpretation of a text, 
“a meaning-generating thought experiment in which a hypothesis is severally 
tested” (228–229). In the endless game of translation-through-time, “bad” trans-
lations “represent falsity and will be lost in the game”, while “good” translations 
“will engender other, ‘better’ translations which will again engender other trans-
lations”, so that eventually what emerges ideally from this flowing series of semi-
oses is “a translation fulfilling the conditions of truth” (228). Recall the way some 
memes survive and spread while others fade. Further: “[k]nowledge increases be-
cause of the goodness and liveliness (in Darwinian parlance: the fitness, hence the 

190	 Memes of Translation
survival) of some habits of interpretation (interpretants) and the sterility of oth-
ers” (230). This reminds us of the image of translation as genetic propagation, as 
evolution. Gorlée stresses the idea of growth inherent in semiosis, and comments 
on Peirce’s “post-Darwinian evolutionary optimism”. “Indeed,” she adds, “the im-
age of translation that emerges from a Peircean semiotics is one of change and 
growth, of expansion through transformation” (231). Yet despite the ever-present 
opportunity for revision, there will always remain lacunae. “A translation […] is 
never finished and can always, however minimally, be improved upon” (231). 
The notion of memes fighting for survival comes out particularly strongly in 
the following quotation. 
Unless the translated sign succeeds at some point in again finding and appeal-
ing to some mind willing and able to continue the process of its translation, it 
becomes dormant and its meaning becomes ossified […] [All this Universe] is 
perfused with translations – living agencies, that is, some of them active and full 
of energy, others not yet discredited, perhaps, but distinctly becoming outmoded. 
The translated signs populating our entire life-world, permeating it, are in differ-
ent stages of either growth, vitality, and development, or of stagnancy, obsoles-
cence, and finally death. 
(Gorlée 1994: 221, on Peirce’s semiotics)
I have tried to illustrate in this book that the same also holds for ideas about 
translation theory. 
Second, translation is based on a contract between two parties. Like any other 
contract, the translation contract too is based on a form of social organization: 
dialogue. The distinguishing feature of translation, however, is that the two con-
tracting parties are within the same person: the contract is between translator-­
as-receiver/interpreter and translator-as-utterer. Between the two halves of this 
single self, there therefore must be a dialogue. This inner dialogue with the self 
marks translation as being akin to other forms of what Peirce called “deliberate 
meditation, or thinking proper”. All such thought processes are neatly described 
by the reassuringly familiar phrase: “I says to myself, says I” (Gorlée 1994: 220, 
citing Peirce). 
The third point to be stressed is that like any contract, the translation contract 
is predicated upon trust between the two parties, and upon the assumption of re-
sponsibility, of keeping to commitments and taking the consequences (cf. Gorlée, 
p. 220). From this point of view, “translation is a self-imposed, well-described 
duty for the future, a promise to perform a task, that is, to do something, and to 
do it ‘together’” (219), i.e. with both sides of the self working in collaboration. 
Both sides are of course “linked by a feedback mechanism,” and so “they are al-
most forced to continuously interact and make themselves conjointly responsible 
for the work done” (219). 

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
191
Finally: emancipatory translation, I suggest, acknowledges three guiding 
principles, each of which relates to one of the professional norms. 
a.	 The TIANA Principle. TIANA stands for There Is Always aN Alternative (as 
opposed to the TINA principle beloved of certain economists and politicians: 
There Is No Alternative.) TIANA denies the existence of a single perfect 
translation, or even of a single optimal one (with some obvious exceptions 
such as standard terminology: recall the discussion of equivalence in 1.2.2). 
It agrees with Gutt and others that no two people can interpret an utterance 
in precisely the same way. It stresses flexibility and openness to change, in 
that translation is open-ended semiosis. And it is underlined by all those who 
wish to stress the creativity of the translator’s craft. The TIANA Principle con-
cerns the relation norm. 
b.	 The Dialogic Principle. This Bakhtinian principle (see e.g. Bakhtin 1981) states 
that the translator is not alone but engaged in obvious social dialogue with a 
number of partners: original writer, commissioner, publisher, potential read-
ership, other members of the translating profession. Translators are equal 
partners in this dialogue, contributing their own particular expertise as links 
in the communicative chain. Furthermore, translators interact dialogically 
with themselves, with other facets of their own personality, as Gorlée points 
out. And they also engage in dialogue with the text itself, interacting intertex-
tually with it, manipulating it, teasing another text out of it which then itself 
stands in a dialogic relation with the original (cf. Oittinen 1993, 1995). The 
Dialogic Principle therefore concerns the communication norm: language is 
social, translating is a social act. 
c.	 “Nur das Ich kann reden” (Ebeling 1971: 103). Only the I can speak. Language 
is individual, translation is a personal act. I myself must take responsibility 
for what I say and how I say it, and to whom I choose to speak. This principle 
thus concerns the accountability norm. There can be no passing the buck: the 
translated text is mine, with my name on (cf. Mossop 1983). I am not anony-
mous. It is my own trustworthiness that will either be maintained, enhanced 
or harmed by my translation. True, not mine alone, in that the author and 
commissioner also share responsibility: ultimately we are all co-accountable 
for this translation. And, true, I may be working as one member of a team 
of translators. But I alone am responsible for my contribution, and I have a 
loyalty also to myself. In this sense, my words are mine.

192	 Memes of Translation
7.9	
Update
Since Memes of Translation was first published, the interest in translation eth-
ics has noticeably increased. Pym has published an English version (2012) of his 
originally French book on ethics referred to above in several places (1997). From 
another point of view, Koskinen (2000) has discussed the relevance of postmo-
dernity and deconstructionism to translation ethics. This includes an interesting 
analysis of the notion of translator visibility (98f.), where she distinguishes be-
tween textual visibility (as advocated e.g. by Venuti), paratextual visibility (trans-
lators’ statements about their work, presence of their name etc.) and extratextual 
visibility (the public status of the profession). There has also been much work 
on the manifestation of the “translator’s voice” (especially after Hermans 1996), 
underlining the ways in which translations are not neutral but always somehow 
reflect the involvement of the translator him/herself. See e.g. Taivalkoski-Shilov 
and Suchet (2013). 
In 2001, there was a special isue of The Translator (vol. 7, no. 2) on ethics. In 
it, I had a paper (Chesterman 2001) proposing a “Hieronymic Oath” that would 
serve the same role for translators as the Hippocratic Oath still does for doctors. 
This proposal sought to take some of the ideas in the present chapter a stage fur-
ther, towards practical application. My suggested oath was as follows (2001: 153). 
The square brackets are original, and indicate values.
1.	 I swear to keep this Oath to the best of my ability and judgement. 
	
[Commitment] 
2.	 I swear to be a loyal member of the translators’ profession, respecting its his-
tory. I am willing to share my expertise with colleagues and to pass it on to 
trainee translators. I will not work for unreasonable fees. I will always trans-
late to the best of my ability. [Loyalty to the profession] 
3.	 I will use my expertise to maximize communication and minimize misunder-
standing across language barriers. [Understanding] 
4.	 I swear that my translations will not represent their source texts in unfair 
ways. [Truth]
5.	 I will respect my readers by trying to make my translations as accessible as 
possible, according to the conditions of each translation task. [Clarity]
6.	 I undertake to respect the professional secrets of my clients and not to exploit 
clients’ information for personal gain. I promise to respect deadlines and to 
follow clients’ instructions. [Trustworthiness] 
7.	 I will be honest about my own qualifications and limitations; I will not accept 
work that is outside my competence. [Truthfulness]

	
Chapter 7.  On translation ethics	
193
8.	 I will inform clients of unresolved problems, and agree to arbitration in cases 
of dispute. [Justice]
9.	 I will do all I can to maintain and improve my competence, including all 
relevant linguistic, technical and other knowledge and skills. [Striving for 
excellence] 
A different angle has been taken by a number of scholars who have been investi-
gating the historical role played by interpreters, professional or amateur, in war-
time contexts. This work is partly historical, but it also raises important ethical 
issues concerning the loyalty of the interpreters themselves, the clash or overlap 
between professional and personal ethics, and the treatment of interpreters by 
their military employers during and after their assignments. This last point relates 
to what I called macro-ethical questions (in 7.1). See e.g. another special issue of 
The Translator (vol. 16 no. 2, 2010) on “translation and violent conflict”, and Footit 
and M. Kelly (2012). The importance of an interpreter’s personal ethical princi-
ples has been provocatively defended in Inghilleri (2012), using a Bourdieu­sian 
framework to analyse ethical relations between agents. On problematizing the 
notion of the interpreter’s neutrality, see also Angelelli (2004), and Baraldi and 
Gavioli (2012).
The macro-ethical view has also influenced discussions of translation qual-
ity, as briefly noted at the end of Chapter 5. Some scholars have argued that the 
whole notion of translation quality should be extended to include ethical factors 
having to do with the status and working conditions of the translators themselves.  
Abdallah (2012), for instance, brings empirical evidence to show that in the trans-
lation agencies she studied there were serious problems in the way the network 
of various agents functioned. There were clashing concepts of quality, translators’ 
viewpoints were often neglected, rights and responsibilities were unclear. She 
shows how textual quality can be dependent on macro-ethical factors, and under-
lines the importance of clear agreements about quality criteria in this broad sense.
And finally, a postscript on the clarity value. In 1998 a campaign was started 
in the EU Commission Directorate-General for Translation to improve the clarity 
of texts both written and translated in the EU bureaucracy. The campaign, spear-
headed by Emma Wagner, was called “Fight the Fog”. It drew its inspiration partly 
from work on simplifying legal English and the Plain Language movement (see 
now Cutts 2013). The Commission’s booklet is available at http://www.au.af.mil/
au/awc/awcgate/eu/fight_the_fog_en.pdf. There are also campaigns to promote 
clear writing in other languages, and an international Plain Language Association 
(see http://plainlanguagenetwork.org/). 


Epilogue
Strand by strand, the web takes shape. When the radii are in place, the gossamer 
spiral is spun, outwards from the central hub to the circumference. The complete 
construction evolves exosomatically, from within the spider, into an independent 
form in the external world; and it exists there in order to fulfil a specific problem-­
solving function: in the short term to catch flies, and in the long term to ensure 
the further development – indeed, the very survival – of its creator. The web’s cre-
ator remains in contact with the web, aware of it, of how it was made, of external 
events impinging upon it. 
This is Karl Popper’s metaphor, or “biological analogue”, for the concept “the-
ory” (e.g. 1972: 145). Like a spider’s web, a theory is a manifestation of the way 
living creatures adapt to the world we live in. Theories are tools for survival. Their 
creation is prompted by the need to solve particular problems; once created, they 
may affect not only the problem in question but also the future behaviour of their 
creators, perhaps giving rise to new problems and new theories, and so on. Else-
where Popper uses the metaphor of the net: 
I see our scientific theories as human inventions – nets designed by us to catch 
the world. To be sure, these differ from the inventions of the poets, and even from 
the inventions of the technicians. Theories are not the only instruments. What we 
aim at is truth: we test our theories in the hope of eliminating those which are 
not true. In this way we may succeed in improving our theories – even as instru-
ments: in making nets which are better and better adapted to catch our fish, the 
real world. 
([1956] 1982: 42; emphasis original) 
The motto Popper chose for his book The logic of scientific discovery (1959) was a 
quote from Novalis: “Theories are nets: only he who casts will catch.” The task of 
the scientist, then, is to seek to improve the web, the net, making the mesh smaller 
and smaller so that more and more of the world can be conceptually caught: the-
ories are attempts to make sense of things. 
But a net can never catch everything: a net, after all, has holes. 
One of the themes of this book has been to develop a Popperian theory of 
translation. I have tried to link some ideas from Popper’s philosophy with a num-
ber of other views and analyses, in the hope of creating a coherent whole, a the-
ory (in its original sense of ‘view’) of translation. The book thus represents one  

196	 Memes of Translation
tentative answer to the question: how can we construct a theory of translation? 
The various arguments and claims are not yet specific enough to be falsifiable 
in Popper’s sense, but I think that the general theoretical structure comprising 
norms, strategies and values suggests a possible research programme in which 
falsifiable hypotheses can be proposed and tested. 
Now for the error elimination. 

Appendix
These are the texts from Sky Lines, the Austrian Airlines magazine (no. 5, 1992), from which 
most of the German-English examples in Chapter 4 were taken. 
Source text A
Sehr geehrte Fluggäste! 
Diese Ausgabe von SKY LINES enthält ein Porträt der Hansestadt Hamburg und einen Bericht 
über die Dominikanische Republik. Es sind dies informativ gestaltete Hinweise auf neue Ziele 
von Austrian Airlines im Winterflugplan 1992/93. 
	
Hamburg wird im Linienverkehr angeflogen. Ebenso mit Beginn des Winterflugplanes wer-
den die Kurse nach Amman in Jordanien und Minsk in Weißrußland aufgenommen. Die Domi-
nikanische Republik erweitert das Angebot unserer Charter-Tochter Austrian Airtransport. 
	
Zu den Neuheiten im Produkt kommen weitere Verbesserungen unserer Dienstleistun-
gen. Besonders erwähnenswert ist der neue Terminal 1 im Flughafen Wien. Er steht – laut 
Terminplanung bei Redaktionsschluß dieses Bordmagazins – ab 9. September zur Verfügung. 
Austrian Airlines werden dort in einem eigenen Check-in-Bereich auch die Fluggäste unse-
rer Partner in der “European Quality Alliance”, Swissair und SAS, sowie zahlreicher anderer 
Gesellschaften betreuen. Wir sind überzeugt, daß damit das mitteleuropäische Luftdrehkreuz 
Wien für Gäste aus aller Welt noch interessanter und bequemer geworden ist. 
	
Ihr besonderes Augenmerk dürfen wir auf eine Dienstleistung lenken, die wir gemeinsam 
mit Swissair anbieten. Es handelt sich um das Vielflieger-Programm “Qualiflyer”. Schon der 
Name signalisiert ein sorgfältig durchdachtes Qualitätsprogramm, mit dessen attraktiven Leis-
tungen und dessen einfacher Abwicklung wir uns von Mitbewerbern abheben wollen. 
	
“Qualiflyer” ist auf den kombinierten Streckennetzen von Austrian Airlines und Swissair 
gültig. Damit können weltweit Meilen-Guthaben gesammelt und ebenso weltweit konsumiert 
werden. Weitere Partner sind Austrian Air Services und Crossair sowie – im Nachbarschaftsver-
kehr zwischen Skandinavien und Österreich bzw. der Schweiz – Scandinavian Airlines System 
(SAS). Durch Einbeziehung von Mietwagenfirmen und First-class-Hotels können Qualiflyer-­
Mitglieder auch am Boden Dienstleistungen zu besonderen Konditionen in Anspruch nehmen 
und zugleich Meilen-Guthaben buchen. 
	
Details über “Qualiflyer” finden Sie auf Seite 97 dieser SKY LINES-Ausgabe. Wenn Sie 
sich entschließen, die Vorteile zu nutzen, so wenden Sie sich, bitte, an unsere Mitarbeiter beim 
Check-in oder an unsere Flugbegleiter an Bord. Selbstverständlich können wir Ihnen die Un-
terlagen auch zusenden. 
	
Wir würden uns freuen, Sie als “Qualiflyer” begrüßen zu können. Denn wir sagen unseren 
Fluggästen gerne “Dankeschön”. 
	
Wir wünschen Ihnen einen guten Flug mit Austrian Airlines. 
	
D. Dr. Anton Heschgl, Vorstandsdirektor 
	
Dr. Herbert Bammer, Vorstandsdirektor-Stv. 

198	 Memes of Translation
Target text A
Dear Passengers,
In the present issue of SKY LINES you will find a portrait of the Hansa city of Hamburg and 
a feature on the Dominican Republic. Both deal in a highly informative way with Austrian 
Airlines destinations which will be making their debut in the airline’s 1992/93 winter timetable. 
The Vienna-Hamburg route will be one of our new scheduled services. Other innovations in 
the winter timetable will be scheduled flights to Amman in Jordan and to Minsk in Byelorussia. 
The Dominican Republic is an addition to the route network of our charter subsidiary Austrian 
Airtransport. 
	
The enlargement of our destinations list is supplemented by further improvements in our 
range of passenger services. The most notable of these is the new Terminal 1 at Vienna Inter-
national Airport. At the time of going to press, it was scheduled to be opened on September 9. 
Austrian Airlines will operate its own check-in area in the new terminal, for its own passengers 
and for those of its “European Quality Alliance” partners Swissair and SAS and of numerous 
other airlines. We are confident that this added degree of convenience will make Vienna even 
more attractive as a Central European interchange to visitors from all corners of the globe. 
	
We should also like to draw your attention to a service which we are offering in conjunc-
tion with Swissair: the frequent-flyer program “Qualiflyer”. 
	
As its name suggests, this is a painstakingly devised quality program whose distinguishing 
features – attractive services and straightforward procedures – should give it a clear edge over 
rival programs. 
	
“Qualiflyer” is valid on the route networks of both Austrian Airlines and Swissair. This 
means that passengers can clock up “Qualiflyer” mileage worldwide, and also claim the benefits 
worldwide. Other partners affiliated to the scheme are Austrian Air Services and Crossair and – 
on routes linking Scandinavia with Austria and Switzerland – Scandinavian Airlines System 
(SAS). Car rental companies and first-class hotels have been incorporated in the “Qualifly-
er” program, so that members can take advantage of its money-saving services on the ground 
too – and at the same time add more miles to their total. 
	
For details of the “Qualiflyer” program, turn to page 97 of this magazine. If you decide to 
become a member of the scheme, any Austrian Airlines or Swissair service office, our check-in 
staff or the flight attendants will be glad to be of assistance. We can, of course, also forward the 
documentation to you by mail. 
	
We should be very pleased to welcome you as a “Qualiflyer” member. Because we are hap-
py for any opportunity to say “Thank you”. 
	
We wish you a pleasant flight with Austrian Airlines. 
	
D. Dr. Anton Heschgl, President 
	
Dr. Herbert Bammer, Chief Executive Marketing & Sales 

	
Appendix	 199
Source text B
Versandbedingungen 
Die Produkte auf den JET SHOP Seiten sind nur eine kleine Auswahl unserer JET SHOP Pro-
duktpalette. Das gesamte Angebot finden Sie im JET SHOP Katalog, der an Bord aufliegt. JET 
SHOP Artikel können nur mit untenstehendem Bestellschein bezogen werden, ein Verkauf an 
Bord ist leider NICHT möglich. 
	
Unsere Flugbegleiter nehmen gerne Ihre Bestellung entgegen, die bestellten Artikel wer-
den Ihnen mit der Post per Nachnahme zugesandt. Bitte beachten Sie, daß zu den angegebenen 
Preisen noch Porto und Nachnahmegebühren verrechnet werden. Bei Versand in das Ausland 
reduziert sich der angegebene JET SHOP Preis um 16,67% Mehrwertsteuer. Der Versand kann 
nur in jene Länder durchgeführt werden, mit denen ein postalisches Nachnahmeabkommen 
besteht. Wir möchten Sie weiters darauf aufmerksam machen, daß in einigen Ländern zusätz-
lich Zölle eingehoben werden und die Versandspesen dadurch relativ hoch sein können. Arti-
kel- und Preisänderungen vorbehalten. 
Target text B 
The merchandise depicted on the JET SHOP pages is only a small selection of the JET SHOP 
articles available. The full range is detailed in the JET SHOP catalogue which can be obtained 
on board. JET SHOP merchandise can be purchased only by completing the order card below. 
We regret that these articles are NOT sold on board. 
	
Our flight attendants will be glad to take your orders. The articles which you order will be 
sent cash-on-delivery (COD) by post to your address. Kindly note that the prices quoted are 
exclusive of postal charges and collection fee. Deduct 16,67% [comma sic] VAT from the JET 
SHOP price quoted, when merchandise is dispatched abroad. Articles can be sent only to those 
countries with which a postal COD agreement exists. We should also like to remind you that 
some countries levy import tariffs, which makes overall dispatching costs relatively high. We 
reserve the right to make alterations to articles and prices. 
Source and target texts C 
Bestellschein / Order Card 
Alle Preise inklusive MWSt., jedoch exklusive Nachnahmegebühr und Porto. Artikel- und 
Preis­änderungen vorbehalten. / All prices include V.A.T. (value added tax) but do not include the 
C.O.D. (cash on delivery) fee and mail charges. Articles and prices subject to change. 
Wir akzeptieren folgende Kreditkarten und ersuchen Sie, jene, mit der Sie Ihre Rechnung be-
gleichen wollen, anzukreuzen. / We accept the following credit cards. Please mark the one which 
you would like to have charged. 


References
Abdallah, Kristiina. 2012. Translators in Production Networks. Reflections on agency, quality and 
ethics. Joensuu: Publications of the University of Eastern Finland. Available at: http://urn.
fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-61-0609-0. (Accessed 17.5.2015.)
Angelelli, Claudia V. 2004. Revisiting the Interpreter’s Role. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.55
Antonini, Rachele (ed.). In press. Non-professional Interpreting and Translation: State of the Art 
and Future of an Emerging Field of Research. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Archer, Carol M. 1986. “Culture bump and beyond”. In J.M. Valdes (ed.) 1986, Culture Bound. 
Bridging the cultural gap in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
170–178.
Arnold, Malcolm. 1924. Essays Literary and Critical. London and Toronto: Dent. (Extract from 
“On translating Homer” in Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 68–69.)
Arrojo, Rosemary. 1996. “Postmodernism and the teaching of translation”. In Dollerup and 
Appel (eds) 1996, 97–103.  doi: 10.1075/btl.16.15arr
Aunger, Robert (ed.). 2000. Darwinizing Culture. The status of memetics as a science. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Baker, Mona. 1992. In Other Words. A coursebook on translation. London: Routledge. 
	
doi: 10.4324/9780203327579
Baker, Mona. 1993. “Corpus linguistics and translation studies – Implications and applications”. 
In M. Baker, et al. (eds), Text and Technology. In Honour of John Sinclair. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: Benjamins, 233–250.  doi: 10.1075/z.64.15bak
Baker, Mona. 2006. Translation and Conflict: A Narrative Account. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Bakhtin, Mikhail M. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. (Ed. M. Holquist, trans. 
C. Emerson and M. Holquist.) Austin: Texas University Press.
Ballard, Michel. 1992. De Cicéron à Benjamin: Traducteurs, traductions, réflexions. Lille: Presses 
Universitaires de Lille.  doi: 10.1075/target.5.2.15del
Baraldi, Claudio, and Laura Gavioli (eds). 2012. Coordinating Participation in Dialogue Inter-
preting. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.102
Barkhudarov, Leonid. 1993. “The problem of the unit of translation”. In Zlateva (ed.) 1993, 
39–46.
Bartsch, Renate. 1987. Norms of Language. London: Longman.
Bassnett, Susan. 1991. Translation Studies. (Revised edition.) London: Routledge.
Bassnett, Susan, and André Lefevere (eds). 1990. Translation, History and Culture. London: 
Pinter.
Beaugrande, Robert de, and Wolfgang Dressler. 1981. Introduction to Text Linguistics. London: 
Longman.

202	 Memes of Translation
Becher, Viktor. 2010. “Abandoning the notion of ‘translation-inherent’ explicitation: against a 
dogma of Translation Studies”. Across Languages and Cultures 11(1): 1–28. 
	
doi: 10.1556/Acr.11.2010.1.1
Bell, Roger T. 1991. Translation and Translating: Theory and Practice. London: Longman.
Benjamin, Andrew. 1989. Translation and the Nature of Philisophy: A new theory of words.  
London: Routledge.
Benjamin, Walter. [1923] 1963. “Die Aufgabe des Übersetzers”. In Störig (ed.) 1963, 182–195.
Berman, Antoine. 1984. L’Épreuve de l’Étranger: Culture et traduction dans l’Allemagne roman-
tique. Paris: Gallimard.
Blackmore, Susan. 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bloom, Harold. [1975] 1980. A Map of Misreading. New York: Oxford University Press.
Blum-Kulka, Shoshana. 1986. “Shifts of cohesion and coherence in translation”. In House and 
Blum-Kulka (eds) 1986, 17–35.
Bly, Robert. 1984. “The eight stages of translation”. In W. Frawley (ed.) 1984, Translation: Lit-
erary, Linguistic and Philosophical Perspectives. New Jersey: Associated University Press, 
67–89.
Bowker, Lynne, and Jennifer Pearson. 2002. Working with Specialized Language: A Practical 
Guide to Using Corpora. London: Routledge.  doi: 10.4324/9780203469255
Brainerd, Barron. 1972. “An exploratory study of pronouns and articles as indices of genre in 
English”. Language and Style 5(4): 239–259.
Breedveld, Hella. 2002. “Writing and revising processes in professional translation”. Across Lan-
guages and Cultures 3(1): 91–100.  doi: 10.1556/Acr.3.2002.1.7
Broeck, Raymond van den. 1981. “The limits of translatability, exemplified by metaphor trans-
lation”. Poetics Today 2(4): 73–87.  doi: 10.2307/1772487
Brownlie, Siobhan. 2003. “Investigating explanations of translational phenomena: a case for 
multiple causality”. Target 15(1): 111–152.  doi: 10.1075/target.15.1.06bro
Brunette, Louse. 2000. “Towards a terminology for Quality Translation Assessment: a compar-
ison of TQA practices”. The Translator 6(2) [Special issue on evaluation and translation]: 
169–182.  doi: 10.1080/13556509.2000.10799064
Brunette, Louise, Chantal Gagnon, and Jonathan Hine (eds). 2005. “The GREVIS project: Revise 
or court calamity”. Across Languages and Cultures 6(1): 29–45.  doi: 10.1556/Acr.6.2005.1.3
Calzada Pérez, Maria (ed.). 2003. Apropos of Ideology: Translation Studies on Ideology – Ideolo-
gies in Translation Studies. Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Carl, Michael, Srinivas Bangalore, and Moritz Schaeffer (eds). 2016. New Directions in Empiri-
cal Translation Process Research. Cham: Springer.  doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-20358-4
Castellano, Lanna. 1988. “Get rich – but slow”. In C. Picken (ed.) 1988, ITI Conference 2: Trans-
lators and interpreters mean business. London: Aslib.
Catford, John C. 1965. A Linguistic Theory of Translation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cattrysse, Patrick. 2014. Descriptive Adaptation Studies. Epistemological and methodological is-
sues. Antwerp: Garant.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luca. 2005. Évolution biologique, évolution culturelle. Paris: Éditions Odile Jacob.
Chafe, Wallace L. 1982. “Integration and involvement in speaking, writing and oral literature”. 
In D. Tannen (ed.) 1982, Spoken and Written Language: Exploring orality and literacy.  
Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 35–53.
Changeux, Jean-Pierre (éd.) 2003. Gènes et cultures. Paris: Éditions Odile Jacob.
Chesterman, Andrew (ed.). 1989. Readings in Translation Theory. Helsinki: Finn Lectura.

	
References	 203
Chesterman, Andrew. 1993. “From ‘is’ to ‘ought’: translation laws, norms and strategies”. Target 
5(1): 1–20.  doi: 10.1075/target.5.1.02che
Chesterman, Andrew. 1994a. “Karl Popper in the translation class”. In Dollerup and Lindegaard 
(eds) 1994, 89–95.
Chesterman, Andrew. 1994b. “Quantitative aspects of translation quality”. Lebende Sprachen 
39(4): 153–156.  doi: 10.1515/les.1994.39.4.153
Chesterman, Andrew. 1995. “The successful translator: the evolution of homo transferens”. Per-
spectives: Studies in Translatology 2: 253–270.  doi: 10.1080/0907676X.1995.9961266
Chesterman, Andrew. 1996a. “Teaching translation theory: the significance of memes”. In 
Dollerup and Appel (eds) 1996, 63–71.  doi: 10.1075/btl.16.10che
Chesterman, Andrew. 1996b. “On similarity”. Target 8(1): 159–164.  doi: 10.1075/target.8.1.10che
Chesterman, Andrew. 1997. “Ethics of translation”. In M. Snell-Hornby (ed.), Translation as 
Intercultural Communication. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 147–157. 
	
doi: 10.1075/btl.20.15che
Chesterman, Andrew. 1998. Contrastive Functional Analysis. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/pbns.47
Chesterman, Andrew. 2001. “Proposal for a Hieronymic Oath”. The Translator 7(2): 139–154. 
	
doi: 10.1080/13556509.2001.10799097
Chesterman, Andrew. 2005a. “The memetics of knowledge”. In H.V. Dam, J. Engberg and 
H. Gerzymisch-Arbogast (eds) 2005, Knowledge Systems and Translation. Berlin and New 
York: Mouton de Gruyter, 17–30.
Chesterman, Andrew. 2005b. “Problems with strategies”. In K. Károly and Á. Fóris (eds) 2005, 
New Trends in Translation Studies. In Honour of Kinga Klaudy. Budapest: Akadémiai 
Kiadó, 17–28.
Chesterman, Andrew. 2006. “Interpreting the meaning of translation”. In M. Suominen, et al. 
(eds) 2005, A Man of Measure. Festschrift in Honour of Fred Karlsson on his 60th Birthday. 
Turku: Linguistic Association of Finland, 3–11.
Chesterman, Andrew. 2007. “On the idea of a theory”. Across Languages and Cultures 8(1): 
1–16.  doi: 10.1556/Acr.8.2007.1.1
Chesterman, Andrew. 2008. “On explanation”. In A. Pym, M. Shlesinger and D. Simeoni (eds) 
2008, Beyond Descriptive Translation Studies. Investigations in homage to Gideon Toury. 
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 363–379.  doi: 10.1075/btl.75.27che
Chesterman, Andrew. 2009. “The Name and Nature of Translator Studies”. Hermes 42: 13–22.
Chesterman, Andrew. 2014. “Universalism in translation studies”. Translation Studies 7(1): 
82–90.  doi: 10.1080/14781700.2013.828904
Chesterman, Andrew, and Rosemary Arrojo. 2000. “Shared ground in Translation Studies”. Tar-
get 12(1): 151–160.  doi: 10.1075/target.12.1.08che
Chesterman, Andrew, and Emma Wagner. 2002. Can Theory Help Translators? A dialogue be-
tween the ivory tower and the wordface. Manchester: St Jerome Publishing.
Cheyfitz, Eric. 1991. The Poetics of Imperialism. Translation and colonization from The Tempest 
to Tarzan. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Connor, Ulla. 1996. Contrastive Rhetoric. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  doi: 10.1017/
CBO9781139524599
Connor, Ulla, and Robert B. Kaplan (eds). 1987. Writing Across Languages: Analysis of L2 texts. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Copeland, Rita. 1991. Rhetoric, Hermeneutics, and Translation in the Middle Ages. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511597534

204	 Memes of Translation
Coseriu, Eugenio. 1970. “System, Norm und Rede”. In E. Coseriu (ed.), Sprache, Strukturen und 
Funktionen. Tübingen: Narr, 193–212.
Cowley, Abraham. [1656] 1975. Extract from “Preface to the Pindarique Odes”. In T. R. Steiner 
1975, English Translation Theory 1650–1800. Assen and Amsterdam: van Gorcum, 66–67.
Craig, George. 1993. “Fine-tuning Proust”. Times Literary Supplement, 22 October 1993, 24.
Crystal, David, and Donald Davy. 1969. Investigating English Style. London: Longman.
Cutts, Martin. 2013. Oxford Guide to Plain English. (Fourth edition.) Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
d’Alembert, Jean le R. 1784. Morceaux choisis de Tacite. Paris: Desaint. (Translated extracts in 
Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 105–116.)
D’hulst, Lieven. 1992. “Sur le rôle des métaphores en traductologie contemporaine”. Target 4(1): 
33–51.  doi: 10.1075/target.4.1.04dhu
Dacier, Anne. 1711. L’lliade d’Homère. Paris: Rigaud. (Translated extract in Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 
10–13.)
Danan, Martine. 1991. “Dubbing as an expression of nationalism”. Meta 36(4): 606–614. 
	
doi: 10.7202/002446ar
Dancette, Jeanne. 1994. “Comprehension in the translation process: an analysis of think-aloud 
protocols”. In Dollerup and Lindegaard (eds) 1994, 113–120.
Davidson, Donald. 1986. “A nice derangement of epitaphs”. In E. LePore (ed.), Truth and Inter-
pretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson. Oxford: Blackwell, 433–446.
Dawkins, Richard. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (New edition 1989.)
de la Motte, Antoine H. 1714. L’lliade, poème. Avec un discours sur Homère. Amsterdam: Depuis. 
(Translated extract from the preface in Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 28–30.)
Delisle, Jean. 1988. Translation: An Interpretative Approach. Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press.
Delius, Juan D. 1989. “Of memes and brain bugs, a natural history of culture”. In W.A. Koch 
(ed.) 1989, The Nature of Culture. Bochum: Brockmeyer, 26–79.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Dennett, Daniel C. 2004. Freedom Evolves. London: Penguin.
Derrida, Jacques. 1985. “Des Tours de Babel”. In J.F. Graham (ed.) 1985, Difference in Transla-
tion. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 209–248.
Dijk, Teun van. 1988. News as Discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dolet, Etienne. 1540. De la Manière de Bien Traduire d’une Langue en Autre. Lyon: Presses E. 
Dolet. (Translated extracts in Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 27–28.)
Dollerup, Cay, and Vibeke Appel (eds). 1996. Teaching Translation and Interpreting 3. New hori-
zons. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.16
Dollerup, Cay, and Annette Lindegaard (eds). 1994. Teaching Translating and Interpreting 2. 
Insights, aims, visions. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.5
Dreyfus, Hubert L., and Stuart E Dreyfus. 1986. Mind Over Machine. Oxford: Blackwell / New 
York: The Free Press.
Dryden, John. [1680] 1975. From “Preface” to Ovid’s Epistles. In T.R. Steiner 1975, English 
Translation Theory 1650–1800. Assen and Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 68–74. (Also in 
Schulte and Biguenet (eds) 1992, 17–31. Parts also in Chesterman (ed.) 1989, 7–12; and in 
Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 102–105.)
Ebeling, Gerhard. 1971. Einführung in Theologische Sprachlehre. Tübingen: Mohr.
Edelman, Gerald. 1992. Brilliant Air, Bright Fire. On the matter of the mind. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.

	
References	 205
Ellegård, Alvar. 1978. The Syntactic Structure of English Texts. (Gothenburg Studies in English 
43.) Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg.
Englund Dimitrova, Birgitta. 2005. Expertise and Explicitation in the Translation Process.  
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.64
Enkvist, Nils Erik. 1991. “Discourse type, text type, and cross-cultural rhetoric”. In Tirkkonen-­
Condit (ed.) 1991, 5–16.
Erasmus, Desiderius. [1506] 1992. Extracts from “Letter to William Warham”. In Lefevere (ed.) 
1992, 60.
Even-Zohar, Itamar. 1990. Polysystem Studies. Poetics Today 11(1).
Faerch, Claus, and Gabriele Kasper (eds). 1983. Strategies in Interlanguage Communication. 
London: Longman.
Faerch, Claus, and Gabriele Kasper. 1987. Introspection in Second Language Research. Philadel-
phia: Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Fairclough, Norman (ed.). 1992. Critical Language Awareness. London: Longman.
Fawcett, Peter. 1995. “Translation and power play”. The Translator 1(2): 177–192. 
	
doi: 10.1080/13556509.1995.10798956
Ferreira, Aline, and John W. Schwieter (eds). 2015. Psycholinguistic and Cognitive Inquiries into 
Translation and Interpreting. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.115
Florin, Sider. 1993. “Realia in translation”. In Zlateva (ed.) 1993, 122–128.
Flotow, Luise von. 1991. “Feminist translation: contexts, practices and theories”. TTR 4(2): 
69–84.  doi: 10.7202/037094ar
Footit, Hilary, and Michael Kelly (eds). 2012. Languages at War. Policies and practices of lan-
guage contacts in conflict. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Foucault, Michel. 1971. L’Ordre du discours. Paris: Gallimard.
Francis, W. Nelson, and Henry Kučera. 1982. Frequency Analysis of English Usage. Lexicon and 
grammar. Boston: Houghton Miffin Company.
Fraser, Janet. 1993. “Public accounts: using verbal protocols to investigate community transla-
tion”. Applied Linguistics 14(4): 325–343.  doi: 10.1093/applin/14.4.325
Friedrich, Hugo. 1965. “Zur Frage der Übersetzungskunst”. Heidelberg: Carl Winter. (English 
translation in Schulte and Biguenet (eds) 1992, 11–16.)
Fuller, Steve. [2003] 2006. Kuhn vs. Popper. The Struggle for the Soul of Science. Cambridge: Icon 
Books.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. 1960. Wahrheit und Methode. Tübingen: Mohr.
Gambier, Yves. 2008. “Stratégies et tactiques en traduction et interprétation”. In G. Hansen, 
A. Chesterman, and H. Gerzymisch-Arbogast (eds) 2008, Efforts and Models in Interpret-
ing and Translation  Research. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 63–82. 
Gambier, Yves. 2012. “The position of audiovisual translation studies”. In Millán and Bartrina 
(eds) 2012, 45–59.  doi: 10.1075/hts.4
Gambier, Yves, and Luc van Doorslaer (eds). 2014. Handbook of Translation Studies. (Four vol-
umes.) Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/hts.4
Gentzler, Edwin. 1993. Contemporary Translation Theories. London: Routledge.
Gerloff, Pamela. 1986. “Second language learners’ reports on the interpretive process: talk-
aloud protocols of translation”. In House and Blum-Kulka (eds) 1986, 243–262.
Gile, Daniel. 1992. “Les fautes de traduction: une analyse pédagogique”. Meta 37(2): 251–262. 
	
doi: 10.7202/002907ar
Gile, Daniel. 1994. “The process-oriented approach in translation training”. In Dollerup and 
Lindegaard (eds) 1994, 107–112.

206	 Memes of Translation
Gile, Daniel. 1995. Basic Concepts and Models for Interpreter and Translator Training. Amster-
dam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.8(1st)
Goethe, Johan W. von. [1819] 1963. “Noten und Abhandlungen zu bessern Verständnis des 
west-­östlichen Divans”. In Störig (ed.) 1963, 35–37.
Göpferich, Susanna. 2009. “Towards a model of translation competence and its acquisition: 
the longitudinal study ‘TransComp’”. In S. Göpferich, A.L. Jakobsen and I.M. Mees (eds) 
2009, Behind the Mind. Methods, Models and Results in Translation Process Research.  
Copenhagen: Samfundslitteratur Press, 11–37. Available at: http://gams.uni-graz.at/fedo-
ra/get/o:tc-095-187/bdef:PDF/get. (Accessed 18.5.2015.)
Göpferich, Susanna. 2013. “Translation competence. Explaining development and stagnation 
from a dynamic systems perspective”. Target 25(1): 61–76.  doi: 10.1075/target.25.1.06goe
Gorlée, Dinda. 1994. Semiotics and the Problem of Translation, with special reference to the semi-
otics of Charles S. Peirce. Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA.: Rodopi.
Grice, Paul. 1975. “Logic and conversation”. In P. Cole and J. L. Morgan (eds) 1975, Syntax and 
Semantics, 3: Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press, 41–58.
Grimes, Joseph E. 1963. “Measuring ‘naturalness’ in translation”. The Bible Translator 14(2): 
49–62.
Gutt, Ernst-August. 1990. “A theoretical account of translation – without a translation theory”. 
Target 2(2): 135–164.  doi: 10.1075/target.2.2.02gut
Gutt, Ernst-August. 1991. Translation and Relevance. Cognition and context. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hailman, Jack P. 1982. “Evolution and behavior: an iconoclastic view”. In H. C. Plotkin (ed.) 
1982, Learning, Development and Culture. Chichester: Wiley, 205–254.
Haiman, John (ed.). 1985. Iconicity in Syntax. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
	
doi: 10.1075/tsl.6
Halverson, Sandra. 1999. “Conceptual work and the ‘translation’ concept”. Target 11(1): 1–31. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.11.1.02hal
Harris, Brian. 1977. “The importance of natural translation”. Working Papers on Bilingualism 
12: 96–114.
Harris, Brian. 1990. “Norms in interpretation”. Target 2(1): 115–119.  doi: 10.1075/target.2.1.08har
Hartama-Heinonen, Ritva. 2008. Abductive translation studies: the art of marshalling signs. Ima-
tra: International Semiotics Institute.
Hartmann, Reinhard R. K. 1980. Contrastive Textology. Comparative discourse analysis in ap-
plied linguistics. (Studies in Descriptive Linguistics 5.) Heidelberg: Groos.
Hartmann, Reinhard R. K. 1981. “Contrastive textology and translation”. In W. Kühlwein, 
G. Thome, and W. Wilss (eds) 1981, Kontrastive Linguistik und Übersetzungswissenschaft. 
München: Fink, 200–208.
Harvey, Keith. 1995. “A descriptive framework for compensation”. The Translator 1(1): 65–86. 
	
doi: 10.1080/13556509.1995.10798950
Hatim, Basil, and Ian Mason. 1990. Discourse and the Translator. London: Longman.
Heidegger, Martin. [1957] 1963. Der Satz vom Grund. Pfullingen: Günther Neske. Excerpt in 
Störig 1963, 369–383.
Hermans, Theo (ed.). 1985. The Manipulation of Literature. Studies in literary translation.  
London: Croom Helm.
Hermans, Theo. 1991. “Translation norms and correct translations”. In Leuven-Zwart and  
Naaijkens (eds) 1991, 155–169.

	
References	 207
Hermans, Theo. 1996. “The translator’s voice in translated narrative”. Target 8(1): 23–48. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.8.1.03her
Herodotus. 1920. Histories Volume 1. Translated by A. D. Godley. London: Heinemann.
Hervey, Sándor, and Ian Higgins. 1992. Thinking Translation. A course in translation method: 
French-­English. London: Routledge.
Hewson, Lance, and Jacky Martin. 1991. Redefining Translation. The variational approach. 
London: Routledge.
Heylen, Romy. 1993. Translation, Poetics and the Stage. Six French Hamlets. London: Routledge.
Hinds, John. 1987. “Reader versus writer responsibility. A new typology”. In Connor and  
Kaplan (eds) 1987, 141–152.
Hochel, Braňo. 1991. “The cross-temporal and cross-spatial factors and the translation of liter-
ary language”. In Leuven-Zwart and Naaijkens (eds) 1991, 41–48.
Holmes, James S. 1978. “Translation theory, translation theories, translation studies, and the 
translator”. In P.A. Horguelin (ed.) 1978, La Traduction, une Profession / Translating, a 
Profession. Montréal: Conseil des traducteurs et interprètes du Canada, 55–61. (Also in 
Holmes 1988, 93–98.)
Holmes, James S. 1988. Translated! Papers on literary translation and translation studies.  
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Holmes, James S., José Lambert, and Raymond van den Broeck (eds). 1978. Literature and 
Translation: New perspectives in literary studies with a basic bibliography of books on trans-
lation studies. Leuven: Acco.
Holz-Mänttäri, Justa. 1984. Translatorisches Handeln. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia.
Hönig, Hans G., and Paul Kußmaul. 1982. Strategie der Übersetzung. Ein Lehr- und Arbeitsbuch. 
Tübingen: Narr.
Horguelin, Paul A., and Louise Brunette. 1998. Pratique de la révision. Brossard, Québec: 
Linguatech.
House, Juliane. 1977. “A model for assessing translation quality”. Meta 22(2): 103–109. 
	
doi: 10.7202/003140ar
House, Juliane. 1981. A Model for Translation Quality Assessment. (2nd edition.) Tübingen: 
Narr.
House, Juliane. 1988. “Talking to onself or thinking with others? On using different thinking 
aloud methods in translation”. Fremdsprachen lehren und lernen 17: 84–98.
House, Juliane, and Shoshana Blum-Kulka (eds). 1986. Interlingual and Intercultural Commu-
nication: Discourse and cognition in translation and second language acquisition studies. 
Tübingen: Narr.
Hu, Gengshen. 2003. “Translation as adaptation and selection”. Perspectives: Studies in Transla-
tology 11(4): 283–291.  doi: 10.1080/0907676X.2003.9961481
Huetius, Petrus D. 1683. De Interpretatione Libri Duo. The Hague: Apud Arnoldum Leers. 
(Translated extracts in Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 86–102.)
Hull, D.L. 1982. “The naked meme”. In Plotkin, H.C. (ed.) 1982, Learning, Development and 
Culture. Chichester: Wiley, 273–327.
Huss, Roger. 1993. “Flaubert in English”. Times Literary Supplement, 22 October 1993, 24.
Inghilleri, Moira. 2012. Interpreting Justice. Ethics, politics and language. London: Routledge.
Inoue, Kyoko. 1991. MacArthur’s Japanese Constitution. A linguistic and cultural study of its 
making. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Itkonen, Esa. 1983. Causality in Linguistic Theory. London: Croom Helm.

208	 Memes of Translation
Jääskeläinen, Riitta. 1989. “The role of reference material in professional vs non-professional 
translation: a think-aloud protocol study”. In S. Tirkkonen-Condit and S. Condit (eds) 
1989, Empirical Studies in Translation and Linguistics. Joensuu: University of Joensuu, Fac-
ulty of Arts, 175–200.
Jääskeläinen, Riitta. 1993. “Investigating translation strategies”. In S. Tirkkonen-Condit and 
J. Laffling (eds) 1993, Recent Trends in Empirical Translation Research. Joensuu: University 
of Joensuu, Faculty of Arts, 99–119.
Jakobsen, Arnt Lykke. 1994a. “Translation – a productive skill”. In H. Bergenholtz, et al. (eds) 
1994, OFT Symposium. Translating LSP texts. Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School, 
41–70.
Jakobsen, Arnt Lykke. 1994b. “Starting from the (other) end: integrating translation and text 
production”. In Dollerup and Lindegaard (eds) 1994, 143–150.
Jakobsen, Arnt Lykke. 2011. “Tracking translators’ keystrokes and eye movements with 
Translog”. In C. Alvstad, A. Hild, and E. Tiselius (eds) 2011, Methods and Strategies of Pro-
cess Research. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 37–55.  doi: 10.1075/btl.94.06jak
Jakobson, Roman. 1959. “On linguistic aspects of translation”. In R. A. Brower (ed.), On Trans-
lation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 232–239. (Also in Chesterman (ed.) 
1989, 53–60.)
Janks, Hilary, and Roz Ivanič. 1992. “CLA [Critical language awareness] and emancipatory dis-
course”. In Fairclough (ed.) 1992, 305–331.
Jodl, Friedrich. 1918. Allgemeine Ethik. Stuttgart and Berlin: J. G. Cotta’sche Buchhandlung 
Nachfolger.
Johansson, Stig. 1978a. Some Aspects of the Vocabulary of Learned and Scientific English. (Go-
thenburg Studies in English 42.) Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg.
Johansson, Stig. 1978b. Studies of Error Gravity. (Gothenburg Studies in English 44.) Gothen-
burg: University of Gothenburg.
Johansson, Stig, and Knut Hoflund. 1989. Frequency Analysis of English Vocabulary and Gram-
mar. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jones, Francis R. 1989. “On aboriginal sufferance: a process model of poetic translating”. Target 
1(2): 183–199.  doi: 10.1075/target.1.2.04jon
Jumpelt, Rudolf W. 1961. Die Übersetzung Naturwissenschaftlicher und Technischer Literatur. 
Berlin: Langenscheidt.
Karlsson, Fred. 1983. Finnish Grammar. (Translated by Andrew Chesterman.) Helsinki:  
Werner Söderström.
Katz, Jerrold. 1978. “Effability and translation”. In F. Guenthner and M. Guenthner-Reutter 
(eds) 1978, Meaning and Translation. London: Duckworth, 191–234.
Keenan, Edward. 1978. “Some logical problems in translation”. In F. Guenthner and 
M.  Guenthner-­Reutter (eds) 1978, Meaning and Translation. London: Duckworth, 
157–189.
Kelly, Louis G. 1979. The True Interpreter. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kemmis, Stephen, and Robin McTaggart. 1988. The Action Research Planner. Deakin: Deakin 
University Press.
Kiraly, Donald C. 1995. Pathways to Translation. Pegagogy and process. Kent, OH: Kent State 
University Press.

	
References	 209
Klaudy, Kinga. 1996. “Back-translation as a tool for detecting explicitation strategies in trans-
lation”. In K. Klaudy, J. Lambert, and A. Sohár (eds) 1996, Translation Studies in Hungary. 
Budapest: Scholastica, 99–114.
Kolb, David A. 1984. Experiential Learning. Experience as the source of learning and develop-
ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Koller, Werner. 1972. Grundprobleme der Übersetzungstheorie. Bern: Francke.
Koller, Werner. 1979. Einführung in die Übersetzungswissenschaft. Heidelberg: Quelle und  
Meyer. (4th revised edition 1992.)
Komissarov, Vilen. 1993. “Norms in translation”. In Zlateva (ed.) 1993, 63–75.
Königs, Frank G. 1990. “‘Die Seefahrt an der Nagel hängen’? Metaphern beim Übersetzen und 
in der Übersetzungswissenschaft”. Target 2(1): 97–113.  doi: 10.1075/target.2.1.06kon
Korpel, Luc. 1993. “Rhetoric and Dutch translation theory (1750–1820)”. Target 5(1): 55–69. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.5.1.05kor
Koskinen, Kaisa. 1994a. The Invisible Hand: The literary translator’s role. Unpublished Licentiate 
thesis, University of Tampere, Finland.
Koskinen, Kaisa. 1994b. “(Mis)translating the untranslatable – the impact of deconstruction 
and post-structuralism on translation theory”. Meta 39(3): 446–452.  doi: 10.7202/003344ar
Koskinen, Kaisa. 2000. Beyond Ambivalence. Postmodernity and the ethics of translation.  
Tampere: University of Tampere.
Kovala, Urpo. 1996. “Translations, paratextual mediation and ideological closure”. Target 8(1): 
119–147.  doi: 10.1075/target.8.1.07kov
Krings, Hans P. 1986. Was in den Köpfen von Übersetzern vorgeht: eine empirische Untersuchung 
zur Struktur des Übersetzungsprozesses an fortgeschrittenen Französischlernern. Tübingen: 
Narr.
Krings, Hans P. 2001. Repairing texts. Empirical investigations of machine translation post-edit-
ing processes. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
Kučera, Henry, and W. Nelson Francis. 1967. Computational Analysis of Present-day American 
English. Providence, Rhode Island: Brown University Press.
Kuhn, Thomas. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. (Second edition.)
Kundera, Milan. 1993. Les Testaments Trahis: Essai. Paris: Gallimard.
Künzli, Alexander. 2007. “Translation revision – A study of the performance of ten professional 
translators revising a legal text”. In Y. Gambier, M. Shlesinger, and R. Stolze (eds) 2007, 
Doubts and directions in Translation Studies.Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 
115–126.  doi: 10.1075/btl.72.14kun
Kußmaul, Paul. 1991. “Creativity in the translation process”. In Leuven-Zwart and Naaijkens 
(eds) 1991, 91–101.
Kußmaul, Paul. 1995. Training the Translator. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
	
doi: 10.1075/btl.10
Ladmiral, Jean-René. 1994. Traduire: Théorèmes pour la traduction. Paris: Gallimard.
Lanstyák, István, and Pál Heltai. 2012. “Universals in language contact and translation”. Across 
Languages and Cultures 13(1): 99–121.  doi: 10.1556/Acr.13.2012.1.6
Leech, Geoffrey N. 1983. Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman.
Lefevere, André (ed.). 1992. Translation / History / Culture. A sourcebook. London: Routledge.
Lefevere, André. 1992. Translation, Rewriting and the Manipulation of Literary Fame. London: 
Routledge.

210	 Memes of Translation
Leppihalme, Ritva. 1997. Culture Bumps. An Empirical Approach to the Translation of Allusions. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Leppihalme, Ritva. 2011. “Realia”. In Y. Gambier and L. van Doorslaer (eds) 2011, Handbook of 
Translation Studies. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 126–130. 
	
doi: 10.1075/hts.2.rea1
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van. 1989/1990. “Translation and original. Similarities and dissimilari-
ties”, I and II. Target1(2): 151–181 and 2(1): 69–95.  doi: 10.1075/target.1.2.03leu
Leuven-Zwart, Kitty M. van, and Ton Naaijkens (eds). 1991. Translation Studies: The state of the 
art. Proceedings of the First James S. Holmes Symposium on Translation Studies. Amsterdam 
and Atlanta: Rodopi.
Levý, Jiří. 1967. “Translation as a decision process”. In To Honor Roman Jakobson, vol. II. The 
Hague: Mouton, 1171–1182. (Also in Chesterman (ed.) 1989, 37–52.)
Levý, Jiří. 1969. Die Literarische Übersetzung. Frankfurt: Athenäum.
Lewis, David K. 1969. Convention: A philosophical study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Lewis, Philip E. 1985. “The measure of translation effects”. In J. Graham (ed.) 1985, Difference 
in Translation. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 31–62.
Liddell, Henry G., and Robert Scott. 1940. A Greek-English Lexicon. (9th edition.) Oxford:  
Clarendon Press.
Linnarud, Moira. 1988. Lexis in Composition: A performance analysis of Swedish learners’ writ-
ten English. Lund: Gleerup.
Lörscher, Wolfgang. 1989. “Models of the translation process: claim and reality”. Target 1(1): 
43–68.  doi: 10.1075/target.1.1.05lor
Lörscher, Wolfgang. 1991. Translation Performance, Translation Process and Translation Strate-
gies: A psycholinguistic investigation. Tübingen: Narr.
Lotbinière-Harwood, Susanne de. 1991. Re-belle et Infidèle. La traduction comme pratique 
de réécriture au feminin / The Body Bilingual. Translation as a rewriting in the feminine.  
Montréal/Toronto: Les éditions du remue-ménage / Women’s Press.
Malmkjær, Kirsten. 1993. “Underpinning translation theory”. Target 5(2): 133–148. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.5.2.02mal
Malmkjær, Kirsten. 2004. “Censorship or Error: Mary Howitt and a Problem in Descriptive 
TS”. In D. Gile, G. Hansen, and K. Malmkjær (eds) 2004, Claims, Changes and Challenges 
in Translation Studies: Selected Contributions from the EST Congress, Copenhagen 2001. 
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 141–155.  doi: 10.1075/btl.50.12mal
Malone, Joseph L. 1988. The Science of Linguistics in the Art of Translation. Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press.
Mauranen, Anna. 1993. Cultural Differences in Academic Rhetoric: A textlinguistic study. Frank-
furt am Main: Lang.
Mauranen, Anna, and Pekka Kujamäki (eds). 2004. Translation Universals. Do they exist?  
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.48
May, Rachel. 1994. The Translator in the Text. On reading Russian literature in English. Evanston, 
Ill.: Norhwestern University Press.
Millán, Carmen, and Francesca Bartrina (eds). 2012. The Routledge Handbook of Translation 
Studies. London: Routledge.
Molina, Lucia, and Amparo Hurtado Albir. 2002. “Translation techniques revisited: A dynamic 
and functionalist approach.” Meta 47(4): 498–512.  doi: 10.7202/008033ar
Morgenstern, Christian. 1969. Galgenlieder. Memmingen: Maximilian Dietrich Verlag.

	
References	
211
Mossop, Brian. 1983. “The translator as rapporteur: a concept for training and self-improve-
ment”. Meta 28(3): 244–278.  doi: 10.7202/003674ar
Mossop, Brian. 2007a. Revising and editing for translators. (Second edition.) Manchester:  
St. Jerome Publishing.
Mossop, Brian. 2007b. “Empirical studies of revision: what we know and need to know”. The 
Journal of Specialised Translation [on-line series], 8. Available at http://www.jostrans.org/
issue08/art_mossop.php. (Accessed 15.5.2015.)
Mounin, Georges. 1963. Les Problèmes théoriques de la traduction. Paris: Gallimard.
Munday, Jeremy. 2012. Introducing Translation Studies. Theories and applications. (Third edi-
tion.) London: Routledge.
Nabokov, Vladimir. [1955] 1992. “Problems of translation: Onegin in English”. In Schulte and 
Biguenet (eds) 1992, 127–143.
Neubert, Albrecht. 1981. “Translation, interpreting and text linguistics”. In B. Sigurd and 
J. Svartvik (eds) 1981, AILA 82 Proceedings: Lectures, 130–145. (Studia Linguistica 35.) 
(Also in Chesterman (ed.) 1989, 141–156.)
Neubert, Albrecht, and Gregory M. Shreve. 1992. Translation as Text. Kent, OH: Kent State 
University Press.
Newmark, Peter. 1981. Approaches to Translation. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Newmark, Peter. 1988. A Textbook of Translation. Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall International.
Newmark, Peter. 2004. “Non-literary in the light of literary translation”. The Journal of Special-
ised Translation 1: 8–13. 
Nida, Eugene A. 1964. Toward a Science of Translating. Leiden: Brill.
Nida, Eugene A. 1969. “Science of translation”. Language 45(3): 483–498.  doi: 10.2307/411434
Nida, Eugene A., and Charles R. Taber. 1969. The Theory and Practice of Translation. Leiden: 
Brill.
Niiniluoto, Ilkka. 1978. “Notes on Popper as follower of Whewell and Peirce”. Ajatus 37: 
272–327.
Niranjana, Tejaswini. 1992. Siting Translation Theory. History, post-structuralism and the colo-
nial context. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Nord, Christiane. 1991. Text Analysis in Translation. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi.
Nouss, Alexis. 1994. “Translation and the two models of interpretation”. In Dollerup and  
Lindegaard (eds) 1994, 157–163.
Nylander-Tuominen, Sirkka-Liisa. 1992. “La Kanteletar and I will sing what I know: semiotic 
features in two translations of Kanteletar”. In E. Tarasti (ed.) 1992, Center and Periphery in 
Representations and Institutions. Imatra: International Semiotics Institute, 333–345.
Nystrand, Martin. 1992. “Social interactionism versus social constructionism: Bakhtin,  
Rommetveit and the semiotics of written text”. In A.H. Wold (ed.) 1992, The Dialogical 
Alternative. Towards a theory of language and mind. Oslo: Scandinavian University Press, 
157–173.
O’Brien, Sharon, and Michel Simard (eds). 2014. Machine Translation, 28. (Special Issue on 
Post-­Editing.)  doi: 10.1007/s10590-014-9166-8
O’Malley, J. Michael, and Anne Uhl Chamot. 1990. Learning Strategies in Second Language Ac-
quisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139524490
Oittinen, Riitta. 1993. I am Me – I am Other: On the dialogics of translating for children. (Acta 
Universitatis Tamperensis, ser. A vol. 386.) Tampere: University of Tampere.
Oittinen, Riitta. 1995. Kääntäjän Karnevaali. Tampere: Tampere University Press.

212	 Memes of Translation
Ortega y Gasset, José. 1937. “La miseria y el esplendor de la traducción”. La Nación (Buenos  
Aires), May-June. (Reprinted in J. Ortega y Gasset, Obras Completas: Tomo V (1933–
1941). Madrid: Revista de Occidente, 429–448. Translated extract in Schulte and Biguenet 
(eds) 1992, 93–112.)
PACTE. 2005. “Investigating translation competence: conceptual and methodological issues”. 
Meta 50(2): 609–619.  doi: 10.7202/011004ar
Paepcke, Fritz. 1986. “Textverstehen – Textübersetzen – Übersetzungskritik”. In M. Snell-­
Hornby (ed.) 1986, Übersetzungswissenschaft: eine Neuorientierung. Zur Integrierung von 
Theorie und Praxis. Tübingen: Francke, 106–132.
Paz, Octavio. 1971. Traducción: Literatura y Literalidad. Barcelona: Tusquets. (Translated ex-
tract in Schulte and Biguenet (eds) 1992, 152–162.)
Pesonen, Pekka. 1993. “Venäläiskertojat löysivät uuden sävellajin”. Helsingin Sanomat, 30 Oc-
tober 1993, C2.
Picken, Catriona (ed.). 1994. Quality – Assurance, Management and Control. (Proceedings, ITI 
Conference 7.) London: Institute of Translation and Interpreting.
Plotkin, Henry C. 1993. “Hunting memes”. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16(4): 768–9. 
	
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00032891
Pöchhacker, Franz. 2004. Introducing Interpreting Studies. London: Routledge.
Pokorn, Nike K. 2005. Challenging the Traditional Axioms. Translation into a non-mother tongue. 
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.62
Popper, Karl R. [1945] 1962. The Open Society and its Enemies. (4th edition.) London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Popper, Karl R. [1956] 1982. The Open Universe. Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
Popper, Karl R. 1959. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Hutchinson.
Popper, Karl R. 1972. Objective Knowledge. An evolutionary approach. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Popper, Karl R. 1992. Unended Quest. London: Routledge.
Purves, Alan C. (ed.). 1988. Writing Across Languages and Cultures. Issues in contrastive rheto-
ric. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Puurtinen, Tiina H. 1995. Linguistic Acceptability in Translated Children’s Literature. (University 
of Joensuu Publications in the Humanities 15.) Joensuu: University of Joensuu.
Pym, Anthony. 1992a. Translation and Text Transfer. Frankfurt am Main: Lang.
Pym, Anthony. 1992b. “The relation between translation and material text transfer”. Target 4(2): 
171–189.  doi: 10.1075/target.4.2.03pym
Pym, Anthony. 1994. “Twelfth-century Toledo and strategies of the literalist Trojan horse”. Tar-
get 6(1): 43–66.  doi: 10.1075/target.6.1.04pym
Pym, Anthony. 1995. “European Translation Studies, une science qui dérange, and Why Equiv-
alence Needn’t Be a Dirty Word”. TTR 8(1): 153–176.  doi: 10.7202/037200ar
Pym, Anthony. 1996. “Venuti’s visibility”. Target 8(1): 165–177.  doi: 10.1075/target.8.1.12pym
Pym, Anthony. 1997. Pour une Éthique du Traducteur. Arras: Artois Presses Université; Ottawa: 
Presses de l’Université d’Ottawa.
Pym, Anthony. 1998. Method in Translation History. Manchester: St. Jerome Publishing.
Pym, Anthony. 2007. “Natural and directional equivalence in theories of translation”. Target 
19(2): 271–294.  doi: 10.1075/target.19.2.07pym
Pym, Anthony. 2010. Exploring Translation Theories. London and New York: Routledge.
Pym, Anthony. 2011. “Translation theory as historical problem-solving”. Intercultural Commu-
nication Review 9:49–61. Available via http://usuaris.tinet.cat/apym/publications/publica-
tions.html. (Accessed 6.5.2015.)

	
References	
213
Pym, Anthony. 2012. On Translator Ethics. Principles for mediation between cultures. Amster-
dam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.104
Pym, Anthony. 2016. Translation Solutions for Many Languages – Histories of a Flawed Dream. 
London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Pym, Anthony, Miriam Shlesinger, and Zuzana Jettmarová (eds). 2006. Sociocultural Aspects of 
Translating and Interpreting. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.67
Pym, Anthony, Miriam Shlesinger, and Daniel Simeoni (eds). 2008. Beyond Descriptive Trans-
lation Studies. Investigations in homage to Gideon Toury. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.75
Quine, Willard van O. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey N. Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Compre-
hensive Grammar of the English Language. London: Longman.
Randell, Elina. 1986. “William Faulknerin teosten suomennoksista”. In U. Kovala (ed.), Maail-
mankirjallisuuden ja sen Klassikoiden Suomentamisesta, Osa III. (Monisteita 32.) Jyväsky-
lä: Jyvaskylän yliopiston kirjallisuuden laitos, 17–30.
Rawson, Claude. 1993. Review of Fima by Amos Oz. Times Literary Supplement, 8 October 
1993, 28.
Reiß, Katharina, and Hans J. Vermeer. 1984. Grundlegung einer Allgemeinen Translationstheo-
rie. Tübingen: Niemeyer.  doi: 10.1515/9783111351919
Rener, Frederick M. 1989. Interpretatio: Language and Translation from Cicero to Tytler.  
Amsterdam and Atlanta: Rodopi.
Retsker, Jakob. 1993. “The theory and practice of translation”. In Zlateva (ed.) 1993, 18–31.
Richards, Ivor A. 1936. The Philosophy of Rhetoric. New York: Oxford University Press.
Riley, Philip. 1979. “Towards a contrastive pragmalinguistics”. Papers and Studies in Contrastive 
Linguistics 10: 90–115.
Ringbom, Håkan (ed.). 1993. Near-native Proficiency in English. (English Department Publica-
tions 2.) Åbo: Åbo Akademi University.
Risku, Hanna. 1998. Translatorische Kompetenz. Tübingen: Stauffenburg.
Risku, Hanna, and Florian Windhager. 2013. “Extended translation. A sociocognitive research 
agenda”. Target 25(1): 33–45.  doi: 10.1075/target.25.1.04ris
Rissanen, Matti. 1971. Problems in the Translation of Shakespeare’s Imagery into Finnish. Helsin-
ki: Société Néophilologique.
Robert, Isabelle, and Luuk Van Waes. 2014. “Selecting a translation revision procedure: do 
common sense and statistics agree?” Perspectives: Studies on Translatology 22(3): 304–320. 
	
doi: 10.1080/0907676X.2013.871047
Robinson, Douglas. 1987. “Koskenko yli saareen? Pentti Saarikoski kääntäjänä ja käännösteo-
reetikkona”. In A. Ollikainen and M. Pulakka (eds) 1987, Kääntäjät Kulttuurivaikuttajina. 
(Monisteita 35.) Jyväskylä: Jyväskylän yliopiston kirjallisuuden laitos, 143–165.
Robinson, Douglas. 1991. The Translator’s Turn. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Robyns, Clem. 1994. “Translation and discursive identity”. Poetics Today 15(3): 405–428. 
	
doi: 10.2307/1773316
Rooten, Luis van. 1967. Mots d’heures: gousses, rames. London: Angus and Robertson.
Roscommon, Earl of. [1685] 1975. “An essay on translated verse”. In T.R. Steiner 1975, En-
glish Translation Theory 1650–1800. Assen and Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 75–85. (Also in  
Lefevere (ed.) 1992, 43–45.)
Rose, Hilary, and Steven Rose. 2001. Alas, Poor Darwin. London: Vintage.
Rosenberg, Tina. 1993. “Playwright on the stage of history”. Guardian Weekly, 24 October 1993.

214	 Memes of Translation
Rydning, Antin F. 1991. Qu’est-ce qu’une traduction acceptable en B? Les conditions d’acceptabi-
lité de la traduction fonctionnelle réalisée dans la langue seconde du traducteur. Oslo: Uni-
versity of Oslo.
Sager, Juan C. 1994. Language Engineering and Translation – Consequences of automation.  
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.1
Schiavi, Giuliana. 1996. “There is always a teller in a tale”. Target 8(1): 1–21. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.8.1.02sch
Schleiermacher, Friedrich. [1813] 1963. “Ueber die verschiedenen Methoden des Uebersezens”. 
In Störig (ed.) 1963, 38–70.
Schreiber, Michael. 1998. “Übersetzungstypen und Übersetzungsverfahren”. In M. Snell-­
Hornby et al. (eds) 1998, Handbuch Translation. Tübingen: Stauffenburg, 151–154.
Schulte, Rainer, and John Biguenet (eds). 1992. Theories of Translation. An anthology of essays 
from Dryden to Derrida. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schultze, Brigitte. (ed.). 1987. Die Literarische Übersetzung: Fallstudien zu ihrer Kulturge­
schichte. (Göttinger Beiträge zur Internationalen Übersetzungsforschung, vol. 1.) Berlin: 
Erich Schmidt Verlag.
Schwarzwald-Rodrigue, Ora. 1993. “Mixed translation patterns: the Ladino translation of Bibli-
cal and Mishnaic Hebrew verbs”. Target 5(1): 71–88.  doi: 10.1075/target.5.1.06sch
Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
	
doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139173452
Séguinot, Candace. 1982. “The editing function of translation”. Bulletin of the Canadian Associ-
ation of Applied Linguistics 4(1): 151–161.
Séguinot, Candace. 1988. “Pragmatics and the explicitation hypothesis”. TTR 1(2): 106–113. 
	
doi: 10.7202/037024ar
Séguinot, Candace. 1989. “The translation process: an experimental study”. In C. Séguinot (ed.) 
1989, The Translation Process. School of Translation, York University: H.G. Publications, 
21–53.
Séguinot, Candace. 1991. “A study of student translation strategies”. In Tirkkonen-Condit 
(ed.)1991, 79–88.
Sell, Roger. 1990. Literary Pragmatics. London: Routledge.
Shlesinger, Miriam. 1992. “Lexicalization in translation: an experimental study of students’ 
progress”. In C. Dollerup and A. Loddegaard (eds) 1992, Teaching Translation and Inter-
preting 1: Training, talent and experience. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 123–
127.   doi: 10.1075/z.56.20shl
Shveitser, Alexander. 1993. “Equivalence and adequacy”. In Zlateva (ed.) 1993, 47–56.
Snell-Hornby, Mary, H.G. Hönig, P. Kußmaul, and P.A. Schmitt (eds). 2004. Handbuch Transla-
tion. (Second edition.) Tübingen: Stauffenburg.
Snell-Hornby, Mary. 1988. Translation Studies. An integrated approach. Amsterdam and Phila-
delphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/z.38
Snell-Hornby, Mary. 2006. The Turns of Translation Studies. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.66
Snell, Bruno. 1975. Die Entdeckung des Geistes. (4th edition.) Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht.
Steiner, Erich. 1988. “Describing language as activity: an application to child language”. In R.P. 
Fawcett and D.J. Young (eds) 1988, New Developments in Systemic Linguistics, Vol. 2. Theo-
ry and applications. London: Pinter, 144–173.

	
References	
215
Steiner, George. 1975. After Babel. London: Oxford University Press.
Stetting, Karen. 1989. “Transediting – a new term for coping with a grey area between editing 
and translating”. In G. Caie, et al. (eds) 1989, Proceedings from the Fourth Nordic Confer-
ence for English Studies. Copenhagen: Department of English, University of Copenhagen, 
371–382.
Störig, Hans J. (ed.). 1963. Das Problem des Übersetzens. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche 
Buchgesellschaft.
Suojanen, Tytti, Kaisa Koskinen and Tiina Tuominen. 2015. User-Centred Translation. Abing-
don: Routledge.
Swales, John. 1991. Genre Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tabakowska, Elzbieta. 1993. Cognitive Linguistics and Poetics of Translation. Tübingen: Narr.
Taivalkoski-Shilov, Kristiina, and Myriam Suchet (eds). 2013. La traduction des voix intra-­
textuelles / Intratextual Voices in Translation. Montréal: Éditions québecoises de l’œuvre. 
Tannen, Deborah, and Muriel Saville-Troike (eds). 1985. Perspectives on Silence. Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex.
Tirkkonen-Condit, Sonja. 1990. “Professional vs. non-professional translation: a think-aloud 
protocol study”. In M.A.K. Halliday, J. Gibbons, and H. Nicholas (eds) 1990, Learning, 
Keeping and Using Language. Selected papers from the Eighth World Congress of Applied 
Linguistics. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 381–394.
Tirkkonen-Condit, Sonja (ed.). 1991. Empirical Research in Translation and Intercultural Stud-
ies. Selected papers of the TRANSIF Seminar, Savonlinna 1988. Tübingen: Narr.
Tirkkonen-Condit, Sonja. 2004. “Unique items – over- or under-represented in translated lan-
guage?” In A. Mauranen and P. Kujamäki (eds) 2004, Translation Universals. Do they Exist? 
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 177–184.  doi: 10.1075/btl.48.14tir
Toma, Peter. [1976] 1989. “An operational machine translation system”. In Chesterman (ed.) 
1989, 162–172. (Originally published in R.W. Brislin (ed.) 1976, Translation. Applications 
and Research. New York: Gardner Press Inc., 249–260.)
Tommola, Jorma. 1986. “Translation as a language process: an empirical approach”. In Y.M. 
Gambier (ed.) 1986, TRANS. Turku: School of Translation Sudies, University of Turku, 
118–140.
Toury, Gideon. 1980. In Search of a Theory of Translation. Tel Aviv: Porter Institute.
Toury, Gideon. 1985. “A rationale for descriptive translation studies”. In Hermans (ed.) 1985, 
16–41.
Toury, Gideon. 1991. “What are descriptive studies into translation likely to yield apart from 
isolated descriptions?” In Leuven-Zwart and Naaijkens (eds) 1991, 179–192.
Toury, Gideon. 1995. Descriptive Translation Studies and Beyond. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.4
Toury, Gideon. 2012. Descriptive Translation Studies – and Beyond. (Revised edition.) Amster-
dam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.100
Tymoczko, Maria. 2006. “Reconceptualizing Western translation theory: Integrating non-­
Western thought about translation”. In T. Hermans (ed.), 2006, Translating Others (vol. 1). 
Manchester: St. Jerome Publishing, 13–32.
Tytler, Alexander F. [1790] 1978. Essay on the Principles of Translation. (Amsterdam Classics in 
Linguistics 13.) Amsterdam: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/acil.13
Ullmann-Margalit, Edna. 1977. The Emergence of Norms. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

216	 Memes of Translation
Ulrych, Margherita. 2009. “Translating and editing as mediated discourse: focus on the re-
cipient”. In R. Dimitriu and M. Shlesinger (eds) 2009, Translators and Their Readers. In 
Homage to Eugene A. Nida. Brussels: Editions du Hasard, 219–234.
Vehmas-Lehto, Inkeri. 1989. Quasi-correctness. A critical study of Finnish translations of Russian 
journalistic texts. Helsinki: Neuvostoliittoinstituutti. Available at https://helda.helsinki.fi/
bitstream/handle/10138/154308/quasicor.pdf?sequence=1.
Venuti, Lawrence. 1992. “Introduction”. In L. Venuti (ed.) 1992, Rethinking Translation. 
London: Routledge, 1–17.
Venuti, Lawrence. 1995a. The Translator’s Invisibility: A history of translation. London: 
Routledge.  doi: 10.4324/9780203360064
Venuti, Lawrence. 1995b. “Translation, authorship, copyright”. The Translator 1(1): 1–24. 
	
doi: 10.1080/13556509.1995.10798947
Vermeer, Hans J. 1989. “Skopos and commission in translational action”. In Chesterman (ed.) 
1989, 173–187.
Vermeer, Hans J. 1992. Skizzen zu einer Geschichte der Translation. Vols 1 and 2. Frankfurt am 
Main: Verlag fur Interkulturelle Kommunikation.
Vermeer, Hans J. 1997. “Translation and the ‘meme’”. Target 9(1): 155–166. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.9.1.10ver
Vermeer, Hans J. 1998. “Starting to unask what translatology is all about”. Target 10(1): 41–68. 
	
doi: 10.1075/target.10.1.03ver
Vieira, Else R.P. 1994. “A postmodern translational aesthetics in Brazil”. In M. Snell-Hornby, 
F. Pöchhacker, and K. Kaindl (eds) 1994, Translation Studies: An interdiscipline. Amster-
dam and Philadelphia: Benjamins, 65–72.  doi: 10.1075/btl.2.09rib
Vinay, Jean-Paul, and Jean Darbelnet. [1958] 1969. Stylistique Comparée du français et de l’an-
glais. Paris: Didier.
Vuorinen, Erkka. 1994. “Kääntäjän ‘tarkkuudesta’ ja ‘vapaudesta’ sekä hyvästä kääntämistavas-
ta”. Kääntäjä 2: 1–3.
Weaver, Warren. 1955. “Translation”. In W.N. Locke and A.D. Booth (eds) 1955, Machine Trans-
lation of Languages. New York: Wiley, 15–23.
Wierzbicka, Anna. 1991. Cross-cultural Pragmatics. The semantics of human interaction. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Will, Frederic. 1973. The Knife in the Stone. The Hague: Mouton.  doi: 10.1515/9783111342412
Willamowitz-Moellendorff, Ulrich von. [1925] 1963. “Was ist Übersetzen?” In Störig (ed.) 
1963, 139–169.
Willems, Dominique, and Bart Defrancq (eds). 2004. Contrastive Analysis in Language: Identi-
fying Linguistic Units of Comparison. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Williams, Bernard. [1985] 1993. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London: Fontana.
Wilss, Wolfram. 1977. Übersetzungswissenschaft. Stuttgart: Klett.
Wilss, Wolfram. 1982. The Science of Translation. Problems and methods. Tübingen: Narr.
Wilss, Wolfram. 1988. Kognition und Übersetzen. Zu Theorie und Praxis der menschlichen und 
der maschinellen Übersetzung. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. (Parallel English translation by G.E.M. 
Anscombe.) Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolf, Michaela, and Alexandra Fukari (eds). 2007. Constructing a Sociology of Translation.  
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: Benjamins.  doi: 10.1075/btl.74
Wright, Georg H. von. 1968. An Essay in Deontic Logic and the General Theory of Action. (Acta 
Philosophica Fennica 21.) Amsterdam: North-Holland.

	
References	
217
Xiao, Richard (ed.). 2010. Proceedings of The International Symposium on Using Corpora in Con-
trastive and Translation Studies (UCCTS 2008). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholar Publishing.
Zabalbeascoa, Patrick. 2000. “From techniques of translation to types of solutions”. In A. Beeby, 
D. Endinger, and M. Presas (eds) 2000, Investigating Translation. Amsterdam and Philadel-
phia: Benjamins, 117–127.  doi: 10.1075/btl.32.15zab
Zalán, P. 1990. “Zur Problematik von Normen und Übersetzen”. In R. Arntz and G. Thome 
(eds) 1990, Übersetzungswissenschaft. Ergebnisse und Perspektiven. Tübingen: Narr, 55–58.
Zanettin, Federico, Silvia Bernardini, and Dominic Stewart (eds). 2003. Corpora in Translator 
Education. Manchester: St. Jerome Publishing.
Zeldin, Theodor. [1994] 1995. An Intimate History of Humanity. London: Minerva (Mandarin 
Paperbacks).
Zlateva, Palma (ed.). 1993. Translation as Social Action. London: Routledge.


A
Abdallah  143, 193
Angelelli  193
Antonini  165
Archer  182
Aristotle  18
Arnold  28
Arrojo  27, 44
Aunger  14
B
Baker  37, 46, 162
Bakhtin  191
Ballard  17
Baraldi  193
Barkhudarov  8
Bartsch  52–53, 55–56, 61
Bassnett  17, 38
Beaugrande  80, 173
Becher  69
Bell  41, 43, 50, 70
Benjamin, A.  27
Benjamin, W.  7, 9, 25
Berman  17, 26, 167
Biguenet  7, 28
Blackmore  14
Bloom  162
Blum-Kulka  69
Bly  116, 142
Bowker  166
Brainerd  132
Breedveld  142
Broeck, van den  103
Brownlie  82
Brunette  142
C
Calzada Pérez  37
Carl  47
Castellano  162
Catford  29, 90, 93, 160
Cattrysse  15
Cavalli-Sforza  14
Chafe  81
Chamot  85
Changeux  14
Chatterton  57
Chesterman  3, 5, 13–14, 17, 29, 
41, 44, 46–47, 53, 57, 60, 66, 
72, 75, 78, 97, 131, 148, 170, 192
Cheyfitz  36, 167
Cicero  23, 41
Connor  81
Copeland  17, 23–24
Coseriu  56
Cowley  23
Craig  115
Crystal  122
Cutts  193
D
Dacier  22
d’Alembert  22
Danan  36
Dancette  68
Darbelnet  21, 29, 90, 92–93, 
113–114, 160
Darwin  1, 156
Davidson  55
Davy  122
Dawkins  1–3
Defrancq  82
de la Motte  23
Delisle  116
Delius  11
Dennett  12, 38
Derrida  6, 9, 26–27
D’hulst  18
Dijk, van  81
Dolet  19, 22, 49
Dressler  80, 173
Dreyfus  145–151, 154, 163
Dryden  8, 23–24, 112
E
Ebeling  179, 181, 185, 191
Edelman  11
Ellegård  80, 131–132
Englund Dimitrova  165
Enkvist  79
Erasmus  20
Even-Zohar  8, 34–35
F
Faerch  40, 85
Fairclough  186
Fawcett  36
Ferreira  47
Fitzgerald  23
Florin  105, 160
Flotow, von  37
Footit  193
Foucault  27
Francis  80, 131
Fraser  40
Friedrich  6
Fuller  45
G
Gadamer  181
Gambier  45, 47, 112–113
Gavioli  193
Gentzler  9, 25–26, 34, 40, 159
Gerloff  40
Gile  89, 118, 150, 153
Goethe  25, 97, 116, 123
Göpferich  165
Gorlée  159, 189–191
Grice  55
Grimes  131
Gutt  33, 41, 43–44, 129, 160, 191
H
Hailman  3
Haiman  79
Halverson  83
Author index

220	 Memes of Translation
Harris  66, 165
Hartama-Heinonen  159
Hartmann  29
Harvey  112
Hatim  33
Heidegger  27
Heisenberg  3
Heltai  84
Hermans  36, 61–62, 108, 192
Hermes  60
Herodotus  ix
Hervey  5, 39, 141
Hewson  158
Heylen  36
Higgins  5, 39, 141
Hinds  80
Hochel  88
Hölderlin  26
Holmes  5, 34, 41, 43, 176
Holz-Mänttäri  31–32
Hönig  33, 87
Horguelin  142
House  5, 63, 98, 104, 122, 129, 
134, 159
Hu  14
Huetius  20
Hull  2
Hurtado Albir  112
Huss  122–123, 126
I
Inghilleri  193
Inoue  37
Itkonen  52, 55
Ivanič  187
J
Jääskeläinen  40, 70, 85, 87–89, 
134
Jakobsen  5, 47, 87, 153
Jakobson  6, 9
Jandl  58, 108
Janks  187
Jerome  20–21
Jodl  53
Johansson  80, 131–132, 137
Jones  104
Jordan  188
Jumpelt  39
K
Kant  138
Kaplan  81
Karlsson  155
Kasper  40, 85
Katz  7
Keenan  7, 32
Kelly, L. G.  17–18, 24, 41, 43, 
159
Kelly, M.  193
Kemmis  150
Kiraly  39–40, 87, 149
Klaudy  69
Kolb  150
Koller  5, 42
Komissarov  50
Königs  103
Korpel  23
Koskinen  27, 159, 192
Kovala  38
Krings  39, 134, 143
Kučera  80, 131
Kuhn  13, 45
Kundera  121
Künzli  142
Kußmaul  5, 33, 40, 87, 137, 150
L
Ladmiral  6
Lanstyák  84
Larson  163
Leech  173
Lefevere  22, 34, 37–39, 70, 76, 
109, 168
Leppihalme  160, 182–183
Leuven-Zwart  29, 34, 90
Levý  33, 39
Lewis, D.  53
Lewis, P.  26
Linnarud  80
Lörscher  40, 85, 87, 89, 134
Lotbinière-Harwood  188
Luther  23
M
Macpherson  57
Mallinen  108
Malmkjær  32, 143
Malone  29, 90, 111
Martin  158
Mason  19, 33
Mauranen  46, 81
May  26
McTaggart  150
Molina  112
Morgenstern  58
Mossop  142, 191
Mounin  6
N
Naaijkens  34
Nabokov  21
Neubert  29, 130, 173
Newmark  5, 21, 41, 43, 91–92, 
103, 112, 178, 182, 188
Nida  5, 30–31, 90, 125–126, 128, 
158, 182
Niiniluoto  13
Niranjana  36
Nord  5, 32, 66, 119, 142, 159–
160, 178
Nouss  60
Novalis  195
Nylander-Tuominen  123
Nystrand  183
O
O’Brien  143
Oittinen  27, 191
Ollinen  59
O’Malley  85
Ortega y Gasset  6
P
PACTE  165
Paepcke  9
Paz  9
Pearson  166
Peirce  13, 189–190
Pesonen  108
Picken  167
Plato  18–19
Plotkin  2
Pöchhacker  14
Pope  23
Popov  108
Popper  10–13, 45, 117, 138, 157, 
163–164, 170, 173, 181–182, 
189, 195
Pound  25

	
Author index	
221
Purves  81
Puurtinen  129–130
Pym  3, 15, 20, 24, 32, 41, 43, 
45, 47, 54, 57, 73, 92, 113–114, 
117–118, 167–168, 178–180, 
183–185, 192
Q
Quine  32, 41, 43
Quintilian  22, 173
Quirk  79
R
Randell  110
Raudseps  124
Rawson  131
Reiß  31
Rener  17–18, 22, 173
Retsker  5
Richards  102
Riley  81
Ringbom  78
Risku  165
Robert  142
Robinson  8, 18, 41, 43, 110, 
161–162, 188–189
Robyns  37
Rooten, van  58
Roscommon  39
Rose, H. and S.  14
Rosenberg  123
Rubelis  124
Rydning  79
S
Saarikoski  110
Sager  118
Saville-Troike  110
Schiavi  108
Schleiermacher  9, 24, 26, 28, 
169
Schreiber  113
Schulte  7, 28
Schultze  38
Schwarzwald-Rodrigue  21
Schwieter  47
Searle  174
Séguinot  69, 88, 111, 152, 157
Sell  38, 100
Shlesinger  150
Shreve  29, 173
Shveitser  30
Simard  143
Snell  ix
Snell-Hornby  6, 14, 32, 35, 41, 
43, 45, 56
Spears  124
Steegmuller  122–123, 126
Steiner, E.  9, 86–88, 149
Steiner, G.  9, 178–179
Stetting  108
Suojanen  142
Swales  81
T
Tabakowska  5
Taber  31, 125, 128, 158
Tannen  110
Tirkkonen-Condit  40, 46, 134
Toma  29
Tommola  40, 87, 134
Toury  5–6, 8, 34–38, 47, 57–58, 
60–62, 68–70, 83, 103, 115, 
142, 165
Tymoczko  83
Tytler  24
U
Ullmann-Margalit  61
Ulrych  84
V
Vehmas-Lehto  69, 79, 111, 128, 
132–133, 136
Venuti  17, 23, 26, 37, 74, 105, 
108, 117, 167, 169, 192
Vermeer  13–14, 17, 31, 170
Vieira  23, 159
Vinay  21, 29, 90–91, 93, 98, 
113–114, 160
Vuorinen  155
W
Waes, Van  142
Wall  122–123, 126
Weaver  28
Wierzbicka  55
Will  26
Willamowitz-Moellendorff  28
Willems  82
Williams  168
Wilss  31, 39, 133, 135–136
Windhager  165
Wittgenstein  5, 68, 83, 133, 177
Wright, von  170–171
X
Xiao  82
Z
Zabalbeascoa  113
Zalan  49
Zeldin  ix, 168
Zlateva  33
Zukovsky  58 


A
abstraction change  98, 100
abusive fidelity  26
accountability norm  66–67, 74, 
76–78, 109, 135–137, 141, 152, 
178, 184–186, 188, 191
action theory  86, 171, 177, 179, 
181–182
adaptation  8, 15, 22–23, 27, 
31–32, 68, 90, 104, 112–113, 
123, 185
addition  106, 111, 113–114
adequacy  30, 58, 121
antonymy  99
articles (English)  131–132
assessment  115–143, 175
see also descriptive, 
evaluative, introspective, 
lateral, pedagogical, 
prospective, retrospective, 
revision, translation 
reviews
attention units  87
awareness  60, 65, 74, 148–152, 
154, 157, 161, 163, 165, 187
see also consciousness
B
belles infidèles  23, 173
Bible  6, 19, 20, 23, 30, 35, 126, 
131, 178
C
calque  90–92
causality  73
clarity  23, 26, 64, 74, 80, 111, 
154, 156, 172–175, 181–182, 184, 
187, 192–193
clause structure change  94
cognition  38, 47, 161, 165
coherence change  107
cohesion  80–81, 95–96, 107, 151
collocation  82, 98
communication  31–33, 44, 
46, 84, 85, 160, 164, 173, 
181–184
see also communication 
norm, communicative 
suffering
communication norm  55, 67, 
74, 77, 109, 111, 126, 130, 136–
137, 141, 153, 181, 184, 186, 191
communicative suffering  182–
183
compensation  112, 114
consciousness  10, 12, 38, 40, 
52–53, 88, 146, 148, 150
see also awareness 
constraints  37, 54, 75–77, 83, 
110, 168, 186, 189
contrastive analysis  29, 77, 159
contrastive rhetoric  81
contrastive stylistics  29
conventions  2, 53, 56, 68, 174, 
187
convergent creativity  118
converses  100, 151
covert error  131
covert translation  63, 69, 159
criticism  12–13, 40–41, 45, 
52–53, 64, 68, 71, 83, 
117–119, 122, 129, 141, 164
see also assessment, 
translation reviews
cultural filtering  104, 123
culture-bound terms  71, 160, 
182
culture bump  182–183
D
daina (Latvian)  124
deconstructionism  192
deliberative rationality  147–
149, 151
deontic logic  170–171
descriptive assessment  121, 
127, 134
descriptive vs. prescriptive  xi, 
34, 50–52, 56, 66, 72, 117, 143, 
169, 172
direct/indirect speech  26, 
107, 110
discovery procedure  35, 60
distribution change  100
divergent creativity  117
domesticating  37, 123
double presentation  92
dubbing  36, 68
E
eco-translatology  14
Effability Principle  7, 32
effect  24, 33, 111, 116, 119–120, 
125–130, 137
emancipatory translation  186–
191
emotiveness  106, 111
emphasis change  101
end focus  79
end weight  79
equivalence  4–9, 14–15, 19–21, 
24, 27–36, 58, 60, 67–68, 116, 
121–122, 125–126, 137, 154, 160, 
172, 176, 182, 185
equivalence probabilities  29
Error Elimination  12–13, 43, 
115–143, 164, 181
error gravity  136–137
errors  see Error Elimination, 
error gravity, covert error, 
overt error
ethics  76, 167–193
evaluation  see assessment, 
translation reviews
evaluative assessment  117, 
121, 134
Subject index

224	 Memes of Translation
exercises for teaching  151–156
expectancy norms  62–66, 68, 
74, 76, 78–80, 82, 109–110, 
130–133, 135–136, 139, 156, 161, 
173–175, 184–185, 188
explanation  51, 72–75, 83, 109, 
138
explicitation  69, 84, 105, 
112–114, 123, 132, 140
explicitness change  105
F
falsifiability  13, 43, 69, 196
family resemblance  5, 68, 83, 
130, 133, 176–177
feminism  37, 188
fidelity  26, 36, 118, 176, 185
fluency  23, 26, 117, 119
foreignizing  26, 104, 169
formality  81, 106
functions of language  164
G
game theory  39
gaps  138–141
global strategies  88
goals of translation theory  38, 
45
H
hermeneutics  9, 24, 31, 40, 44, 
178–179
homogeneous readership fallacy  
33
hyponymy  99, 123
I
iconicity  79, 97, 156, 175
ideology  13, 36–38, 44–45, 64, 
76–77, 92, 105, 109, 120, 141, 
160, 167–169, 186, 188
illocutionary change  107
implicitation  105–106, 109, 114
indeterminacy  32, 41
indirect translation  37, 61
information change  106, 109, 
123
initial norm  61–62
interference  22, 33, 46, 69–70, 
75, 78, 82, 92, 120, 150, 153
interpersonal change  106
introspective assessment  133–
135
J
Japanese constitution  37
L
lateral assessment  130–131
level shift  91, 96
lexical density  80
lexical variety  80
linguistics  4, 29–32, 38, 45–46, 
55, 85, 159, 186
literal translation  8–9, 20–21, 
91–92, 109, 121, 123, 142, 158, 
185
loan  91–92, 102–103
local strategies  88
logos  24–28, 30, 40, 158–159, 
162
loyalty  31, 64, 66–67, 167–168, 
178–180, 191–193
M
machine translation  28–30, 
83, 143
manipulation  36, 77, 160, 183, 
188
meaning  7, 9–10, 18–20, 25–27, 
30, 37, 67, 98, 110–111, 122–123, 
156, 174–175, 182, 189–190
meme pool  1, 3, 18, 25, 40–41, 
49, 85
memes  1–4, 10–14, 17–18, 40, 
45, 49, 85, 89, 148–150, 170, 
189–190
metaphors of translation  x, 4, 
19, 21–22, 25, 28, 31, 36–38, 41, 
188–189 
metatext  81
minimal transfer  21, 158
minimizing suffering  181–182
modulation  90, 98
motivation  20, 109–112, 114
N
naturalistic fallacy  72
naturalization  104, 125
natural translation  165
normalization  70, 122, 131
normative  49–51, 54–55, 68, 
71–75, 83, 138, 170
normative laws  68, 71–75
norm-breaking  64–65, 110, 135, 
138–139, 187
norms  49–83
see also accountability, 
communication, 
expectancy, initial, 
normative, norm-
breaking, operational, 
preliminary, process, 
product, professional, 
recommendable, relation
norm theory  36, 42–54
see also norms
O
omission  68, 90, 106, 113–114
ontogenetic development  156–
157
operational norms  61
Otherness  26–27, 37, 120, 167, 
189
overt error  131
overt translation  122
P
parallel texts  62, 130–131, 133, 
153, 156
paraphrase  24, 28, 85, 99, 101, 
112, 158
paratexts  37
partial translation  108
patronage  37, 76
pedagogical assessment  135–138
phonetic translation  139
phrase structure change  93
plastic control  11–12, 75, 
163–164, 189
poetics  36–37, 76–77, 110
polysystem  35–36, 61, 63, 75, 
123, 160
postmodernism  9, 23, 108, 192
preliminary norms  61, 76
prescriptive  see descriptive vs. 
prescriptive
process norms  53, 55, 61–62, 
65–66, 175

	
Subject index	 225
product norms  53, 55, 61–62
professional norms  65–68, 
71, 191
prospective assessment  125–
128
protocol studies  39, 87, 134
pseudo-translations  37
Q
quality  see assessment, 
revision, standard 
R
readability  23, 30, 64, 74, 80, 
111, 128–130, 136, 154, 156, 160, 
167, 187
recommendable norms  79, 
136, 156
regime  54, 173
regulative ideas  43, 138, 150, 
164, 170, 181
relation norm  67–68, 75–78, 
109, 121, 126, 135, 137, 141, 154, 
175–176, 184–188, 191
relevance  33, 39, 43, 55, 74, 
160, 173 
retrospective assessment  121–
125
revision  47, 116, 118, 141–143, 
153, 189–190
rhetoric  21–24, 27, 30, 34–35, 
70, 81, 97–98, 101–103, 107, 111, 
123, 158–159
S
sameness  see equivalence
scheme change  97–98, 125
semantic translation  21
semiotics  7, 32, 123, 159, 
189–190
sentence structure change  95, 
125
significance threshold  110–111
silence threshold  110
similarity  1, 5, 15, 32, 60, 67, 147, 
157–158, 176, 187
skopos  14, 31, 45, 73, 87, 126–
127, 129, 139, 153, 155, 170
speech act  107, 125
standard (CEN, ISO)  142
standardization  46, 70, 75, 82
strategies  85–114, 121, 123, 
151–152, 160, 167–170
see also global, local
subtitling  36
supermemes  3–10, 14–15, 30, 
150
synonymy  99
T
target-language enrichment   
22, 35, 
Tentative Theory  12–13, 17, 
42–43, 115–119, 141, 147, 149, 
174, 
text-type  5, 9, 19, 21, 30, 32, 62, 
65, 67, 70–71, 76, 79–81, 83, 
130, 137, 139, 153, 155, 158–159, 
167, 175, 184
thematic focus  101
theory
etymology  ix–x
attitudes to  x–xi, 40–45
translation as  115–119
of expertise  145–148
of ethics  168–169
as a net  195
see also action theory, eco-
translatology, memes, 
norm theory, polysystem, 
Popper, relevance, skopos
transediting  108, 114, 139, 153, 
175, 187
translation  see covert, overt, 
emancipatory, indirect, 
literal, machine, metaphors, 
partial, phonetic, pseudo-, 
semantic
translational competence  71, 
115, 117–118, 145, 148, 158
translation copyright  37
translation ethics  167–193
translation from LI  78–79
translation laws  38, 68–75, 82, 
149–150
translation reviews  122–123, 
126–127, 131
translation status  56–61
Translator’s Charter  184, 187
translator training  44–45, 
50, 78, 83, 89, 118, 135, 137, 
150–162, 165–166, 187
Translog  47
transposition  90, 93, 151
trope change  101–103
trust  57, 114, 172, 178–180, 184, 
188–190
truth  ix, 10, 13, 20–21, 115–116, 
138, 164, 170, 175–177, 184–185, 
189, 192, 195
U
understanding  42, 55, 146–148, 
181–184, 186–187, 189, 192
unit of translation  8
unit shift  93
universals  45–46, 55, 69, 82, 84
untranslatability  6–7, 10, 41–42
V
validation of norms  54, 64, 156
values  3, 12, 37, 76, 111, 116–117, 
119, 130, 138, 141, 167, 169–172, 
184, 187, 189, 192
visibility  108, 167, 180, 186, 192
W
Worlds (Popper)  10–11, 163, 
189

This revised edition of Memes of Translation includes updates that relate the 
book's themes to more recent research in Translation Studies. The book 
contributes to the debate about whether it is worth seeking a coherent 
theory of translation, by proposing an approach based on norms, strategies 
and values, which are all seen as kinds of memes, i.e. ideas that spread. 
The meme metaphor allows us to see translation in the context of cultural 
evolution, and also highlights similarities with the philosopher Karl 
Popper's analysis of another kind of evolution: that of scientiic knowledge. 
A translation is, after all, itself a theory – a theory about the source text. 
And as Popper stressed, theories of all kinds are like nets we make in order 
to catch something of reality: never perfectly, but always in the hope of better 
understanding.
John Benjamins Publishing Company
“This is an intelligent, practical, full-blown theory of translation, hiding under a modest 
title. It amply demonstrates the way clever concepts can bring clarity and balance to 
key issues in contemporary Translation Studies, without reduction or partisanship. The 
many updates cover an impressively broad range of recent studies, placing them in 
context, pointing to several paths forward, and providing lashes of illumination.”
Anthony Pym, President of the European Society for Translation Studies
“Andrew Chesterman is one of the few people capable of providing a detailed bird’s eye 
perspective on Translation Studies. In this new edition of the ‘Memes’ volume, he has 
lown over the disciplinary landscape nearly twenty years after his irst view, resulting 
in a commentary that includes updated references to more recent work and his own 
relection on the criticism received the irst time around. 
The new edition demonstrates the staying power of 
some of the most central ideas in the ield, as well as the 
interesting ways in which they continue to evolve.”
Sandra L. Halverson, Bergen University College
 
isbn 978 90 272 5868 7

