
memes 
in digital culture

The MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series
Computing: A Concise History, Paul Ceruzzi
Crowdsourcing, Daren C. Brabham
Information and the Modern Corporation, James Cortada
Memes in Digital Culture, Limor Shifman
Intellectual Property Strategy, John Palfrey
Open Access, Peter Suber
Waves, Fred Raichlen

memes 
in digital culture
Limor Shifman
The MIT Press        |        Cambridge, Massachusetts        |        London, England

© 2014 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by 
any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or 
information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the 
publisher.
 
MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business 
or sales promotional use. For information, please email special_sales@
mitpress.mit.edu or write to Special Sales Department, The MIT Press, 55 
Hayward Street, Cambridge, MA 02142.
 
This book was set in Chaparral Pro by the MIT Press. Printed and bound in 
the United States of America.
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Shifman, Limor, 1974–.
Memes in Digital Culture/ Limor Shifman.
  pages  cm.—(MIT press essential knowledge)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-52543-5 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Social evolution.  2. Memes.  3. Culture diffusion.  4. Internet—Social 
aspects.  5. Memetics.  I. Title.
HM626.S55  2014
302—dc23
2013012983
 
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Contents
Series Foreword 
vii
Acknowledgments 
ix
1  Introduction 
1
2  A Telegraphic Biography of a Conceptual  
Troublemaker 
9
3  When Memes Go Digital 
17
4  Defining Internet Memes 
37
5  Memes versus Virals 
55
6  Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
65
7  Meme Genres 
99
8  May the Excessive Force Be with You: Memes as  
Political Participation 
119
9  When Internet Memes Go Global 
151
10	 Future Directions for Internet Meme Research 
171
Glossary 
177
Notes 
179
Further Readings 
189
Index 
191


Series Foreword
The MIT Press Essential Knowledge series offers acces-
sible, concise, beautifully produced pocket-size books on 
topics of current interest. Written by leading thinkers, the 
books in this series deliver expert overviews of subjects 
that range from the cultural and the historical to the sci-
entific and the technical.
In today’s era of instant information gratification, we 
have ready access to opinions, rationalizations, and super-
ficial descriptions. Much harder to come by is the founda-
tional knowledge that informs a principled understanding 
of the world. Essential Knowledge books fill that need. 
Synthesizing specialized subject matter for nonspecialists 
and engaging critical topics through fundamentals, each 
of these compact volumes offers readers a point of access 
to complex ideas.
 
Bruce Tidor
Professor of Biological Engineering and Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


Acknowledgments
This book could not have been written without the support 
of a number of patient colleagues who have put up with 
my meme obsession over the last few years. I am indebted 
to Elad Segev, Paul Frosh, Ben Peters, Nicholas John, and 
Leora Hadas for their valuable comments on parts of this 
manuscript. I am particularly grateful to Menahem Blond-
heim, the most generous friend and intellectual I have ever 
encountered. 
I consider myself extremely fortunate to be part of the 
Department of Communication at the Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem. I have benefited greatly from the wisdom 
and kindness of my friends in this wonderful academic 
home. Besides those mentioned above, other colleagues 
and graduate students from the department—in particu-
lar Elihu Katz, Zohar Kampf, Keren Tenenboim-Weinblatt, 
Asaf Nissenboim, Noam Gal, and Lillian Boxman-Shabtai—
offered many insightful observations and criticisms. The 
members of the “Jerusalem Discourse Forum”—Gonen 
Hacohen, Michal Hamo, Ayelet Kohn, Chaim Noy, and 
Motti Neiger—raised enlightening issues in two brain-
storming sessions dedicated to memes. 
I started my journey to the light heavyweight side of 
the Internet as a postdoctoral researcher at the Oxford 
Internet Institute, UK. My colleagues at the Institute, 

x 
 
Acknowledgments
particularly Bill Dutton and Stephen Coleman, fully backed 
my plan to study the (then) eccentric topic of Internet hu-
mor. I am also extremely grateful to danah boyd and Nancy 
Baym from Microsoft Research. Their ongoing support 
means a lot to me. 
Parts of the introduction and chapters 2, 3, 4, and 6 
were originally published in the Journal of Computer-Me-
diated Communication (“Memes in a Digital World: Recon-
ciling with a Conceptual Troublemaker,” 2013, 18[3]) and 
New Media & Society (“An Anatomy of a YouTube Meme,” 
2012, 14[2]). I am thankful to the editors and publishers of 
those journals for their assistance and permission to reuse 
the papers.
My gratitude also goes to the editorial and produc-
tion staff at MIT Press, particularly Margy Avery, who 
supported this project enthusiastically even before I knew 
that I wanted to write a book, and Judith Feldmann, who 
edited it with great sensitivity. Three anonymous review-
ers offered thoughtful, constructive, and wise comments 
on the manuscript, and I’m greatly appreciative of that.
Finally, I wish to thank my parents, Nili and Tommy 
Schoenfeld, my husband, Sagiv, and my children, Neta and 
Yuval. My love and gratitude is beyond what any meme 
could express. 

Introduction
On December 21, 2012, a somewhat peculiar video broke 
YouTube’s all-time viewing records. Performed by a South 
Korean singer named PSY, “Gangnam Style” was the first 
clip to surpass the one-billion-view mark. But the Gang-
nam phenomenon was not only a tale of sheer popular-
ity. Besides watching the clip, people also responded to it 
creatively, in dazzling volume. Internet users from places 
as far-flung as Indonesia and Spain, Russia and Israel, the 
United States and Saudi Arabia imitated the horse-riding 
dance from the original video while replacing the reference 
to Gangnam—a luxurious neighborhood in Seoul—with 
local settings and protagonists, generating videos such as 
“Mitt Romney Style,” “Singaporean Style,” and “Arab Style.” 
At first glance, this whole process seems enigmatic. How 
did such a bizarre piece of culture become so successful? 
Why are so many people investing so much effort in imi-
tating it? And why do some of these amateur imitations 
1

2 
 
Chapter 1
attract millions of viewers? In what follows, I suggest 
that the key to these questions lies in defining “Gangnam 
Style”—as well as many other similar Internet phenom-
ena—as an Internet meme.
The term “meme” was coined by Richard Dawkins in 
1976 to describe small units of culture that spread from 
person to person by copying or imitation. Since then, the 
meme concept has been the subject of constant academic 
debate, derision, and even outright dismissal. Recently, 
however, the term once kicked out the door by many aca-
demics is coming back through the Windows (and other 
operating systems) of Internet users. In the vernacular dis-
course of netizens, the tag “Internet meme” is commonly 
applied to describe the propagation of items such as jokes, 
rumors, videos, and websites from person to person via 
the Internet. As illustrated by the Gangnam Style case, a 
central attribute of Internet memes is their sparking of 
user-created derivatives articulated as parodies, remixes, 
or mashups. “Leave Britney Alone,” “Star Wars Kid,” “Hit-
ler’s Downfall Parodies,” “Nyan Cat,” and the “Situation 
Room” Photoshops are particularly famous drops in a me-
metic ocean.
Another fundamental attribute of Internet memes is 
intertextuality: memes often relate to each other in com-
plex, creative, and surprising ways. The example in figure 
1 demonstrates such an amalgamate between “Gangnam 
Style” and “Binders Full of Women”—a meme created in 

Introduction 
 
3
Figure 1  When “Gangnam Style” meets “Binders Full of Women.” Source: 
http://bindersfullofwomen.tumblr.com/.

4 
 
Chapter 1
response to an assertion made by Mitt Romney in a 2012 
US presidential debate about the “binders full of women” 
that he asked for in order to locate female job applicants for 
senior positions. While an eccentric Korean rapper might 
seem as far as one may get from an affluent American pres-
idential candidate, meme creators managed to link them. 
“My Binders Full of Women Exploded” is thus not only a 
striking example of intertextuality; it also demonstrates 
that this new arena of bottom-up expression can blend 
pop culture, politics, and participation in unexpected ways. 
This book is a first step in bridging the yawning gap 
between (skeptic) academic and (enthusiastic) popular dis-
course about memes. Internet users are on to something, 
and researchers should follow. Users seem to have sensed 
that the meme concept encapsulates some of the most 
fundamental aspects of contemporary digital culture. Like 
many Web 2.0 applications, memes diffuse from person to 
person, but shape and reflect general social mindsets. The 
term describes cultural reproduction as driven by various 
means of copying and imitation—practices that have be-
come essential in contemporary digital culture. In this en-
vironment, user-driven imitation and remixing are not just 
prevalent practices: they have become highly valued pillars 
of a so-called participatory culture. In what follows, I will 
argue that we live in an era driven by a hypermemetic logic, 
in which almost every major public event sprouts a stream 
of memes. In this sense, Internet memes are like Forrest 

Like many Web 2.0  
applications, memes 
diffuse from person  
to person, but shape 
and reflect general  
social mindsets.

6 
 
Chapter 1
Gump. Ostensibly, they are trivial pieces of pop culture; 
yet, a deeper look reveals that they play an integral part 
in some of the defining events of the twenty-first century. 
In what follows, I explore the utility of memes for un-
derstanding digital culture, positing two premises through-
out. First, the intense emotions and dramatic statements 
characterizing both sides of the memes debate need to be 
toned down. While enthusiastic advocates argue that the 
meme concept explains everything and their opponents 
assert that it explains and changes absolutely nothing, it 
might be worth asking whether the term may be useful 
for something. Here I follow in the footsteps of researchers 
such as Michele Knobel, Colin Lankshear, Lance Bennett, 
Ryan Milner, and Jean Burgess, who have used the meme 
as a prism for understanding certain aspects of contempo-
rary culture without embracing the whole set of implica-
tions and meanings ascribed to it over the years.
My second assertion is that we should look at memes 
from a communication-oriented perspective. Coined by a 
biologist, the term “meme” has been widely adopted (and 
disputed) in many disciplines, including psychology, phi-
losophy, anthropology, folklore, and linguistics. For the 
most part, however, it has been utterly ignored in the field 
of communication. Until the twenty-first century, mass 
communication researchers felt comfortable overlooking 
memes. As units that propagate gradually through many 
interpersonal contacts, memes were considered irrelevant 

Introduction 
 
7
for understanding mass-mediated content, which is often 
transmitted simultaneously from a single institutional 
source to many people. But this is no longer the case in 
an era of blurring boundaries between interpersonal and 
mass, professional and amateur, bottom-up and top-down 
communications. In a time marked by a convergence of 
media platforms, when content flows swiftly from one me-
dium to another, memes have become more relevant than 
ever to communication scholarship.
While memes and digital culture seem like a match 
made in heaven, several issues need to be resolved before 
the concept can be integrated meaningfully into academia 
and industry. First, there is a core problem about the ex-
act meaning of the term—the jury is still out on what is 
meant by “meme.” Second, many competing terms—such 
as “viral”—tend to be used interchangeably with it. And 
finally, only a handful of studies have actually examined 
the practices and politics involved in the creation and dif-
fusion of Internet memes.
And that is where this book comes in. In its first part, I 
survey the history of the term “meme” (chapter 2), tracing 
the controversies associated with the concept as well as its 
renaissance in the digital age (chapter 3). I then introduce 
a new definition for Internet memes (chapter 4). Instead of 
depicting the meme as a single cultural unit that has prop-
agated successfully, I suggest defining an Internet meme 
as (a) a group of digital items sharing common characteristics 

8 
 
Chapter 1
of content, form, and/or stance; (b) that were created with 
awareness of each other; and (c) were circulated, imitated, 
and/or transformed via the Internet by many users. This 
definition is helpful for analyzing Internet memes as so-
cially constructed public discourses in which different me-
metic variants represent diverse voices and perspectives. 
In chapter 5, I differentiate between Internet memes and 
virals. While these concepts are often used interchange-
ably, charting the differences between them enables us 
to better understand what’s going on in the ostensibly 
chaotic world of user-generated content. This differentia-
tion between memes and virals sets the basis for chapter 
6, in which I address the question of success, comparing 
features characterizing viral and memetic “hits.” The rest 
of the book is devoted almost solely to Internet memes 
(rather than virals), covering three dimensions: popular 
meme genres (chapter 7), the political role of memes in 
democratic and nondemocratic contexts (chapter 8), and 
memes as globalizing agents (chapter 9). This book was 
written—and should be read—as a primer for the study of 
Internet memes. As such, it introduces some core defini-
tions, controversies, and research trajectories, but it does 
not offer an in-depth contextual analysis of all the memes 
mentioned. In the final section of the book (chapter 10), I 
present some possible paths of future research that may 
help others in conducting such in-depth analyses. 

A Telegraphic Biography of a 
Conceptual Troublemaker
The term “meme” was introduced by the biologist Rich-
ard Dawkins in his 1976 book The Selfish Gene. As part of 
his larger effort to apply evolutionary theory to cultural 
change, Dawkins defined memes as small cultural units of 
transmission, analogous to genes, that spread from per-
son to person by copying or imitation. Examples of memes 
in his pioneering essay include cultural artifacts such as 
melodies, catchphrases, and clothing fashions, as well as 
abstract beliefs (for instance, the concept of God). Like 
genes, memes are defined as replicators that undergo vari-
ation, competition, selection, and retention. At any given 
moment, many memes are competing for the attention of 
hosts; however, only memes suited to their sociocultural 
environment spread successfully, while others become 
extinct. Dawkins also noted that certain groups of coad-
aptive memes tend to be replicated together—strengthen-
ing each other in the process. Dawkins called such groups 
2

10 
 
Chapter 2
“coadapted meme complexes,” a tag later shortened by 
Hans-Cees Speel to “memeplexes.”1 Democracy, for in-
stance, can be regarded as a memeplex that includes sev-
eral submemeplexes such as human rights and free regular 
elections, which can further be broken down to respective 
memes.
The word “meme” derives from the Greek mimema, 
signifying “something which is imitated,” which Dawkins 
shortened to rhyme with “gene.” Interestingly, a similar 
term to signify cultural evolution had appeared a cen-
tury earlier. In 1870 the Austrian sociologist Ewald Her-
ing coined the term “die Mneme” (from the Greek mneme, 
meaning memory), which the German biologist Richard 
Semon used in the title of a book he published in 1904. Un-
aware of this existing terminology, Dawkins’s expression 
proved an accidental but successful imitation in itself: his 
concept survived and proliferated in the scientific world.2
After more than a decade of sporadic growth, memet-
ics—described by Francis Heylighen and Klaas Chielens3 
as “the theoretical and empirical science that studies the 
replication, spread and evolution of memes”—began to 
take shape as an active research program, drawing scien-
tists from many fields in the 1990s. Important landmarks 
on this path included contributions from the prominent 
philosophers Douglas Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett, 
the emergence of the Journal of Memetics in 1997 and 
its publication until 2005, and the publication of several 

A Telegraphic Biography of a Conceptual Troublemaker 
 
11
meme-oriented books. Of these, Susan Blackmore’s The 
Meme Machine from 1999 may well be the most influential, 
yet also the most disputed.
Since its early days, memetics has drawn constant fire. 
Two controversies surrounding memes—tagged as “bio-
logical analogies” and “who’s the boss”—are particularly 
relevant to the topic of this book. The “biological analogies” 
dispute relates to the strong tendency to liken memes to 
both viruses and genes. The meme-as-virus analogy sees a 
similarity between memes and disease agents. Taking epi-
demiology as its model, it considers memes as the cultural 
equivalents of flu bacilli, transmitted through the commu-
nicational equivalents of sneezes. In Internet culture, this 
metaphor is prevalent in the highly visible discourse on 
viral content. Yet Henry Jenkins and his colleagues right-
fully assert that this metaphor has been used in a problem-
atic way, conceptualizing people as helpless and passive 
creatures, susceptible to the domination of meaningless 
media “snacks” that infect their minds.4
The second prevalent biological metaphor for memes—
derived directly from Dawkins’s work—takes evolutionary 
genetics as its model. However, some works have taken 
this analogy too far, seeking cultural equivalents for all 
principal evolutionary genetic concepts, including geno-
type, phenotype, transcription, and code. This effort was 
criticized not only because memes behave very differently 
than genes, but also because reducing culture to biology 

12 
 
Chapter 2
narrows and simplifies complex human behaviors. The 
prevalent notion is thus that the meme–gene analogy 
should be taken with many grains of salt. Indeed, it is not 
necessary to think of biology when analyzing memes. The 
ideas of replication, adaptation, and fitness to a certain 
environment can be analyzed from a purely sociocultural 
perspective.
The second fundamental controversy in memetics, 
tagged here as “who’s the boss,” relates to the issue of hu-
man agency in the process of meme diffusion. At one end 
of the spectrum are scholars such as Susan Blackmore, 
who claims in The Meme Machine that people are merely 
devices operated by the numerous memes they host and 
constantly spread. I contend, on the other hand, that 
the undermining of human agency is inherent not to the 
meme concept itself, but only to one strain of its interpre-
tation. A number of works within the field of memetics 
are clearly opposed to it. Most important to this book is 
Rosaria Conte’s suggestion to treat people not as vectors of 
cultural transmission, but as actors behind this process.5 
The dissemination of memes, she submits, is based on 
intentional agents with decision-making powers: social 
norms, perceptions, and preferences are crucial in me-
metic selection processes. As I will elaborate in chapter 3, 
the depiction of people as active agents is essential for un-
derstanding Internet memes, particularly when meaning 
is dramatically altered in the course of memetic diffusion.

A Telegraphic Biography of a Conceptual Troublemaker 
 
13
While widely disputed in academia, the meme concept 
has been enthusiastically picked up by Internet users. A 
search of Google Trends suggests a spurt of interest on the 
subject since 2011, and a recent Google query of the term 
“Internet meme” yielded around 1,900,000 hits, many 
of them leading to large interactive meme depositories. 
For example, on the popular website Know Your Meme 
(http://knowyourmeme.com), “resident internet scien-
tists” appropriately dressed in white coats provide various 
explanations for certain memes’ success. At other popular 
“meme hubs”—such as 4chan, Reddit, and Tumblr—a con-
stant flow of Internet memes is uploaded and negotiated 
daily. According to Michele Knobel and Koline Lankshear, 
Internet users employ the word “meme” to describe the 
rapid uptake and spread of a “particular idea presented as 
a written text, image, language ‘move,’ or some other unit 
of cultural ‘stuff.’”6 This vernacular use of the term, the 
authors submit, differs utterly from its use in the academic 
study of memetics: if the former tends to describe recent, 
often short-lasting fads, longevity is the key to “serious” 
memetics, since successful memes are defined as the ones 
that survive in the long term. 
Another difference relates to the object of analysis: 
whereas in memetics the unit of analysis itself is abstract 
and controversial, Internet users tend to ascribe the meme 
tag to observable audiovisual content, such as YouTube 
videos and humorous images. But the gap between the 

Internet memes can be 
treated as (post)modern 
folklore, in which shared 
norms and values are 
constructed through 
cultural artifacts such as 
Photoshopped images 
or urban legends.

A Telegraphic Biography of a Conceptual Troublemaker 
 
15
popular and serious accounts of memes can be bridged. 
While memes are seemingly trivial and mundane artifacts, 
they actually reflect deep social and cultural structures. In 
many senses, Internet memes can be treated as (post)mod-
ern folklore, in which shared norms and values are con-
structed through cultural artifacts such as Photoshopped 
images or urban legends.7 For instance, in chapter 8 I show 
how postfeminist ideas about gender differences are cir-
culated globally through Internet jokes, and how critical 
approaches toward race-based stereotyping are reflected 
in visual memes. Whereas a single meme may rise and fall 
as quick as a flash, revealing the common ideas and forms 
shared by many Internet memes might tell us something 
about digital culture. For instance, while the single lipdub 
“Numa Numa” features one guy from New Jersey, its analy-
sis in chapter 7 as part of a stream of thousands of similar 
videos that constitute the lipdub genre will reveal a larger 
story about the eroding boundaries between top-down 
pop culture and bottom-up folk culture in contemporary 
society. Moreover, as I will demonstrate in the next chap-
ter, the meme concept is not only useful for understanding 
cultural trends: it epitomizes the very essence of the so-
called Web 2.0 era.


When Memes Go Digital
The uptick in vibrant popular discourse about memes in 
an era increasingly defined by digital communication is 
not coincidental. Although the term “meme” was coined 
long before the digital era, the Internet’s unique features 
turned memes’ diffusion into a ubiquitous and highly vis-
ible routine. According to Dawkins’s analysis in The Selfish 
Gene, memes that spread successfully incorporate three 
basic properties—longevity, fecundity, and copy fidelity. All 
three are enhanced by the Internet. Online meme trans-
mission has higher copy fidelity (that is, accuracy) than 
communication through other media, since digitization al-
lows lossless information transfer. Fecundity (the number 
of copies made in a time unit) is also greatly increased—
the Internet facilitates the swift diffusion of any given 
message to numerous nodes. Longevity may potentially 
increase, as well, because information can be stored indefi-
nitely in numerous archives.1
3

18 
 
Chapter 3
Yet the scale, scope, and accuracy of digital meme dif-
fusion are only the tips of the iceberg with regard to the 
meme–Internet congruence. What Internet users seemed 
to have grasped—and Richard Dawkins couldn’t have imag-
ined back in 1976—is that the meme is the best concept to en-
capsulate some of the most fundamental aspects of the Internet 
in general, and of the so-called participatory or Web 2.0 cul-
ture in particular. Three main attributes ascribed to memes 
are particularly relevant to the analysis of contemporary 
digital culture: (1) a gradual propagation from individuals 
to society, (2) reproduction via copying and imitation, and 
(3) diffusion through competition and selection.
First, memes may best be understood as pieces of cul-
tural information that pass along from person to person, but 
gradually scale into a shared social phenomenon. Although 
they spread on a micro basis, their impact is on the macro 
level: memes shape the mindsets, forms of behavior, and 
actions of social groups. This attribute is highly compat-
ible to the way culture is formed in the Web 2.0 era, which 
is marked by platforms for creating and exchanging user-
generated content. YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Wikipe-
dia, and other similar applications and sites are based on 
propagation of content, to paraphrase Abraham Lincoln, 
of the users, by the users, and for the users. Such sites rep-
resent “express paths” for meme diffusion: content spread 
by individuals through their social networks can scale up 
to mass levels within hours.

When Memes Go Digital 
 
19
Moreover, the basic activity of spreading memes has 
become desired and highly valued, as it is associated with 
what Nicholas John has identified as the constitutive ac-
tivity of Web 2.0: sharing. John’s historical analysis shows 
that since 2007, “sharing” has become the overarching 
term to describe a variety of activities such as uploading 
photographs, updating a Facebook status, Tweeting, or 
posting a review on Amazon. Yet sharing is not only a 
buzzword: it has emerged as a central cultural logic, en-
compassing realms such as “sharing economies” and shar-
ing emotions in intimate relationships. In this new era, the 
two meanings of the term in the predigital age—sharing 
as distribution and sharing as communication—converge. 
When I post a funny clip on Facebook, I distribute a cul-
tural item and at the same time express my feelings about 
it. And most often, I anticipate that others will continue 
spreading the piece that I have enjoyed so much. In other 
words: sharing content—or spreading memes—is now a 
fundamental part of what participants experience as the 
digital sphere.2
A second attribute of memes is that they reproduce 
by various means of repackaging or imitation. In oral com-
munication, people become aware of memes through their 
senses, process them in their minds, and then “repackage” 
them in order to pass them along to others. In this process, 
memes often change their form and content—it is almost 
impossible to retell a joke using the exact words in which it 

20 
 
Chapter 3
was originally uttered. In the digital age, however, people 
do not have to repackage memes: they can spread content 
as is by forwarding, linking, or copying. Yet a quick look at 
any Web 2.0 environment reveals that people do choose to 
create their own versions of Internet memes, and in star-
tling volumes.
Two main repackaging mechanisms of memes are 
prevalent on the Web: mimicry and remix. Mimicry in-
volves the practice of “redoing”—the re-creation of a 
specific text by other people and/or by other means. In 
its essence, mimicry is not new—people have always 
engaged in impersonating others—whether these were 
domineering parents, annoying teachers, or hypocrite 
politicians. In fact, imitation is what has stood, accord-
ing to Blackmore, at the very basis of meme diffusion 
since the dawn of humanity. However, in the Web 2.0 era, 
everyday mimetic praxis has turned into a highly visible 
phenomenon in the public sphere. On websites such as 
YouTube, almost any user-generated video that passes a 
certain view threshold inspires a stream of emulations. 
Figure 2 features one of these highly mimicked videos—
the clip “Charlie Bit My Finger,” started by two English 
brothers, Harry and Charlie Davies-Carr. Yet mimicry 
is relevant not only to video; in the case of mimetic still 
Figure 2  Various means of imitation: “Charlie Bit My Finger” imitated and 
remixed. Source: http://www.youtube.com.

Original
Remix
Mimicry

22 
 
Chapter 3
images, it takes the form of reconstructing images in Lego, 
dough, or Simpsons characters. 
The second strategy of digital meme repackaging, 
remixing, is a newer one. It involves technology-based 
manipulation, for instance by Photoshopping an image 
or adding a new soundtrack. A plethora of user-friendly 
applications that enable people to download and re-edit 
content have turned remixing into an extremely popu-
lar practice. Mimicry and remix are thus conquering the 
Web, and the term “meme” seems particularly suitable to 
describe this glut of reworks, as the concept—deliberately 
connoting “mimesis”—is flexible enough to capture a wide 
range of communicative intentions and actions, spanning 
all the way from naive copying to scornful imitation.
A third attribute of memes that is amplified in digital 
environments is their diffusion through competition and 
selection. Memes vary greatly in their degree of fitness, 
that is, their adaptability to the sociocultural environment 
in which they propagate. Although processes of cultural se-
lection are ancient, digital media have afforded researchers 
the ability to trace the spread and evolution of memes. And 
it is not only experts who can now analyze digital traces on 
the Web—on many Web 2.0–friendly websites, metadata 
about viewing preferences, choices, and responses is con-
stantly aggregated and displayed for all users. Thus, meta-
information about competition and selection processes is 
increasingly becoming a visible and influential part of the 

When Memes Go Digital 
 
23
process itself—people take it into consideration before 
they decide to download an album, remake a video, or even 
march in a street protest.
In this section, I’ve demonstrated how three features 
ascribed to memes—micro–macro propagation, replica-
tion through imitation, and selective competition—are 
strongly manifest in digital environments. Yet these qual-
ities are not just amplified in the digital era. In the last 
few years, sharing, imitating, remixing, and using popu-
larity measurements have become highly valued pillars of 
participatory culture, part and parcel of what is expected 
from a “digitally literate” netizen. This new environment 
is dominated by what I call a hypermemetic logic. “Hyper” 
refers not only to the fact that memes spread more widely 
and swiftly than ever before, but also to their evolution as 
a new vernacular that permeates many spheres of digital 
and nondigital expression.
This pervasiveness of Internet memes becomes evi-
dent when they appear in unexpected circumstances, such 
as the ostensibly private occasion of a marriage proposal. 
In November 2011, a young blogger named Timothy 
Tiah Ewe Tiam approached his girlfriend in a restaurant 
and began showing her poster-sized printed memes, ac-
companied with his own captions. Finally, he got to the 
point (see figure 3). A video featuring the proposal and the 
(positive) reaction to it was then uploaded to YouTube and 
other social media platforms, sparking memetic responses 

24 
 
Chapter 3
in the form of other meme-based marriage proposals. In 
this case and others, “hypermemetic” assumes a further 
meaning: it depicts a culture in which memes have a mul-
tidimensional presence.
The hypermemetic nature of contemporary culture 
can be further clarified by a comparison between “old” 
and “new” memes. As I note above, memes were not born 
with the Internet; they were always part of human soci-
ety. However, I argue that the digital era did change some 
fundamental aspects of memes. To demonstrate this, I 
will take a close look at one veteran meme: “Kilroy Was 
Here.” This meme incorporated a simple drawing of a man 
with a long nose looking over a wall, alongside a myste-
rious caption: “Kilroy Was Here.” It was launched during 
World War II, and though its origins are still a matter of 
debate, the most agreed-upon version, according to Dan-
iel Gilmore, links it to a Massachusetts shipyard inspec-
tor named James J. Kilroy.3 Kilroy’s job was to examine 
riveters’ work after they completed their shifts. To keep 
track of his inspections, he began marking inspected areas 
with the phrase “Kilroy Was Here.” When the ships were 
completed and launched to the battlefield, soldiers no-
ticed these scribblings. Kilroy appeared everywhere, even 
in the weirdest and most unexpected internal parts of the 
ships. Soldiers began to inscribe the slogan on diverse sur-
faces, and at some point they added a drawing of a little 
man with a big nose. A meme was born. Throughout the 

When Memes Go Digital 
 
25
Figure 3  A meme-based marriage proposal. Source: http://ryanseacrest 
.com/.

26 
 
Chapter 3
war, the doodle popped up in almost any imaginable space 
within the reach of Allied soldiers, who then brought it 
back to the United States (and other countries). After the 
war, Kilroy was reincarnated in urban graffiti, as well as in 
various pop-culture artifacts.
Henrik Bjarneskans, Bjarne Grønnevik, and Anders 
Sandberg have analyzed Kilroy’s memetic success.4 In ad-
dition to the fact that the message was simple and could 
thus be easily reproduced, it also tended to appear in pub-
lic places, which ensured that many people, or “potential 
hosts” who could further diffuse the meme, noticed it. 
That the slogan’s “real” meaning was mysterious and open 
to interpretation was also an advantage, as it allowed each 
person to endow it with his or her own preferred meaning. 
Moreover, this lack of obvious meaning made the meme 
hard to contradict and, at the same time, enhanced peo-
ple’s engagement with it as they tried to solve the mystery. 
When attempting to decipher what motivated people to 
replicate the meme with no direct incentive in the form 
of peer-reaction, Bjarneskans and his colleagues postu-
late that people strove to join a circle of individuals who 
“shared the joke.” In this way, the act of reproducing the 
meme created an invisible bond with a community of “Kil-
roy writers,” or a sense of membership in a privileged and 
Figure 4  “Kilroy Was Here.” Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
Category:Kilroy_was_here.


28 
 
Chapter 3
mysterious brotherhood. At first glance, “Kilroy Was Here” 
seems surprisingly similar to some contemporary Inter-
net memes. For instance, it shares many features with 
“planking,” which basically involves people lying face down 
with their arms at their sides in public places (see figure 
5), or “241543903/Heads in Freezers,” in which people are 
photographed with their heads in a freezer and post the 
photos tagged with the number 241543903, allowing easy 
detection via search engines. Like “Kilroy Was Here,” these 
instances involve bizarre, weird, and unexpected juxtapo-
sitions. Moreover, in all three memes, people imitate a cer-
tain action in a unique setting and form a bond with those 
“in the know.” And finally, they are all imbedded in the “real” 
(that is, outside of the Internet) world.
Yet beyond these commonalities, traditional and In-
ternet-based memes differ in several fundamental ways. 
The first distinction relates to individuals’ awareness of 
the overall meme-scape. In the pre-Internet era, each in-
dividual was exposed to a very limited number of memetic 
manifestations—a person might have seen the Kilroy 
graffiti a dozen times in his or her lifetime, but probably 
not much more than that. Since the main realm in which 
the meme existed was the streets, its true magnitude was 
Figure 5  The planking meme. Sources: http://ourtwobits.com/ 
a-perspective-on-planking-the-evolution-of-a-revolution/; http://www 
.squidoo.com/planking-whats-wrong-with-people.


30 
 
Chapter 3
always a mystery. By contrast, the “real world” existence 
of memes like planking is often ephemeral, as they are 
based on capturing a moment through photography. Yet 
the corpus as a whole is very much alive on the Web: it only 
takes a couple of mouse clicks to see hundreds of versions 
of the planking or head in the freezer memes. If with Kil-
roy and its ilk most variants were invisible to most partici-
pants, the visibility of memetic variability—as well as the 
timeline of the memes’ appearance—is an integral part of 
contemporary Internet memes. This is another aspect of 
what I term the hypermemetic: memes are present in the 
public and private sphere not as sporadic entities but as 
monstrously sized groups of texts and images.
A further difference between Internet and traditional 
memes relates to the central place of the meme’s creator in 
the former. In particular, memetic videos and photos of-
ten focus much more on the performative self. Uploaders 
become both the meme’s medium and its message: their 
faces and/or bodies are integral parts of it. Thus, such 
memes are emblems of a culture saturated with personal 
branding and strategic self-commodification.5 As I will 
elaborate in the next section, this attribute aligns with a 
common social logic: in an era marked by “network indi-
vidualism,” people use memes to simultaneously express 
both their uniqueness and their connectivity.

When Memes Go Digital 
 
31
In an era marked by 
“network individualism,” 
people use memes to  
simultaneously express 
both their uniqueness 
and their connectivity.

32 
 
Chapter 3
Probing “Hypermemetic Logic”
So far, I have described the compatibility between memes 
and contemporary digital culture. Now I shall try to explain 
it. Why are so many people driven to re-create videos and 
images that others have produced? What are the potential 
benefits of such an activity, and for whom? While a full 
explanation of contemporary hypermemetic logic falls be-
yond the scope of a single book (particularly a short one), 
to spark the discussion I will suggest three initial prisms 
for understanding it, rooted in economic, social, and cul-
tural logics of participation.
The economy-driven logic relates to the notion that 
contemporary society is based on an “attention economy.”6 
Whereas the old economic system focused on things, the 
most valuable resource in the information era is not infor-
mation but the attention people pay to it. On sites such 
as YouTube, attention can be directly tied to mimesis: 
the number of derivatives spawned by a certain video is 
an indicator of attention, which, in turn, draws attention 
to the initial memetic video in a reciprocal process. This 
dynamic is particularly pertinent to user-generated con-
tent: whereas attention paid to corporate-produced videos 
largely relates to the status of mass media stars, attention 
to an amateur video is not guaranteed—it can, however, 
be accumulated through mimetic activity. According to 
this logic, a video structured for easy replication has a 

When Memes Go Digital 
 
33
chance to succeed in YouTube’s attention economy. This 
logic also applies to those who imitate famous memetic 
videos: emulations may get attention because they are 
similar to a successful video, and thus will appear in You-
Tube’s “suggestions” bar or pop up as a highly relevant 
search result when one is looking for the “original” video. 
Using memetic activity to drive attention is also evident 
in campaigns led by political parties or activists. In such 
campaigns, the reappropriation of messages (such as “We 
are the 99 percent”) by numerous users helps in promoting 
a topic on the mass media agenda, which, in turn, draws 
more attention to it. 
The second prism through which we can understand 
memetic activities is the social logic of participation, which 
can be linked to what Barry Wellman and others describe 
as “networked individualism.” In our era of accelerated in-
dividualization, people are expected to fashion a unique 
identity and image and by doing so actively construct 
their “selves.” At the same time, individuals participate 
enthusiastically in the shaping of social networks, dem-
onstrating an enduring human longing for communality. 
User-generated versions of an Internet meme may serve 
as a way to have it all: on the one hand, users who upload a 
self-made video or a Photoshopped image signify that they 
are digitally literate, unique, and creative; on the other 
hand, the text that they upload often relates to a common, 
widely shared memetic video, image, or formula. By this 

34 
 
Chapter 3
referencing, users simultaneously indicate and construct 
their individuality and their affiliation with the larger You-
Tube, Tumblr, or 4chan community. Re-creating popular 
videos and images can thus be seen as the cultural embodi-
ment of “networked individualism”: it allows people to be 
“themselves,” together.
The third prism through which the miming phenom-
ena can be examined is based on the cultural and aesthetic 
logics of participation. It draws on the notion that memes 
are not confined to the secluded spheres of YouTube or 
4chan, or even to the Internet at large. Since memes serve 
as the building blocks of complex cultures, we need to fo-
cus not only on the texts but also on the cultural practices 
surrounding them. Jean Burgess suggests treating You-
Tube videos as mediating ideas that are practiced within 
social networks, shaped by cultural norms and expecta-
tions. Such norms are often rooted in the history of pop-
culture genres and fan cultures: music videos, for instance, 
are replicated as part of broader cultures of jamming, re-
mix, and covers that characterize music making.7 These 
examples of historical roots highlight the ways in which 
practices of re-creating videos and images blur the lines 
between private and public, professional and amateur, 
market- and non-market-driven activities. Thus, Internet 
memes can be seen as sites in which historical modes of 
cultural production meet the new affordances of Web 2.0.

When Memes Go Digital 
 
35
The analysis so far presents memes and digital cul-
ture as a match made in heaven: the Internet is not only 
saturated with memes, but also allows for their investiga-
tion in unprecedented ways. However, some controversies 
surrounding memes—in particular those I referred to in 
chapter 2 as “biological analogies” and “who’s the boss”—
have hindered the wide uptake of the concept in studying 
digital culture. I suggested two paths to overcoming these 
barriers: forsaking the aspiration to find biological equiva-
lents to all things cultural and ascribing greater agency to 
humans. In the next chapter, I address a third dispute that 
obstructs the empirical study of memes: the disagreement 
on the seemingly simple question, “What is a meme?”


Defining Internet Memes
A core problem of memetics, maybe the core quandary, 
is the exact meaning of the term “meme.” As mentioned 
above, Dawkins’s initial definition was quite ambiguous: 
he referred to a meme as “a unit of cultural transmission, 
or a unit of imitation.” His set of meme examples spanned 
ideas (God), texts (nursery rhymes and jokes), and prac-
tices (Christian rituals). Ever since, the study of memes 
has been subject to disputes centering on the mind–body 
or genotype–phenotype dichotomy, yielding three posi-
tions regarding the nature of memes: mentalist driven, 
behavior driven, and inclusive.
Mentalist-driven memetics, advocated by leading 
scholars in the field such as Dawkins himself (in his 1982 
clarification of the theory), Daniel Dennett, and Aaron 
Lynch, is based on the differentiation between memes 
and meme vehicles. According to this school of thought, 
memes are ideas or pieces of information that reside in the 
4

38 
 
Chapter 4
brain. They are not simple ideas such as red, round, or cold, 
but complex ones such as ideas of the alphabet, chess, or 
impressionism.1 In order to be passed along from one per-
son to another, memes are “loaded” on various vehicles: 
images, texts, artifacts, or rituals. According to this view, 
those observable meme vehicles are equivalent to pheno-
types—the visible manifestation of genes. In other words, 
memes are idea complexes and meme vehicles are their 
tangible expressions.
By contrast, behavior-driven memetics sees memes as 
behaviors and artifacts rather than ideas.2 In the behavior-
ist model, the meme vehicle and the meme itself are in-
separable: the meme has no existence outside the events, 
practices, and texts in which it appears; that is, it is always 
experienced as encoded information. Moreover, this ap-
proach claims that if memes were indeed only abstract 
units of information, it would be impossible to disassoci-
ate them from their manifestation in the outside world. 
Defining memes as concrete units enables their evolution 
and diffusion to be studied empirically. This brand of me-
metics is closely related to the scholarly approach known 
as “diffusion studies.” Many studies in this rich tradition 
focus on the diffusion of “innovations,” occasionally adopt-
ing the term “meme” and the general memetic framework. 
However, diffusion studies tend to cling to narrow defini-
tions of memes, thus overlooking the concept’s complexity 
and richness. In particular, this tradition tends to look at 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
39
the diffused units as stable, well-defined entities with clear 
boundaries.
Whereas members of the mentalist- and behavior-
driven schools see memes as either ideas or practices, what 
I tag as the inclusive memetic approach, represented by Su-
san Blackmore in The Meme Machine, uses the term “in-
discriminately to refer to memetic information in any of 
its many forms; including ideas, the brain structures that 
initiate those ideas, the behaviors these brain structures 
produce, and their versions in books, recipes, maps and 
written music” (p. 66); that is, any type of information 
that can be copied by imitation should be called a meme. 
But this inclusive approach may lack analytical power, as 
it assembles very different elements under its large con-
ceptual tent.
Reassessing these standpoints, I suggest a different 
approach to defining memes. This suggestion is based on 
two rather simple principles: (a) looking at diffused units 
as incorporating several memetic dimensions—namely, sev-
eral aspects that people may imitate; and (b) understand-
ing memes not as single entities that propagate well, but 
as groups of content units with common characteristics. I 
will soon demonstrate how these two principles produce a 
workable definition of Internet memes.
Going back to Dawkins’s original idea—that memes 
are units of imitation—I find it useful to isolate three 
dimensions of cultural items that people can potentially 

40 
 
Chapter 4
imitate: content, form, and stance.3 The first dimension 
relates mainly to the content of a specific text, referencing 
to both the ideas and the ideologies conveyed by it. The 
second dimension relates to form: this is the physical in-
carnation of the message, perceived through our senses. 
It includes both visual/audible dimensions specific to cer-
tain texts and the more complex genre-related patterns 
organizing them (such as lipsynch or animation). While 
ideas and their expression have been widely discussed in 
relation to memes the third dimension is presented here 
for the first time. This dimension—which relates to the 
information memes convey about their own communica-
tion—is labeled here as stance. I use “stance” to depict the 
ways in which addressers position themselves in relation 
to the text, its linguistic codes, the addressees, and other 
potential speakers. As with form and content, stance is po-
tentially memetic; when re-creating a text, users can de-
cide to imitate a certain position that they find appealing 
or use an utterly different discursive orientation.
Since I use stance in this context as a very broad cat-
egory, I wish to clarify it by breaking it into three subdi-
mensions, drawing on concepts from discourse and media 
studies: (1) participation structures—which delineate who 
is entitled to participate and how, as described by Susan 
Phillips; (2) keying—the tone and style of communication, 
as conceptualized by Erving Goffman and further devel-
oped by Shoshanna Blum-Kulka and her colleagues; and 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
41
(3) communicative functions, used according to the typol-
ogy suggested by Roman Jakobson. Jakobson identified 
six fundamental functions of human communication: 
(a) referential communication, which is oriented toward 
the context, or the “outside world”; (b) emotive, oriented 
toward the addresser and his or her emotions; (c) cona-
tive, oriented toward the addressee and available paths of 
actions (e.g., imperatives); (d) phatic, which serves to es-
tablish, prolong, or discontinue communication; (e) meta-
lingual, which is used to establish mutual agreement on 
the code (for example, a definition); and (f) poetic, focus-
ing on the aesthetic or artistic beauty of the construction 
of the message itself.4
In addition to this three-dimensional breakdown, I 
suggest that for Internet memes—which are often based 
on an extensive and swift mutation rate—it may be use-
ful to turn Dawkins’s definition on its head by looking at 
memes not as single ideas or formulas that propagate well, 
but as groups of content items. Combining these two prin-
ciples, I define an Internet meme as:
(a) a group of digital items sharing common 
characteristics of content, form, and/or stance, which 
(b) were created with awareness of each other, and (c) 
were circulated, imitated, and/or transformed via the 
Internet by many users.

42 
 
Chapter 4
This revised definition may help us in providing more nu-
anced accounts of the meanings and possible implications 
of Internet memes. To demonstrate its applicability and util-
ity, I will now take a closer look at three memes: “Leave Brit-
ney Alone,” “It Gets Better,” and the “Pepper-Spraying Cop.” 
Leave Britney (and the Pepper-Spraying Cop?) Alone, It 
Doesn’t Get Better
On September 10, 2007, a young gay blogger and actor 
named Chris Crocker uploaded a YouTube video in which 
he reacted to the harsh criticism that followed pop star 
Britney Spears’s lackluster performance on the MTV Mu-
sic Video Awards. Crying and shouting throughout most 
of the clip, Crocker implored his viewers to “Leave Britney 
Alone”:
And how fucking dare anyone out there make fun 
of Britney, after all she’s been through! She lost 
her aunt, she went through a divorce, she had two 
fucking kids, her husband turned out to be a user, 
a cheater, and now she’s going through a custody 
battle. All you people care about is readers and 
making money off of her. SHE’S A HUMAN! […] Her 
song is called “give me more” for a reason because 
all you people want is MORE, MORE, MORE, MORE, 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
43
MORE! LEAVE HER ALONE! You’re lucky she even 
performed for you BASTARDS! LEAVE BRITNEY 
ALONE! […] Leave Britney Spears alone right NOW!
The video gained over two million views within twenty-
four hours, and many more in the following days and 
months. The Crocker sensation was reported on various 
mainstream media platforms and generated worldwide at-
tention. The video soon spawned a stream of derivatives: 
mimcry-based clips (in which known actors and ordinary 
users impersonated Crocker) as well as remix-based clips 
(in which music, graphic elements, or dubbing were re-
edited with the original).
In exploring “Leave Britney Alone” as a meme, we need 
to examine the distribution of the original video, but per-
haps more importantly, we should investigate the struc-
ture and meaning of this video’s new variations. People 
may share a certain video with others for many different 
reasons (which I will explore in chapter 6), but when they 
create their own versions of it, they inevitably reveal their 
personal interpretations. Thinking of Internet memes as 
trinities of content, form, and stance requires that we de-
termine whether the imitator embraces or rejects each of 
these memetic dimensions. In what follows, I will imple-
ment this strategy to evaluate the ways in which Crock-
er’s video was transformed in the course of its memetic 
diffusion.

44 
 
Chapter 4
Crocker’s 2007 video is a complex amalgam of ideas, 
textual practices, and communicative strategies. Our 
starting point is the video’s content, namely, the ideas and 
ideologies that it conveys. The text includes, among other 
things, facts about Britney Spears’s life (for example, her 
two children) and the castigation of people criticizing fallen 
celebrities. More broadly, in this and other videos, Crocker 
wishes to convey the message that being gay and effemi-
nate is a legitimate practice. In terms of form, or textual 
construction, the video’s layout features one talking head, 
filmed in close-up and in one-shot and situated in front 
of a white cloth. It further features repetitions of certain 
phrases, raised voice pitch, tears, and distraught hair-hand 
gestures. The most complex dimension in Crocker’s video 
relates to stance. Regarding the subdimension of participa-
tion structure, the video, by virtue of its existence, reminds 
the viewer that a gay, overtly effeminate individual is 
openly expressing his opinion in the public sphere. Keying, 
as noted above, is the tone, or modality, of the internal 
framing of discursive events as formed by their partici-
pants. People can key their communication as funny, ironic, 
mocking, pretend, or serious. In the case of “Leave Britney 
Alone,” Crocker keys his utterances as extremely serious 
and as ultra-emotional—sometimes so serious that, at a 
remove, it can even appear comical and ambiguously pa-
rodic. While some commentators questioned the sincer-
ity of the video, Crocker insisted it was utterly genuine. In 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
45
relation to the communication functions defined by Jakob- 
son, of the six described above, the most prominent are 
the referential (Crocker provides us with facts about Brit-
ney’s life); the conative (viewers are implored to change 
their behavior); and above all, the emotive, as this video 
is all about the addresser and his emotional state. In ad-
dition, a contextual examination of this video may lead to 
the identification of a certain phatic function to it. “Leave 
Britney Alone” is one of a stream of videos uploaded by 
Crocker on his YouTube channel. Through these frequent 
feeds, Crocker aspires to maintain the communicative 
path between himself, his budding acting career, and his 
faithful YouTube (and MySpace) viewers.5
So far, I have charted the memetic dimensions embed-
ded in Crocker’s initial video. The question to be addressed 
now is: Which of these dimensions was imitated with accu-
racy by Internet users in their derivatives, and which were 
altered? In other words, which of these dimensions suc-
ceeded in the competitive meme selection process? Since 
it is virtually impossible to track and examine all of this 
meme’s versions, I compiled a sample of twenty highly 
viewed derivative videos. To create the sample, two queries 
were used in YouTube’s internal search engine: the string 
“Leave Britney Alone,” and the words “leave,” “alone,” and 
“Crocker.” I then sorted the results according to their view 
count, and selected the twenty most-viewed videos (above 
100,000) in which people imitate Crocker. Analyzing them 

46 
 
Chapter 4
qualitatively, I aimed at identifying patterns of memetic 
uptake.
Among the three memetic dimensions, the one that 
viewers imitated with a high level of accuracy is the video’s 
form. The mise-en-scène of one person in front of a white 
cloth filmed in one-shot was evident in virtually all texts. 
Men were featured in sixteen videos out of twenty, often 
bearing feminine markers similar to Crocker’s (such as a wig 
or eyeliner). In addition, the composition style of Crocker’s 
sentences was repeated throughout the sample, as were key 
phrases such as “leave X alone” and “she/he is a human.”
In contrast to the relative accuracy in the imitation of 
the videos’ form, radical changes take place on both the con-
tent and stance dimensions. These alternations are related, 
to a large extent, to the construction of all the videos in the 
sample as parodies. A major feature of parody is its critical 
stance vis-à-vis the source text that it mimics. While all par-
ody includes some kind of imitation, it is important to note 
that not all imitations are parodies. Many YouTube videos 
are emulated without mocking their protagonists. For in-
stance, the “Evolution of Dance” hit—itself capturing an 
openly self-parodying event—has spawned numerous imi-
tations in which people copy the performer’s dance move-
ments in various contexts, without lampooning him. This 
is distinctly not the case in “Leave Britney Alone,” where 
the parodic intentions of the original are at best ambigu-
ous and highly exploitable. As I demonstrate below, parody 

While all parody includes 
some kind of imitation,  
it is important to note  
that not all imitations 
are parodies.

48 
 
Chapter 4
targets both the ideological and communicative aspects of 
the original meme.
Crocker’s message about the legitimacy of being an 
overtly effeminate homosexual is lampooned in many of 
the videos. For instance, the comedian Seth Green, in a 
heavily viewed parody, shouts and “implores” the audi-
ence to leave Chris Crocker alone, pausing occasionally to 
fix his black eyeliner: “You have not spent a mile walking 
in his sneakers, or, platform pumps … I don’t know what 
he wears … BUT I BET IT’S STYLISH!” Other clips mock 
a battery of pop stars and celebrities. In videos such as 
“Leave Justin Bieber Alone” or “Leave Rebecca Black Alone,” 
the presenters mock Crocker’s outcry to pity celebrities 
by publicly bashing them. Such clips represent a radical 
alternation of the original video’s stance, particularly its 
keying (the tone and style of communication). User-gen-
erated derivatives abandon Crocker’s overtly emotional 
performance in favor of a cynical and ironic one. No one 
says what he or she means in these videos. When a speaker 
pleads with his audiences to “leave Michael Jackson alone” 
because he “loves his monkey,” it is quite clear that the 
words spoken are not those meant. Curiously enough, 
the vast majority of the sampled videos employ common 
ironic keying: these videos are more similar to each other 
than to Crocker’s original.
My analysis so far yields a complex web of imitations 
and memetic dimensions. While users emulate the forms 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
49
manifested in Crocker’s video, they imitate the other imi-
tators to construct opposing memes at the content and 
stance dimensions. In other words, the process of imita-
tion combines overt copying and reversing aspects of the 
original event. It may be that the most powerful commu-
nication-oriented meme spread by users in this process is 
ironic communication: communication that veers from a 
definite commitment to one’s uttered words, using lan-
guage in a playful and non-obliging way.
In a recent work using the three-dimensional meme 
model, Noam Gal examined the role of memetic practices 
in Internet-based collective identity formation.6 She fo-
cused on a participatory YouTube campaign entitled “It 
Gets Better,” produced as a response to vast media cov-
erage of gay teen suicide in the United States as a result 
of homophobic bullying. Gal analyzed this stream of vid-
eos as a meme; people create new versions in response to 
the former ones, preserving and altering various aspects. 
Through this practice of partial citation, a distinct discur-
sive arena is constituted, shaped by an ongoing negotiation 
over its norms and conventions. To investigate the con-
struction of identity through the aggregation of sporadic 
acts of imitation and deviation, Gal analyzed qualitatively 
and quantitatively 200 campaign videos. In terms of con-
tent, she found that campaign videos tend to describe both 
the problems of gay teens and their solutions as associated 
with the private domain. In relation to stance, she found 

50 
 
Chapter 4
that the majority of protagonists are white, young, able-
bodied American men, constituting a typical hegemonic 
structure of participation, despite the relative absence of 
formal gatekeepers from the medium. With regard to form, 
she found that one mise-en-scène—of a protagonist(s) 
seated in front of a camera—dominates the corpus. This 
differentiation between content, form, and stance allowed 
Gal to identify various modes of compliance and subver-
sion in this campaign: whereas in some videos the rather 
conservative content was paired with a subversive stance 
(as in the case of a Puerto Rican woman praising Jesus), 
in others, radical assertions where packed in professional 
formats that “blocked” further participation.
So far I have demonstrated the utility of the threefold 
meme typology through video-based examples. I wish to 
further illustrate its applicability to other formats, such as 
image and text. To this end, I’ll briefly look into the recent 
example of the “Pepper-Spraying Cop” meme. On Novem-
ber 18, 2011, students from the University of California, 
Davis, gathered as part of the Occupy Wall Street protest. 
When they refused police orders to evacuate the area, two 
officers reacted by pepper-spraying a row of still-sitting 
students directly in their faces. Shortly after the incident, 
videos documenting it were uploaded to YouTube, generat-
ing uproar against the excessive use of force by American 
police officers. A photograph in which one of the offi-
cers, John Pike, was shown spraying the students quickly 

Defining Internet Memes 
 
51
evolved into an Internet meme. Users Photoshopped the 
“Pepper-Spraying Cop” into an endless array of contexts, 
spanning historical, artistic, and pop-culture-oriented 
backgrounds.
The plethora of images constituting the “Pepper-
Spraying Cop” meme can be analyzed through the model 
of content, form, and stance. Such an exercise reveals that 
while most versions share a similar Photoshop-based form, 
they vary greatly in terms of content. Content-wise, I iden-
tified two main groups of meme versions. The first focuses 
on political contexts: Pike is shown pepper-spraying iconic 
American symbols such as George Washington crossing 
the Delaware, the former US presidents on Mount Rush-
more, and the Constitution itself, as well as freedom fight-
ers across the globe (in Tiananmen Square, for example). 
These political versions share a clear idea, namely that the 
officer brutally violated the basic values of justice and free-
dom as represented by the protestors. A second group of 
user-generated images is pop-culture-oriented. In these 
versions, Pike is pepper-spraying icons such as Snoopy and 
Marilyn Monroe, as well as a battery of stars identified with 
other Internet memes, such as “Little Baby Panda” and 
“Keyboard Cat.” Such pop-culture-oriented meme versions 
are often open to multiple interpretations. In one case, 
in which Pike is portrayed as spraying Rebecca Black—a 
widely scorned teen singer and Internet phenomenon—
the original meaning of the photo as criticism of Pike 


Defining Internet Memes 
 
53
seems to be almost reversed. This differentiation between 
two types of memetic content can be further associated 
with stance alternations. For example, the utterly serious 
keying of the original photograph has been transformed 
in the process of memetic uptake, which involves explicit 
playfulness. However, if the keying of politically oriented 
versions is mainly sardonic, the predominant tone in the 
pop-culture-oriented ones is amused and humorous.
The analysis of the “Pepper-Spraying Cop” meme ac-
cording to the three memetic dimensions reveals that, 
in contrast to the unified uptake pattern characterizing 
“Leave Britney Alone,” other memes might encompass a 
more divergent mode of diffusion and evolution. Tracing 
the ways in which they diffuse may prove that the ostensi-
bly chaotic World Wide Web may in fact follow more orga-
nized cultural trajectories than meet the eye.
The differentiation between memetic dimensions 
may also advance our ability to draw borders between In-
ternet memes. If we think of Internet memes as groups of 
interconnected content units that share common charac-
teristics, we may further posit that such shared features 
may include content, form, and stance, and various com-
binations thereof. Therefore, the definition of a certain 
meme’s scope may rely on the dimension through which 
Figure 6  The “Pepper-Spraying Cop” meme. Sources: (top) http://www 
.tumblr.com/tagged/louise+macabitas (photo credit: Louise Macabitas); 
(middle and lower) http://www.uproxx.com/webculture/.

54 
 
Chapter 4
it is examined. For instance, if our prism is that of con-
tent, or ideas, we may argue that the same content can be 
expressed in a video, a text, or a Photoshop image. In this 
case, what we define as a particular “Internet meme” will 
incorporate different forms. Alternatively, we may identify 
memetic formats, such as image macros or lip synch, that 
are used for conveying various ideas. I will return to this 
distinction in the seventh chapter, in which I will define 
genres of Internet memes as intersections between specific 
themes and formats.

Memes versus Virals
The closest neighbor of the meme concept in both popular 
and academic discourse is “viral.” While many people use 
the terms interchangeably, I would like to highlight the 
difference between them. In a recent article, Jeff Hems-
ley and Robert Mason provide a comprehensive definition 
of “virality.” They describe it as “a word-of-mouth-like 
cascade diffusion process wherein a message is actively 
forwarded from one person to other, within and between 
multiple weakly linked personal networks, resulting in a 
rapid increase in the number of people who are exposed 
to the message.”1 The three key attributes of virality, ac-
cording to these authors, are (1) a person-to-person mode 
of diffusion; (2) great speed, which is enhanced by social 
media platforms; and (3) broad reach, which is achieved 
by bridging multiple networks. Hemsley and Mason, like 
other scholars researching virality, identify it as a certain 
diffusion process in which a specific item propagates in a 
5

56 
 
Chapter 5
certain way. This item is often tagged as a “viral video,” “vi-
ral ad,” or “viral photo.”
The main difference between Internet memes and vi-
rals thus relates to variability: whereas the viral comprises 
a single cultural unit (such as a video, photo, or joke) that 
propagates in many copies, an Internet meme is always a 
collection of texts. You can identify a single video and say 
“This is a viral video” without referring to any other text, 
but this would not make much sense when describing an 
Internet meme. A single video is not an Internet meme but 
part of a meme— one manifestation of a group of texts 
that together can be described as the meme. Going back to 
“Leave Britney Alone,” I would argue that Chris Crocker’s 
video can be defined as a viral video that became a me-
metic video only with the emergence of its derivatives.2 As 
elaborated in chapter 3, the “Leave Britney Alone” meme 
is composed of many videos. In a narrow, technical sense, 
both viral and memetic videos can be seen as adhering 
to Dawkins’s idea of memes in that they spread gradu-
ally from person to person. However, memetic content 
is closer to the original idea of the meme as a living and 
changing entity that is incorporated in the body and mind 
of its hosts.
But this straightforward differentiation fails to cap-
ture the complex relationship between memes and virals. 
In pursuit of a more nuanced distinction, I put forward 
two assertions. First, we should think of the viral and the 

Whereas the viral com-
prises a single cultural 
unit (such as a video, 
photo, or joke) that 
propagates in many  
copies, an Internet meme 
is always a collection  
of texts.

58 
 
Chapter 5
memetic as two ends of a dynamic spectrum rather than 
as a binary dichotomy. In fact, purely viral content prob-
ably does not exist—once a photo, or a video, reaches a 
certain degree of popularity on the Web, you can bet that 
someone, somewhere, will alter it. Moreover, there is a 
strong temporal element lurking here: many memetic 
videos started off as viral ones. Thus, if we think of the 
viral and the memetic as two ends of a dynamic spectrum, 
a more accurate differentiation would be threefold: (1) a 
viral: a single cultural unit (formulated in words, image 
or video) that is spread by multiple agents and is viewed 
by many millions. A “viral” may or may not have deriva-
tives (see, for example, the Kony 2012 campaign, http:// 
invisiblechildren.com/kony/, or the Evian Roller Babies, 
http://youtu.be/XQcVllWpwGs); (2) a founder-based meme: 
an Internet meme that is sparked by a specific (often viral) 
text, video, or photo (such as “The Situation Room” or the 
“Pepper-Spraying Cop”). The “founding” unit is followed 
by many versions, each viewed by fewer people; and (3) 
an egalitarian meme: comprising many versions that seem 
to have evolved simultaneously without a clear founding 
text. As I will elaborate in chapter 7, egalitarian memes 
are often based on a certain formula or genre. Such memes 
are characterized by a more even popularity distribution 
between the various versions. Rage comics, LOLCats, and 
“Hitler’s Downfall Parodies” would be examples of this 
category.

Memes versus Virals 
 
59
My second assertion is that we should think of In-
ternet memes and virals as different modes of engage-
ment rather than as passive versus active formulations. 
Although it could be argued that viral diffusion is a more 
passive mode of communication than memetic imitation, 
I assert that both viral and memetic content involve en-
gaged communication, albeit associated with different 
Table 1  Virals, founder-based, and egalitarian memes.
 
Viral
Founder-based  
meme
Egalitarian  
meme
Number of  
versions
One*
Many
Many
Distribution of  
popularity
Millions of  
viewers of  
initial video
One (often viral)  
clip/photo that  
initiated the meme 
is by far the most 
popular
Popularity spreads 
quite evenly among 
numerous versions
Focus of  
derivatives
People relate to  
a specific photo  
or video
People relate to a 
certain formula
User  
involvement
Meta- 
comments
Modifying the text
Modifying the text
Examples
Evian Roller  
Babies
“Leave Britney  
Alone”
LOLCats
*When a viral generates many derivatives it can also be described as memetic.

60 
 
Chapter 5
engagement levels. In the case of the viral, the communi-
cation may involve personalized meta-comments (for ex-
ample, “Don’t try this at home”), whereas memetic content 
invites modifications of the text itself.
While Internet memes and virals are similar in many 
respects, until now these concepts have been used in dif-
ferent ways in academic research. This split may stem 
from their association with two antithetic framings of 
communication—communication as transmission and com-
munication as ritual. Articulated by James Carey in his 
book Communication as Culture (1989), this distinction 
provides fertile ground for mapping the new meme–vi-
ral scholarly landscape. The “transmission” standpoint 
likens the movement of goods or people in space to the 
spread of information through mass media. According to 
this view, communication is mainly a process of imparting 
information in the hope of augmenting the spread and ef-
fect of messages as they travel in space. To communicate 
effectively, on this view, is to “get your message through” 
to the masses quickly and without disturbances. By con-
trast, what Carey calls the “ritual” model defines commu-
nication not as the act of imparting information but as 
the construction and representation of shared beliefs. It 
highlights the sharedness of values, symbols, and cultural 
sensibilities that embody what people see as their com-
munities. According to this view, the “message” in com-
munication is not a unit whose reach and effect are easily 

Memes versus Virals 
 
61
traceable, but an ongoing process in which identities and 
senses of belonging are continually constructed.
Studies of virality tend to embrace the “transmission” 
model of communication. Virality-focused research—
conducted mostly in the fields of marketing and political 
communication—focus on questions that relate to the 
diffusion of particular “items.” They ask how and to what 
degree virals spread, investigate the factors that enhance 
their effectiveness, and chart the power structures under-
pinning this process. A prevalent question in politically 
oriented studies is what role do blogs and other social 
media play in the viral process—comparing it to the role 
played by established mass media outlets. For instance, 
in chapter 8 I will survey studies led by Kevin Wallsten 
and by Karine Nahon and her colleagues that focus on 
the diffusion of political clips in the 2008 US presiden-
tial campaign, and the role that official campaigners and 
bloggers had in augmenting the viral process.3 In contrast, 
marketing-oriented studies—such as Phelps’s and Berger 
and Milkman’s analysis, discussed in chapter 6—tend to 
focus not on the processes or power structures underpin-
ning viral diffusion but on successful strategies for viral 
marketing.
The handful of studies focusing on Internet memes 
(rather than virals) seems to be linked more strongly to 
Carey’s second framing of communication as ritual. Such 
studies reflect the notion that memetic activities play an 

62 
 
Chapter 5
important role in constructing shared values in contem-
porary digital cultures. Treating memes as cultural build-
ing blocks, they attempt to understand people’s memetic 
choices, as well as the meanings they ascribe to memes. 
The scholarship produced by Jean Burgess, Michele Kno-
bel, Colin Lankshear, Patrick Davidson, and Ryan Mil-
ner—cited in various chapters of this book—reflects this 
fledging research trajectory.
An interesting way to move forward would be to invert 
the ways in which we study memes and virals, looking at 
viral content in terms of ritual, and examining memetic 
content in terms of transmission. In practice, this would 
require the evaluation of viral videos not only in terms of 
success or effectiveness but also in terms of their cultural 
implications and role in the formation of social and politi-
cal identities. By contrast, an inspection of Internet memes 
from a transmission standpoint would focus on success 
factors and diffusion patterns. Such a “transmission”-
oriented approach toward Internet memes is currently ap-
parent mostly in the fields of information and computer 
science. Research there tends to focus on verbal memes, 
such as quotes, hash tags, or catchphrases, looking into 
the changes they undergo and the underlying factors that 
influence this process—such as utterance length and the 
source of the quote.4
In sum: while the borderline between “memes” and 
“virals” may be fuzzy, and in fact many videos and images 

Memes versus Virals 
 
63
are associated with both categories (by first spreading vi-
rally and then spawning numerous derivatives), it is still 
worth differentiating between them. In the next chapter, 
I will demonstrate that this distinction is especially useful 
when we think of the factors that motivate people to share 
content as opposed to those that augment users’ tendency 
to engage with it creatively.


Unpacking Viral and Memetic 
Success
Now that we have a better grasp of what memes and vi-
rals are, it’s time to delve into the sixty-four-million-dollar 
question: which features enhance the propagation of—
and engagement with—Internet memes? The answer will 
unfold in two parts: first, I will tackle the issue of viral-
ity, that is, users’ tendency to propagate certain types of 
content. Second, I will discuss the memetic qualities that 
enhance people’s involvement with content by way of re-
making, remixing, or imitating.
What Makes Content “Viral”?
Every day, each one of us is exposed to a mind-blowing 
amount of information: news and video clips; recipes and 
funny kittens; quizzes and weather alerts. Mostly, we pass. 
Sometimes, we read. And occasionally, we share: forward, 
6

66 
 
Chapter 6
post on our blog, tweet. While the decision to share or not 
to share is usually taken by individuals seated in isolation 
in front of their screens, research has revealed some of the 
patterns underlying these behaviors.
Jonah Berger and Katherine Milkman have conducted 
the most comprehensive study to date about the features 
that enhance sharing tendencies on the Internet. To ex-
plore what augments the “spreadability” of news items, the 
researchers examined a huge data set of nearly 7,000 New 
York Times articles published online, focusing on those that 
made it to the newspaper’s list of most emailed stories.1 
Building on this work, as well as on more focused analyses 
of specific campaigns (particularly Kony 2012), I wish to 
highlight six factors that enhance content’s virality. I la-
bel them as the “six Ps” (or the six-pack, for the marketers 
among you): positivity, provocation of high-arousal emotions, 
participation, packaging, prestige, and positioning.
(1)  Positivity (and Humor)
One of Berger and Milkman’s key findings is that people are 
more likely to share positive than negative stories. In ad-
dition, they prefer sharing items that are perceived as sur-
prising, interesting, or practically useful. These preferences 
are explained as deriving from users’ motivations of shar-
ing content online. Since Internet users share for both so-
cial and self-presentation purposes, they prefer spreading 
content that makes others feel good and at the same time 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
67
reflects on themselves as upbeat and entertaining. A news 
story about a rare elephant giving birth to twins in a tropi-
cal setting would probably cater well to both motivations: 
it puts a smile on the face of the person who gets it, and it 
will associate the sender with a positive, uplifting message.
This tendency toward positivity is in line with the 
growing body of evidence about the centrality of humor-
ous content in viral processes. In their analysis of email 
forwarding, Joseph Phelps and his colleagues found that 
“jokes” was by far the largest forwarded content category. 
Similarly, Golan and Zaidner found that a striking major-
ity (more than 90 percent) of advertisements produced by 
viral advertising companies include humorous elements.2 
In addition to the social and self-presentational benefits 
associated with positive content in general, humorous 
content may be particularly sharable as it tends to be sur-
prising.3 Surprise often invokes emotional arousal, which, 
as outlined below, is key for virality.
(2)  Provoking “High-Arousal” Emotions
Berger and Milkman found that people share content that 
arouses them emotionally—both positively and nega-
tively. Positive high-arousal is embedded in what the au-
thors tag as “Awa” stories: pieces that generate a feeling 
of elevation in the face of something greater than oneself. 
Natural wonders, path-breaking scientific discoveries, and 
people overcoming adversities are prominent examples 

68 
 
Chapter 6
of narratives that generate “Awa” or “Wow” responses. 
“Awa” stories—combining positive valence and high levels 
of emotional arousal—were, by far, the most-forwarded 
stories in the New York Times list. But apparently, some 
less cheerful stories have become viral as well. These were 
stories that evoked negative high-arousal feelings of an-
ger and anxiety. Such feelings activate people to do some-
thing—for example to share content. In contrast, stories 
that made people sad (but not angry or anxious) did not 
propagate very well—probably since sadness is a deacti-
vating emotion.
The “Kony 2012” phenomenon illustrates vividly the 
relevance of high arousal for virality. Aired in March 2012 
by the Invisible Children organization, this film launched 
a campaign to stop Joseph Kony’s reign of terror, torture, 
and child abduction in Uganda. The film, which featured a 
young Ugandan whose brother was killed by Kony’s army, 
as well as the director and founder of Invisible Children, 
Jason Russell, along with his young son, became an instant 
viral sensation. Within six days it reached 100 million 
viewers—spreading quicker than pop-culture-oriented 
hits such as Susan Boyle’s appearance on Britain’s Got Tal-
ent or Rebecca Black’s “Friday.” Part of the campaign’s suc-
cess relates to the fact that Kony 2012 made people angry: 
the crimes portrayed in the video were so outrageous, so 
shocking, and so extreme that remaining indifferent after 
watching it was almost impossible.

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
69
(3)  Packaging
A pivotal aspect of viral diffusion is the packaging of mes-
sages. Berger and Milkman found that clear and simple 
news stories spread better than complex ones. Although 
unproven empirically, this principle may work for other 
genres and formats as well: simple videos or jokes could 
prove as more “sharable” since people understand them 
quickly and assume that others will decode them easily as 
well. Here, again, Kony 2012 provides a striking illustra-
tion. Simplicity is pivotal both in the videos’ definition 
of the problem and in its proposed solution. An individ-
ual—Joseph Kony—is portrayed as the ultimate enemy, 
the worst villain on Earth. Since the problem is simple, 
the solution offered is equally straightforward. Users 
should double-click to influence policy makers and cover 
the streets with signs; America will then send soldiers to 
catch the bad guy and the world will be a better place. This 
straightforward and easy-to-digest message was regarded 
as important to the video’s viral success; yet at the same 
time it was criticized as reducing a complex situation to 
simplistic frames.4
(4)  Prestige
“Prestige” relates to users’ knowledge about the content’s 
source. With regard to news stories, it was found that the 
more famous the author is, the more likely people are to 
spread the piece. In other words: if you want to write a 

70 
 
Chapter 6
viral story, it will probably help if your name is Bill Gates 
or Brad Pitt. A similar tendency to rely on famous peo-
ple—in a somewhat different configuration—is appar-
ent in the diffusion of viral videos. Kony 2012’s strategy, 
for instance, was to influence celebrities to support the 
cause publically by asking users to flood a defined list of 
celebrities and policy makers with premade tweets. This 
approach, tagged by Ethan Zuckerman as “attention phi-
lanthropy,”5 generated public support of celebrities such 
as Oprah Winfrey, Rihanna, and Justin Bieber, further 
boosting the campaign.
(5)  Positioning 
According to Berger and Milkman, positioning is impor-
tant for virality. In news stories, this manifests in the loca-
tion of a certain article in digital space and time, based on 
editorial decisions. Unsurprisingly, stories featured for a 
long time in prominent locations on the New York Times 
home page tend to be more viral than those that are pre-
sented for shorter periods in less central locations.
Yet “positioning” may assume a broader meaning in 
the context of viral diffusion, which relates to the location 
of a message within social networks and to its associa-
tion with certain actors. In viral marketing, the centrality 
of this feature is embedded in the emphasis on “seeding 
strategies,” namely on the selection of the initial set of 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
71
targeted consumers to whom the message is sent. Studies 
have shown that approaching the “right” users is crucial 
in the viral process. There are two types of preferred users 
for seeding: “hubs”—people with a high number of con-
nections to others; and “bridges”—people who connect 
between otherwise unconnected parts of the network. 
Sending the initial message to these highly connected indi-
viduals has proved to be much more effective than sending 
it to “regular” users.6
In some cases, the forces that ignite the viral process 
are well-positioned and organized actors. According to Gi-
lad Lotan’s study, Kony 2012 was initially spread by a net-
work of committed actors who had been supporters of the 
organization for a long time. These actors were clustered 
in several communities based in mid-sized cities such as 
Birmingham, Pittsburgh, and Oklahoma City. Many mem-
bers of these seed networks identify themselves as young 
people with strong Christian faith. When the campaign 
was launched, they were ready for activation, and indeed 
contributed significantly to the ostensibly spontaneous 
viral spread of this message.7
The examples presented in this section demonstrate 
that positioning is influenced by both gatekeeping and 
strategic planning. Editors, advertisers, and activists can 
play a major role in processes that are seemingly free of 
formal control by positioning the article on the right web-
site, or sending it to the right ultraconnected people.

72 
 
Chapter 6
(6)  Participation
The five Ps presented so far seem to work well across many 
types of viral content. The last one, “participation,” may be 
more relevant to viral-based political or commercial cam-
paigns, in which sharing a particular piece of content is 
often a means to a different end such as boosting sales, 
winning an election, or changing a regime. What I mean 
by “participation” in this context is that viral dissemina-
tion may be enhanced if people are encouraged not only to 
share a certain item, but also to carry out other activities 
related to it.
Focusing on commercial campaigns, Odén and Larsson 
assert that viral success can be achieved when a campaign 
gives its audience an opportunity to engage and affect 
rather than just “pass through it.”8 In a similar vein, Ethan 
Zuckerman posits that a key component of Kony 2012’s 
success was that it provided people with an opportunity 
to assert their influence via social media. Having seen the 
video and having been moved by it, users could actually do 
something with their rage, such as send a premade twit-
ter message to a key policy maker. This additional activ-
ity deepened people’s sense of involvement, vital for any 
political campaign.
Many successful campaigns depend not only on shar-
ing content but also on the active engagement of users in 
re-creating or appropriating items. Lance Bennett and Al-
exandra Segerberg speak of such activities as “personalized 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
73
content sharing” across media networks.9 In chapter 8, I 
will focus on the example of the “We Are the 99 Percent” 
slogan of the Occupy Wall Street protest, showing how its 
appropriation into various contexts created a personal but 
universal narrative where, to cite Grant Meacham, “every-
body is unique but in a similar situation.”10 Yet such modes 
of participation, as I will elaborate in chapter 8, are best un-
derstood not from a viral but from a memetic perspective.
What Makes Content Memetic?
Some virals are born and buried as virals. Others evolve 
to be memetic: content units that generate user-created 
derivatives in the form of remakes, parodies, or imitations. 
In this section, I look into the features of such memetic 
items, starting with video and moving on to photographs.
Memetic Videos
In a recent study, I asked: “Do YouTube videos that gener-
ate a high volume of derivatives share common features? 
And, if so, what are they?”11 The first step in addressing 
this question was to identify “memetic videos”—excep-
tionally popular videos generating a high volume of deriva-
tive work. To do that, I used both YouTube’s popularity 
measures of the top 100 “most viewed,” “most responded,” 
“most discussed,” and “most favorited” videos, as well as 

74 
 
Chapter 6
user playlists of Internet memes. The list of candidate me-
metic videos was then screened by two coders to identify 
the videos that generated a substantial number of deriva-
tives. These phases yielded a research corpus of thirty ul-
trapopular memetic videos.
At first glance, this group of memetic videos boasted 
such a dazzling array of seemingly unrelated features that 
finding any kind of common denominator appeared hope-
less. After all, what could possibly connect a guy demon-
strating weird dance maneuvers (“Evolution of Dance”) 
with a face-painted boy declaring “I Like Turtles” (“Zom-
bie Kid”); or an annoying dancing banana (“Peanut But-
ter Jelly Time”) with a boy sticking his finger into his 
brother’s mouth (“Charlie Bit My Finger”)? Yet systematic 
qualitative and quantitative analysis did yield six common 
features amid this diversity: a focus on ordinary people, 
flawed masculinity, humor, simplicity, repetitiveness, and 
whimsical content.
1  Ordinary People  The first feature of memetic videos 
reflects YouTube’s famous focus on ordinary people. Sev-
enteen texts in the sample feature ordinary folks whose 
fame can only be ascribed to their YouTube appearance, 
whereas only eight—all music videos—feature mass 
media celebrities. The “You-ness” of this group is also 
reflected in the sources producing the videos. Of thirty 
memes in the group, seventeen are clearly user-generated, 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
75
ten were coded as originating in traditional media sources, 
and three could not be determined. While these numbers 
do not indicate a statistically significant advantage of ordi-
nary-people-focused videos over celebrity-focused videos 
in the group, a comparison of our sample group with the 
pool of candidate memetic videos provides substantial evi-
dence for this trend.
We reexamined the videos that were in our initial can-
didate meme pool but did not generate enough derivatives 
to be included in the sample group. The vast majority of 
these widely viewed videos (19 out of 22) were created by 
conventional media, mostly featuring celebrities. Compar-
ing the videos that generated enough derivatives and were 
therefore included in the sample with those that did not 
meet our threshold indicated that popular user-generated 
videos tend to lure more derivatives than equivalent cor-
porate or professional videos. These results suggest that if 
a user-created video achieves a certain level of popularity, 
it is more likely to generate a substantial number of de-
rivatives than traditional content with the same number 
or even more viewings. In a similar vein, Jean Burgess and 
Joshua Green found that whereas traditionally generated 
videos are more common in YouTube’s “most viewed” lists 
(66 percent), people tend to react more to user-generated 
videos. Such clips are more popular in the categories “most 
responded to” (video responses—63 percent) and “most 
discussed” (text-based responses—69 percent).12 

76 
 
Chapter 6
But why do user-generated videos evoke more deriva-
tives? One obvious answer is that this kind of production 
is simple, and thus easier to imitate (see below). Yet an-
other key factor may be related to the videos’ protagonists: 
ordinary people may set an achievable goal for others. 
Moreover, if we look at YouTube not just as a broadcasting 
platform but also as a community (following researchers 
such as Patricia Lange), then responding to a user-gener-
ated video seems to make more sense than responding to 
that of a celebrity, as we are communicating with peers. 
Our peers might even answer us or comment on our vid-
eoed responses, thus validating our imitation and our po-
tential of attaining Internet fame. Yet, the protagonists of 
these videos are not just ordinary people; as we shall see, 
they tend to be ordinary men.
2  Flawed Masculinity  Although in the initial design 
of this study gender was not a prominent factor, a quick 
look at the sample required a change of plan. Men were 
the leading characters in twenty-four out of the thirty 
videos, while only three videos featured women as pro-
tagonists. This is not, however, simply a story about male 
hegemony, at least not in the conventional sense. Whereas 
in the three videos featuring women as leading characters 
(“Single Ladies,” “Miss Teenage South Carolina,” and “Pa-
per Planes”) the women adhere to conventional beauty 
standards prevalent in contemporary Western society, 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
77
most of the men featured in these videos fail to meet prev-
alent expectations of masculinity either in appearance or 
behavior. Among the twenty-four videos, there are three 
overweight characters (“Star Wars Kid,” “Numa Numa Guy,” 
and the “Angry German Kid”); one little person (“Little 
Superstar”); one constantly perspiring individual with 
thick glasses (“Chocolate Rain”); and the fictional Leeroy 
Jenkins, who manages to get his entire group killed in a 
World of Warcraft game. Our collection includes videos 
featuring four young boys who also fail to represent the 
Western male model: “Zombie Kid”; baby Charlie and his 
big brother; and little David, shown under the effects of 
anesthesia (“David after Dentist”). Joining this cheerful 
bunch is Chris Crocker (“Leave Britney Alone”), an extro-
vertly expressive, effeminate homosexual.
The prominence of “flawed masculinity” in this col-
lection of memetic videos can be seen as an extreme 
manifestation of men’s representation in contemporary 
mass media genres, particularly the sitcom. Such genres 
have responded to the so-called crisis of masculinity in 
Western society by presenting far-from-perfect men who 
fail to fulfill basic functions in their personal and pro-
fessional lives. Many sitcoms are characterized by am-
bivalent sexual politics: they embody a certain rebellion 
against hegemonic masculinity, yet at the same time re-
inforce traditional norms through the comic framing of 
their protagonists.

78 
 
Chapter 6
As in the case of sitcoms, flawed masculinity is pre-
sented in our corpus of memetic videos as comic and is 
thus associated with ambivalence. Unlike sitcoms, how-
ever, new meanings may be added to such videos through 
the discursive practices of the users who imitate them. A 
future exploration of the positions users take up when 
mimicking these videos—whether they mock or venerate 
their less-than-perfect masculine protagonists—is thus 
crucial for our understanding of the implications of this 
mode of representation.
3  Humor  Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear found 
that humor served as a major component of successful 
memes created between 2000 and 2005.13 In their analy-
sis they assigned humorous texts to one of two categories: 
“quirky and situational humor,” including dancing badgers, 
bizarre translations, and wacky teenagers; and “biting so-
cial commentary,” in which humor was used to address a 
variety of political issues.
The present analysis of videos created mainly between 
2006 and 2008 indicates that humor continues to be a key 
feature of Internet memes: no fewer than twenty-five of 
the thirty videos in the sample have a humorous aspect. 
But while quirky and situational humor is dominant in 
these videos, there was no trace of biting social commen-
tary humor to be found in this specific group. This is not to 
say that politics does not find its way into Internet memes: 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
79
as I elaborate in chapter 8, it definitely does. Yet it is not 
a prominent feature of this group of extremely “memetic” 
videos. In ten clips, the protagonists are clearly trying to 
be funny; however, a larger group features individuals who 
do not (or at least do not obviously) intend to create hu-
mor. This category includes, for instance, films of animals 
and kids; protagonists who may or may not be acting out 
(e.g., “Angry German Kid,” “Leave Britney Alone”); and co-
lossal mistakes that people were unfortunate enough to be 
videoed making (“Miss Teenage South Carolina”).
Three attributes of the comic seem to account for the 
prominence of humor in this sample of memetic videos: 
playfulness, incongruity, and superiority.
Playfulness  As described above, some videos in the group 
are clearly intended to be humorous. In these cases the 
comic tends to be intertwined with playfulness. In his semi-
nal work Homo ludens, Johan Huizinga conceptualized play 
as an open-ended activity, in which people step out of real 
life “into a temporary sphere of activity with a disposition 
of its own.” Like game-playing, humor is enjoyed for its 
own sake and involves a multilayered perception of social 
situations. Comic playfulness may thus lure user creativity 
by summoning viewers to take part in a game.
Incongruity  According to the incongruity theory of hu-
mor, comedy derives from an unexpected cognitive en-
counter between two incongruent elements, as in a pun, 

80 
 
Chapter 6
a man in women’s clothing, or a dancing banana. Various 
forms of incongruity were found in the sample. For ex-
ample, humans were juxtaposed with animals, and mascu-
line traits with feminine ones. Among these incongruous 
structures, one emerged as particularly dominant: the fun-
damental yet often subtle incongruity between the audio 
and visual components of texts. In a few cases, such incon-
gruity is embedded in the video format, most notably in 
lipsynch (“Numa Numa,” for example); however, in others, 
it is derived from textual components unique to a specific 
video. For example, in “Chocolate Rain,” incongruity stems 
from the contrast between the singer’s boyish appearance 
and his low-pitched, mature male voice; in “Charlie Bit My 
Finger” we hear Charlie’s big brother complaining about 
the biting, yet we see him deliberately sticking his finger 
into the baby’s mouth.
Two features may explain the salience of audiovisual 
incongruity in our sample. First, this form of disharmony 
builds on the medium and its multimodality: the ability 
to convey both voice and image and to play with them 
through creative editing. But there may be more to it than 
that. In some cases, the gap between what we see and what 
we hear creates a dissonance, a puzzle that users may feel 
inclined to solve or further highlight by creating their own 
versions of the video.

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
81
Superiority  In some cases, play and incongruity are not 
what the video creators seem to have had in mind. Rather, 
they feature people who are unintentionally, or at least not 
clearly intentionally, funny. Here, a different attribute of 
humor—the association of the comic with superiority—
may have a crucial role in generating remakes. Espoused 
in the writings of Plato and Aristotle and centuries later 
of Thomas Hobbes, superiority theory interprets laugh-
ter as an expression of the pleasant experience of one-
upmanship. Superiority theories of humor may provide a 
simple explanation for the rocketing popularity of videos 
responding to memetic videos such as “David after Den-
tist,” “Star Wars Kid,” or “Miss Teenage South Carolina”: 
some people enjoy not only watching videos of others 
whom they perceive to be inferior, but also take pleasure 
in scornfully imitating them, thus publicly demonstrating 
their own superiority.
4  Simplicity  Another prominent feature in this group 
of videos is simplicity. The vast majority of the videos were 
coded as employing a simple construction of their topics or 
ideas (that is, conveying one uncomplicated idea or slogan 
such as “It’s peanut butter jelly time”). Simplicity is also a 
key feature of the videos’ visual construction, as reflected 
in various attributes: most of the videos feature one or 
two performers, and even those with more participants 
usually focus on only one or two. In addition, half of the 

82 
 
Chapter 6
videos—for the most part user-generated—were not ed-
ited but rather were filmed in one take of a single shot. 
Another feature that emerged in the qualitative analysis 
is the simple design of the frames and settings in which 
the videos take place: some are shot against a plain white 
background (for example, “Leave Britney Alone”), others 
in a simple domestic setting (“Numa Numa”), or on a bare 
stage (“Evolution of Dance”).
Simplicity is an important attribute contributing 
to the creation of user-generated versions of the meme. 
While any video can be edited or remixed, only a simple 
one can be imitated easily. It is almost impossible for an 
average user to create a persuasive emulation of the visual 
construction in Avril Lavigne’s “Girlfriend” clip, yet one 
only needs a white piece of cloth, a camera, and a modicum 
of talent to remake “Leave Britney Alone.” Simple videos 
enable people to emulate them in their own vernacular set-
tings, with limited resources, and with low levels of digital 
literacy.
5  Repetitiveness  Repetitiveness complements simplic-
ity: most videos in the sample incorporate one simple unit 
that is repeated throughout the clip. Prominent examples 
include the highly repetitive lyrics and melody of “Choco-
late Rain,” a banana constantly jumping up and down in 
the “Peanut Butter Jelly Time” song, and Chris Crocker’s 
recurring plea to “Leave Britney Alone.” Simplicity and 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
83
repetitiveness are found not only in user-generated con-
tent but also in several professional video clips in the 
sample, most notably Beyoncé’s “Single Ladies.” Filmed as 
a single sequence, the video features the singer and two 
Beyoncé look-alike dancers (that is, replicators) perform-
ing in front of a plain background and repeating the line 
“put a ring on it.”
Repetitiveness may play an important role in encour-
aging active user involvement in remaking video memes. 
The meme itself includes a persuasive demonstration of 
its own replicability and therefore contains encrypted 
instructions for others’ replications. In addition, repeti-
tions enhance memorability, a feature described in the lit-
erature as important for memetic success.14 Moreover, in 
some memetic videos, such as “Evolution of Dance” and 
“Numa Numa,” repetition is intertwined with imitating a 
well-known person. Such videos are themselves imitations, 
calling for further imitation by others.
6  Whimsical Content  The codebook for our study in-
cluded a lengthy list of topics that were expected to appear 
in the videos; among them were sex, politics, the work-
place, gender, race, ethnicity, sports, and religion. Coders 
were asked to mark the presence or absence of each topic 
in each of the videos. The analysis revealed that most an-
ticipated topics did not appear in the corpus. Several did 
appear in a limited number of cases: traditional media 

84 
 
Chapter 6
content, such as pop music (“Evolution of Dance”) and 
films (“Star Wars Kid”) as well as the world of computers 
and gaming (Leeroy Jenkins and the “Angry German Kid”). 
If we combine these categories, it appears that the only 
content type somewhat salient in these memetic videos 
is related to popular culture. This referencing of pop cul-
ture may be connected to the videos’ success. Since people 
may have different opinions on politics, religion, or sex, 
the moment any of these issues is injected, at least some 
people are bound to be alienated. But one can reasonably 
assume that most people contributing to YouTube know 
and appreciate popular culture, simply by dint of being on 
YouTube.
Aside from referencing pop culture, these memetic 
videos seem to share the absence of a concrete theme. Or, 
in other words, they demonstrate a tendency toward the 
whimsical (for example, “Zombie Kid” or “Charlie Bit My 
Finger”). In addition, they share a certain mode of pre-
sentation: depicting people playing or performing, often 
acting in a silly or irrational manner. This combination of 
playfulness and a lack of concrete content may in fact be 
regarded as an advantage when evaluating the tendency 
to replicate YouTube memes: users can imitate the playful 
spirit embedded in the texts, yet inject new themes accord-
ing to personal preferences.
While not all memetic videos incorporate the whole 
set of six attributes, the most successful among them tend 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
85
to integrate at least three or four. “Gangnam Style,” for ex-
ample, seems to encompass all six. Although PSY was pop-
ular in Korea, for the rest of the world he was completely 
anonymous until “Gangnam” went viral. Thus, the clip ad-
heres to the “ordinary people” category. It also resonates 
well with the flawed masculinity attribute: PSY is some-
thing of a “weird bird” in the “K-pop” scene. Unlike most 
performers in the Korean pop music industry, he is not 
very young and does not adhere to conventional standards 
of beauty. The third memetic attribute—humor—is also 
evident in many aspects of this exaggerated and incongru-
ous video. Simplicity seems to be the trickiest attribute to 
apply. At first glance, it does not fit this clip: “Gangnam 
Style” is a very rich text, adhering to professional produc-
tion styles in its mise-en-scène and editing. Yet it incorpo-
rates some very simple and clear elements that stick out in 
the video’s complex setting, particularly the words “Gang-
nam Style” and “sexy lady,” and the unusual horse-riding 
dance performed by PSY. Moreover—and this leads me to 
the repetitiveness characteristic—most of these simple el-
ements are repeated throughout the video time and again, 
demonstrating its own replicability. Finally, this video is 
as whimsical as it gets: it features a set of extremely quirky 
and bizarre situations coupled with lyrics that are utterly 
cryptic for anyone who does not know Korean. Interest-
ingly, for Koreans this clip does have a concrete—and 
some say even satirical—framing, as it deals with identity 

86 
 
Chapter 6
practices of people who desperately try to look rich and 
successful, thus affiliating themselves with the luxurious 
neighborhood of Gangnam. But this meaning is evident 
only if you understand Korean; if you don’t, the single 
message that seems to come through clearly is childish 
playfulness, which, as claimed above, seems to elicit more 
playfulness.
So far, I have presented each of the six memetic fea-
tures separately and demonstrated how they all come to 
play in one ultramemetic video. Yet there is also a common 
thread among these features. Each of the six attributes 
found to be common to memetic videos—a focus on ordi-
nary people, flawed masculinity, humor, simplicity, repeti-
tiveness, and whimsical content—marks them as textually 
incomplete or flawed, and thus distinct from and perhaps 
defiant of glossy corporate content. Moreover, these me-
metic videos differ significantly from the viral videos that 
were included in our initial sample of highly viewed videos 
but did not generate enough derivatives to make it into 
the research group. Most of these excluded texts were visu-
ally rich, serious, and sophisticated music clips featuring 
celebrities.
This leads to a somewhat surprising conclusion: “bad” 
texts make “good” memes in contemporary participatory cul-
ture. Since the logic of contemporary participatory culture 
is based on the active involvement of users, incomplete-
ness serves as a textual hook for further dialogue, and for 

Thus, the ostensibly  
unfinished, unpolished, 
amateur-looking, and 
even weird video  
invites people to fill in 
the gaps, address the 
puzzles, or mock its 
creator.

88 
 
Chapter 6
the successful spread of the meme. Thus, the ostensibly 
unfinished, unpolished, amateur-looking, and even weird 
video invites people to fill in the gaps, address the puzzles, 
or mock its creator. This interpretation follows Henry Jen-
kins and his colleagues’ description of gaps as enhancing 
the “spreadability” of content.15 They depict incomplete 
and open-ended videos as epitomes of what John Fiske, 
writing about television, referred to as “producerly texts”: 
media products in which gaps and inconsistencies invite 
viewers to “write in their absences,” thus creating new 
meanings.16
A further conclusion relates to the fundamental com-
plexity and elasticity of the meme concept.  In this particu-
lar study, I conceptualized memes as texts—that is, videos 
with distinct visual layouts, participants, and plots. Yet, as 
I elaborated in chapter 4, the meme concept was originally 
thought of more expansively, incorporating social prac-
tices (such as celebrating birthdays) and ideas (such as be-
lief in Heaven). And indeed, when exploring the corpus of 
videos studied here, bearing in mind the complex nature of 
memes, one can arrive at a higher-order understanding of 
memetic videos. It is the proposition that what is actually 
being replicated on YouTube is the practice of creating sim-
ple and repetitive content, which can be easily replicated and 
imitated by others. Thus, people are emulating not only 
specific videos, but the cluster of textual traits identified 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
89
here as catalysts for imitation by others. Transplanting 
this to the realm of ideas would suggest that more than 
anything, these memetic videos spread the notion of partici-
patory culture itself: a culture based on the active spread 
and re-creation of content by users.
Memetic Photos
So far, I have probed the question of what makes a video 
clip memetic. Now I shall address a similar query about 
memetic photos: photographs that attract extensive vol-
umes of user-created responses, usually in the format of 
Photoshop-based collages. In order to systematically as-
semble such photos, I used the word “Photoshop” as a key-
word in the huge database of “Know Your Meme” (http://
knowyourmeme.com). I scanned all the results and ana-
lyzed only those that fit the category of memetic photos. 
Looking at this group of nearly fifty images, I asked: can 
we identify recurrent themes, forms, and stances of such 
photographs?
Well, yes we can. I divided the photos into two the-
matic groups: memetic photos featuring politicians and 
those devoted to other themes. I elaborate on political 
photos in chapter 8, and will focus my discussion here on 
the photos of ordinary people or entertainment celebrities. 
I suggest that these photos share two prevalent features: 
image juxtaposition and frozen motion.

90 
 
Chapter 6
Juxtaposition
A fundamental feature of many memetic photos is a strik-
ing incongruity between two or more elements in the 
frame. More specifically, what we often see is one person 
who sticks out as alien to the surrounding situation. The 
little “Frowning Flower Girl” at the royal wedding is the 
single grumpy face in a sea of grins, while the “Disaster 
Girl” smiles at the camera in front of a burning house.
These juxtapositions call for memetic responses: 
since the people featured in memetic photos appear to be 
out of context, their reappropriation to other contexts 
seems almost natural. Moreover, the sharp juxtaposi-
tions in the frame make some of the original memetic 
photographs look Photoshopped themselves, thus pav-
ing the way for similar Photoshop-based reactions. Users 
who capitalize on the incongruity embedded in the origi-
nal memetic photo tend to do one of two things: to deepen 
the ridicule associated with the incongruity by presenting 
even stronger juxtapositions suggested by the original 
photo (for example, the “Disaster Girl” has not only set 
her house on fire, but she has also masterminded 9/11), 
or to diminish the initial incongruity by repositioning the 
character in a more appropriate context. For instance, in 
many versions the “Frowning Flower Girl” is relocated to 
situations that may be described as noisy disorder. When 
faced with circumstances such as the vuvuzelas during the 
World Cup or Rebecca Black’s “Friday,” putting your hands 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
91
Figure 7  Left: “Disaster Girl” and its memetic offspring. (Sources: http:// 
jpgmag.com/photos/349763/ [photo courtesy of Dave Roth]; http:// 
wierdwebsites.blogspot.co.il/.) Right: “Frowning Flower Girl” and its memetic 
offspring. (Sources: http://mashable.com/2011/04/30/frowning-flower-girl/; 
http://sonictruths.tumblr.com/post/5065937679/frowning-flower-girl 
-friday.) 

92 
 
Chapter 6
over your ears to avoid unbearable noise seems perfectly 
logical.
In some cases, this incongruity between the actor and 
his or her surroundings assumes a grave moral guise. In 
such memetic photos, the protagonist either ignores or 
actively causes the suffering of others. Thus, the photo 
presenting Eden Abargil—a former Israeli soldier who 
posted photos of herself smiling beside bound and blind-
folded Palestinian prisoners on Facebook—has much in 
common with the photo of Lieutenant John Pike, the 
“Pepper-Spraying Cop” described in chapter 4. Both photos 
present a contrast between a group of still, seated people 
and a single offender. In both, the wrongdoer seems to be 
utterly oblivious of the suffering he or she has caused. As 
discussed in chapter 4, memetic responses to such images 
may range from sardonic criticism to playful pastiche.
Frozen Motion
Another group of memetic photos depicts people in the 
midst of a physical activity such as running, dancing, or 
blowing soap bubbles. These photos feature both celebri-
ties (such as Leonardo DiCaprio) and ordinary people (such 
as the “Bubble Girl”), who are captured during an intense 
movement that is “frozen in time” through photography. 
Figure 8  “Still moving” images: “Bubble Girl” and “Leonardo DiHapprio.” 
Sources: http://www.tumblr.com/tagged/chubby+bubbles+girl; http://forum 
.nin.com/bb/read.php?36,1144410,1144471.


94 
 
Chapter 6
A simple explanation for the extensive memetic reactions 
that such photos generate is that they tend to capture 
people in a somewhat ludicrous posture—in particular, it 
is the ungainly positioning of their bodies that makes peo-
ple look funny. A further explanation would suggest that 
these photos capture a moment of great instability—peo-
ple cannot remain in midair for more than a split second. 
Users are thus drawn to “join the action” and complete a 
seemingly unfinished movement. 
Viral and Memetic Promoters: Commonalities and 
Differences
The main conclusion of this chapter is that viral and me-
metic promoters are not coextensive: the features that 
drive people to share content are not necessarily the same 
as those that draw them to imitate and remake it. Reevalu-
ating the categories presented so far, I suggest a division 
into three groups of success factors, applicable to (a) both 
viral and memetic content, (b) viral content only, and (c) 
memetic content only.
Three features are related to both viral and memetic 
success: simple packaging, humor (and more generally, posi-
tive valence, when it relates to virals), and augmented 
participation tools. Simple packaging enhances content 
sharing: when people understand something quickly and 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
95
Figure 9  Viral and memetic success factors.
•Prestige 
•Positioning 
•Strong emotions 
•Simplicity 
•Humor 
•Participation
tools 
Viral success 
Memetic success 
Viral  & memetic
success 
•
•Puzzle/problem 
Memetic potential  

96 
 
Chapter 6
intuitively they are happy to forward it to others. It also 
encourages memetic responses, since simple content is 
easy to imitate. Humor augments sharing, as people wish 
to amuse their friends and to be associated with wittiness, 
but it also augments the tendency to imitate and remake 
content, given its association with playfulness, incongru-
ity, and feelings of superiority. Finally, providing an assort-
ment of participation tools (in addition to mere content 
diffusion) works well for viral campaigns, as people prefer 
to propagate content accompanied by “action points” that 
deepen their sense of agency and involvement. Yet such 
tools often lead to a transition from the “viral” to the “me-
metic,” as users reappropriate and personalize universal 
content to describe their own cases.
Three criteria seem to be applicable particularly to 
viral (rather than memetic) success: prestige, position-
ing, and the provocation of strong emotions. In many ways, 
these features resonate with well-known success factors 
for mass-mediated items. A movie featuring flashy stars is 
more likely to succeed than one with an anonymous cast, a 
prime-time broadcast will draw more viewers than a show 
aired at dawn, and genres provoking strong emotions (such 
as thrillers) do particularly well at the box office. True, the 
motives for sharing content may differ from those driving 
people to watch it; when I send my friend a link to an in-
furiating movie about social injustice I also convey a mes-
sage about my own moral standpoint. But putting motives 

Unpacking Viral and Memetic Success 
 
97
aside and looking at the features themselves, the similarity 
between viral and mass-media success factors is striking.
The same is not the case for factors that enhance 
“memetic” creative responses. Based on my analysis so 
far, I can point to two factors that encourage memetic re-
sponses to both videos and photos: manifesting memetic 
potential and introducing a puzzle or problem. In videos, 
memetic potential is mainly demonstrated through rep-
etition: repeating the same idea time and again improves 
the videos’ prospects for successful replication. The me-
metic potential of many photographs is embedded in their 
Photoshop-like appearance. When the initial photograph 
already looks as if it had been Photoshopped, it elicits fur-
ther Photoshopping and creative modifications. The sec-
ond feature shared by memetic photos and videos is the 
appearance of a puzzle or problem that needs to be solved 
through creative responses. This puzzle often relates to 
the fundamental incongruities characterizing these texts, 
which again, seem to call out for the intervention of Inter-
net users.


Meme Genres
In theory, all Internet users are free spirits, individuals who 
take their unique path to the hall of digital fame. In prac-
tice, they tend to follow the same beaten tracks of meme 
creation. These paths can be thought of as meme genres. 
Defined as “socially recognized types of communicative 
action,”1 genres share not only structures and stylistic 
features, but also themes, topics, and intended audiences. 
The study of genres encompasses both top-down cultural 
artifacts such as drama, film, and television, and bottom-
up mundane types of rhetorical actions such as “best man” 
speeches and application letters. Recently, Internet meme 
genres have been added to the long list of genres that we 
encounter on a daily basis.
Internet meme genres are based on what Jean Burgess 
describes as “vernacular creativity”:2 everyday innovative 
and artistic practices that can be carried out by simple pro-
duction means. Although vernacular creativity predates 
7

100 
 
ChapteR 7
digital culture, Burgess suggests that new media have re-
shaped it by turning hidden and mundane practices (such 
as singing in front of the mirror) into highly visible public 
culture. As public discourse, meme genres play an impor-
tant role in the construction of group identity and social 
boundaries. Ryan Milner shows that while technically 
meme creation is becoming increasingly easy—special-
ized websites offer templates that even a six-year-old can 
operate—creating and understanding memes requires so-
phisticated “meme literacy.”3 In what follows, I assert that 
different meme genres involve different levels of literacy: 
some can be understood (and created) by almost anyone, 
whereas others require detailed knowledge about a digital 
meme subculture.
My selected list of nine meme genres is far from com-
prehensive, yet it surveys some of the central formats 
that have emerged in the past decade. It is written mainly 
as an introduction for those who are less immersed into  
digital culture. In other words: if you are a regular on 
4chan, Tumblr, or Reddit, you may want to skip ahead to 
the next chapter.
Reaction Photoshops
Editing software in general and Adobe Photoshop in par-
ticular have been an inseparable part of Internet humor 

Meme Genres 
 
101
Different meme genres 
involve different levels 
of literacy: some can  
be understood (and cre-
ated) by almost anyone, 
whereas others require 
detailed knowledge 
about a digital meme 
subculture. 

102 
 
ChapteR 7
since the early 2000s.4 The genre that I’m calling “reac-
tion Photoshops” is composed of the images created in 
response to memetic photos, defined in chapter 6 as pho-
tographs that provoke extensive creative reactions. One 
of the earliest examples of a reaction Photoshop was the 
“Tourist Guy” meme. Shortly after 9/11, a photograph of 
a young man with sunglasses and a backpack standing on 
the World Trade Center observation deck, with a plane 
heading toward him, was widely circulated over the Inter-
net. It soon became apparent that the photo was a hoax: a 
young Hungarian named Peter Guzli had edited a photo of 
himself—taken in 1997—and sent it to a couple of friends 
as a private joke. Once the hoax was exposed, the Internet 
was flooded by reaction Photoshops, showing the “tourist 
guy” in various settings and historical periods, spanning 
the sinking of the Titanic, the film The Matrix, and a Ku 
Klux Klan rally. Since reaction Photoshops are so prevalent, 
I discuss them at length in various parts of this book—par-
ticularly in chapters 6 and 8.
Photo Fads
The photo fad genre (as described by “Know Your Meme”) 
includes staged photos of people who imitate specific 
positions or actions in various settings, usually with the 
purpose of posting the picture on the Web. Specific photo 

Meme Genres 
 
103
fad memes include, for instance, the ones described above 
as planking (lying face down with arms to the side in un-
usual settings) and “Heads in Freezers” (which is just what 
it sounds like), as well as “Put Shoe on Head” (ditto) and 
“owling” (sitting in a perched position and looking into the 
distance to imitate an owl). I provided a brief analysis of 
this genre in chapter 3. In many ways, it resembles the 
next genre on which I will elaborate.
Flash Mob
The flash mob is a phenomenon in which a group of strang-
ers gather in a public space, suddenly and simultaneously 
perform a particular act, and after that just leave the scene, 
quick as a flash. The public act can assume many forms: 
frivolous dancing and freezing in place, zombie walks, and 
sudden disrobing. The gathering is coordinated through 
the Internet and mobile phones, and then photographed 
and uploaded to YouTube.
Flash mobs emerged as an Internet phenomenon in 
2003, when over one hundred people flooded the home 
furnishings department of Macy’s in Manhattan. They 
told the sales assistants they were members of a commune 
living in a warehouse in Williamsburg and were looking 
to buy a “love rug” for the price of $10,000 “to play on.” 
Bill Wasik, then a senior editor of Harper’s Magazine, was 

104 
 
ChapteR 7
credited with organizing this prank and consequently with 
the invention of the flash mob genre, which quickly spread 
outside New York City and the United States.
Virág Molnár traces the roots of the genre to twenti-
eth-century avant-garde movements, such as the Dadaists, 
who wanted to shock the conformist “bourgeois” middle 
classes by using surprise and guerilla tactics.5 For instance, 
the US-based Yippies (members of the Youth Interna-
tional Party), an amalgam of apolitical hippies and radical 
New Left activists, engaged in politically oriented pranks. 
In one of them, a group of Yippies took a tour of the New 
York Stock Exchange and started throwing dollar bills onto 
the trading floor. Trade was stopped as elegantly dressed 
brokers stumbled over each other to get to the money.
According to Molnár’s typology, contemporary flash 
mobs include several subtypes. While some of these are 
apolitical, others have an embedded anticonsumerist ele-
ment: they want to “reclaim” public space that has been 
overtaken by commercial use and interests in order to gen-
erate consumption-free enjoyment. Yet, somewhat ironi-
cally, from an early stage the genre was capitalized on for 
marketing purposes. For instance, the cellular company 
T-Mobile coordinated a flash mob dance of three hundred 
people at a London train station, resulting in an extremely 
popular YouTube advertisement. This commercial use has 
been criticized as subverting the basic principles of the 
genre: democracy, anticommercialism, and spontaneity.

Meme Genres 
 
105
Lipsynch
Lipsynch (or lipdub) videos are clips in which an individual 
or group is seen matching their lip movements to a popu-
lar song. Before the 1970s, lipsynch was used widely as 
a technical—yet concealed—procedure in popular music 
performance and cinema: the audience was not supposed 
to see any disconnection between voice and body. Even 
now, exposure of lipsynching elicits mockery and accu-
sations of lack of authenticity. The origins of lipdub as a 
performative genre, in which the split between voice and 
body is manifest and played upon, can be traced to Dennis 
Potter’s TV series Pennies from Heaven (1978). The series 
featured a 1930s salesman who avoided the agonies of his 
life by escaping, through lipsynch, to the magical world 
of music. In Potter’s later productions—The Singing Detec-
tive, Lipstick on Your Collar, and Karaoke—lipsynching was 
further developed as a technique through which the ideas 
and emotions of the characters were exposed.6
The Internet, and especially the introduction of per-
sonal webcams and, later on, simple editing software, has 
enabled the quick popularization of the genre. Indeed, 
lipsynching has become extremely prevalent across the 
globe. It currently embeds two main subgenres: bedroom 
lipdubs and collective lipdubs. As I outline below, the first 
subgenre is linked to private households and the second to 
public activities and organizations.

106 
 
ChapteR 7
Bedroom lipsynchs feature a small number of par-
ticipants, usually in front of their webcams. One of the 
first notable examples of this genre was the “Numa Numa” 
dance, performed by Gari Brolsma in 2004. Brolsma, a 
nineteen-year-old student from New Jersey, just wanted 
to entertain his friends with a personal version of the 
Romanian hit “Dragostea Din Tei.” But apparently the 
video amused other people as well: within a short period, 
it had been viewed by millions, evoking numerous me-
metic responses, in the form of both flattering homage 
and derogatory mockery. Another notable example is the 
“Back-Dorm Boys,” two Chinese art students from Guang-
dong Province who, in 2005, uploaded a lipsynched ver-
sion of the Backstreet Boys hit “I Want It That Way.” Their 
overwhelming popularity resulted in a subsequent series 
of videos and vast mainstream media attention. Such 
success stories encouraged many others, resulting in nu-
merous bedroom lipsynchs covering almost every imag-
inable pop hit. The memetic appeal of this genre can be 
explained in light of the principles discussed in chapter 3. 
Bedroom lipdubs are very easy to produce, and they relate 
strongly to today’s era of networked individualism. They 
highlight the presence and talents of a specific individual, 
and also signal that this person is part of a larger digital 
pop culture.
In contrast to the individualistic aura of bedroom 
lipsynchs, public sphere lipsynchs are multiparticipant 

Meme Genres 
 
107
collective productions. They are often created as an or-
ganizational effort, featured in spaces such as university 
campuses, offices, or army bases, and filmed in one con-
tinuous camera shot. This subgenre has also been labeled 
lipdub, a term coined in 2006 by Jakob Lodwick, the 
founder of Vimeo (a video-sharing venture that allows 
only user-generated material). Lodwick explains: “It’s kind 
of the bridge between amateur video and actual music vid-
eos.”7 Collective lipdubs are often used for public relations. 
They signify to the world that a certain university or firm 
is “cool,” vigorous, and frivolous—the kind of place you 
would like to be.
Both types of lipdub embody a blend of fame and ano-
nymity that characterize participatory culture. Lipdubs 
are based on the reappropriation of mass-mediated hits, 
originally performed by professional singers, by small, lo-
cal communities of amateurs. While this may be seen as a 
positive, democratizing turn, a more critical reading claims 
that lipdub also draws a line between amateur and profes-
sional art: most lipsynchers remain anonymous, and even 
if they do become famous, they are labeled as class B You-
Tube stars who are never equivalent to “real” film or televi-
sion stars. Moreover, as Graham Turner suggests, success 
in digital media is still measured through one’s ability to be 
incorporated into traditional mass media.8 Thus, genres 
such as lipsynch do not create a real alternative to the con-
ventional media industries.

108 
 
ChapteR 7
Misheard Lyrics
Phonetic translation or misheard-lyrics videos are based 
on amusing mistranslations of spoken sounds to written 
words. These are done by transcribing what the words 
sound like (that is, their phonetics), regardless of their 
true meaning. Phonetic translations were molded into a 
distinct meme genre following a popular 2001 animation 
that Neil Cicierega created to the Japanese song “Hyaku-
gojyuuichi.” At a certain point, subtitles such as “Give my 
sweater back or I will play the guitar” popped on the screen, 
reflecting what the Japanese words would sound like to 
an average English speaker. In subsequent years, many 
similar clips (tagged as “animutations”) emerged on the 
Internet.9
At a later stage, another phonetic translation subgenre 
emerged based on an even simpler user-generated manip-
ulation: the insertion of subtitles into an existing video 
clip, usually one that originated in South or East Asia. This 
subversion is sometimes called “buffalax,” referring to the 
nickname of the YouTuber who in 2007 posted the staple 
video of this subgenre, “Benny Lava.” His phonetic trans-
lation of the song “Kalluri Vaanil” by Tamil artists Prabhu 
Deva and Jaya Sheel opens with the unforgettable line: 
“My loony bun is fine, Benny Lava!,” followed by such gems 
as “Have you been high today? I see the nuns are gay.” The 
genre quickly globalized, with numerous linguistic dyads 

Meme Genres 
 
109
emerging, including, for example, Malayalam subtitles to 
a Russian folksong. English language songs, heard (but not 
always understood) the world over, have also became pop-
ular targets. For instance the Beatles’ “I Want to Hold Your 
Hand” is phonetically translated into Japanese as “Stupid 
public urination,” and “I’ve Got the Power” becomes in 
German “Agathe Bauer.”10
Recut Trailers
A recut trailer is a user-generated “fake” movie trailer based 
on the re-editing or remixing of film footage. In many 
cases, it displaces the original film’s genre with an utterly 
different one, creating “new” movies such as Brokeback to 
the Future (an amalgam between Brokeback Mountain and 
Back to the Future) and Scary Mary Poppins. The genre was 
popularized in 2005, with the launch of the trailer for 
The Shining, which presented the famous horror film as a 
delightful family comedy featuring a story of father–son 
bonding.
Kathleen Williams unpacks some of the paradoxes un-
derpinning recut trailers. While their very existence clearly 
indicates that people are familiar with (and even enjoy) 
movie trailers, these clips are also saturated with criticism 
of the trailers’ blunt marketing strategies. Specifically, re-
cut trailers mock the formula-based and mechanistic ways 

110 
 
ChapteR 7
in which marketers try to press audience’s emotional but-
tons. For instance, a recut trailer that presents the horror 
film Jaws as a romantic comedy uses the narration, “In a 
world that does not understand … in a place where there 
is no hope at all … love comes to the surface.” The incon-
gruity between these motivational words and what we 
know about the film parodies the original trailers’ overly 
optimistic scripts of overcoming adversaries. Moreover, 
recut trailers reflect the ambivalent nature of audiences’ 
relationship with pop culture in the Web 2.0 era.11 While 
professional trailers are released and consumed accord-
ing to industry-dictated timing, recut trailers reflect the 
new power claimed by Internet users who play with cin-
ema without actually needing “to go to cinema at all.”12 
Yet although these parodied trailers seemingly promote 
nothing, they actually do promote something: the image 
of their creators as talented, creative, and digitally literate 
people. 
LOLCats
LOLCats are pictures of cats accompanied by systematically 
misspelled captions, which typically refer to the situation 
shown in the photo. The genre’s name is a composite of the 
Internet acronym “LOL” (laughing out loud) and the word 
“cat.” It was the first prominent manifestation of “image 

Meme Genres 
 
111
macros”: a more general form of pictures with overlaid 
text. The spike in this genre’s popularity is associated with 
the image-posting board I Can Has Cheezburger? (http://
icanhas.cheezburger.com), launched in 2007. Motivated 
by the urge to understand “Why in the name of Ceiling 
Cat are LOLCats so popular,” Kate Miltner investigated the 
appeal of the genre by interviewing LOLCat lovers.13 She 
found that the LOLCat audience actually comprises three 
separate groups: CheezFrenz (who like LOLCats because 
they love cats), MemeGeeks (who love LOLCats because 
they acknowledge the genre’s place in the grand history 
of Internet memes), and casual users (all the rest, mostly 
composed of the “bored at work” population).
Miltner found that beyond these differences, LOL-
Cats are used to construct and maintain social boundaries. 
Creating—and enjoying—LOLCats requires familiarity 
with the genre and the special language underpinning it, 
“LOLspeak.” This is a complex, nonstandard, childlike (or 
catlike) English Internet dialect, which is celebrated by its 
users as “teh furst language born of teh intertubes.” En-
joying the genre involves the sweet scent of an inside joke, 
understood by those who are immersed in the digital cul-
tural landscape. In addition, in many cases LOLCats are 
created or shared for the purpose of interpersonal commu-
nication: they serve as indirect ways to convey a wide ar-
ray of feelings and states of mind. Thus, although LOLCats 
are often dismissed as emblems of a silly and whimsical 

112 
 
ChapteR 7
culture, Miltner shows that they actually fulfill diverse and 
complex social roles.
Stock Character Macros
The stock character macros meme genre originated from 
one meme, labeled “Advice Dog.” The initial meme, featur-
ing a photo of a puppy’s face positioned on a multicolored 
rainbow background, was launched on a 2006 discussion 
board on which a boy asked for romantic advice about kiss-
ing a girl. The photo of the dog advising “Just do it” spurred 
a stream of derivatives on 4chan, featuring the dog offer-
ing further pieces of bad advice. This then prompted a pro-
fusion of related “advice animal” memes, such as “Socially 
Awkward Penguin,” the aggressive “Courage Wolf,” and 
“Bachelor Frog.”14
While the genre is commonly labeled “advice ani-
mals,” it does not always include advice, and, over time, 
many human protagonists have been added to the initial 
animal-based arsenal. Yet memes belonging to this family 
do share two features: they use image macros, and they 
build on a set of stock characters that represent stereo-
typical behaviors. A very partial list of macro characters 
includes “Scumbag Steve” (who always acts in unethical, 
irresponsible, and asocial ways) and his antithesis, “Good 
Guy Greg” (who always tries to help, even if it brings him 

Meme Genres 
 
113
harm); “Naive College Freshman” (who is overenthusiastic 
about his new status as a student and clueless about the 
norms of social behavior in college); “Annoying Facebook 
Girl” (who is overenthusiastic and overanxious about Face-
book and its significance to her social life); “Female Col-
lege Liberal” (also known as “Bad Argument Hippie,” who 
is both naive and a hypocrite); “Success Kid” (a baby with 
a self-satisfied grin, accompanied by a caption describing 
a situation that works better than expected); and “Suc-
cessful Black Man” (a black man who comically subverts 
racist assumptions about him by acting like a middle class 
bourgeois). This array of stock character macros provides 
a glimpse into the drama of morality of the First World of 
the twenty-first century: it is a conceptual map of types 
that represent exaggerated forms of behavior. As detailed 
below, these extreme forms tend to focus on success and 
failure in the social life of a particular group.
Rage Comics
Rage comics are amateur-looking comics featuring “rage 
faces”—a set of expressive characters, each associated 
with a typical behavior. The genre embarked on 4chan 
in 2008 with a stream of four-panel comics dedicated to 
the tales of a character named the Rage Guy, who was of-
ten caught in situations that led him to scream in anger 


Meme Genres 
 
115
(FFFFFFUUUUUUU). Following the success of this ini-
tial rage face, a series of neighboring characters shortly 
emerged, among them Forever Alone (a sad, lonely chap 
with no friends); Me Gusta (“I like” in Spanish, a character 
who expresses enjoyment); Troll Face (who enjoys annoy-
ing and harming people); and Poker Face (who tries to con-
ceal his embarrassment in awkward situations). Since then, 
rage comics have migrated from 4chan into other commu-
nities, expanding the range of faces in the repertoire. The 
means for creating rage comics were also popularized, with 
the introduction of “Rage Makers” websites, on which us-
ers can create rage comics easily by reappropriating ready-
made characters. Yet, as Ryan Milner observes, digital 
literacy is not enough in order to participate in the rage 
discourse. It also requires subcultural literacy: knowledge 
of the codes and norms developed in this meme-based sub-
culture. Thus, one needs to have a considerable amount 
of knowledge about a large number of characters and the 
socially appropriate ways to use them in order to create an 
ostensibly simple four-panel comic.
Although rage comics and image macros differ in for-
mat, they deal with similar themes. According to Ryan 
Milner’s illuminating analysis, these meme genres tend to 
focus on a small core of subjects associated with winners 
Figure 10  Stock character macros: “Scumbag Steve,” “Success Kid,” and 
“Socially Awkward Penguin.” Source: http://www.quickmeme.com/.

116 
 
ChapteR 7
Figure 11  Rage comics. Source: http://fuckyeahchallengeacceptedguy 
.tumblr.com/.

Meme Genres 
 
117
and losers in social life. He tags them as “Fail,” “What the 
fuck,” and “Win” memes. “Fail” marks moments of social 
incompetence, embarrassment, and misfortune and is 
incarnated in specific characters (such as “Forever Alone” 
and “Socially Awkward Penguin”), as well as in the narra-
tive structure of many rage comics that end with a moment 
of personal failure. In numerous cases, failure has to do 
with geeky or awkward young men’s lack of romantic suc-
cess, often associated with Net subcultures. Posters often 
accompany these memes with commentary such as “This 
happened to me today,” thus using the memes as a “way to 
share geeky failure in a collective way.”15 “What the fuck” 
(or WTF) memes relate to those instances in which fail-
ure is not associated with the self, but with others, leav-
ing the protagonist with the eternal question, WTF? The 
“others” in such memes are framed as the out-group. They 
lack intelligence, discernment, and literacy—particularly 
digital literacy. Finally, “Win” memes deal with successful 
social interactions and small daily victories that help the 
protagonist avoid “a Forever Alone fate.”16
In this chapter, I have presented nine major Internet 
meme genres, as a first step in mapping a complex uni-
verse of user-generated content. As evident from this 
survey, some of these genres have already been studied in 
depth, while others have attracted less scholarly attention. 
Yet to obtain a fuller understanding of the memesphere, 
an integrative and comparative analysis of these genres is 

118 
 
ChapteR 7
required. An initial observation stemming from this sur-
vey is that meme genres can be divided into three groups: 
(1) Genres that are based on the documentation of “real-life” 
moments (photo fads, flash mobs). These genres are always 
anchored in a concrete and nondigital space. (2) Genres 
that are based on explicit manipulation of visual or audiovi-
sual mass-mediated content (reaction Photoshops, lipdubs, 
misheard lyrics, recut trailers). These genres—which may 
be grouped as “remix” memes—often reappropriate news 
and popular culture items. Such transformative works re-
veal multifaceted attitudes of enchantment and criticism 
toward contemporary pop-culture. (3) Genres that evolved 
around a new universe of digital and meme-oriented content 
(LOLCats, rage comics, and stock character macros). These 
genres, emerging mainly after 2007, embody the develop-
ment of a complex grid of signs that only those “in the 
know” can decipher. Thus, in order to produce and under-
stand LOLCats, users need to master LOLspeak; to create a 
rage comic, the user requires familiarity with a broad range 
of new symbols. These genres are thus strongly associated 
with what Ryan Milner describes as the meme subculture, 
which flourishes on specific sites such as 4chan, Tumblr, 
and Reddit. Yet since all nine genres that I have surveyed 
in this chapter are still alive and kicking, users who are not 
part of this subculture still have a wide spectrum of op-
tions for creating and consuming Internet memes.

May the Excessive Force Be 
with You: Memes as Political 
Participation
The Web was invented so physicists could share research 
papers. Web 2.0 was invented so we could share 
cute pictures of our cats. The tools of Web 2.0, while 
designed for mundane uses, can be extremely powerful 
in the hands of digital activists, especially those in 
environments where free speech is limited.
—Ethan Zuckerman, “The Cute Cat Theory of Digital Activism”
This chapter focuses on a new amalgamation of cute cats 
and hard-core politics: political memes. Politics—both in 
its broad sense as the societal construction of power and 
in its narrow sense as a system of governance—is deeply 
intertwined with the construction and consumption of In-
ternet memes. In the following pages, I will explore memes 
as forms of political participation, looking into both dem-
ocratic and nondemocratic settings. This inspection will 
elucidate the distinction between Internet memes and 
8

120 
 
ChapTER 8
Internet humor: while some political memes are framed 
in a humorous manner, others are deadly serious. But re-
gardless of their emotional keying, political memes are 
about making a point—participating in a normative de-
bate about how the world should look and the best way to 
get there.
The general prism through which I explore political 
memes is that of political participation. Whereas traditional 
political-science accounts of participation have focused on 
easily measurable practices, such as voting or joining po-
litical organizations, in recent years the perception of what 
constitutes political participation has been broadened to 
include mundane practices, such as commenting on po-
litical blogs and posting jokes about politicians. To a large 
extent, this transformed perception of what counts as po-
litical participation is tied to the rise of the Internet and 
other digital media. New media offer appealing and con-
venient ways to stimulate participatory activity, especially 
among younger citizens who have been the least likely to 
participate in formal politics.1
The centrality of new media in contemporary politics 
was strongly demonstrated in the 2008 US presidential 
election campaign. Heralded as the first Web 2.0 campaign, 
these elections were characterized by massive amounts of 
politically oriented user-generated content. Social media 
like YouTube and Facebook played an important role in 
these elections and were exploited by all candidates, but 

But regardless of their 
emotional keying,  
political memes are 
about making a point—
participating in a  
normative debate about 
how the world should 
look and the best way  
to get there.

122 
 
ChapTER 8
especially by Barack Obama. The innovative use of digital 
media in his campaign mobilized supporters into action in 
multifaceted and unprecedented ways.
New media proved to be pivotal not only in top-down 
political campaigns, but also in grassroots social and po-
litical movements. In 2011, Time magazine crowned “The 
Protester” as its “Person of the Year,” referring to the mas-
sive and effective street protests seen around the globe 
in that period. It began with the so-called Arab Spring—
when protesters joined forces in Tunisia, Egypt, and other 
countries to put an end to corrupt dictatorships. Soon the 
idea of mass protests became memetic: in New York and 
Moscow, Madrid and Tel-Aviv, millions of people occu-
pied the streets protesting injustices and flawed policies. 
Though the motivations for these protests were varied 
and the stakes different, in all cases the protesters made 
extensive use of new media for organization, persuasion, 
and mobilization.2
Memes and virals have played an important role 
within this new landscape of Web-based political partici-
pation, both in grassroots and top-down campaigns. In 
this chapter, I suggest that Internet-based political memes 
fulfill three interwoven functions:
(1)  Memes as forms of persuasion or political advocacy.  The 
extensive use of memes in recent election campaigns has 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
123
demonstrated their persuasive capability. As I outline be-
low, the majority of studies on this issue have looked into 
virals (rather than memes), attempting to gauge their in-
fluence and diffusion patterns.
(2)  Memes as grassroots action.  Building on Lance Ben-
nett and Alexandra Segerberg’s notion of digital “connec-
tive action,”3 I will discuss the central role of memes in 
linking the personal and the political to empower coordi-
nated action by citizens.
(3)  Memes as modes of expression and public discussion. 
Meme creation is an accessible, cheap, and enjoyable route 
for voicing one’s political opinions. As a result, any major 
event of the past few years has generated a flux of com-
mentary memes. Drawing on Ryan Milner’s notion that 
memes constitute spaces of polyvocal expression in which 
multiple opinions and identities are negotiated,4 I will look 
into recent examples of these meme-driven discourses.
These three functions of political memes are manifest in 
both democratic and nondemocratic contexts. Yet, as I will 
elaborate in the last section of this chapter, in nondemo-
cratic environments Internet memes may bear an addi-
tional important meaning of democratic subversion. 

124 
 
ChapTER 8
Memes (and Virals) as Persuasion: The 2008 US 
Presidential Campaign
Within the vibrant universe of online activities during 
the 2008 campaign, watching and spreading audiovisual 
content was particularly common. Clips such as “Obama 
Girl,” “Wassup,” and “Yes We Can” attracted millions of 
viewers and commanded considerable public and schol-
arly attention. This interest in political virals derives from 
the assumption that such videos may be highly influen-
tial. As early as the 1950s, Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld 
showed that people listen to what their neighbors, fam-
ily, and community members have to say about politics.5 
They found that personal influence is a pivotal aspect of 
persuasion—probably more important than mass-media 
messages. It is not surprising, then, that people are ex-
pected to treat political ads forwarded to them by their 
friends and colleagues more favorably than standard 
broadcasted ones. Moreover, virality itself is considered 
to be highly persuasive: raw “view-count” numbers in-
form viewers that many others have found a particular 
piece of content interesting.
While it is agreed that viral videos may bear consider-
able political impact, many questions remain about their 
sources, content, and diffusion patterns. Based on a vast 
number of political videos from the 2008 campaign, Tra-
vis Ridout and colleagues examined whether YouTube 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
125
enables new voices and forms of expression to enter the 
political process.6 In theory, any person can create a politi-
cal viral. But does it actually happen? An analysis of 3,880 
election-driven YouTube clips that passed the threshold 
of 1,000 views yielded interesting results. On one hand, 
the researchers found that the vast majority of such clips 
were posted by traditional actors, mostly the official cam-
paigns. However, when they broke down the data to the 
number of views per clip, they found a strong bias to-
ward nontraditional political actors. Thus, whereas typi-
cal party-sponsored ads had an average of 55,000 views 
and typical candidate-sponsored ads had just over 60,000, 
interest-group-sponsored ads yielded 139,000 views, cit-
izen-designed ads averaged 807,000 views, and ads cre-
ated by other entities (mostly media companies, small 
news organizations, groups of bloggers, or small video 
production groups) averaged a startling 2.5 million-plus 
views. This finding is corroborated by an examination of 
the most viral videos—only a fifth of them were produced 
by the campaigners, and in all cases they were not typical 
ads, but edited footage (such as Obama dancing on The El-
len DeGeneres Show). Yet, it is important to note that these 
viral videos were not produced “by a lone citizen, armed 
with only a camera and a cause.” Interest groups and other 
nontraditional actors who produced the 2008 virals were 
established organizations backed by financial and social 
resources.

126 
 
ChapTER 8
Clips created by such well-resourced groups often bear 
the esthetics of professional media content. For instance, 
“Yes We Can”—widely acknowledged as the most influen-
tial music video during the campaign—was produced by 
a group of Obama-supporting artists. It combines images 
from two sources—television footage of Obama’s speech 
after the New Hampshire primary and celebrity appear-
ances by stars like Scarlett Johansson, Kate Walsh, and 
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. Though the clip is shot in a simple 
setting of a black background, it is neatly crafted by profes-
sionals like hip hop artist Will.i.am, director Jesse Dylan, 
and cinematographer Rolf Kestermann.
The success of this video led Kevin Wallsten to explore 
the factors and actors that enhanced its spreadability.7 He 
found that members of the Obama campaign played an im-
portant role in this process. Campaign member statements 
significantly influenced not only the number of views, but 
the amount of discussion about it in the blogosphere, as 
well as the clip’s coverage in the media. Although the video 
itself was not produced as part of the official campaign, be-
ing embraced by it was crucial to its going viral. Another 
pivotal actor in the diffusion of the clip was bloggers: 
discussion of the clip in blogs drew the attention of both 
Internet users and journalists. Wallsten’s study thus cor-
roborated the central role of political blogs in the diffusion 
of political content. While this may sound like an optimis-
tic finding, further large-scale analysis of the types of blogs 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
127
that influence virality suggests a clear hierarchy within 
the blogoshere. Karine Nahon and her colleagues analyzed 
data on nearly 10,000 blogs and 13,000 blog posts linking 
to 65 of the top viral videos in the presidential election.8 
The authors show that a small group of blogs—which they 
tag “elite blogs” and “top-general” blogs—ignite the viral 
process. Once these blogs link to a video and “crown” it as 
viral, other blogs—such as political blogs and “tail” blogs, 
tend to follow. Their study thus demonstrates that a small 
group of powerful actors has a large influence on the pro-
cess of viral diffusion.
Memes as Political Action and Discourse: Occupy Wall 
Street and Memetic Photos
Whereas existing analysis of viral videos in the context 
of persuasion and political campaigns tends to highlight 
the ways power comes into play in an allegedly egalitar-
ian sphere, the analysis of memes as political action tends 
to stress their role in citizen empowerment. Looking into 
activist movements in the past decade, Lance Bennett and 
Alexandra Segerberg9 identify two types of logic (or struc-
tural principles) that govern contemporary digital political 
action. The first is the well-known “old” logic of collective 
action, associated with high levels of organizational re-
sources and the formation of group identities. The Internet 

128 
 
ChapTER 8
has made it easier to engage in collective action, but has 
not changed it in a fundamental sense. Thus, for instance, 
an NGO like Greenpeace has benefited greatly from new 
media, but is still dependent on its loyal group of support-
ers and its “offline” resources. Yet recently, another struc-
ture of political action has become prevalent worldwide. 
This second logic, labeled “connective action,” is based on 
personalized content sharing across media networks. Con-
nective action emerged in an era in which formal organi-
zations’ influence over individuals is declining and strong 
ties between people and the groups to which they belong 
are being replaced by large-scale, fluid social networks. As 
more and more people share their opinions and criticisms 
with networked peers, technology platforms begin to take 
the place of established organizations. Protests such as 
the Spanish Los Indignados (the Indignant Ones) or the 
American Occupy Wall Street are not backed by a strong 
existing organization—they are energized by the digitally 
coordinated actions of millions of ordinary people.
Memes play an important role in these coordinated 
actions. Shared slogans that travel easily across large and 
diverse populations are essential to stimulating thousands 
or millions of people to take up a cause. Yet the power of 
these campaigns, according to Bennett and Segerberg, 
stems from the fact that their general messages or slogans 
do not prorogate in a single mode: they are personalized, 
adapted by individuals to tell their own stories. Thus, for 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
129
instance, the central website for “Put People First”—a 
civil society platform calling for an economy based on 
environmental considerations and fair distribution of 
wealth—presented an empty text box under an image 
of a megaphone, inviting the visitor to “Send Your Own 
Message to the G20.” In response, users applied the catchy 
slogan “Put People First,” connecting it to their personal 
backgrounds. A similar process took place around the “We 
Are the 99 Percent” meme, which I shall address shortly.
The perception emerging from Bennett and Seger-
berg’s analysis is that memes serve as pivotal links between 
the personal and the political. Since they are based on shared 
frameworks that call for variation, memes allow citizens 
to participate in public, collective actions, while maintain-
ing their sense of individuality. The role that memes play 
in connective action is thus the political manifestation of 
what I described in chapter 3 as the compatibility between 
memes and “networked individualism.” Yet the personal-
ization of political memes is beneficial not only to the indi-
viduals spreading them. As I will demonstrate through the 
case of the “99 Percent,” personalized memes also serve 
the rhetoric of political movements. 
Occupy Wall Street, 2011
The prevalent role played by memes in grassroots “connec-
tive action” was strongly manifest in Occupy Wall Street—
a protest movement criticizing social and economic 

130 
 
ChapTER 8
injustices in the United States. The strong connection be-
tween this movement and memetic activity is rooted in 
the identity of its initiators—the editors of the Canadian 
magazine Adbusters. One of them, Kalle Lasn, suggested 
in a manifesto titled Culture Jam: The Uncooling of America 
that readers should resist the corporate messages that 
dominate American media through creative vandalism 
and mock-advertisements. Lasn was one of the first activ-
ists to use memes as an integral part of his rhetoric, claim-
ing that in order to resist the memes produced by large 
corporations, people should create and circulate subver-
sive “countermemes.” For instance, in a satire on a Tommy 
Hilfiger ad, the brand’s name was rewritten to read “To My 
Ill Figure,” highlighting the role of major fashion brands in 
promoting unrealistically thin body images. This practice 
of altering consumer icons in ways that charge them with 
new subversive meanings has been labeled “culture jam-
ming.” While the term was coined in the early 1990s, it 
emerged as a mass practice only in the twenty-first cen-
tury, stimulated by the blend of user-friendly image-edit-
ing software and the ubiquitous presence of social media 
through which millions can jam.
Given the identity of Occupy’s founders, it is not sur-
prising that the very conception of the movement in Sep-
tember 2011 was intertwined with memetic activity. The 
initial email sent out by Adbusters to its mailing list about 
the forthcoming protests was accompanied by a poster of a 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
131
Figure 12  Culture jamming. Source: http://subvertise-antidot.blogspot 
.co.il/2009_01_01_archive.html.

132 
 
ChapTER 8
graceful ballerina pirouetting on top of Wall Street’s iconic 
charging bull statue.10 It adhered to the familiar Adbusters 
aesthetic of taking a famous corporate icon and subver-
sively repositioning it, thus calling for further interroga-
tion and criticism of taken-for-granted symbols.
And indeed, the ballerina on the charging bull was the 
first in a surge of memes that accompanied the protests. 
Ryan Milner, who provides an extensive analysis of the Oc-
cupy memes, asserts that such forms of amateur partici-
pation made a perfect fit with the movement’s egalitarian 
and nonauthoritative ethos. To a large extent, the protests 
were energized and backed by the Web’s prominent meme 
hubs, particularly Reddit and Tumblr. However, the me-
metic activity surrounding Occupy was not one-sided. As 
the protests evolved, a rich variety of opinions were ex-
posed through the posting of memes and countermemes. 
While numerous voices supported the protests, many oth-
ers were opposed to it. This rich, multifaceted discussion 
is framed by Milner as a polyvocal quality of meme-based 
discourse, through which diverse opinions and identities 
are expressed and negotiated. He demonstrates this qual-
ity through a detailed analysis of the flagship meme of the 
protest, “We Are the 99 Percent.”
This slogan relates to the argument that 1 percent of 
the American population controls almost all the country’s 
Figure 13  The memetic initiation of Occupy Wall Street. Source: http://
noclexington.com/?p=5363.


134 
 
ChapTER 8
financial wealth. Early on in the campaign, it was molded 
into a meme with a particular aesthetics: a person holds a 
handwritten text depicting her or his gloomy story, lead-
ing to the shared motto “I am the 99 percent.” This meme’s 
power stems from the way in which its three memetic di-
mensions of form, content, and stance re-enforce each 
other. Its message about the agonies of ordinary Ameri-
cans is conveyed by average-looking people with serious fa-
cial expressions holding similar amateurish-looking signs. 
This combination of repetition and variation turns the 
personal to political: Stories about the sick young woman 
who is unable to afford medication, the single mom who 
struggles to provide for her son, and the father who can-
not send his daughter to college are reframed as particular 
cases of the same flawed structure. These people’s miseries 
are not just personal problems; they stem from the sys-
temic economic and political illnesses of their habitat. 
The popularity of the “99 percent” meme soon gener-
ated a countermeme, in which the aesthetics and rhetoric 
of the original meme were played against it: the “53 per-
cent” meme. Created by conservative activists, it referred 
to the premise that only 53 percent of American people 
pay income tax. In this countermeme, personal stories of 
hard-working people who pay taxes and refrain from com-
plaints portray Occupy protesters as the 47 percent of the 
Figure 14  “We Are the 99 Percent.” Source: http://wearethe99percent 
.tumblr.com/.


136 
 
ChapTER 8
country who do not actually work. According to this meme, 
the 99 percent protesters have failed to take personal re-
sponsibility for their actions. This dialogue between the 
“99” and “53,” alongside their numerous offspring (e.g., the 
“1 percent”), constituted, according to Ryan Milner, a rich 
sphere of multivoiced meme-based discussion.
For the sake of clarity, I have so far differentiated be-
tween memes as dealing with persuasion, action, or discus-
sion. Yet my brief analysis has demonstrated that in reality 
these functions are intertwined: political memes are often 
used as an amalgamation of all three. The 99 percent meme, 
for instance, was created as part of a grassroots move-
ment; it was meant to be persuasive and it ignited a rich 
and diverse meme-based discourse.
Not all Occupy memes were as serious as the 99 per-
cent meme. Many others drew on vast arenas of pop cul-
ture to create comic effects. Building on Henry Jenkins’s 
work on these new, playful dimensions of civic participa-
tion, Ryan Milner and Geniesa Tay show how pop culture 
is used in memes as a common ground to discuss politics.11 
As pop culture is part of people’s everyday lives and cul-
tural identities, using it to talk about politics makes the 
latter more approachable. Pop culture thus serves as a plat-
form through which individuals can communicate with 
each other about politics in a playful and engaging way. For 
example, Tay describes the heavy usage of Star Wars char-
acters in memes as shorthand to communicate meaning. 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
137
Figure 15  “We Are the 53 Percent.” Source: http://the53.tumblr.com/.

138 
 
ChapTER 8
When a public figure is framed as a Jedi Knight, it is quite 
clear that he or she is on the good side of the force, with 
the opposite applying to any politician associated with the 
Imperial forces. In figure 16, a popular accusation that Oc-
cupy protesters have only a vague plan of action is turned 
on its head when uttered by Palpatine, while protesters are 
associated with the positive characters of Yoda and Luke 
Skywalker. Yet, as demonstrated in chapter 4, this heavy 
reliance on pop culture images in political memes may, 
at some points, lead to a process of “depoliticization,” in 
which the political and critical aspects of Internet memes 
are diminished in favor of pure playful amusement.
Political Memetic Photos
As demonstrated in the analysis of the “Pepper-Spraying 
Cop” meme in chapter 3, meme-based political discourse 
often begins with a single “memetic photo” that relates to 
political actors and controversies. In order to find shared 
attributes of such photos, I analyzed an array of examples 
from the United States, France, China, Israel, and Egypt 
(assembled through the method described in chapter 6). I 
found that most political memetic photos relate to a single 
Figure 16  “Occupy Star Wars.” Source: http://www.tumblr.com/tagged/ 
occupy%20star%20wars.


140 
 
ChapTER 8
theme: an interplay between the “frontstage” and “backstage” 
of political performances. Described by sociologist Erving 
Goffman back in the 1950s, “frontstage” is the main site in 
which impression management activities are performed.12 
Such activities are carried out in front of an audience, aim-
ing to project a desired image such as “I am a devoted and 
strong politician, who sticks by his principles.” In contrast, 
“backstage” is a more private area, where intimacy, famil-
iarity, and authenticity govern. Far from the public eye, 
this is also the place where the techniques of impression 
management are practiced.
The disintegration of the borderline between front- 
and backstage regions stands at the core of many political 
scandals in the twentieth century. In instances such as the 
Clinton–Lewinsky scandal or Watergate, something said 
or done in the supposedly safe backstage realm leaked into 
the frontstage of newspapers and newscasts. As a result, 
embarrassed politicians were required to apologize for ac-
tions taken behind the scenes.13 Surprisingly, this mode of 
breaching the screen between front- and backstage is quite 
rare in memetic photos. What we find instead is a differ-
ent sort of blend between the two spheres: a carefully ar-
ticulated, strategic exposure of a political backstage, presented 
frontstage. Prominent examples of this category include 
the photograph taken in the Situation Room of the White 
House, picturing President Barack Obama alongside mem-
bers of the National Security team receiving an update 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
141
on Osama bin Laden’s assassination in Pakistan, and the 
Netanyahu–Shalit photo, featuring Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu smiling proudly in the background 
while Gilad Shalit, the Israeli soldier released after five 
years of captivity by Hamas, embraces his father for the 
first time.
In their memetic responses to such photos, users ex-
pose them as “inauthentic,” flawed, and manipulated. For 
instance, the meme developing in response to the Ne-
tanyahu–Shalit photo has been tagged as “Bibi Gump”: 
it situates Netanyahu in a gallery of historic events, tak-
ing credit for the 1969 moon landing, Maccabi Tel Aviv’s 
1977 European Cup basketball victory, the signing of the 
peace treaty with Egypt in 1979, and the royal wedding of 
Prince William and Kate Middleton. In this case and oth-
ers, netizens use memes to articulate a collective critical 
response toward what they perceive as slick manipulation 
by a politician.
Similar responses emerge when Internet users dis-
cover that a seemingly authentic “backstage” photo was 
artificially constructed. In the case of the “Sarkozy Was 
There” meme, a photo of Nicolas Sarkozy at the Berlin Wall 
was uploaded to his Facebook page, with the claim that it 
was taken on the evening East German officials opened 
the gates to the West. Yet, according to “Know Your Meme,” 
shortly afterward the French media showed that Sarkozy 
was indeed in the right place, but not at the right time: 


May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
143
the photo had been taken a week after the historical mo-
ment. A slightly different kind of fabrication was ridiculed 
in the case of the “Three Chinese Officials” meme. It all be-
gan when a Chinese government website of Huili County 
published a photo showing three local officials inspecting 
a newly completed road. The only problem was that the 
photo looked like a badly produced Photoshop paste-up: 
the officials seemed to be levitating several inches above 
the ground. The photo generated many mocking memetic 
responses, in which the officials were relocated in other 
contexts. As a result, the website issued an apology, ex-
plaining that the three men did visit the road in question, 
but the photographer felt his original pictures were not 
impressive enough and relocated the officials.
Users’ memetic responses to such manipulations of 
political images can be seen as the bottom-up, digital in-
carnations of Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert’s agendas 
in The Daily Show and The Colbert Report. These shows con-
tinuously reveal the “backstage” strategies that politicians 
and reporters use in order to sound persuasive and author-
itative, even when they do not have much to say.14 Henry 
Jenkins claims that such programs provide “good training 
grounds for monitorial citizens,” who become accustomed 
to looking out for signs of manipulation and fabrication.15 
By manipulating political photos, users signal that they 
Figure 17  The “Bibi Gump” meme. Source: http://fuckyeahbibibomb 
.tumblr.com/.

144 
 
ChapTER 8
are aware of the artificial construction of images and that 
they can create competing (and somewhat less flattering) 
images themselves.
Memes thus expand the range of participatory options 
in democracies: citizens can express their political opinions 
in new and accessible ways, engage in heated debates, and 
enjoy the process to boot. But in nondemocracies, Internet 
memes are not just about expanding discursive opportuni-
ties—they may represent the idea of democracy itself.
Memes as Democratic Subversion: The Case of China
Over the last decade, the Internet has become an impor-
tant arena for public discourse in China. The immensity 
and anonymity characterizing new media offer millions 
of Chinese Internet users a new promise of freer informa-
tion. And indeed, since its early days, political discourse 
and attempts at political protest have flourished in Chi-
nese cyberspace. Aware of the dangers this kind of subver-
sive communication could pose to the regime, the Chinese 
government has been implementing an active censor-
ship system, including blocking certain keyword searches 
and websites; monitoring chat rooms, blogs, and micro-
blogging platforms; and requiring the installation of cen-
sorship software on new computers. It also promotes 
self-censorship, obliging administrators of chat rooms, 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
145
for instance, to remove potentially objectionable content. 
Recently the government justified such censorship as part 
of the endeavor to build a “harmonious society.” The con-
cept is associated with China’s current president, Hu Jin-
tao, who uses it to describe the need for a socialist unified 
society in an age of transition.
This policy generated many forms of resistance. For 
instance, Christopher Rea describes netizens who sar-
castically complain about “being harmonized” after their 
blogs or chat rooms have been closed by government cen-
sors. This ironic usage led to the word being flagged as a 
sensitive keyword, which puts those who use it on their 
websites at risk. In response, bloggers and other content 
creators switched the characters making up the word to 
produce another phrase with a slightly different intona-
tion. This resulted in a pun, as the new phrase means “river 
crab.” Thus, when bloggers write about “river crab,” or be-
ing “river crabbed,” they are actually talking about censor-
ship. This in turn soon spawned popular visual memes.16 
In one, a crab is wearing three watches, a pun on the “three 
represents,” declared by Jiang Zemin in 2000: “The Party 
must always represent the requirements of the develop-
ment of China’s advanced productive forces, the orienta-
tion of the development of China’s advanced culture, and 
the fundamental interests of the overwhelming majority 
of the people in China.”17 

146 
 
ChapTER 8
The “River Crab” meme was also manifest in video 
clips. For instance, in one of these videos, dubbed with a 
boys band pop soundtrack, televised footage of government 
meetings and embarrassing photos of the president are re-
edited to include flashes of watch-wearing crabs. The reso-
nance between some of the images and the song’s lyrics (for 
instance, a photo of Jiang combing his hair is synchronized 
with the words “prettyin’ up”) denigrates Chinese leaders in 
a way that would never appear in local mass media.18
Another popular Chinese political meme that was ini-
tially constructed to manipulate the censors is the “Grass 
Mud Horse.” It evolved as a response to the authorities’ 
campaign to cleanse the Internet of pornographic content, 
banned as unhealthy and harmful to Chinese youth. While 
such “purifying” actions ostensibly focused on sexual con-
tent, in reality they were used to silence unapproved po-
litical opinions. This led to the creation of the “Grass Mud 
Horse”—a “mythical beast” whose name in Chinese is pro-
nounced as literally meaning “fuck your mother.” Gallop-
ing onto the Internet in 2008, Grass Mud Horse became an 
instant memetic hit. Christopher Rea describes the video 
that introduced this animal to the world as “a jaunty ditty 
sung by a chorus of childish voices,” paired with moving 
images of peaceful alpacas. Yet this sweet and innocent fa-
cade is deceiving. What makes the song funny is the incon-
gruity between how its lyrics are meant to be read (by the 
censors) and how they sound. For instance, the line “On 

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
147
Figure 18  The “River Crab” meme. Source: http://chinadigitaltimes 
.net/2012/03/word-of-the-week-river-crab/.

148 
 
ChapTER 8
the vast and beautiful Male Gobi desert is a herd of grass 
mud horses” actually sounds like “In your mother’s vast 
and beautiful cunt is a group fucking your mother.” Later 
in the song the grass mud horses defeat the dangerous 
river crabs, protecting their grassland. In this encrypted 
narrative, the harmless beasts represent innocent Inter-
net users, who are victims of a cruel censorship regime, 
but will prevail. The Grass Mud Horse song has inspired 
numerous memetic responses. In 2009 and onward a flow 
of cartoon versions, Photoshop reactions, and poems have 
swamped Chinese websites, generating interest and cover-
age of the phenomena in other countries as well.
Yet this story does not end in cyberspace. Shaojung 
Sharon Wang describes a process through which this sub-
versive symbol—created in coded language as a new form 
of social resistance—has been commercialized.19 As early 
as 2009, the popularity of the creature resulted in a stream 
of merchandise, such as T-shirts and soft toys sold by In-
ternet retailers and in toy stores. In a sense, this move 
from cyberspace to physical artifacts in the “real world” 
represents Internet users’ urge to deepen their shared sub-
versive experience. At the same time, the process also sig-
nifies the power of capitalism to reinvent itself: as Wang 
says, “With the productive and participatory aspects of 
internet tools, the products have already ensured a profit 
because through free advertising, internet users act volun-
tarily as marketers.”20

May the Excessive Force Be with You 
 
149
So what is the meaning of memes in such tightly con-
trolled political environments? In these contexts, political 
memes seem to be more than just a ventilation of anger and 
frustration; the widespread subversive meme circulation 
serves as a powerful public display of criticism and distrust. 
It breaks the facade of optimism and unity presented in of-
ficial mass media, showing that things are not as “harmoni-
ous” as the party would like to present them. Nonetheless, 
it is still unclear whether this public criticism will be trans-
lated to connective action and actual regime change.
In this chapter, I have provided a snapshot of contem-
porary political memes in democratic and nondemocratic 
settings. To conclude, I will take a step back and compare 
Internet memes with predigital memes, such as political 
jokes in the former Soviet Union. Memes have always 
played an important role as venues for expressing opin-
ions and subverting established order, and in this funda-
mental sense there is nothing new in their latest digital 
incarnation. Yet whereas in the predigital era political 
memes were mostly part of the private lives of ordinary 
people who were ranting against those in power, in the dig-
ital era these expressions have become part of the public 
sphere: a performative display of opinions that is meant to 
be heard far and wide. Moreover, as demonstrated by Ryan 
Milner, since meme hubs such as 4chan and Reddit incor-
porate a variety of contrasting voices and opinions, Inter-
net memes assume a new role in deliberative processes, 

150 
 
ChapTER 8
providing a polyvocal “meeting space” between opposing 
camps. In this sense, they differ from political jokes, often 
told in intimate gatherings with like-minded others. 
A further realm of difference between old and new 
political memes relates to form: digital memes are much 
more visual than their predecessors. This has two main 
implications. First, visual display allows greater integration 
between politics and pop culture. While it may take some 
ingenuity to invent a verbal joke in which Barack Obama 
meets Luke Skywalker, it is easy to Photoshop the presi-
dent’s head on a Jedi’s body. A second implication of the 
visual nature of Internet memes relates to their polysemic 
potential—that is, their tendency to be open to multiple 
readings. Whereas in verbal jokes the target of mockery and 
its scorned feature are often clear, visual images’ openness 
and lack of a clear narrative may invoke contrasting inter-
pretations. Lillian Boxman-Shabtai claims that this poten-
tial for multiple meanings is stronger when visual imagery 
involves intertextuality: the additional layer of meanings 
associated with a text such as Star Wars may add complexity 
and ambiguity to the message.21 Thus, whereas one person 
will read the Obama-as-Luke meme as glorifying Obama, 
another will understand it as criticizing this leader’s preva-
lent construction as a superhero. Yet in both cases, the Force 
is with Internet users: as demonstrated in this chapter, In-
ternet memes constitute a new arena of political discourse 
and, possibly, of bottom-up political influence.

When Internet Memes Go Global
So far, we have looked at memes as embedded in local cul-
tures and power structures. But Internet memes are rarely 
confined to a single geographic location. Probably more 
than any previous medium, the Internet is suited to cross-
national large-scale meme distribution. The realization of 
this potential, however, is not determined merely by tech-
nology; rather, it is the complex nexus of Internet users’ 
practices and choices that generates modes of globaliza-
tion. In this chapter, I will show that in the last decade 
Internet memes have indeed become powerful—yet often 
invisible—agents of globalization. But this is not a one-
way process of cultural homogenization: at the same time, 
modified versions of imported meme formulas stress the 
uniqueness of local cultures. After charting some basic 
definitions and controversies related to globalization, I 
will look into two modes of meme-based global diffusion: 
those related to verbal memes and those associated with 
visual and audiovisual content.
9

152 
 
ChapTER 9
According to one of its numerous definitions, global-
ization is the “developing process of complex intercon-
nections between societies, cultures, institutions and 
individuals worldwide.”1 Although regional and worldwide 
interdependences are old phenomena, the speed and scale 
of global flows has accelerated dramatically in recent de-
cades, affecting almost every aspect of social life. Since 
the 1990s, the rapid growth of the Internet has raised new 
hopes, anxieties, and debates about globalization. Built 
as an international network of networks, the Internet al-
lows—technically at least—the effortless transcending 
of national borders. However, a growing body of research 
suggests that contrary to the predicted obliteration of 
space and distance in a new digitized order, cyberspace is 
embedded in—and shaped by—material, social, linguistic, 
and cultural contexts.2
The debate over globalization—both in the predigital 
and digital eras—is tied to a large extent to the claim that 
global flows have a specific direction, from “the West to 
the rest.” Globalization, according to its critics, is a form of 
Western imperialism, serving the economic, cultural, and 
political interests of the West in general and the United 
States in particular. This description of globalization as an 
inevitable, one-way, monolithic Americanization process 
has been widely challenged. Coined by Roland Robertson, 
the term “glocalization” was borrowed from Japanese 
business circles to portray the “processes that telescope 

In the last decade Inter-
net memes have indeed 
become powerful—yet 
often invisible—agents 
of globalization.

154 
 
ChapTER 9
the global and local (scales) to make a blend.”3 The concept 
challenges the sharp distinction between cultural homoge-
nization and heterogenization by depicting contemporary 
culture as synthesizing internal and external influences. 
Thus, rather than simply accepting or rejecting global 
models, local actors combine the foreign and the familiar 
to create multifaceted, hybrid cultures. 
These disputes over globalization and glocalization are 
evident in contemporary research into the flow of Internet 
content. Some studies of globalization and the Internet 
support the arguments about inequality and Americaniza-
tion, highlighting both global divides in infrastructure and 
access, as well as Western-American biases in aspects such 
as language, commodification, and commercialization 
processes.4 Parallel to these findings, a growing body of 
literature also provides evidence for processes of local and 
glocal Internet uses. These studies show that many people 
use the Internet locally to communicate with people and 
institutions in their own country or region. 
A major focus in such user-oriented studies is lan-
guage: from its early days, the lingua franca of the Internet 
has been English, evoking concerns about the medium’s 
role in promoting “linguistic imperialism” and threaten-
ing the status of smaller languages. Yet recent studies in-
dicate that the dominance of English is declining. As early 
as 2003, two-thirds of Internet users across the globe 
were not native speakers of English, and the accelerating 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
155
growth of Internet use in countries such as China was ex-
pected to strengthen this trend.5 This linguistic variation 
invokes a series of fundamental questions about cultural 
globalization and the Internet: How can the Internet fa-
cilitate global flows in a multilingual setting? What is the 
function of translation in this environment? To what ex-
tent is globalization in such a context based on visual cues? 
And finally, what is the role of ordinary Internet users in 
these new processes of globalization?
In what follows, I will explore some of these ques-
tions through the prism of user-generated globalization—a 
process in which memes are translated, customized, and 
distributed across the globe by ordinary Internet users. 
User-generated globalization has previously gone unno-
ticed in the research literature for three reasons: first, it 
is not driven by high-profile commercial agencies, such as 
major production companies, but by the daily practice of 
many ordinary users; second, unlike the transnational flow 
of mass media content (such as TV formats), this arena of 
globalization does not explicitly involve commerce; and fi-
nally, once a text is translated and some local markers are 
added, its foreign origins may be invisible to those who 
read and distribute it.
My colleagues and I explored the scale and scope of 
user-generated globalization through two consecutive 
studies that focused on the translation of verbal jokes. 
In the first one (conducted in collaboration with Mike 

156 
 
ChapTER 9
Thelwall), we looked into the narrow case of one Inter-
net joke about men, women, and computers.6 Framed as 
a letter from a frustrated computer user to a tech support 
team, the text focuses on the agonies of “Upgrading from 
Girlfriend 7.0 to Wife 1.0.” The user complains that Wife 
1.0 has “begun unexpected child processing that took up a 
lot of space and valuable resources,” and that it blocks ap-
plications such as “Poker Night 10.3, Football 5.0, Hunting 
and Fishing 7.5, and Racing 3.6.” In his response, the tech 
support representative explains that the user’s problems 
stem from “a primary misconception: many people up-
grade from Girlfriend 7.0 to Wife 1.0, thinking it is merely 
a utilities and entertainment program. Wife 1.0 is an OP-
ERATING SYSTEM and is designed by its creator to run 
EVERYTHING!!!” While this version is ostensibly from a 
masculine perspective, a feminine version of this text has 
also become widespread over the Web. In “Upgrading from 
Boyfriend 7.0 to Husband 1.0,” the newly wedded wife 
complains that “Husband 1.0” severely limits “access to 
wardrobe, flower and jewelry applications,” which “func-
tioned flawlessly under Boyfriend 7.0,” and that it “un-in-
stalled many other valuable programs” such as “Romance 
9.5” and “Personal Attention 6.5.” 
We found this joke to be highly popular in English, 
and anticipated that its topics—computers and roman-
tic love—would appeal to people worldwide. Our aim was 
therefore to explore the extent to which it was translated 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
157
into other languages. We looked for copies of translated 
versions in the top nine (non-English) languages spoken 
by Internet users when the study was carried out (2009): 
Chinese, Spanish, Japanese, French, German, Portuguese, 
Arabic, Korean, and Italian. We found that the joke trav-
eled well across linguistic and cultural borders: it appeared 
in a considerable number of copies in eight out of the nine 
languages examined. 
The strong global aspect of the joke’s diffusion was 
accompanied by a limited degree of glocalization; transla-
tions in the three languages explored in detail—Chinese, 
German, and Portuguese—incorporated many small local 
adaptations. Thus, for instance, in the German transla-
tions many changes related to sports-oriented references: 
NBA and rugby were replaced by German indicators such 
as Fussball-Bundesliga (the German premier league soc-
cer) and Sportschau (a major German soccer TV show). 
Yet although the “flavors” in these languages differed, 
the “ingredients”—in our case, postfeminist assumptions 
and gender-related stereotypes—remained unchanged. 
Throughout the globe, “Mars and Venus”–related stereo-
types of needy women who are too talkative and emo-
tional and men who just want to be left alone to watch 
their sports were replicated time and again without sig-
nificant opposition.7 
Out of the nine languages examined in the study, the 
only one in which translated texts for the joke were very 

158 
 
ChapTER 9
rare was Arabic. A possible explanation may be culture-
related: some of the norms encoded in the joke—such as 
premarital sexual relationships—may be considered un-
suitable in Arab-speaking societies. This explanation was 
corroborated about a year after we finished our data col-
lection, when a new, Arabic version of the joke started to 
propagate quickly on the Web. The joke was reframed as a 
letter written by a woman to her husband, who is a com-
puter programmer. While built on the same comic mecha-
nism of juxtaposing marriage life and computers, it does 
not include hints at premarital sex and is saturated with 
references to Islamic customs.   
The major limitation of our first investigation was its 
focus on a single case study: it was impossible to draw gen-
eral conclusions on the basis of one joke. In a more recent 
study, conducted by Hadar Levy, Mike Thelwall, and my-
self, we significantly expanded the scope of analysis, trac-
ing the translations of 100 popular jokes in English to the 
top languages spoken by Internet users in 2010 (Chinese, 
Spanish, Japanese, French, German, Portuguese, Ara-
bic, Korean, and Russian). We found that user-generated 
globalization through joke translation is common but var-
ies greatly across languages. While many translated joke 
copies were found in five languages (Russian, Portuguese, 
Spanish, French, German), fewer copies were found in 
Chinese and Arabic, and significantly fewer in Korean and 
Japanese. The results may be related to cultural proximity: 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
159
The top languages on the list are spoken in so-called West-
ern cultures based mainly in America or Europe, while 
the languages in which we found fewer translations are 
prevalent mainly in Asia and Africa. We also found sig-
nificant differences between various jokes in terms of 
global spread: while some jokes circulate widely across 
the globe, others are “translation resistant” and appear 
only in English.8 “Global” jokes shared two main topics: 
gender differences and consumerism. These two themes 
are strongly manifest in the following example, found in 
many languages:
It’s not difficult to make a woman happy. A man only 
needs to be:
1.  a friend
2.  a companion
3.  a lover
4.  a brother
5.  a father
6.  a master
7.  a chef
8.  an electrician
9.  a carpenter
10.  a plumber
11.  a mechanic
12.  a decorator
13.  a stylist

160 
 
ChapTER 9
(and the list continues until clause 44)
WITHOUT FORGETTING TO:
45.  give her compliments regularly
46.  love shopping
47.  be honest
48.  be very rich
49.  not stress her out
50.  not look at other girls
AND AT THE SAME TIME, YOU MUST ALSO:
51.  give her lots of attention, but expect little 
yourself
52.  give her lots of time, especially time for herself
53.  give her lots of space, never worrying about 
where she goes
IT IS VERY IMPORTANT:
54.  Never to forget:
*  birthdays
*  anniversaries
*  arrangements she makes
HOW TO MAKE A MAN HAPPY
1.  Show up naked
2.  Bring alcohol
“Global” jokes tend not to mention specific places or com-
panies, and if they do, they focus on high-profile corpora-
tions or products, such as Microsoft or Barbie. In contrast, 
translation-resistant jokes tend to focus on specific places 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
161
within America, on local American stereotypes (for exam-
ple, rednecks), and on local American politics. Overall, our 
findings suggest that Internet jokes serve as powerful and 
invisible agents of Westernization and Americanization; 
yet this is not a universal process: some cultures (in par-
ticular Korean and Japanese) do not seem to participate in 
cultural globalization through joke diffusion.
So far, I have discussed only one mode of user-gener-
ated globalization – the circulation of verbal humor. But the 
process of international meme diffusion is not confined to 
verbal forms: in fact, visual content may cross linguistic 
and national borders with much greater ease. Research has 
not yet addressed this issue systematically, but a growing 
body of examples suggests that flows of visual content are 
taking place, and in considerable volumes. Similar to ver-
bal humor, visual and audiovisual humor forms are often 
subject to localization strategies. I will discuss these glo-
calization processes with reference to two cases: the migra-
tion of the “Successful Black Man” meme to the Holy Land 
and international versions of “Gangnam Style.”
The “Successful Black Man” meme features a photo of 
a young black man dressed in a suit, accompanied by two 
captions: the top line hints at a (usually negative) stereo-
type associated with being black, while the bottom one 
reverses it to display a middle-class, responsible family 
man. For instance, in the examples below, the initial line 
“Let’s all get high” (hinting at the stereotypical association 

162 
 
ChapTER 9
of blacks and drugs) is reversed by “grades on our finals,” 
“Just got outta jail” turns out to be part of a family Monop-
oly game, and “I jacked that lady’s car” proves to be nothing 
but the first step of a gentleman changing a stranger’s flat 
tire. The humorous effect of this meme derives from the 
comic clash between two scripts:9 a false one that adheres 
to stereotypic conventions and the true one in which the 
stereotypes prove false.
Ryan Milner discusses the ambiguous social implica-
tions of this meme.10 On the one hand, its name, “Suc-
cessful Black Man,” hints at the racial presumption that 
the modifier “successful” needs to be inserted before the 
“black man” category in order to differentiate between this 
guy and the “regular” black man. The meme thus rein-
forces stereotypes by presenting the exception that proves 
the rule. Yet at the same time, this meme is poignant with 
a strong anti-stereotyping message: It challenges readers’ 
(often invisible) racist assumptions by presenting a coun-
terexample to each of them. The second clause can thus be 
read as “punishing” readers for their initial stereotypical 
reading.
Similarly to other prominent memes, “Successful 
Black Man” has migrated from the United States into other 
national settings. In some of them, it has been altered in 
order to make a better fit with local culture. In Israel, for 
Figure 19  “Successful Black Man.” Source: http://www.quickmeme.com/.


164 
 
ChapTER 9
example, it has been reincarnated in memes about the 
ultra-Orthodox Jews (Haredim) and the settlers in the 
West Bank (Mitnachalim). The meme “Akiva, the Human-
ist Ultra-Orthodox Man” replicates the comic mechanism 
underpinning its American ancestor: it comprises a top 
line which alludes at a stereotype strongly associated with 
the Ultra-Orthodox group, juxtaposed with a bottom line 
that turns the stereotype on its head. In the examples be-
low, the cry “Woman, to the kitchen” (hinting at strict and 
segregating gender roles in this society) turns into the sur-
prising: “you need to taste the kartoffel that I made you,” 
and the assertion “In our house we never watch movies” 
(hinting at the Haredi ban on television and films) is fol-
lowed by the contrasting modifier: “that are of lower qual-
ity than DVD-RIP.”
At first glance, the Israeli version of “Successful Black 
Man” seems to work similarly to the original American 
meme as it simultaneously confirms and subverts stereo-
types. But a closer look reveals that this is not the case. By 
tagging a name to the character, the meme conveys the 
message that we are talking about a singular exception 
that actually validates the stereotypical assumptions as-
sociated with the group. In other words: the meme tells 
us that only one specific Haredi is humanistic; the rest are 
not. Moreover, since people who encounter this meme 
are often familiar with the original “Successful Black Man” 
meme, they may interpret it not as a reflection on Israeli 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
165
Figure 20  “Akiva, the Humanist Ultra-Orthodox Man.” Source: http://
www.10gag.co.il/.

166 
 
ChapTER 9
society, but as a playful parody on the American origin. 
Thus, the strong satirical aspect embedded in the original 
meme seems to get lost in translation. This example dem-
onstrates that dividing memes to form, content and stance 
may be useful in understanding mechanisms of localiza-
tion: While the Israeli version copied the format of the 
American meme, it altered its content and satirical stance. 
A more recent example of widespread local adap-
tations of an Internet meme is that of the music video 
“Gangnam Style.” In chapter 6, I attributed this video’s 
memetic appeal to a combination of simple, repetitive, 
elements and content that seems (to most non-Korean 
viewers) completely whimsical and full of puzzling ele-
ments. This combination allows, on the one hand, easy 
imitation of some of the video’s basic features (such as the 
horse dance and the recurring expressions), and on the 
other, incorporation of a very wide arena of themes and 
topics to its derivatives.
And indeed, “Gangnam Style” has produced an as-
tounding volume of derivative videos, spanning almost 
every possible language and nationality. Given the great 
variety of contexts in which these derivatives were pro-
duced, it is striking to see the similarities in the ways users 
across the globe have reacted to the video. In particular, 
they have tended to charge the clip with local meaning 
by replacing the word “Gangnam”—which, as previously 
noted, refers to an affluent neighborhood in Seoul—with 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
167
a variety of substitute terms such as “Mexi Style,” “Rom-
ney Style,” and “Aussie Battler Style.” This wide array of ad-
aptations stems from the connotative richness of the word 
“style,” which has been described by Penelope Eckert as the 
“visible manifestation of social meanings.” Style is regarded 
in both academic and popular discourses as a pivotal as-
pect of the construction and maintenance of personal and 
collective identities.11 The various adaptations of the clip 
seem to relate to four distinct styles, or identity circles.
The first and most notable identity circle relates to 
style as an expression of national, regional, or subcul-
tural identities. Some of these clips seem to be directed 
outward, using the video as a means of attracting visitors. 
Such clips are either in English or have English subtitles. 
For instance, the creators of “Orang Sabah Style” explain: 
“Sabah is one of the states of Malaysia. It is simply a beauti-
ful place. Everyone can come and visit Sabah for tourism 
spot.” Others seem to use it in a more internal way, almost 
as a private joke. For instance, a group of young Saudis 
produced a version that includes a sarcastic reference to 
the phenomenon of young men wearing white undershirts 
and thobe pants that look more like undergarments, both 
when they are home and outside, a phenomenon that trig-
gers complaints from their wives.12 Other “internal” videos 
relate to subgroups within national settings. Thus, for in-
stance, the lyrics of “Aussie Battler Style” replace the line 
“Hey, sexy lady” with “Hey, chips and gravy,” or “Hey, we 

168 
 
ChapTER 9
love Lowndesy” (referring to the famous Australian racing 
driver Craig Lowndes).
Alongside those videos that follow the original clip in a 
depiction of a particular place, others have followed a dif-
ferent attribute of the original video, namely, its construc-
tion as social satire. Some of the most viewed clips from 
across the world build on the song’s popularity to con-
vey straightforward political messages. For instance, the 
American “Mitt Romney Style,” produced in the course of 
the presidential election campaign, depicts the Republican 
candidate as a rich and corrupt politician, who’s “got dis-
tinguished hair and a private jet that flies me way up in the 
air.” In China, a version entitled “Grass Mud Horse Style” 
(referring to the anti-censorship symbol discussed in chap-
ter 8) has been removed from local websites by govern-
ment authorities. This version featured its creator—the 
Chinese artist and political activist Ai Weiwei—dancing to 
the sounds of the original song with a pair of handcuffs 
that symbolize his arrest by Chinese authorities in 2011.
If political clips use the video’s popularity to display 
controversial points of view, “institutional” clips tend to 
build on it mainly for self-promotion. For instance, “NASA 
Johnson Style”—a parody created by no less than the 
American National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion—valorizes the cutting-edge technologies and scien-
tific work involved in sending astronauts to space. Similar 
promotion strategies have been used by a wide array of 

When Internet Memes Go Global 
 
169
organizations across the globe. In France, for example, a 
team working in a certain nightclub in the Bordeaux region 
remade the video and posted it as an explicit commercial.
Finally, the video has been used for presenting a wide 
range of personal styles, which are often created for cer-
emonial events. People have remade the clip for display 
at weddings, bar mitzvahs, and Christmas parties. While 
some of these versions use the song as a “hook” on which 
to hang lyrics depicting a specific individual’s personal 
style (for example, “Jacob’s Style”), the main mechanism 
for personalizing the general template in most of them 
is shooting the clip in vernacular and other familiar lo-
cations, using the event’s hosts and guests as the main 
protagonists. In such cases, the popularity of the original 
video serves as a common denominator between the vari-
ous guests attending the event, connecting them to each 
other through the pop culture world they inhabit.
This last point leads to a more general assertion about 
the social and cultural role of “local” meme remakes in 
a globalized world. In chapter 3, I discussed the key role 
memes play in a society based on networked individual-
ism. I argued that, on the one hand, each memetic version 
is unique, reflecting the digital literacy and creativity of 
its producers; on the other hand, adding one’s version 
of a well-known clip or template signals membership in 
a larger community that enjoys similar (pop) culture ar-
tifacts. This community is construed simultaneously as 

170 
 
ChapTER 9
global and local: the vernacular versions of “Gangnam 
Style” use the universal/Western template of dance move-
ments and rapid editing to strip the video from its origi-
nal (local Korean) context and charge it with a different, 
culture-specific meaning. Thus, if globalization is invisible 
in the case of translated verbal jokes, the story of trans-
national flows is manifested explicitly in memetic videos 
such as “Gangnam Style.”

Future Directions for 
Internet Meme Research
If you’ve made it to the last chapter of this book, I hope I 
have convinced you that:
(1)  The veteran term “meme” is highly relevant and ap-
plicable for understanding a wide range of contemporary 
behaviors, ranging from worldwide political protests to bi-
zarre Korean dance movements.
(2)  By defining Internet memes not as single units that 
propagate well but as groups of items with similar charac-
teristics, we can study memes as reflections of cultural and 
social collectives, as well as the individual voices constitut-
ing them.
(3)  The terms “viral” and “memetic” are not coextensive: 
the features that lead us to share a certain video or photo 
differ from the features that drive us to mimic or remix it.
10

172 
 
ChapTER 10
(4)  Internet memes play a key role in contemporary formu-
lations of political participation and cultural globalization.
These four points merge into a single assertion: we 
need to take Internet memes seriously. The fledgling field 
of research devoted to this understanding has already 
demonstrated that Internet memes may help us decipher 
contemporary political, cultural, and social processes. In 
this short book, I have traced some of the main trends in 
the field, but I have not been able to cover the entire range 
of possible implications of this multifarious topic. There-
fore, by way of conclusion, I wish to highlight four promis-
ing areas for meme research.
•  The politics of memetic participation  Memes do not just 
flow on the Internet in a capricious, arbitrary manner. Be-
hind each successful meme is a person—or rather, many 
people. Understanding the individuals who participate in 
the process of generating and diffusing Internet memes, 
and finding out how their participation patterns relate 
to race, ethnicity, gender, and power, is a worthwhile en-
deavor. For instance, Noam Gal’s work on “It Gets Better” 
(discussed in chapter 4) showed that even in a campaign 
energized by the liberal motto of supporting gay teenagers, 
the majority of presenters were white, young males. Fur-
ther work, spanning a wider range of case studies, would 
help us discover to what extent Internet memes do indeed 

Future Directions 
 
173
serve as alternative routes of expression for marginalized 
groups, and to what extent they reflect well-entrenched 
power structures.
•  Internet memes as a language  As elaborated in chapter 7, 
the past decade has been marked not only by the explosion 
of Internet memes, but also by their evolution into distinct 
formulas. Because memes constitute shared spheres of 
cultural knowledge, they allow us to convey complex ideas 
within a short phrase or image. Thus, instead of saying “I 
had a bad date and I feel miserable and lonely,” one can 
simply paste the “Forever Alone” character. 
This influx of shared symbols has led to the evolution of 
memes into a secondary layer of language, often comple-
menting and sometimes even replacing its standard uses. 
According to Ryan Milner, in order to use this memetic 
language correctly, one needs a certain familiarity with 
subcultural standards.1 The “right” or “wrong” way of em-
ploying memes in a discourse is never definitive—it is ne-
gotiated through continuous intergroup discussions within 
each “meme hub.” Asaf Nissenboim, who studied memetic 
practices in 4chan, found that appropriate meme use has 
become a form of cultural capital in this setting, differen-
tiating between those who are “in the know” and are thus 
part of the community and those who are outsiders.2 
If indeed memes are evolving as “the language of the In-
ternet,” future research should take on the ambitious mis-
sion of understanding how this language is used by diverse 

174 
 
ChapTER 10
groups. One of the main questions relating to this process 
has to do with global and local identities: to what extent do 
Internet memes constitute a “global” language mastered 
by billions of netizens, and to what extent do specific cul-
tures create their own discrete memetic vernaculars?
•  Memes and political change  In chapter 8, I offered an 
overview of the ways in which Internet memes are used as 
modes of political participation by citizens in democratic 
and nondemocratic countries. But while memetic activities 
empower citizens to express political opinions in new and 
creative ways, the extent to which memes actually influ-
ence political processes such as legislation or regime change 
remains unclear. For instance, although Occupy Wall Street 
was definitely a memetic success, it has failed to dent the 
status-quo, let alone generate the economic and political 
transformation it advocated. Future research could thus 
delve into the question of what constitutes an Internet 
meme’s “effect,” and how this effect can be measured.
•  Viral and memetic success  In chapter 6, I charted some 
factors that enhance viral success (that is, the probability 
that people will share a certain item), differentiating them 
from factors that enhance memetic success (that is, the 
probability that people will respond creatively to an item by 
remaking or remixing it). This distinction may have prac-
tical implications for advertisers and other professionals 
who aim at maximizing the effects of their messages. While 

Future Directions 
 
175
currently the buzzword in the advertising industry is “vi-
ral,” understanding the power of the memetic seems to be 
important in an era of growing user engagement. As argued 
in chapter 6, memetic videos compete well in contemporary 
attention economies, since each derivative strengthens the 
status of the original viral video, while at the same time the 
initial viral video helps promote its derivatives. Yet the map 
of factors that I charted in chapter 6 as augmenting mimesis 
and virality is only a first step in a long journey: presented as 
an overarching general model, it misses the more nuanced 
factors that may apply to specific genres and settings. Fu-
ture research should therefore look into distinctive factors 
enhancing virality and memetic uptake in specific genres, 
such as commercial advertising or political campaigns.
As is evident in this concluding chapter, there are con-
siderably more question marks than exclamation points in 
the state of our knowledge of Internet memes. But this 
should not deter us. Since memes are fundamental build-
ing blocks of digital culture, understanding them means 
understanding ourselves. A comprehensive tapestry of the 
ways in which memes interact with social, cultural, and po-
litical realities will require a combination of quantitative 
“big data” analysis and qualitative close reading of texts, 
as well as comparative cross-cultural studies. Hopefully, 
these challenges will be met by enthusiastic researchers, 
blessed with a tad of humor.


Glossary
Internet meme  (a) A group of digital content units sharing common char-
acteristics of content, form, and/or stance. For instance—photos featuring 
funny cats with captions share a topic (cats), form (photo + caption), and 
stance (humor). (b) These units are created with awareness of each other—
the person posting the “cat with caption” image builds on the previous cats in 
the series. (c) These units are circulated, imitated, and/or transformed via the 
Internet by many users. Internet memes are multiparticipant creative expres-
sions through which cultural and political identities are communicated and 
negotiated.
Meme  A term introduced by the biologist Richard Dawkins in his 1976 book 
The Selfish Gene. Dawkins defined memes as small cultural units of transmis-
sion, analogous to genes, which are spread from person to person by copying 
or imitation. Examples of memes in his pioneering essay include cultural arti-
facts such as melodies, catchphrases, and clothing fashions, as well as abstract 
beliefs. Like genes, memes are defined as replicators that undergo variation, 
competition, selection, and retention. At any given moment, many memes are 
competing for the attention of hosts; however, only memes suited to their 
sociocultural environment spread successfully, while others become extinct.
Virality  A diffusion process in which a certain message (such as a catchphrase, 
video, or image) spreads from one person to another via digital and social 
media platforms. The process is characterized by great speed (the number of 
people exposed to the “viral” message increases dramatically in a short time), 
and with broad reach (achieved by bridging multiple networks). The propa-
gated message is often defined as “viral content” (e.g., “viral video”). When 
viral content lures user-created derivatives in the form of re-mix or imitation, 
it can be described as “memetic.”

178 
 
Glossary
Prevalent Meme Hubs
4chan  An imageboard website on which users upload and discuss visual im-
ages. It is divided into multiple channels, or boards, with particular content 
and guidelines. The most popular board is “random” (also known as “/b/”), 
which is notorious for its wild, aggressive, and often rude style and content. 
Memes constitute an important facet of 4chan, serving as an integral part of 
many discussions. 4chan is also a major hub of the hacktivist group Anony-
mous. See http://4chan.com/.
Tumblr  A microblogging platform on which users upload short posts to a 
profile known as a tumblog. Tumblr also functions as a social networking site, 
in which Tumblrs “follow” each other. Most posts are constituted of images, 
many of which can be defined as memes. See http://www.tumblr.com.
Reddit  A content aggregation site that consists of user-generated news links. 
These links are voted up-or-down by the community members, tagged as “red-
ditors.” It contains subreddits—boards dedicated to various topics. It is known 
as a “lefty” or “geeky” hub of Internet culture and memes. See http://www 
.reddit.com/.

Notes
Chapter 2
1.  Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976); 
Susan Blackmore, The Meme Machine (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999); 
Hans-Cees Speel, “Memetics: On a Conceptual Framework for Cultural Evolu-
tion,” in The Evolution of Complexity, ed. Francis Heylighen and Diederik Aerts 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1996). 
2.  For elaboration on the term “meme” and its origins, see David L. Hull, “Tak-
ing Memetics Seriously: Memetics Will Be What We Make It,” in Darwinizing 
Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, ed. Robert Aunger (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000), 43–168.
3.  In Encyclopedia of Complexity and System Sciences, ed. Robert A. Meyers 
(New York: Springer, 2009), http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Memetics-
Springer.pdf.
4.  Henry Jenkins, Xiaochang Li, Ana Domb Krauskopf, and Joshua Green, “If 
It Doesn’t Spread, It’s Dead (Part One): Media Viruses and Memes,” Feb. 11, 
2009, http://henryjenkins.org/2009/02/if_it_doesnt_spread_its_dead_p.html.
5.  Rosaria Conte, “Memes Through (Social) Minds,” in Darwinizing Culture: 
The Status of Memetics as a Science, ed. Robert Aunger (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2000), 83–120.
6.  Colin Lankshear and Michele Knobel, A New Literacies Sampler (New York: 
Peter Lang, 2007).
7.  On memes as folklore, see Lynne McNeill, “The End of the Internet: A Folk 
Response to the Provision of Infinite Choice,” in Folklore and the Internet, ed. 
Trevor J. Blank (Logan: Utah University Press, 2009), 80–97.
Chapter 3
1.  One of the first accounts of the intersection between memes and the Inter-
net can be found in Francis Heylighen and Klaas Chielens, “Cultural Evolution 
and Memetics,” in Encyclopedia of Complexity and System Science, ed. Robert A. 
Meyers, http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Memetics-Springer.pdf.
2.  Nicholas John, “Sharing and Web 2.0: The Emergence of a Keyword,” 
New Media and Society (published online before print, July 3, 2012, doi: 

180 
 
Notes
10.1177/14614448124506). See also Nicholas John, “The Social Logics of 
Sharing,” Communication Review (forthcoming).
3.  Daniel Gilmore, “Another Brick in the Wall: Public Space, Visual Hegemonic 
Resistance, and the Physical/Digital Continuum,” Communication Theses, paper 
91 (MA thesis, Georgia State University, 2012).
4.  Henrik Bjarneskans, Bjarne Grønnevik, and Anders Sandberg, “The Life-
cycle of Memes” (1999), http://www.aleph.se/Trans/Cultural/Memetics/
memecycle.html.
5.  Alice Marwick and danah boyd, “I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: 
Twitter Users, Context Collapse, and the Imagined Audience,” New Media and 
Society 13 (2011): 96–113.
6.  For more on attention economy, see Richard A. Lanham, The Economics of 
Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of Information (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2006).
7.  Jean Burgess, “All Your Chocolate Rain Are Belong to Us? Viral Video, 
YouTube, and the Dynamics of Participatory Culture,” in Video Vortex Reader: 
Responses to YouTube, ed. Geert Lovink and Sabine Niederer (Amsterdam: In-
stitute of Network Cultures, 2008), 101–109.
Chapter 4
1.  An elaborated account of the “mentalist approach,” as well as a most illumi-
nating discussion of memes, can be found in Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dan-
gerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York: Touchstone, 1995).
2.  For a detailed discussion of the “behavioral” approach, see Derek Gatherer, 
“Why the ‘Thought Contagion’ Metaphor Is Retarding the Progress of Memet-
ics,” Journal of Memetics—Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission, 
http://jom-emit.cfpm.org/1998/vol2/gatherer_d.html.
3.  Patrick Davidson suggests using the dimension of “behavior” in addition 
to the dimensions of ideas and their expression. I think this dimension is par-
ticularly applicable to the analysis of genres, as I will outline in chapter 7. See 
Patrick Davidson, “The Language of (Internet) Memes,” in The Social Media 
Reader, ed. Michael Mandiberg (New York: NYU Press, 2012), 120–127.
4.  Susan U. Philips, “Participant Structures and Communicative Compe-
tence: Warm Springs Children in Community and Classroom,” in Functions 
of Language in the Classroom, ed. Courtney B. Cazden, Vera P. John, and Dell 
H. Hymes (New York: Teachers College Press, 1972), 370–394; Shoshana 

Notes 
 
181
Blum-Kulka, Deborah Huck-Taglicht, and Hanna Avni, “The Social and Dis-
cursive Spectrum of Peer Talk,” Discourse Studies 6, no. 3 (2004): 307–328, doi: 
10.1177/1461445604044291; Roman Jakobson, “Linguistics and Poetics,” in 
Style in Language, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960), 
350–377.
5.  For further analysis of “Leave Britney Alone,” see Aymar Jean Christian, 
“Camp 2.0: A Queer Performance of the Personal,” Communication, Culture, and 
Critique 13, no. 3 (2010): 352–376; Nick Salvato, “Out of Hand: YouTube Ama-
teurs and Professionals,” Drama Review 53, no. 3 (2009): 67–83. 
6.  Noam Gal, “Internet Memes and the Construction of Collective Identity: 
The Case of ‘It Gets Better’” (unpublished MA thesis, The Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem, 2012). 
Chapter 5
1.  Jeff Hemsley and Robert M. Mason, “The Nature of Knowledge in the So-
cial Media Age: Implications for Knowledge Management Models,” Journal of 
Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce 23, no. 1–2 (2013):138–176.
2.  Both types of videos can be relegated to what Jenkins et al. term spreadable 
media (“If It Doesn’t Spread, It’s Dead [Part One]: Media Viruses and Memes,” 
Feb. 11, 2009, http://henryjenkins.org/2009/02/if_it_doesnt_spread_its_
dead_p.html). While I agree with Jenkins’s criticism about the fuzziness of 
previous descriptions of viral media and Internet memes, I suggest that we 
should not abandon these terms, but rather attempt to define them better. 
3.  This does not mean that studies on this issue use only the word viral, but 
that this is a key term in this tradition. Prominent works that deal with the ac-
tors involved in online diffusion processes are Jure Leskovec, Lars Backstrom, 
and Jon Kleinberg, “Meme-Tracking and the Dynamics of the News Cycle,” in 
Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining (Paris, June 28–July 1, 2009); and Gabe Ignatow and 
Alexander T. Williams, “New Media and the ‘Anchor Baby’ Boom,” Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication 17, no. 1 (2011): 60.
4.  Lada A. Adamic, Thomas M. Lento, and Andrew T. Fiore, “How You Met 
Me” (short paper, International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Me-
dia, Dublin, June 4–7, 2012), http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ 
ICWSM12/paper/view/4681; Matthew P. Simmons, Lada A. Adamic, and Ey-
tan Adar, “Memes Online: Extracted, Subtracted, Injected, and Recollected” 
(short paper, International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 

182 
 
Notes
Barcelona, July 17–21, 2011), http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/
ICWSM11/paper/view/2836/3281.
Chapter 6
1.  Jonah Berger and Katherine Milkman, “What Makes Online Content Vi-
ral?,” Journal of Marketing Research, 49 no. 2 (2012): 192–205.
2.  For elaboration on the centrality of humor in “viral” circulation, see Jo-
seph Phelps, Regina Lewis, Lynne Mobilio, David Perry, and Niranjan Raman, 
“Viral Marketing or Electronic Word-of-Mouth Advertising: Examining Con-
sumer Responses and Motivations to Pass along Email,” Journal of Advertis-
ing Research 45, no.4 (2004): 333–348; Guy Golan and Lior Zaidner, “Creative 
Strategies in Viral Advertising: An Application of Taylor’s Six-Segment Mes-
sage Strategy Wheel,” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13, no. 4 
(2008): 1083–6101.
3.  Jenkins Blaise, “Consumer Sharing of Viral Video Advertisements: A Look 
into Message and Creative Strategy Typologies and Emotional Content: A Cap-
stone Project” (MA thesis, American University, 2011), http://www.american 
.edu/soc/communication/upload/blaise-jenkins.pdf.
4.  See Ethan Zuckerman’s comprehensive blog post, “Unpacking Kony 2012,” 
http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/2012/03/08/unpacking-kony-2012/.
5.  Ethan Zukerman, “Useful reads on Kony 2012,” http://www.ethanzucker 
man.com/blog/2012/03/14/useful-reads-on-kony-2012/.
6.  Oliver Hinz, Bernd Skiera, Christian Barrot, and Jan Becker, “Seeding Strat-
egies for Viral Marketing: An Empirical Comparison,” Journal of Marketing 75, 
no. 6 (2011), http://www.marketingpower.com/AboutAMA/Documents/JM_
Forthcoming/seeding_strategies_for_viral.pdf.
7.  Gilad Lotan, “KONY2012: See How Invisible Networks Helped a Campaign 
Capture the World’s Attention,” http://blog.socialflow.com/post/7120244932/
data-viz-kony2012-see-how-invisible-networks-helped-a-campaign-capture 
-the-worlds-attention.
8.  Niklas Odén and Richard Larsson, “What Makes a Marketing Campaign a 
Viral Success? A Descriptive Model Exploring the Mechanisms of Viral Market-
ing,” Umeå University, Faculty of Social Sciences, Department of Informatics, 
http://www.essays.se/essay/a028b08bc6/.
9.  W. Lance Bennett and Alexandra Segerberg, “The Logic of Connective Ac-
tion,” Information, Communication, and Society 15, no. 5 (2012): 739–768.

Notes 
 
183
10.  Grant Meacham, “#Occupy: The Power of Revolution When It Becomes 
Memetic,” Nov. 4, 2011, http://d-build.org/blog/?p=2995.
11.   Limor Shifman, “An Anatomy of a YouTube Meme,” New Media and Society 
14, no. 2 (2012):187–203.
12.  Jean Burgess and Joshua Green, YouTube: Online Video and Participatory 
Culture (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2009).
13.  Colin Lankshear and Michele Knobel, A New Literacies Sampler (New York: 
Peter Lang, 2007).
14.  Richard J. Pech, “Memes and Cognitive Hardwiring: Why Are Some Memes 
More Successful Than Others?,” European Journal of Innovation Management 6, 
no. 3 (2003):173–181.
15.  Henry Jenkins, Xiaochang Li, Ana Domb Krauskopf, and Joshua Green, 
“If It Doesn’t Spread, It’s Dead (Part One): Media Viruses and Memes,” Feb. 
11, 2009, http://henryjenkins.org/2009/02/if_it_doesnt_spread_its_dead_p 
.html.
16.  John Fiske, Television Culture (London: Methuen, 1987).
Chapter 7
1.  Wanda J. Orlikowski and JoAnne Yates, “Genre Repertoire: The Structur-
ing of Communicative Practices in Organizations,” Administrative Science Quar-
terly 39 (1994), 541–574. 
2.  Jean Elizabeth Burgess, “Vernacular Creativity and New Media” (PhD diss., 
Queensland University of Technology, Australia, 2007).
3.  Ryan M. Milner, “The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in Par-
ticipatory Media” (PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012). Although meme 
creation has been simplified in the last decade, varying degrees of technologi-
cal proficiency are applied for their creation: savvy Photoshoppers or editors 
“break the mold” more easily than others and thus stand out.
4.  An illuminating analysis of Photoshop-based humor and the visual aspects 
underpinning Internet humor can be found in Giselinde Kuipers, “Media Cul-
ture and Internet Disaster Jokes: Bin Laden and the Attack on the World Trade 
Center,” European Journal of Cultural Studies 5 (2002): 451–471.
5.  Virág Molnár, “Reframing Public Space through Digital Mobilization: Flash 
Mobs and the Futility(?) of Contemporary Urban Youth Culture” (2009), 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/91277534/Reframing-Public-Space. 

184 
 
Notes
6.  Joshua Walden, “Lip-sync in Lipstick: 1950s Popular Songs in a Television 
Series by Dennis Potter,” Journal of Musicological Research 27 (2008): 169–195.
7.  Dan Zak, “Office Drones, Lip-Sync Your Heart Out,” Washington Post, 
Nov. 11, 2007, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/ 
2007/11/08/AR2007110802060.html.
8.  Graeme Turner, Ordinary People and the Media (London: Sage, 2009).
9.  Lori Kendall, “Beyond Media Producers and Consumers: Online Multime-
dia Productions as Interpersonal Communication,” Information, Communica-
tion, and Society 11, no. 2 (2008): 207–220.
10.  Aaron Schwabach, “Reclaiming Copyright From the Outside In: What the 
Downfall Hitler Meme Means for Transformative Works, Fair Use, and Parody,” 
Buffalo Intellectual Property Law Journal (2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2040538.
11.  Kathleen Amy Williams, “Fake and Fan Film Trailers as Incarnations of 
Audience Anticipation and Desire, Transformative Works and Cultures 9 (2012), 
http://journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/360.
12.  Ibid., 2.
13.  Kate Miltner, “Srsly Phenomenal: An Investigation into the Appeal of LOL-
Cats” (MA thesis, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2011).
14.  Lee Knuttila, “User Unknowns: 4chan, Anonymity, and Contingency,” First 
Monday 16, no. 10 (2012), http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/ 
index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/3665/3055.
15.  Milner, “The World Made Meme,” 66.
16.  Ibid., 70.
Chapter 8
1.  Limor Shifman, Stephen Coleman, and Stephen Ward, “Only Joking? On-
line Humour in the 2005 UK General Election,” Information, Communication, 
and Society, 10, no. 4 (2007): 465–487.
2.  On the role of new media in these protests, see Zeynep Tufekci and Chris-
topher Wilson, “Social Media and the Decision to Participate in Political Pro-
test: Observations from Tahrir Square,” Journal of Communication 62, no. 12 
(2012): 363–379; Gilad Lotan, Erhardt Graeff, Mike Ananny, Devin Gaffney, 
Ian Pearce, and danah boyd, “The Revolutions Were Tweeted: Information 
Flows During the 2011 Tunisian and Egyptian Revolutions,” International 

Notes 
 
185
Journal of Communication 5 (2012): 1375–1405. A critical analysis of the role 
of new media in these protests can be found in Gadi Wolfsfeld, Tamir Sheafer, 
and Elad Segev, “The Social Media and the Arab Spring: Politics Always Comes 
First,” International Journal of Press/Politics 18, no. 2 (2013): 115–137. 
3.  W. Lance Bennett and Alexandra Segerberg, “The Logic of Connective Ac-
tion,” Information, Communication, and Society 15, no. 5 (2012): 739–768.
4.  Ryan Milner, “The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in Participa-
tory Media” (PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012).
5.  Elihu Katz and Paul Lazarsfeld, Personal Influence (Glencoe, IL: Free Press 
of Glencoe, 1955).
6.  Travis Ridout, Erika Franklin Fowler, and John Branstetter, “Political 
Advertising in the 21st Century: The Rise of the YouTube Ad” (paper pre-
sented at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, 
Washington, DC, September 2–5, 2010), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers 
.cfm?abstract_id=1642853.
7.  Kevin Wallsten, “Yes We Can: How Online Viewership, Blog Discussion, 
Campaign Statements, and Mainstream Media Coverage Produced a Viral 
Video Phenomenon,” Journal of Information, Technology, and Politics 7, nos. 2–3 
(2010): 163–181.
8.  Karine Nahon, Jeff Hemsley, Shawn Walker, and Muzammil Hussain, “Fif-
teen Minutes of Fame: The Place of Blogs in the Life Cycle of Viral Political 
Information,” Policy and Internet 3, no. 1 (2011). 
9.   Bennett and Segerberg, “The Logic of Connective Action.”
10.  Nathan Schneider, “From Occupy Wall Street to Occupy Everywhere,” Na-
tion, October 31, 2011.
11.  Geniesa Tay, “Embracing LOLitics: Popular Culture, Online Political Hu-
mor, and Play” (MA thesis, University of Canterbury, 2012).
12.  Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (New York: Dou-
bleday, 1959). 
13.  On various forms of scandals and talk scandals, see John B. Thompson, 
Political Scandal: Power and Visibility in the Media Age (Cambridge: Polity, 2000); 
Mats Ekstrom and Bengt Johansson, “Talk Scandals,” Media, Culture, and Soci-
ety 30, no. 1 (2008): 61–79.
14.  Jonathan Alan Gray, Jeffrey P. Jones, and Ethan Thompson, “The State of 
Satire, the Satire of State,” in Satire TV: Politics and Comedy in the Post-Network 

186 
 
Notes
Era, ed. Jonathan Alan Gray, Jeffrey Jones, and Ethan Thompson (New York: 
NYU Press, 2009), 3–36.
15.  Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide 
(New York: NYU Press, 2008).
16.  Christopher Rea, “Spoofing (e’gao) Culture on the Chinese Internet,” in 
Humor in Chinese Life and Letters: Modern and Contemporary Approaches, ed. Jes-
sica Milner Davis and Jocelyn Chey (Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 
forthcoming).
17.  Jiang Zemin, cited in Xi Chen, “Dynamics of News Media Regulations in 
China: Explanations and Implications,” Journal of Comparative Asian Develop-
ment 5 (2006): 49–64.
18.  Rea, “Spoofing (e’gao) Culture on the Chinese Internet.”
19.  Shaojung Sharon Wang, “China’s Internet Lexicon: The Symbolic Meaning 
and Commoditization of Grass Mud Horse in the Harmonious Society,” First 
Monday 17, nos. 1–2 (2012), http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/
ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3758/3134.
20.  Ibid.
21.  Lillian Boxman-Shabtai, “Ethnic Humor in the Digital Age: A Reevalua-
tion” (MA thesis, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2012).
Chapter 9
1.  John Tomlinson, Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Introduction (London: 
Pinter, 1991).
2.  Shani Orgad, “The Cultural Dimensions of Online Communication: A Study 
of Breast Cancer Patients’ Internet Spaces,” New Media and Society 8, no. 6 
(2006): 877–899; Charles Ess and Fay Sudweeks, “Culture and Computer-
Mediated Communication: Toward New Understanding,” Journal of Computer 
Mediated Communication 11, no. 1, article 9 (2005), http://jcmc.indiana.edu/
vol11/issue1/ess.html.
3.  Roland Robertson, “Glocalization: Time-Space and Homogeneity-Hetero-
geneity,” in Global Modernities, ed. Mike Featherstone, Scott Lash, and Roland 
Robertson (London: Sage, 1995), 25–44, 28.
4.  Robert McChesney, “So Much for the Magic of Technology and the Free 
Market: The World Wide Web and the Corporate Media System,” in The World 
Wide Web and Contemporary Cultural Theory, ed. Andrew Herman and Thomas 

Notes 
 
187
Swiss (London: Routledge, 2000), 5–35; N. A. John, “The Construction of the 
Multilingual Internet: Unicode, Hebrew, and Globalization,” Journal of Com-
puter-Mediated Communication 18 (2013) 321–338. 
5.  David Crystal, “The Future of Englishes,” in Analyzing English in a Global 
Context, ed. Ann Burns and Caroline Coffin (London: Routledge, 2001), 53–64.
6.  Limor Shifman and Mike Thelwall, “Assessing Global Diffusion with Web 
Memetics: The Spread and Evolution of a Popular Joke,” Journal of the Ameri-
can Society for Information Science and Technology 60, no. 12 (2009): 2567–2576.
7.  For elaboration on Internet-based “Mars and Venus” humor, see Limor Shif-
man and Dafna Lemish, “‘Mars and Venus’ in Virtual Space: Post-feminist Hu-
mor and the Internet,” Critical Studies in Media Communication 28, no. 3 (2011): 
253–273; Limor Shifman and Dafna Lemish, “Between Feminism and Fun(ny)
mism: Analyzing Gender in Popular Internet Humor,” Information, Communica-
tion, and Society 13, no. 6 (2010): 870–891.
8.  Limor Shifman, Hadar Levy, and Mike Thelwall, “Internet Memes as Glo-
balizing Agents?” (paper presented at the Association of Internet Researchers 
[AoIR] 13th Conference, Salford, England, October 2012).
9.  On humor as based on opposing scripts, see Victor Raskin, Semantic Mecha-
nisms of Humor (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985).
10.  Milner, “The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in Participatory 
Media” (PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012), 179–182.
11.  Penelope Eckert, “The Meaning of Style,” in SALSA XI: Proceedings of the 
Eleventh Annual Symposium about Language and Society, ed. Wai Fong Chiang, 
Elaine Chun, Laura Mahalingappa, and Siri Mehus (Austin: Texas Linguistics 
Forum, 2004).
12.  See http://english.alarabiya.net/articles/2012/11/04/247600.html.
Chapter 10
1.  Milner, “The World Made Meme: Discourse and Identity in Participatory 
Media” (PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012).
2.  Asaf Nissenboim, “Lurk More, It’s Never Enough: Memes as Social Capital 
on 4chan” (MA thesis, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, in progress).
 


Further Readings
Aunger, Robert, ed. Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Blackmore, Susan. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Burgess, Jean, and Joshua Green. YouTube: Online Video and Participatory Cul-
ture. Malden, MA: Polity, 2009.
Coleman, Gabriella. Coding Freedom: The Ethics and Aesthetics of Hacking. 
Prince­ton: Princeton University Press, 2012.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Dennett, Daniel C. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. 
New York: Touchstone, 1995.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: NYU Press, 2006.
Jenkins, Henry, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Value 
and Meaning in a Networked Culture. New York: NYU Press, 2013.
Lanham, Richard A. The Economics of Attention: Style and Substance in the Age of 
Information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Lankshear, Colin, and Michele Knobel. A New Literacies Sampler. New York: 
Peter Lang, 2007.
Milner, Ryan M. The world made meme: Discourse and identity in participa-
tory media. PhD diss., University of Kansas, 2012.
189 
  Further Readings


Index
Note: Page numbers in italic type indicate illustrations.
Abargil, Eden, 92
Abdul-Jabbar, Kareem, 126
Action, political memes as, 123, 
127–138
Adbusters (magazine), 130, 132
“Advice Animals,” 112
“Advice Dog,” 112
Advocacy. See Persuasion
Aesthetic logic, 34
Agency, in meme diffusion, 12, 35
Ai Weiwei, 168
“Akiva, the Humanist Ultra-Ortho-
dox Man,” 164, 165, 166
Amazon reviews, 19
Americanization, 152, 154, 161
“Angry German Kid,” 77, 79, 84
“Annoying Facebook Girl,” 113
Anonymous (hacktivist group), 178
Arab Spring, 122, 185n2
“Arab Style,” 1, 167
Aristotle, 81
Attention economy, 32–33, 175
Attention philanthropy, 70
Audiovisual incongruity, 80
“Aussie Battler Style,” 167–168
Avant-garde, 104
“Awa” stories, 67–68
“Bachelor Frog,” 112
“Back-Dorm Boys,” 106
Backstage, 140–141, 143
Backstreet Boys, 106
Back to the Future (film), 109
“Bad Argument Hippie,” 113
Beatles, 109
Bedroom lipdubs, 105–106
Behavior-driven memetics, 38
Bennett, Lance, 6, 72, 123, 127–129
“Benny Lava,” 108
Berger, Jonah, 61, 66, 67, 69, 70
Berlin Wall, 141
Beyoncé, 83
“Bibi Gump,” 141, 142
Bieber, Justin, 48, 70
“Binders Full of Women,” 2, 3, 4
Bin Laden, Osama, 141
“Biological analogies” controversy, 
11–12
Bjarneskans, Henrik, 26
Black, Rebecca, 48, 51, 68, 92
Blackmore, Susan, 12, 20
Meme Machine, The, 11, 39
Blogs, 61, 126–127
Blum-Kulka, Shoshanna, 40
Boxman-Shabtai, Lillian, 150
Boyle, Susan, 68
Branstetter, John, 124–125
Bridges, 71
Brokeback Mountain (film), 109
Brolsma, Gari, 106
“Bubble Girl,” 92, 93
Buffalax, 108
Burgess, Jean, 6, 34, 62, 75, 99–100

192 
 
Index
Carey, James, 60–62
Celebrities
memetic photos and, 92
memetic videos and, 74–76
political virals and, 126
viral videos and, 69–70
Censorship, 144–146, 148
“Charlie Bit My Finger,” 20, 21, 74, 
80, 84
Chielens, Klaas, 10
China, subversive memes in, 
144–149, 168
“Chocolate Rain,” 77, 80, 82
Cicierega, Neil, 108
Citizen empowerment, 127
Clinton, Bill, 140
Coadapted meme complexes, 10
Colbert, Stephen, 143
Collective action, 127–128
Collective identity, 49–50, 60. See 
also Group identity
Collective lipdubs, 106–107
Commercial campaigns, 72
Communication
functions of, 41, 45
as ritual, 60–62
as transmission, 60–62
Community
genres’ role in construction of, 
100
global memes and, 169–170
memetic activities and, 30, 33–34, 
61–62
YouTube as, 76
Competition, meme diffusion 
through, 22–23
Conative communication, 41, 45
Connective action, 128–129
Conte, Rosaria, 12
Content
characteristics of memetic, 73–94, 
95, 96–97, 174–175
characteristics of viral, 65–73, 94, 
95, 96–97, 174–175
of cultural items, 40
of “Leave Britney Alone” and 
derivatives, 44, 46, 49
of “Pepper-Spraying Cop” deriva-
tives, 51
Copy fidelity, 17
Corker, Chris, 83
Countermemes, 130, 132, 134
“Courage Wolf,” 112
Crocker, Chris, 42–49, 56, 77
Cultural evolution, 9–12
Cultural logic, 34
Culture jamming, 130, 131
Cynicism, 48
Dadaists, 104
“David after Dentist,” 77, 81
Davidson, Patrick, 62, 180n3
Davies-Carr, Harry and Charlie, 20
Dawkins, Richard, 2, 9–11, 17, 37, 
39, 56
Democracy, as meme, 10
Democratic subversion, 144–149
Dennett, Daniel C., 10, 37
Derivatives, 2, 32, 43, 45, 48, 56, 58, 
63, 73–76, 86, 166–169. See also 
Emulations; Mimicry; Versions
Deva, Prabhu, 108
DiCaprio, Leonardo, 92, 93
Diffusion
human agency in, 12
studies of memetic, 38–39
Digital literacy, 23, 33, 82, 115, 117, 
169

Index 
 
193
“Disaster Girl,” 90, 91
Discourse, political memes as, 123, 
127–138, 150
Dylan, Jesse, 126
Eckert, Penelope, 167
Economy-driven logic, 32–33
Editing software, 100, 105, 130. See 
also Photoshop
Egalitarian memes, 58
Ellen DeGeneres Show (television 
show), 125
Emotional arousal, 67–68, 96
Emotive communication, 41, 45
Emulations, 20, 33, 46, 48, 82, 89. 
See also Derivatives; Mimicry; 
Versions
English language, 154
Evolution, 9–12
“Evolution of Dance,” 46, 74, 82, 83, 84
Facebook, 18, 19, 120, 141
“Fail” memes, 117
Fecundity, 17
“Female College Liberal,” 113
Fiske, John, 88
Flash mobs, 103–104
Flawed masculinity, 76–78
“Forever Alone,” 115, 117, 173
Form, 40, 41, 44, 46, 50, 51, 53, 
99–118
Founder-based memes, 58
4chan, 13, 112, 113, 115, 118, 149, 
173, 178
Fowler, Erika, 124–125
“Friday,” 68, 92
Frontstage, 140
“Frowning Flower Girl,” 90, 91, 92
Frozen motion, 92, 93, 94
Gal, Noam, 49–50, 172
“Gangnam Style,” 1–2, 3, 4, 85–86, 
166–170
Gay (LGBT), 42, 44, 48, 49, 172
Gay teen suicide, 49
Genes, 9, 11–12
Genotype–phenotype dichotomy,  
37
Genres, 54, 99–118
defined, 99
flash mobs, 103–104
lipsynch and lipdub, 105–107
LOLCats, 110–112
misheard lyrics, 108–109
photo fads, 102–103
rage comics, 113, 115
reaction Photoshops, 100, 102
recut trailers, 109–110
stock character macros, 112–113
types of, 118
Gilmore, Daniel, 24
“Girlfriend,” 82
Globalization
defining, 152
directionality of, 152, 154–155
Internet role in, 152, 154–155
and language, 154–161, 174
user-generated, 155–170
Global memes, 155–170
Glocalization, 152, 154, 157
God, as meme, 9, 37
Goffman, Erving, 40, 140
Golan, Guy, 67
“Good Guy Greg,” 112
“Grass Mud Horse,” 146, 148, 168
Green, Joshua, 75
Green, Seth, 48
Greenpeace, 128
Groønnevik, Bjarne, 26

194 
 
Index
Group identity, 127. See also Collec-
tive identity
Guzli, Peter, 102
Hacktivists, 178
“Heads in Freezers,” 28, 30, 103
Hemsley, Jeff, 55
Hering, Ewald, 10
Heylighen, Francis, 10
“Hitler’s Downfall Parodies,” 2, 58
Hobbes, Thomas, 81
Hofstadter, Douglas, 10
Hubs, 71
Huizinga, Johan, 79
Hu Jintao, 145
Human agency, 12, 35
Humor
in memetic content, 78–81, 94
sharing of, 96
verbal, global transmission of, 
155–161
in viral content, 67, 94
visual/audiovisual, 161–170
“Hyakugojyuuichi” (song), 108
Hypermemetic logic, 4, 23–24, 30
I Can Has Cheezburger? (image-
posting board), 111
Identity. See Collective identity; 
Group identity; Self, memetic 
fashioning of
Image juxtaposition, 90, 91, 92
Image macros, 110–112, 115, 117
Imitation. See Memetic activities
Inclusive memetic approach, 39
Incompleteness, 86, 88
Incongruity
audiovisual, 80
humorous, 79–80
puzzling, 90, 92, 97
Internet memes
attributes of, 2, 4, 6, 18–23
author’s definition of, 7–8, 41, 
177
communication theory and, 60–62
defining, 2, 13, 37–54 (see also 
author’s definition of)
diffusion of, 53
as folklore, 15
future research on, 171–176
genres of, 99–118
global, 155–170
as language, 173–174
memes compared to, 13, 15, 
17–18, 24, 28, 30, 149–150
modes of engagement with,  
59–60
political, 119–150
political impact of, 174
properties of, 17
rise in the digital era, 13
visual nature of, 150
Intertextuality, 2, 4, 56, 150
Invisible Children, 68
Irony, 48, 49
“It Gets Better,” 49–50, 172
Jakobson, Roman, 41, 45
Jaws (film), 110
Jenkins, Henry, 11, 88, 236, 143, 
181n2
Jenkins, Leeroy (fictional character), 
77, 84
Jiang Zemin, 145, 146
Johansson, Scarlett, 126
John, Nicholas, 19
Journal of Memetics, 10
Juxtaposition of images, 90, 91, 92

Index 
 
195
“Kalluri Vaanil” (song), 108
Katz, Elihu, 124
Kestermann, Rolf, 126
“Keyboard Cat,” 51
Keying, 40, 44, 48, 53
Kilroy, James J., 24
“Kilroy Was Here,” 24, 26, 27, 28
Knobel, Michele, 6, 13, 62, 78
Know Your Meme (website), 13, 89, 
102, 141
Kony, Joseph, 68, 69
“Kony 2012,” 68, 69, 70, 71, 72
Lange, Patricia, 76
Language
and culture, 158
Internet globalization and, 
154–161, 174
Internet memes as, 173–174
Lankshear, Colin, 6, 13, 62, 78
Larsson, Richard, 72
Lasn, Kalle, 130
Lavigne, Avril, 82
Lazarsfeld, Paul, 124
“Leave Britney Alone,” 2, 42–49, 53, 
56, 77, 79, 82
“Leave Justin Bieber Alone,” 48
“Leave Rebecca Black Alone,” 48
“Leonardo DiHapprio,” 93
Levy, Hadar, 158
Lewinsky, Monica, 140
Lipsynch and lipdub, 15, 80, 
105–107
“Little Baby Panda,” 51
“Little Superstar,” 77
Lodwick, Jakob, 107
LOLCats, 58, 110–112
Longevity, 17
Los Indignados, 128
Lotan, Gilad, 71
Lowndes, Craig, 168
Lynch, Aaron, 37
“Make a Woman Happy,” 159–160
Marriage proposals, 23–24, 25
“Mars and Venus” stereotypes, 157
Mary Poppins (film), 109
Masculinity, 76–78
Mason, Robert, 55
Meacham, Grant, 73
“Me Gusta,” 115
Meme hubs, 13, 132, 149, 173,  
178
Meme literacy, 100, 173
Memeplexes, 10
Memes. See also Internet memes
in communication field, 6–7
controversies over, 2, 4, 6, 11–12, 
37
defining, 2, 7, 9, 37, 177
digital culture as site for, 4, 6–7, 
17–35
egalitarian, 58
founder-based, 58
history of term, 2, 9–11
Internet memes compared to, 13, 
15, 17–18, 24, 28, 30, 149–150
nature of, 37–39
properties of, 17
study of, 10–11
vehicles for, 37–38
virals vs., 7, 55–63
Meme subculture, 100, 115, 118
Memetic activities. See also De-
rivatives; Emulations; Mimicry; 
Versions
and community, 30, 33–34, 61–62
complexity of, 48–49

196 
 
Index
Memetic activities (cont.)
content characteristics of, 73–94, 
95, 96–97, 174–175
dimensions of, 40, 53–54
elicitation of, through gaps and 
incompleteness, 86, 88, 94
elicitation of, through memetic 
potential and puzzles/problems, 
97
logics behind, 32–34
politics of, 172–173
Memetic photos
content characteristics of, 89–94
frozen motion in, 92, 94
juxtaposition in, 90–92
political, 138–144
reactions to, 90, 94, 100, 102
Memetics, 10–11, 13, 37–39
Memetic videos
common characteristics of, 73–89
flawed masculinity, 76–78
humor, 78–81
ordinary people, 74–76
as a practice, 88–89
repetitiveness, 82–83
simplicity, 81–82
whimsy, 84
Mentalist-driven memetics, 37–38
Metadata, 22
Metalingual communication, 41
Milkman, Katherine, 61, 66, 67, 
69, 70
Milner, Ryan, 6, 62, 100, 115, 117, 
118, 123, 132, 136, 149, 162, 
173
Miltner, Kate, 111–112
Mimicry, 20, 22. See also Deriva-
tives; Emulations; Versions
Mind–body dichotomy, 37
Misheard lyrics, 108–109
“Miss Teenage South Carolina,” 76, 
79, 81
“Mitt Romney Style, 1
Mneme, 10
Molnár, Virág, 104
Monroe, Marilyn, 51
Movie trailers, fake, 109–110
Nahon, Karine, 61, 127
“Naive College Freshman,” 113
“NASA Johnson Style,” 168
National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA), 168
Netanyahu, Benjamin, 141
Networked individualism, 30, 
33–34, 106, 129. See also Self, 
memetic fashioning of
New media, political participation 
through, 120, 122. See also 
Social media; Web 2.0
New York Times (newspaper), 66, 70
Nissenboim, Asaf, 173
“Numa Numa,” 15, 77, 80, 82, 83, 
106
“Nyan Cat,” 2
Obama, Barack, 122, 125, 126, 140, 
150
“Obama Girl,” 124
“Occupy Star Wars,” 139
Occupy Wall Street, 50, 73, 128, 
129–130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 
138, 174
Odén, Niklas, 72
“Orang Sabah Style,” 167
Ordinary people
in memetic photos, 92
in memetic videos, 74–76

Index 
 
197
in political memes, 134
Owling, 103
Packaging, 69, 94, 96. See also 
Repackaging
“Paper Planes,” 76
Parodies, 46–48
Participation, virality dependent on, 
72–73, 94, 96. See also Political 
participation
Participation structures, 40, 44
Participatory culture. See also Web 
2.0
characteristics of, 4, 18
incompleteness as invitation to, 
86, 88, 94
political participation on Internet, 
120, 122
as subject and agent of memetic 
videos, 89
“Peanut Butter Jelly Time,” 74, 
82–83
Pennies from Heaven (television 
series), 105
“Pepper-Spraying Cop,” 50–51, 52, 
53, 58, 92
Personalized content sharing, 
72–73
Personal webcams, 105
Persuasion, 122–127
Phatic communication, 41, 45
Phelps, Joseph, 61, 67
Phenotypes, 38
Phillips, Susan, 40
Phonetic translation, 108–109
Photo fads, 102–103
Photographs. See Memetic photos
Photoshop, 2, 15, 22, 51, 89, 90, 
100, 102, 143, 150
Pike, John, 50–51, 92
Planking, 28, 29, 30, 103
Plato, 81
Playfulness, 79, 84
Poetic communication, 41
“Poker Face,” 115
Political jokes, 149–150
Political memes, 119–150
as action, 123, 127–138
critical use of, 141, 143–149
as democratic subversion, 144–149
as discourse, 123, 127–138, 150
functions of, 122–123
as persuasion, 122–127
photos as, 138–144
political participation through, 72, 
120, 122, 144
popular culture in, 136, 138
Political participation, 72, 120, 122, 
144
Politics
as content, 51, 79, 119–150
Internet memes’ impact on, 174
of memetic activities, 172–173
scandals in, 140
Polysemy, 150
Popular culture
audiences’ relationship with, 110
memes based on, 51
in memetic videos, 84
in political memes, 136, 138
Positioning, 70–71, 96
Positivity, 66–67, 94
Postmodernism, 15
Potter, Dennis, 105
Presidential campaigns
2008, 120, 122, 124–127
2012, 4, 168
Prestige, 69–70, 96

198 
 
Index
PSY, 1, 85
Public relations, 107
“Put People First,” 129
“Put Shoe on Head,” 103
Puzzles/problems, memetic re-
sponses to, 90, 92, 97
Rage comics, 58, 113, 115, 116, 117
Rage Guy, 113, 115
“Rage Makers” websites, 115
Rea, Christopher, 145, 146
Reaction Photoshops, 90, 94, 100, 102
Recut trailers, 109–110
Reddit, 13, 118, 132, 149, 178
Referential communication, 41, 45
Remixing, 20, 22, 118
Repackaging, 19–20, 22. See also 
Packaging
Repetitiveness, 82–83, 88
Ridout, Travis, 124–125
Rihanna, 70
“River Crab,” 145–146, 147, 148
Robertson, Roland, 152
Romney, Mitt, 1, 4, 168
Russell, Jason, 68
Sadness, 68
Sandberg, Anders, 26
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 141
“Sarkozy Was There,” 141
“Scumbag Steve,” 112, 114
Seeding strategies, 70–71
Segerberg, Alexandra, 72, 123, 
127–129
Selection, meme diffusion through, 
22–23
Self, memetic fashioning of, 30, 
33–34, 43. See also Networked 
individualism
Semon, Richard, 10
Shalit, Gilad, 141
Sharing
connective action through, 128
information features that encour-
age, 66–73
motivations for, 66–67
personalization in, 72–73
in Web 2.0, 19
Sheel, Jaya, 108
Shining, The (film), 109
Simplicity, 69, 81–82, 88
“Singaporean Style,” 1
“Single Ladies,” 76, 83
Sitcoms, 77–78
“Situation Room,” 2, 58, 140–141
Slogans, 128–129
Snoopy, 51
Social boundaries, 100, 111
“Socially Awkward Penguin,” 112, 
114, 117
Social media
culture jamming through, 130
political participation through, 
61, 120
wielding personal influence with, 72
Spears, Britney, 42, 44
Speel, Hans-Cees, 10
Spreadability, 88, 126, 181n2
Stance, 40–41, 44, 46, 49–50, 53
Star Wars (film), 136, 138, 139, 150
“Star Wars Kid,” 2, 77, 81, 84
Stereotypes, 157, 161–162
Stewart, Jon, 143
Stock character macros, 112–113
Styles, in “Gangnam Style” deriva-
tives, 167–169
Subcultural literacy, 117. See also 
Meme subculture

Index 
 
199
Success
of memetic content, 73–94, 95, 
96–97, 174–175
of viral content, 65–73, 94, 95, 
96–97, 174–175
“Successful Black Man,” 113, 
161–162, 163, 164, 166
“Success Kid,” 113, 114
Superiority theory of humor, 81
Surprise, 67
Tay, Geniesa, 136
Technological proficiency, 184n3
Thelwall, Mike, 155–156, 158
“Three Chinese Officials,” 143
Tiam, Timothy Tiah Ewe, 23
Time (magazine), 122
T-Mobile, 104
Tommy Hilfiger, 130
“To My Ill Figure,” 130, 131
“Tourist Guy,” 102
“Troll Face,” 115
Tumblr, 13, 118, 132, 178
Turner, Graham, 107
Twitter, 18, 19
Uganda, 68
University of California, Davis, 50
“Upgrading from Girlfriend/Boy-
friend,” 156–158
User-generated content, 32–33, 
75–76, 82, 120. See also Internet 
memes
Vehicles, for memes, 37–38
Verbal humor, global transmission 
of, 155–161
Vernacular creativity, 99–100
Versions, 20, 30, 33, 43, 51, 58, 82. 
See also Derivatives; Emulations; 
Mimicry
Videos. See Memetic videos
Vimeo, 107
Viral marketing, 70–71
Virals and virality
attributes of, 55
biological analogy underlying, 11
communication theory and, 60–62
content characteristics of, 65–73, 
94, 95, 96–97, 174–175
defining, 55, 177
emotional arousal, 67–68
memes vs., 7, 55–63
modes of engagement with, 59–60
packaging, 69
participation, 72–73
persuasiveness of, 124
political, 124–127
positioning, 70–71
positivity and humor, 76–78
prestige, 69–70
Viruses, 11
Visual/audiovisual humor, 161–170
Wallsten, Kevin, 61, 126
Walsh, Kate, 126
Wang, Shaojung Sharon, 148
Wasik, Bill, 103
“Wassup,” 124
Watergate, 140
“We Are the 53 Percent,” 134, 136, 
137
“We Are the 99 Percent,” 73, 129, 
132, 134, 135, 136
Web 2.0. See also Participatory 
culture
activities valued in, 19, 23

200 
 
Index
Web 2.0 (cont.)
cultural/aesthetic logic of, 34
economy-driven logic of, 32–33
imitation and mimicry in, 20, 22
memes as epitomizing, 4, 15, 18
morality and social behavior in, 
112–113
political uses of, 119
presidential campaigns and, 120, 
122, 124–127
sharing as characteristic of, 19
social logic of, 33–34
Webcams, 105
Wellman, Barry, 33
Westernization, 152, 154, 161
“What the fuck” (WTF) memes, 117
Whimsical content, 83–84
“Who’s the boss” analogy, 12
Wikipedia, 18
Will.i.am, 126
Williams, Kathleen, 109
Winfrey, Oprah, 70
“Win” memes, 117
World War II, 24
“Yes We Can,” 124, 126
Yippies, 104
YouTube. See also Memetic videos
attention economy of, 32–33
as a community, 76
cultural factors in, 34
flash mobs on, 103–104
“It Gets Better,” 49–50
“Leave Britney Alone,” 42–49
marriage proposals on, 23
meme diffusion on, 18, 20
“most...” on, 75
“Pepper-Spraying Cop,” 50–51
political participation through, 
120, 125
Zaidner, Lior, 67
“Zombie Kid,” 74, 77, 84
Zuckerman, Ethan, 70, 72, 119

