XVIII
MENSURATION: HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Controversies as to Heron's date.
THE vexed question of Heron's date has perhaps called
forth as much discussion as any doubtful point in the history
of mathematics. In the early stages of the controversy much
was made of the supposed relation of Heron to Ctesibius.
The Belopoe'ica of Heron has, in the best manuscript, the
heading "Hpavos Kr-qcrifiiov BeXonouKa, and from this, coupled
with an expression used by an anonymous Byzantine writer
of the tenth century, 6 'AaKprji/bs KTrjo-iftios 6 rod 'AXegavSpecos
"Hpcovo? KaOrjy-rjTrjs, ' Ctesibius of Ascra, the teacher of Heron
of Alexandria', it was inferred that Heron was a pupil of
Ctesibius. The question then was, when did Ctesibius live ?
Martin took him to be a certain barber of that name who
lived in the time of Ptolemy Euergetes II, that is, Ptolemy VII,
called Physcon (died 117 B.C.), and who is said to have made
an improved water-organ1; Martin therefore placed Heron at
the beginning of the first century (say 126-50) B.C. But
Philon of Byzantium, who repeatedly mentions Ctesibius by
name, says that the first mechanicians (reyvlTai) had the
great advantage of being under kings who loved fame and
supported the arts.2 
This description applies much better
to Ptolemy II Philadelphus (285-247) and Ptolemy III Euer-
getes I (247-222). It is more probable, therefore, that Ctesibius
was the mechanician Ctesibius who is mentioned by Athenaeus
as having made an elegant drinking-horn in the time of
Ptolemy Philadelphus3; a pupil then of Ctesibius would
probably belong to the end of the third and the beginning of
the second century B.C. But in truth we cannot safely*con-
clude that Heron was an immediate pupil of Ctesibius. The
Byzantine writer probably only inferred this from the title
1 Athenaeus, Deipno-Soph. iv. c. 75, p. 174 b-e: cf. Vitruvius, x. 9,13.
2 Philon, Median Spit, p. 50. 38, ed. Schone.
3 Athenaeus, xi. c. 97, p. 497 b-e.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONTROVERSIES AS TO HERON'S DATE 
299
above quoted; the title, however, in itself need not imply
more than that Heron's work was a new edition of a similar
work by Ctesibius, and the KTTJO-L^LOV may even have been added
by some well-read editor who knew both works and desired to
indicate that the greater part of the contents of Heron's work
was due to Ctesibius. One manuscript ha,8t/Hp<Di/os 'AXegav-
Spicos BeXonouKci, which corresponds to the titles of the other
works of Heron and is therefore more likely to be genuine.
The discovery of the Greek text of the Metrica by R. Schone
in 1896 made it possible to fix with certainty an upper limit.
In that work there are a number of allusions to Archimedes,
three references to the ycoplov aTrorofirj of Apollonius, and
two to ' the (books) about straight lines (chords) in a circle'
(SiSeiKTat Se kv TOLS irepl TCOV kv KVKXCO evOtLcov). Now, although
the first beginnings of trigonometry may go back as far as
Apollonius, we know of no work giving an actual Table of
Chords earlier than that of Hipparchus. We get, therefore,
at once the date 150 B.C. or thereabouts as the terminus post
quern. A terminus ante quern is furnished by the date of the
composition of Pappus's Collection; for Pappus alludes to, and
draws upon, the works of Heron. As Pappus was writing in
the reign of Diocletian (A.D. 284-305), it follows that Heron
could not be much later than, say, A.D. 250. In speaking of
the solutions by ' the old geometers' (ol naXaiol yeoD/jLeTpcu) of
the problem of finding the two mean proportionals, Pappus may
seem at first sight to include Heron along with Eratosthenes,
Nicomedes and Philon in that designation, and it has been
argued, on this basis, that Heron lived long before Pappus.
But a close examination of the passage1 shows that this is
by no means necessary. The relevant words are as follows:
' The ancient geometers were not able to solve the problem
of the two straight lines [the problem of finding two mean
proportionals to them] by ordinary geometrical methods, since
the problem is by nature '* solid " . . . but by attacking it with
mechanical means they managed, in a wonderful way, to
reduce the question to a practical and convenient construction,
as may be seen in the Mesolabon of Eratosthenes and in the
mechanics of Philon and Heron . . . Nicomedes also solved it
by means of the cochloid curve, with which he also trisected
an angle.'
1 Pappus, lii, pp. 54-6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

300 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Pappus goes on to say that he will give four solutions, one
of which is his own; the first, second, and third he describes
as those of Eratosthenes, Nicomedes and Heron. But in the
earlier sentence he mentions Philon along with Heron, and we
know from Eutocius that Heron's solution is practically the
same as Philon's. Hence we may conclude that by the third
solution Pappus really meant Philon's, and that he only men-
tioned Heron's Mechanics because it was a convenient place in
which to find the same solution.
Another argument has been based on the fact that the
extracts from Heron's Mechanics given at the end of Pappus's
Book VIII, as we have it, are introduced by the author with
a complaint that the copies of Heron's works in which he
found them were in many respects corrupt, having lost both
beginning and end.1 But the extracts appear to have been
added, not by Pappus, but by some later writer, and the
argument accordingly falls to the ground.
The limits of,date being then, say, 150 B.C. to A.D. 250, our
only course is to try to define, as well as possible, the relation
in time between Heron and the other mathematicians who
come, roughly, within the same limits. This method has led
one of the most recent writers on the subject (Tittel2) to
place Heron not much later than 100 B.C., while another,3
relying almost entirely on a comparison between passages in
Ptolemy and Heron, arrives at the very different conclusion
that Heron was later than Ptolemy and belonged in fact to
the second century A. D.
In view of the difference between these results, it will be
convenient to summarize the evidence relied on to establish
the earlier date, and to consider how far it is or is not con-
clusive against the later. 
We begin with the relation of
Heron to Philon. Philon is supposed to come not more than
a generation later than Ctesibius, because it would appear that
machines for throwing projectiles constructed by Ctesibius
and Philon respectively were both available at one time for
inspection by experts on the subject4; it is inferred that
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1116. 4-7.
2 Art. ' Heron von Alexandreia' in Pauly-Wissowa's Real-Encyclopadie
der class. Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 8. 1, 1912.
3 I. Hammer-Jensen in Hermes, vol. 48, 1913, pp. 224-35.
4 Philon, Mech. Stjnt. iv, pp. 68. 1, 72. 36.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONTROVERSIES AS TO HERON'S DATE 
301
Philon's date cannot be later than the end of the second
century B.C. (If Ctesibius flourished before 247 B.C. the argu-
ment would apparently suggest rather the beginning than the
end of the second century.) 
Next, Heron is supposed to have
been a younger contemporary of Philon, the grounds being
the following. 
(1) Heron mentions a ' stationary-automaton'
representation by Philon of the Nauplius-story,1 and this is
identified by Tittel with a representation of the same story by
some contemporary of Heron's (oi KCCO' ^//ay2). But a careful
perusal of the whole passage seems to me rather to suggest
that the latter representation was not Philon's, and that
Philon was included by Heron among the ' ancient' auto-
maton-makers, and not among his contemporaries.3 (2) Another
argument adduced to show that Philon was contemporary
1 Heron, Autom., pp. 404. 11-408. 9. 
2 Ib., p. 412. 13.
3 The relevant remarks of Heron are as follows. (1) He says that he
has found no arrangements of 'stationary automata' better or more
instructive than those described by Philon of Byzantium (p. 404. 11).
As an instance he mentions Philon's setting of the Nauplius-story, in
which he found everything good except two things (a) the mechanism
for the appearance of Athene, which was too difficult (ipyabeo-Tepov), and
(p) the absence of an incident promised by Philon in his description,
namely the falling of a thunderbolt on Ajax with a sound of thunder
accompanying it (pp. 404. 15-408. 9). This latter incident Heron could
not find anywhere in Philon, though he had consulted a great number
of copies of his work. He continues (p. 408. 9-13) that we are not to
suppose that he is running down Philon or charging him with not being
capable of carrying out what he promised. On the contrary, the omission
was probably due to a slip of memory, for it is easy enough to make
stage-fchunder (he proceeds to show how to do it). But the rest of
Philon's arrangements seemed to him satisfactory, and this, he says, is
why he has not ignored Philon's work: ' for I think that my readers will
get the most benefit if they are shown, fiist what has been well said by
the ancients and then, separately from this, what the ancients overlooked
or what in their work needed improvement' (pp. 408.22-410. 6). (2) The
next chapter (pp. 410. 7-412. 2) explains generally the sort of thing the
automaton-picture has to show, and Heron says he will give one example
which he regards as the best. Then (3), after drawing a contrast between
the simpler pictures made by(the ancients', which involved three different
movements only, and the contemporary (ol KaS' 77/xas) representations of
interesting stories by means of more numerous and varied movements
(p. 412. 3-15), he proceeds to describe a setting of the Nauplius-story.
This is the representation which Tittel identifies with Philon's. But it
is to be observed that the description includes that of the episode of the
thunderbolt striking Ajax (c. 30, pp. 448.1-452. 7) which Heron expressly
says that Philon omitted. Further, the mechanism for the appearance
of Athene described in c. 29 is clearly not Philon's * more difficult5
arrangement, fyut the simpler device described (pp. 404. 18-408. 5) as
possible and preferable to Philon's (cf. Heron, vol. i, ed. Schmidt, pp.
lxviii-lxix).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

302 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
with Heron is the fact that Philon has some criticisms of
details of construction of projectile-throwers which ar,e found
in Heron, whence it is inferred that Philon had Heron's work
specifically in view. But if Heron's BeXowouKa was based on
the work of Ctesibius, it is equally possible that Philon may
be referring to Ctesibius.
A difficulty in the way of the earlier date is the relation in
which Heron stands to Posidonius. In Heron's Mechanics,
i. 24, there is a definition of 'centre of gravity' which is
attributed by Heron to 'Posidonius a Stoic'. But this can
hardly be Posidonius of Apamea, Cicero's teacher, because the
next sentence in Heron, stating a distinction drawn by Archi-
medes in connexion with this definition, seems to imply that
the Posidonius referred to lived before Archimedes. But the
Definitions of Heron do contain definitions of geometrical
notions which are put down by Proclus to Posidonius of
Apamea or Rhodes, and, in particular, definitions of ' figure'
and of parallels'. Now Posidonius lived from 135 to 51 B.C.,
and the supporters of the earlier date for Heron can only
suggest that either Posidonius was not the first to give these
definitions, or alternatively, if he was, and if they were
included in Heron's Definitions by Heron himself and not by
some later editor, all that this obliges us to admit is that
Heron cannot have lived before the first century B. c.
Again, if Heron lived at the beginning of the first cen-
tury B.C., it is remarkable that he is nowhere mentioned by
Vitruvius. The De architectnra was apparently brought out
in 14 B.C. and in the preface to Book VII Vitruvius gives
a list of authorities on machinationes from whom he made
extracts. 
The list contains twelve names and has every
appearance of being scrupulously complete; but, while it
includes Archytas (second), Archimedes (third), Ctesibius
(fourth), and Philon of Byzantium (sixth), it does not men-
tion Heron. Nor is it possible to establish interdependence
between Heron and Vitruvius; the differences seem, on the
whole, to be more numerous than the resemblances. A few of
the differences may be mentioned. Vitruvius uses 3 as the
value of 7T, whereas Heron always uses the Archimedean value
3^. 
Both writers make extracts from the Aristotelian
Mrj^avLKa TrpofiXrjfjLaTcc, but their selections are different. The
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONTROVERSIES AS TO HERON'S DATE 303
machines used by the two for the same purpose frequently
differ in details; e. g. in Vitruvius's hodometer a pebble drops
into a box at the end of each Roman mile,1 while in Heron's
the distance completed is marked by a pointer.2 It is indeed
pointed out that the water-organ of Heron is in many respects
more primitive than that of Vitruvius; but, as the instru-
ments are altogether different, this can scarcely be said to
prove anything.
On the other hand, there are points of contact between
certain propositions of Heron and of the Roman agrimen-
sores. Columella, about A.D. 62, gave certain measurements of
plane figures which agree with the formulae used by Heron,
notably those for the equilateral triangle, the regular hexagon
(in this case not only the formula but the actual figures agree
with Heron's) and the segment of a circle which is less than
a semicircle, the formula in the last case being
where s is the chord and h the height of the segment. Here
there might seem to be dependence, one way or the other;
but the possibility is not excluded that the two writers may
merely have drawn from a common source; for Heron, in
giving the formula for the area of the segment of a circle,
states that it was the formula used by 'the more accurate
investigators' (ol aKpifieo-Tepov €^7777/core?).3
We have, lastly, to consider the relation between Ptolemy
and Heron. If Heron lived about 100 B.C., he was 200 years
earlier than Ptolemy (A.D. 100—178). The argument used to
prove that Ptolemy came some time after Heron is based on
a passage of Proclus where Ptolemy is said to have remarked
on the untrustworthiness of the method in vogue among the
' more ancient' writers of measuring the apparent diameter of
the sun by means of water-clocks.4 Hipparchus, says Pro-
clus, used his dioptra for the purpose, and Ptolemy followed
him. Proclus proceeds:
'Let us then set out here not only the observations of
the ancients but also the construction of the dioptra of
1 Vitruvius, x. 14. 
2 Heron, Dioptra, c. 34.
3 Heron, Metrica, 1. 31, p. 74. 21.
4 Proclus, Hypotyposis, pp. 120. 9-15, 124. 7-26.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

304 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Hipparchus. 
And first we will show How we can measure an
interval of time by means of the regular efflux of water,
a procedure which was explained by Heron the mechanician
in his treatise on water-clocks/
Theon of Alexandria has a passage to a similar effect.1 He
first says that the most ancient mathematicians contrived
a vessel which would let water flow out uniformly through a
small aperture at the bottom, and then adds at the end, almost
in the same words as Proclus uses, that Heron showed how
this is managed in the first book of his work on water-
clocks. Theon's account is from Pappus's Commentary on
the Syntaxis, and this is also Proclus's source, as is shown by
the fact that Proclus gives a drawing of the water-clock
which appears to have been lost in Theon's transcription from
Pappus, but which Pappus must have reproduced from the
work of Heron. Tittel infers that Heron must have ranked
as one of the ' more ancient' writers as compared with
Ptolemy. 
eBut this again does not seem to be a necessary
inference. No doubt Heron's work was a convenient place to
refer to for a description of a water-clock, but it does not
necessarily follow that Ptolemy was referring to Heron's
clock rather than some earlier form of the same instrument.
An entirely different conclusion from that of Tittel is
reached in the article e Ptolemaios and Heron' already alluded
to.2 The arguments are shortly these. (1) Ptolemy says in
his Geography (c. 3) that his predecessors had only been able
to measure the distance between two places (as an arc of a
great circle on the earth's circumference) in the case where
the two places are on the same meridian. He claims that he
himself invented a way of doing this even in the case where
the two places are neither on the same meridian nor on the
same parallel circle, provided that the heights of the pole at
the two places respectively, and the angle between the great
circle passing through both and the meridian circle through
one of the places, are known. Now Heron in 'his Dioptm
deals with the problem of measuring the distance between
two places by means of the dioptra, and takes as an example
1 Theon, Comm. on the Syntaxis, Basel, 1538, pp. 261 sq. (quoted in
Proclus, Hypotyposis, ed. Manitius, pp. 309-11).
2 Hammer-Jensen, op, cit.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONTROVERSIES AS TO HERON'S DATE 305
the distance between Rome and Alexandria.1 
Unfortunately
the text is in places corrupt and deficient, so that the method
cannot be reconstructed in detail. But it involved the obser-
vation of the same lunar eclipse at Rome and Alexandria
respectively and the drawing of the anal&nvma for Rome.
That is to say, the mathematical method which Ptolemy
claims to have invented is spoken of by Heron as a thing
generally known to experts and not more remarkable than
other technical matters dealt with in the same book. Conse-
quently Heron must have been later than Ptolemy. (It is
right to add that some hold that the chapter of the Dioptra
in question is not germane to the subject of the treatise, and
was probably not written by Heron but interpolated by some
later editor; if this is so, the argument based upon it falls to
the ground.) 
(2) The dioptra described in Heron's work is a
fine and accurate instrument, very much better than anything
Ptolemy had at his disposal. If Ptolemy had been aware of
its existence, it is highly unlikely that he would have taken
the trouble to niake his separate and imperfect c parallactic J
instrument, since it could easily have been grafted on to
Heron's dioptra. Not only, therefore, must Heron have been
later than Ptolemy but, seeing that the technique of instru-
ment-making had made such strides in the interval, he must
have been considerably later. (3) In his work irepl poTr&v*
Ptolemy, as we have seen, disputed the view of Aristotle that
air has weight even when surrounded by air. 
Aristotle
satisfied himself experimentally that a vessel full of air is
heavier than the same vessel empty; Ptolemy, also by ex-
periment, convinced himself that the former is actually the
lighter. Ptolemy then extended his argument to water, and
held that water with water round it has no weight, and that
the diver, however deep he dives, does not feel the weight of
the water above him. 
Heron3 asserts that water has no
appreciable weight and has no appreciable power of com-
pressing the air in a vessel inverted and forced down into
the water. 
In confirmation of this he cites the case of the
diver, who is not prevented from breathing when far below
1 Heron, Dioptra, c. 35 (vol. iii, pp. 302-6).
2 Simplicius on De caelo, p. 710. 14, Heib. (Ptolemy, vol. ii, p. 263).
3 Heron, Pneumatica, i. Pref. (vol. i, p. 22. 14 sq.).
1523.2 
X
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

306 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
the surface. He then inquires what is the reason why the
diver is not oppressed though he has an unlimited weight of
water on his back. He accepts, therefore, the view of Ptolemy
as to the fact, however strange this may seem. But he is not
satisfied with the explanation given : ' Some say ', he goes on,
'it is because water in itself is uniformly heavy (lo-oftapes avrb
KCCO* avro)'—this seems to be equivalent to Ptolemy's dictum
that water in water has no weight—' but they give no ex-
planation whatever why divers . . / 
He himself attempts an
explanation based on Archimedes. It is suggested, therefore,
that Heron's criticism is directed specifically against Ptolemy
and no one else. (4) It is suggested that the Dionysius to whom
Heron dedicated his Definitions is a certain Dionysius who
was praefectus urbi at Rome in A.D. 301. The grounds are
these (a) Heron addresses Dionysius as Aiovvcriz Xa/jLirpoTare,
where XafiirpoTaros obviously corresponds to the Latin claristi-
vius, a title which in the third century and under Diocletian
was not yet in common use. Further, this Dionysius was
curator aquarum and curator operum publicorum, so that he
was the sort of person who would have to do with the
engineers, architects and craftsmen for whom Heron wrote.
Lastly, he is mentioned in an inscription commemorating an
improvement of water supply and dedicated c to Tiberinus,
father of all waters, and to the ancient inventors of marvel-
lous constructions' (repertoribus admirabilium 
fabricarum
pritds viris), an expression which is not found in any other
inscription, but which recalls the sort of tribute that Heron
frequently puys to his predecessors. This identification of the
two persons named Dionysius is an ingenious conjecture, but
the evidence is not such as to make it anything more.1
The result of the whole investigation just summarized is to
place Heron in the third century A.D., and perhaps little, if
anything, earlier than Pappus. Heiberg accepts this conclu-
sion,2 which may therefore, I suppose, be said to hold the field
for the present.
1 Dionysius was of course a very common name. Diophantus dedicated
his Arithmetica to a person of this name {rifuaTare /xot Atoi/uo-te), whom he
praised for his ambition to learn the solutions of arithmetical problems.
This Dionysius must have lived in the second half of the third century
A.D., and if Heron also belonged to this time, is it not possible that
Heron's Dionysius was the same person ?
2 Heron, vol. v, p. ix.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

CONTROVERSIES AS TO HERON S DATE 307
Heron was known as 6 yAkegav8psv$ (e.g. by Pappus) or
6 firjxaviKo? (mechanicus), to distinguish him from other
persons of the same name; Proclus and Damianus use the
latter title, while Pappus also speaks of ol nepl rov "Hpcova
Character of works.
Heron was an almost encyclopaedic writer on mathematical
and physical subjects. Practical utility rather than theoreti-
cal completeness was the object aimed at; his environment in
Egypt no doubt accounts largely for this. His Metrica begins
with the old legend of the traditional origin of geometry in
Egypt, and in the Bioptra we find one of the very problems
which geometry was intended to solve, namely that of re-
establishing boundaries of lands when the flooding of the
Nile had destroyed the land-marks: ' When the boundaries
of an area have become obliterated to such an extent that
only two or three marks remain, in addition to a plan of the
area, to supply afresh the remaining marks.'x 
Heron makes
little or no claim to originality; he often quotes authorities,
but, in accordance with Greek practice, he more frequently
omits to do so, evidently without any idea of misleading any
one; only when he has made what is in his opinion any
slight improvement on the methods of his predecessors does
he trouble to mention the fact, a habit which clearly indi-
cates that, except in these cases, he is simply giving the best
traditional methods in the form which seemed to him easiest
of comprehension and application. The Metrica seems to be
richest in definite references to the discoveries of prede-
cessors ; the names mentioned are Archimedes, Dionysodorus,
Eudoxus, Plato; in the Dioptra Eratosthenes is quoted, and
in the introduction to the Gatoptrica Plato and Aristotle are
mentioned.
The practical utility of Heron's manuals being so great, it
was natural that they should have great vogue, and equally
natural that the most popular of them at any rate should be
re-edited, altered and added to by later writers; this was
inevitable with books which, like the Elements of Euclid,
were in regular use in Greek, Byzantine, Roman, and Arabian
1 Heron, Dioptra, c. 25, p. 268. 17-19.
x 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

308 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
education for centuries. 
The geometrical or mensurational
books in particular gave scope for expansion by multiplication
of examples, so that it is difficult to disentangle the genuine
Heron from the rest of the collections which have come down
to us under his name. 
Hultsch's considered criterion is as
follows: 'The Heron texts which have come down to our
time are authentic in so far as they bear the author's name
and have kept the original design and form of Heron's works,
but are unauthentic in so far as, being constantly in use for
practical purposes, they were repeatedly re-edited and, in the
course of re-editing, were rewritten with a view to the
particular needs of the time/
List of Treatises.
Such of the works of Heron as have survived have reached
us in very different ways. Those which have come do\tfn in
the Greek are:
I. The Metrica, first discovered in 1896 in a manuscript
of the eleventh (or twelfth) century at Constantinople by
R. Schone and edited by his son, H. Schone (Heronis Opera, iii,
Teubner, 1903).
II. On the Dioptra, edited in an Italian version by Venturi
in 1814 ; the Greek text was first brought out by A. J. H.
Vincent1 in 1858, and the critical edition of it by H. Schone is
included in the Teubner vol. iii just mentioned.
III. The Pneumatica, in two Books, which appeared first in
a Latin translation by Commandinus, published after his
death in 1575; the Greek text was first edited by Th^venot
in Veterum mathematicorum opera Graece et Latine edita
(Paris, 1693), and is now available in Heronis Opera, i (Teub-
ner, 1899), by W. Schmidt.
IV. On the art of constructing automata (nepl avTo/xaro-
notTjTLKTJs), or The automaton-theatre, first edited in an Italian
translation by B. Baldi in 1589 ; the Greek text was included
in Th^venot's Vet math., and now forms part of Heronis
Opera, vol. i, by W. Schmidt.
V. Belopoe'ica (on the construction of engines of war), edited
1 Notices et extracts des manuscrits de la Bibliotheque impe'riale, xix, pt. 2,
pp. 157-337.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

LIST OF TREATISES 
309
by B. Baldi (Augsburg, 1616), Th^venot (Vet math.), Kochly
and Riistow (1853) and by Wescher (Poliorcetique des Grecs,
1867, the first critical edition).
VI. The Cheirobalistra 
("Hpcovos xtLpofiaWlo-Tpas KaracrKevrj
KCCI arvfifjL€Tpta (?)), edited by V. Prou, Notices et extraits, xxvi. 2
(Paris, 1877).
VII. The geometrical works, Definitiones> Geometria, Geo-
daesia, Stereometrica I and II, Mensurae, Liber Geeponicus,
edited by Hultsch with Variae collectiones (Heronis Alexan-
drini geometricorum et stereometricorum reliquiae, 1864).
This edition will now be replaced by that of Heiberg in the
Teubner collection (vols. iv, v), which contains much addi-
tional matter from the Constantinople manuscript referred to,
but omits the Liber Geeponicus (except a few extracts) and the
Geodaesia (which contains only a few extracts from the
Geometry of Heron).
Only fragments survive of the Greek text of the Mechanics
in three Books, which, however, is extant in the Arabic (now
edited, with German translation, in Heronis Opera, vol. ii,
by L. Nix and W. Schmidt, Teubner, 1901).
A smaller separate mechanical treatise, the BapovXicos, is
quoted by Pappus.1 The object of it was ' to move a given
weight by means of a given force', and the machine consisted
of an arrangement of interacting toothed wheels with different
diameters.
At the end of the Dioptra is a description of a hodometer for
measuring distances traversed by a wheeled vehicle, a kind of
taxameter, likewise made of a combination of toothed wheels.
A work on Water-clocks 
(nept vSptcou <hpoo-KOTTeicoi>) is men-
tioned in the Pneumatica as having contained four Books,
and is also alluded to by Pappus.2 Fragments are preserved
in Proclus (Hypotyposisy chap. 4) and in Pappus's commentary
on Book V of Ptolemy's Syntaxis reproduced by Theon.
Of Heron's Commentary on Euclid's Elements only very
meagre fragments survive in Greek (Proclus), but a large
number of extracts are fortunately preserved in the Arabic
commentary of an-Nairizi, edited (1) in the Latin version of
Gherard of Cremona by Curtze (Teubner, 1899), and (2) by
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1060. 5. 
2 Ib., p. 1026. 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

310 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Besthorn and Heiberg {Codex Leidensis 399. 1, five parts of
which had appeared up to 1910). The commentary extended
as far as Elem. VIII. 27 at least.
The Catoptrica, as above remarked under Ptolemy, exists in
a Latin translation from the Greek, presumed to be by William
of Moerbeke, and is included in vol. ii of Heronis Opera,
edited, with introduction, by W. Schmidt.
Nothing is known of the Camarica (' on vaultings') men-
tioned by Eutocius (on Archimedes, Sphere and Cylinder), the
Zygia (balancings) associated by Pappus with the Automata}
or of a work on the use of the astrolabe mentioned in the
Fihrist
We are in this work concerned with the treatises of mathe-
matical content, and therefore can leave out of account such
works as the Pneumatica, the Automata, and the Belopoewa.
The Pneumatica and Automata have, however, an interest to
the historian of physics in so far as they employ the force of
compressed air, water, or steam. 
In the Pneumatica the
reader will find such things as siphons, 'Heron's fountain',
' penny-in-the-slot' machines, a fire-engine, a water-organ, and
many arrangements employing the force of steam.
Geometry.
(a) Commentary on Euclid's Elements.
In giving an account of the geometry and mensuration
(or geodesy) of Heron it will be well, I think, to begin
with what relates to the elements, and first the Commen-
tary on Euclid's Elements, of which we possess a number
of extracts in an-Nairizi and Proclus, enabling us to form
a general idea of the character of the work. 
Speaking
generally, Heron's comments do not appear to have contained
much that can be called important. They may be classified
as follows :
(1) A few general notes, e.g. that Heron would not admit
more than three axioms.
(2) Distinctions of a number of particular cases of Euclid's
propositions according as the figure is drawn in one way
or another.
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1024. 28.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEOMETRY 
311
Of this class are the different cases of I. 35, 36, III. 7, 8
(where the chords to be compared are drawn on different sides
of the diameter instead of on the same side), III. 12 (which is
not Euclid's at all but Heron's own, adding the case of
external to that of internal contact in III. 11 , VI. 19 (where
the triangle in which an additional line is drawn is taken to
be the smaller of the two), VII. 19 (where the particular case
is given of three numbers in continued proportion instead of
four proportionals).
(3) Alternative proofs.
It appears to be Heron who first introduced the easy but
uninstructive semi-algebraical method of proving the proposi-
tions II. 2-10 which is now so popular. On this method the
propositions are proved ' without figures' as consequences of
II. 1 corresponding to the algebraical formula
a (b + c + d + ...) = ab + ac + ad + ...
Heron explains that it is not possible to prove II. 1 without
drawing a number of lines (i. e. without actually drawing the
rectangles), but that the following propositions up to II. 10
can be proved by merely drawing one line. He distinguishes
two varieties of the method, one by dissolutio, the other by
compositio, by which he seems to mean splitting-up of rect-
angles and squares and combination of them into others.
But in his proofs he sometimes combines the two varieties.
Alternative proofs are given (a) of some propositions of
Book III, namely III. 25 (placed after III. 30 and starting
from the arc instead of the chord), III. 10 (proved by means
of III. 9), III. 13 (a proof preceded by a lemma to the effect
that a straight line cannot meet a circle in more than two
points).
A class of alternative proof is (b) that which is intended to
meet a particular objection (evcrraa-Ls) which had been or might
be raised to Euclid's constructions. 
Thus in certain cases
Heron avoids producing a certain straight line, where Euclid
produces it, the object being to meet the objection of one who
should deny our right to assume that there is any space
available. Of this class are his proofs of I. 11, 20 and his
note on 1.16 
Similarly in I. 48 he supposes the right-angled
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

312 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
triangle which is constructed to be constructed on the same
side of the common side as the given triangle is.
A third class (c) is that which avoids reductio ad absurdum,
e.g. a direct proof of I. 19 (for which he requires and gives
a preliminary lemma) and of I. 25.
(4) Heron supplies certain converses of Euclid's propositions
e.g. of II. 12, 13 and VIII. 27.
(5) A few additions to, and extensions of, Euclid's propositions
are also found. 
Some are unimportant, e. g. the construction
of isosceles and scalene triangles in a note on I. 1 and the
construction of two tangents in III. 17. The most important
extension is that of III. 20 to the case where the angle at the
circumference is greater than a right angle, which gives an
easy way of proving the theorem of III. 22. Interesting also
are the notes on I. 37 (on I. 24 in Proclus), where Heron
proves that two triangles with two sides of the one equal
to two sides of the other and with the included angles supple-
mentary are equal in area, and compares the areas where the
sum of the included angles (one being supposed greater than
the other) is less or greater than two right angles, and on I. 47,
where there is a proof (depending on preliminary lemmas) of
the fact that, in the figure of Euclid's proposition (see next
page), the straight lines AL, BG, GE meet in a point. This
last proof is worth giving. First come the lemmas.
(1) If in a triangle ABC a straight line BE be drawn
parallel to the base BG cutting the sides ABy AC or those
sides produced in D, E, and if F be the
middle point of BG, then the straight line
AF (produced if necessary) will also bisect
DE. (HK is drawn through A parallel to
DE, and HDL, KEM through D, E parallel
to AF meeting the base in L, M respec-
B L 
F 
M c 
tively. 
Then the triangles ABF, AFC
between the same parallels aie equal. So are the triangles
DBF, EFC. Therefore the differences, the triangles ADF,
AEF} are equal and so therefore are the parallelograms HF,
KF. Therefore LF^FM, 
or DG = GE.)
(2) is the converse of Eucl. I. 43. If a parallelogram is
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

GEOMETRY
313
cut into four others ABGE, BF, FGGB, GE, so that BF, GE
are equal, the common vertex G will lie on the diagonal AB.
Heron produces AG to meet GF in H, and then proves that
AHB is a straight line.
Since BF, GE are equal, so are
the triangles BGF, EGG. Adding
the triangle GGF, we have the
triangles EOF, BOF equal, and
BE, GF are parallel.
But (by I. 34, 29, 26) the tri-
angles AKE, GKB are congruent, 
w
so that EK=KB; 
and by lemma (1) it follows that CH=HF.
Now, in the triangles FHB, CHG, two sides (BF, FH and
GG, OH) and the included angles are equal; therefore the
triangles are congruent, and the angles BHF, GHG are equal.
Add to each the angle GHF, and
Z BHF+ Z FHG = Z CHG + Z GHF = two right angles.
To prove his substantive proposition Heron draws AKL
perpendicular to BC, and joins EG meeting AK in M. Then
we have only to prove that BMG is a straight line.
Complete the parallelogram FAHO, and draw the diagonals
OA, FH meeting in Y. 
Through M draw PQ, SR parallel
respectively to BA, AC.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

314 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Now the triangles FAH, BAG are equal in all respects;
therefore IHFA = /.ABC
= Z GAK (since AK is at right angles to BC).
But, the diagonals of the rectangle FH cutting one another
in F, we have FY = 7A and Z HFA = Z (M.F;
therefore LOAF — LCAK, and 0^4 is in a straight line
with AKL.
Therefore, OM being the diagonal of 8Q, SA = AQ, and, if
we add AM to each, FM = ilf.ff.
Also, since EG is the diagonal of FN, FM = MN.
Therefore the parallelograms MH, MN are equal; and
hence, by the preceding lemma, BMG is a straight line. Q.E.D.
(/?) The Definitions.
The elaborate collection of Definitions is dedicated to one
Dionysius in a preface to the following effect:
'In setting out for you a sketch, in the shortest possible
form, of the technical terms premised in the elements of
geometry, I shall take as my point of departure, and shall
base my whole arrangement upon, the teaching of Euclid, the
author of the elements of theoretical geometry; for by this
means I think that I shall give you a good general under-
standing not only of Euclid's doctrine but of many other
works in the domain of geometry. I shall begin then with
the point!
He then proceeds to the definitions of the point, the line,
the different sorts of lines, straight, circular, 'curved' and
' spiral-shaped' (the Archimedean spiral and the cylindrical
helix), Defs. 1-7; surfaces, plane and not plane, solid body,
Defs. 8-11; angles and their different kinds, plane, solid,
rectilinear and not rectilinear, right, acute and obtuse angles,
Defs. 12-22; figure, boundaries of figure, varieties of figure,
plane, solid, composite (of homogeneous or non-homogeneous
parts) and incomposite, Defs. 23-6. The incomposite plane
figure is the circle, and definitions follow of its parts, segments
(which are composite of non-homogeneous parts), the semi-
circle, the Ayjris (less than a semicircle), and the segment
greater than a semicircle, angles in segments, the sector,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DEFINITIONS 
315
* concaveJ and ' convex', lune, garland (these last two are
composite of homogeneous parts) and axe (ireXeicvs), bounded by
four circular arcs, two concave and t,wo convex, Defs. 27-38.
Rectilineal figures follow, the various kinds of triangles and
of quadrilaterals, the gnomon in a parallelogram, and the
gnomon in the more general sense of the figure which added
to a given figure makes the whole into a similar figure,
polygons, the parts of figures (side, diagonal, height of a
triangle), perpendicular, parallels, the three figures which will
fill up the space round a point, Defs. 39-73. Solid figures are
next classified according to the surfaces bounding them, and
lines on surfaces are divided into (1) simple and circular,
(2) mixed, like the conic and spiric curves, Defs. 74, 75. The
sphere is then defined, with its parts, and stated to be
thte figure which, of all figures having the same surface, is the
greatest in content, Defs. 76-82. Next the cone, its different
species and its parts are taken up, with the distinction
between the three conies, the section of the acute-angled cone
(' by some also called ellipse') and the sections of the right-
angled and obtuse-angled cones (also called parabola and
hyperbola), Defs! 83-94; the cylinder, a section in general,
the spire or tore in its three varieties, open, continuous (or
just closed) and ' crossing-itself', which respectively have
sections possessing special properties, ' square rings' which
are cut out of cylinders (i. e. presumably rings the cross-section
of which through the centre is two squares), and various other
figures cut out of spheres or mixed surfaces, Defs. 95-7;
rectilineal solid figures, pyramids, the five regular solids, the
semi-regular solids of Archimedes two of which (each with
fourteen feces) were known to Plato, Defs. 98-104; prisms
of different kinds, parallelepipeds, with the special varieties,
the cube, the beam, SOKOS (length longer than breadth and
depth, which may be equal), the brick, IT\IV6L$ (length less
than breadth and depth), the (T^V'KTKOS or fico/iio-icos with
length, breadth and depth unequal, Defs. 105-14.
Lastly come definitions of relations, equality of lines, sur-
faces, and solids respectively, similarity of figures,' reciprocal
figures', Defs. 115-18; indefinite increase in magnitude,
parts (which must be homogeneous with the wholes, so that
e. g. the horn-like angle is not a part or submultiple of a right
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

316 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
or any angle), multiples, Defs. 119-21 ; proportion in magni-
tudes, what magnitudes can have a ratio to one another,
magnitudes in the same ratio or magnitudes in proportion,
definition of greater ratio, Defs. 122-5; transformation of
ratios (componendo, separando, convertendo, alternando, in-
vertendo and ex aequali), Defs. 126-7; commensurable and
incommensurable magnitudes and straight lines, Defs. 128,
129. There follow two tables of measures, Defs. 130-2.
The Definitions are very valuable from the point of view of
the historian of mathematics, for they give the different alter-
native definitions of the fundamental conceptions; thus we
find the Archimedean 'definition' of a straight line, other
definitions which we know from Proclus to be due to Apol-
lonius, others from Posidonius, and so on. 
No doubt the
collection may have been recast by some editor or editors
after Heron's time, but it seems, at least in substance, to go
back to Heron or earlier still. So far as it contains original
definitions of Posidonius, it cannot have been compiled earlier
than the first century B.C.; but its content seems to belong in
the main to the period before the Christian era. Heiberg
adds to his edition of the Definitions extracts from Heron's
Geometry, postulates and axioms from Euclid, extracts from
Geminus on the classification of mathematics, the principles
of geometry, &c, extracts from Proclus or some early collec-
tion of scholia on Euclid, and extracts from Anatolius and
Theon of Smyrna, which followed the actual definitions in the
manuscripts. These various additions were apparently collected
by some Byzantine editor, perhaps of the eleventh century.
Mensuration.
The Metrica, Geometrica, Stereometrica, Geodaesia,
Mensurae.
We now come to the mensuration of Heron. Of the
different works under this head the Metrica is the most
important from our point of view because it seems, more than
any of the others, to have preserved its original form. It is
also more fundamental in that it gives the theoretical basis of
the formulae used, and is not a mere application of rules to
particular examples. It is also more akin to theory in that it
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENSURATION 
317
does not use concrete measures, but simple numbers or units
which may then in particular cases be taken to be feet, cubits,
or any other unit of measurement. 
Up to 1896, when a
manuscript of it was discovered by R. Schone at Constanti-
nople, it was only known by an allusion to it in Eutocius
(on Archimedes's Measurement of a Circle), who states that
the way to obtain an approximation to the square root of
a non-square number is shown by Heron in his Metrica, as
well as by Pappus, Theon, and others who had commented on
the Syntaxis of Ptolemy.1 
Tannery2 had already in 1894
discovered a fragment of Heron's Metrica giving the particular
rule in a Paris manuscript of the thirteenth century contain-
ing Prolegomena to the Syntaxis compiled presumably from
the commentaries of Pappus and Theon. Another interesting
difference between the Metrica and the other works is that in
the former the Greek way of writing fractions (which is our
method) largely preponderates, the Egyptian form (which
expresses a fraction as the sum of diminishing submultiples)
being used comparatively rarely, whereas the reverse is the
case in the other works.
In view of the greater authority of the Metrica, we shall
take it as the basis of our account of the mensuration, while
keeping the other works in view. 
It is desirable at the
outset to compare broadly the contents of the various collec-
tions. Book I of the Metrica contains the mensuration of
squares, rectangles and triangles (chaps. 1-9), parallel-trapezia,
rhombi, rhomboids and quadrilaterals with one angle right
(10-16), regular polygons from the equilateral triangle to the
regular dodecagon (17-25), a ring between two concentric
circles (26), segments of circles (27-33), an ellipse (34), a para-
bolic segment (35), the surfaces of a cylinder (36), an isosceles
cone (37), a sphere (38) and a segment of a sphere (39).
Book II gives the mensuration of certain solids, the solid
content of a cone (chap. 1), a cylinder (2), rectilinear solid
figures, a parallelepiped, a prism, a pyramid and a frustum,
&c. (3-8), a frustum of a cone (9, 10), a sphere and a segment
of a sphere (11, 12), a spire or tore (13), the section of a
cylinder measured in Archimedes's Method (14), and the solid
1 Archimedes, vol. iii, p. 232. 13-17.
2 Tannery, M4moires scientifiques, ii, 1912, pp. 447-54.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

318 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
formed by the intersection of two cylinders with axes at right
angles inscribed in a cube, also measured in the Method (15),
the five regular solids (16-19). Book III deals with the divi-
sion of figures into parts having given ratios to one another,
first plane figures (1-19), then solids, a pyramid, a cone and a
frustum, a sphere (20-3).
The Geometria or Geometrumena is a collection based upon
Heron, but not his work in its present form. The addition of
a theorem due to Patriciusl and a reference to him in the
Stereometrica (I. 22) suggest that Patricius edited both works,
but the date of Patricius is uncertain. Tannery identifies
him with a mathematical professor of the tenth century,
Nicephorus Patricius; if this is correct, he would be contem-
porary with the Byzantine writer (erroneously called Heron)
who is known to have edited genuine works of Heron, and
indeed Patricius and the anonymous Byzantine might be one
and the same person. The mensuration in the Geometry has
reference almost entirely to the same figures as those
measured in Book I of the Metrica, the difference being that
in the Geometry (1) the rules are not explained but merely
applied to examples, (2) a large number of numerical illustra-
tions are given for each figure, (3) the Egyptian way of
writing fractions as the sum of submultiples is followed,
(4) lengths and areas are given in terms of particular
measures, and the calculations are lengthened by a consider-
able amount of conversion from one measure into another.
The first chapters (1-4) are of the nature of a general intro-
duction, including certain definitions and ending with a table
of measures. Chaps. 5-99, Hultsch ( = 5-20,14, Heib.), though
for the most part corresponding in content to Metrica I,
seem to have been based on a different collection, because
chaps. 100-3 and 105 (= 21, 1-25, 22, 3-24, Heib.) are clearly
modelled on the Metrica, and 101 is headed 'A definition
(really ' measurement') of a circle in another book of Heron \
Heiberg transfers to the Geometrica a considerable amount of
the content of the so-called Liber Geeponicus, a badly ordered
collection consisting to a large extent of extracts from the
other works. Thus it begins with 41 definitions identical
with the same number of the Definitiones. Some sections
1 Geometrica, 21 26 (vol. iv, p. 386. 23).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MENSURATION 
319
Heiberg puts side by side with corresponding sections of the
Geometrica in parallel columns; others he inserts in suitable
places; sections 78. 79 contain two important problems in
indeterminate analysis (= Geom. 24, 1-2, Heib.). 
Heiberg
adds, from the Constantinople manuscript containing the
Metrica, eleven more sections (chap. 24, 3-13) containing
indeterminate problems, and other sections (chap 24,14-30 and
37-51) giving the mensuration, mainly, of figures inscribed in or
circumscribed to others, e.g. squares or circles in triangles,
circles in squares, circles about triangles, and lastly of circles
and segments of circles.
The Stereometrica I has at the beginning the title Elaa-
ycdyal TG>V o-TepeofieTpov/jLevcdu "Hpcovos but, like the 
Geometrica,
seems to have been edited by Patricius. Chaps. 1-40 give the
mensuration of the geometrical solid figures, the sphere, the
cone, the frustum of a cone, the obelisk with circular base,
the cylinder, the 'pillar', the cube, the <r(f>rji/iarKo? (also called
ovvg), the iieiovpov Trpoeo-KapLfav/Aevoi/, pyramids, and frusta.
Some portions of this section of the book go back to Heron;
thus in the measurement of the sphere chap. 1 = Metrica
II. 11, and both here and elsewhere the ordinary form of
fractions appears. Chaps. 41-54 measure the contents of cer-
tain buildings or other constructions, e. g. a theatre, an amphi-
theatre, a swimming-bath, a well, a ship, a wine-butt, and
the like.
The second collection, Stereometrica II, appears to be of
Byzantine origin and contains similar matter to Stereometrica I,
parts of which are here repeated. Chap. 31 (27, Heib.) gives
the problem of Thales, to find the height of a pillar or a tree
by the measurement of shadows; the last sections measure
various pyramids, a prism, a fioofiio-Kos (little altar).
The Geodaesia is not an independent work, but only con-
tains extracts from the Geometry; thus chaps. 1-16 = Geom.
5-31, Hultsch ( = 5, 2-12, 32, Heib.); chaps. 17-19 give the
methods of finding, in any scalene triangle the sides of which
are given, the segments of the base made by the perpendicular
from the vertex, and of finding the area direct by the well-
known ' formula of Heron'; i.e. we have here the equivalent of
Metrica I. 5-8.
Lastly, the /jLerprjaeis, or Mensurae, was attributed to Heron
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

320 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
in an Archimedes manuscript of the ninth century, but can-
not in its present form be due to Heron, although portions of
it have points of contact with the genuine works. Sects. 2-27
measure all sorts of objects, e.g. stones of different shapes,
a pillar, a tower, a theatre, a ship, a vault, a hippodrome ; but
sects. 28-35 measure geometrical figures, a circle and segments
of a circle (cf. Metrica I), and sects. 36-48 on spheres, segments
of spheres, pyramids, cones and frusta are closely connected
with Stereom. I and Metrica II; sects. 49-59, giving the men-
suration of receptacles and plane figures of various shapes,
seem to have a different origin. We can now take up the
Contents of the Metrica.
Book I. 
Measurement of Areas.
The preface records the tradition that the first geometry
arose out of the practical necessity of measuring and dis-
tributing land (whence the name 'geometry'), after which
extension to three dimensions became necessary in order to
measure solid bodies. Heron then mentions Eudoxus and
Archimedes as pioneers in the discovery of difficult measure-
ments, Eudoxus having been the first to prove that a cylinder
is three times the cone on the same base and of equal height,
and that circles are to one another as the squares on their
diameters, while Archimedes first proved that the surface of
a sphere is equal to four times the area of a great circle in it,
and the volume two-thirds of the cylinder circumscribing it.
(a) Area of scalene triangle.
After the easy cases of the rectangle, the right-angled
triangle and the isosceles triangle, Heron gives two methods
of finding the area of a scalene triangle (acute-angled or
obtuse-angled) when the lengths of the three sides are given.
The first method is based on Eucl. II. 12 and 13. If a, 6, c
be the sides of the triangle opposite to the angles A, B, G
respectively, Heron observes (chap. 4) that any angle, e.g. C, is
acute, right or obtuse according as c2 < = or > a2 -f 62, and this
is the criterion determining which of the two propositions is
applicable. The method is directed to determining, first the
segments into which any side is divided by the perpendicular
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

AREA OF SCALENE TRIANGLE
321
from the opposite vertex, and thence the length of the per-
pendicular itself. We have, in the cases of the triangle acute-
angled at C and the triangle obtuse-angled at C respectively,
or
CD =
whence AD2 ( = b2—CD2) is found, so that we know the area
In the cases given in Metrica I. 5, 6 the sides are (14, 15, 13)
and (11, 13, 20) respectively, and AD is found to be rational
(=12). But of course both CD (or BD) and AD may be surds,
in which case Heron gives approximate values. Cf. Geom.
53, 54, Hultsch (15, 1-4, Heib.), where we have a triangle
in which a = 8, 6 = 4 , c = 6, so that a2 + b2 — c2 = 44 and
CD = 44/16 = 2\\. 
Thus AD2 = 16-(2f±)2 = 16-7fTV
= 8£ |^g, and AD— \/(8\ \ ^ ) = 2§ \ approximately, whence
the area — 4 x 2§ ^ = 11|. Heron then observes that we get
a nearer result still if we multiply AD2 by (fa)2 before
extracting the square root, for the area is then \/(16 x 8 | | T y
or >/(135), which is very nearly llf T\ ^T or llff-
So in Metrica I. 9, where the triangle is 10, 8, 12 (10 being
the base), Heron finds the perpendicular to be \/63, but he
obtains the area as \/(% AD2. BC2) or \/(1575), while observing
that we can, of course, take the approximation to \/63, or
7k i I TS> an(J multiply it by half 10, obtaining 39f | T
Xg as
the area.
Proof of the formula A = */{s(s — a) (s~b) (s — c)}.
The second method is that known as the ' formula of
Heron', namely, in our notation, A = \/{s (s — a) (s — b)(s — c)}.
The proof of the formula is given in Metrica I. 8 and also in
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

322
HEKON OF ALEXANDRIA
chap 30 of the Dioptra; but it is now known (from Arabian
sources) that the proposition is due to Archimedes.
Let the sides of the triangle ABC be given in length.
Inscribe the circle DEFy and let 0 be the centre.
Join AO, BO, CO, DO, E0} FO.
Then 
BC.0D = 2AB0C,
CA.0E = 2AC0A,
AB.0F=2AA0B;
whence, by addition,
p.0D = 2 A ABC,
where p is the perimeter.
Produce CB to H, so that BH = AF.
Then, since AE = AF, BF = BD, and CE = CD, we have
CH.0D = A ABC.
Therefore.
But CH.OD is the 'side' of the product CHKOD2, i.e.
CH. 0D2),
so that
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PROOF OP THE < FORMULA OF HERON; 
323
Draw OL at right angles to OG cutting BG in K, and BL at
right angles to BG meeting OL in L. Join CL.
Then, since each of the angles COL, GBL is right, GOBL is
a quadrilateral in a circle.
Therefore 
Z GOB + Z GLB = 2 E.
But £COB + £AOF= 2iJ, because J.0, BO, CO bisect the
angles round 0, and the angles GOB, AOF are together equal
to the angles AOG, BOF, while the sum of all four angles
is equal to 4JR.
Consequently 
Z A OF = Z 0X5.
Therefore the right-angled triangles -AOJ7, 0Z5 are similar;
therefore 
BC:BL = AF:F0
= BH:0D}
and, alternately, 
CB:BH= BL: OD
= BK:KD;
whence, componendo, CH.HB = BD: DK.
It follows that
Off2 :CH.HB = BD.DC:CD.DK
= BD. DG: OD2, since the angle GOK is right.
Therefore (A ABC)2 = GH2. OD2 (from above)
= 
CH.HB.BD.DC
= s(s — a) (s-b) (s — c).
(/3) Method of approximating to the square root of
a non-square number.
It is a propos of the triangle 7, 8, .9 that Heron gives the
important statement of his method of approximating to the
value of a surd, which before the discovery of the passage
of the Metrica had been a subject of unlimited conjecture
as bearing on the question how Archimedes obtained his
approximations to \/3.
In this case s = 12, s — a = 5, s — b = 4, s — c = 3, so that
A = -/(12.5.4.3) = 7(720).
Y 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

324 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
'Since', says Heron,1 ' 720 has not its side rational, we can
obtain its side within a very small difference as follows. Since
the next succeeding square number is 729, which has 27 for
its side, divide 720 by 27. This gives 26|. 
Add 27 to this,
making 53f, and take half of this or 26f | . 
The side of 720
will therefore be very nearly 2 6 | | . 
In fact, if we multiply
26|§ by itself, the product is 720/^, so that the difference (in
the square) is -^.
' If we desire to make the difference still smaller than ^ , we
shall take 720^ instead of 729 [or rather we should take
26|§ instead of 27], and by proceeding in the same way we
shall find that the resulting difference is much less than •£§.'
In other words, if we have a non-square number A, and a2
is the nearest square number to it, so that A = a2 ± b, then we
have, as the first approximation to /
for a second approximation we take
(+£> 
<*>
and so on.2
1 Metrica, i. 8, pp. 18. 22-20. 5.
2 The method indicated by Heron was known to Barlaam and Nicolas,
Rhabdas in the fourteenth century. The equivalent of it was used by
Luca Paciuolo (fifteenth-sixteenth centuiy), and it was known to the other
Italian algebraists of the sixteenth century. Thus Luca Paciuolo gave
2J, 2 ^ and 2T
8
9^ as successive approximations to A/6. He obtained
2 
C 2i)2 — 6
the first as 2+ ^ - 5 ' t h e sec0Tld 
a s 2 J ~ o 01 > a t l d 
t h e t h i r d 
a s
£0 "frST- 
The above 
rule
The formula of Heron was again put forward, in modem times, by
Buzengeiger as a means of accounting for the Archimedean approxima-
tion to \/3, apparently without knowing its previous history. Bertrand
also stated it in a treatise on arithmetic (1853). The method, too, by
which Oppermann and Alexeieff sought to account for Archimedes's
approximations is in reality the same. The latter method depends on
the formula
/(l8)
-/(«l8):~-
Alexeieff separated A into two factors a0, b0, and pointed out that if, say.
ao></A>bo<
then, 
i(ao+bo)></A>-2A- 
or 2~°^°,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPROXIMATIONS TO SURDS 
325
Substituting in (1) the value a2±b for A, we obtain
b_
1 ~~ ~ 2a
Heron does not seem to have used this formula with a nega-
tive sign, unless in Stereom. I. 33 (34, Hultsch), where \/(63)
and again, if 
J (aQ -f b0) = a1, 2 A/(a0 + b0) = bx,
and so on.
Now suppose that, in Heron's formulae, we put a = Xo, A/a = #<,,
(*! = Xl5 -k/ttj = a?lf and so on. We then have
o r — - ;
that is, Xu xx aie, lespectively, the arithmetic and harmonic means
between Xo, x0 , X2i x2 are the arithmetic and harmonic means between
Xiix1, and so on, exactly as in Alexeieff's formulae.
Let us now try to apply the method to Archiinedes's case, */% and we
shall see to what extent it serves to give what we want. Suppose
we begin with 3 >>y/3 > 1. We then have
and fiom this we derive successively
i > </3 > if., u > V3 > w, im > v/3 > am-
But, if we stait from f, obtained by the formula a+ 
<V(a 2 + &),
we obtain the following approximations by excess,
4(4+*) ~ H . *(?»+«) = W -
The second process then gives one of Archimedes's results, ^ ^ , but
neither of the two processes gives the other, f | j , directly. The latter
can, however, be obtained by using the formula that, if r < ^ , then
a 
ma + nc 
c
b 
?nb + nd 
d
Q7 4-1 
fi8 
Pfi^
For we can obtain -|4f from ^ and - ^ thus: ——^ = — , or from
f£ and \ thus: n > ' 5 6 _ 4 = ~^ 
= 153 ' a n d S° °n# ° r a g a i n
i. 
^ • 
J r 
, « r 
J Q7 ^ 
18817 + 97 
18914 
1351
be obtained from lft§fc and ft thus:
The advantage of the method is that, as compared with that of con-
tinued fractions, it is a veiy rapid way of arriving at a close approxi-
mation. Grunther has shown that the (m+l)th approximation obtained
by Heron's formula is the 2mth obtained by continued fractions. (' Die
quadratischen Irrationalitaten der Alten und deren E ntwickelungs-
methoden in Abhandlungen zur Gesch. d. Math. IV. 1882, pp. 83-6.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

326 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
is given as approximately 8 — TV 
In Metrica I, 9, as we
have seen, \/(63) is given as 7| J § T^, which was doubtless
obtained from the formula (1) as
The above seems to be the only classical rule which has
been handed down for finding second and further approxi-
mations to the value of a surd. But, although Heron thus
shows how to obtain a second approximation, namely by
formula (2), he does not seem to make any direct use of
this method himself, and consequently the question how the
approximations closer than the first which are to be found in
his works were obtained still remains an open one.
(y) Quadrilaterals.
It is unnecessary to give in detail the methods of measuring
the areas of quadrilaterals (chaps. 11-16). Heron deals with
the following kinds, the parallel-trapezium (isosceles or non-
isosceles), the rhombus and rhomboid, and the quadrilateral
which has one angle right and in which the four sides have
given lengths. Heron points out that in the- rhombus or
rhomboid, and in the general case of the quadrilateral, it is
necessary to know a diagonal as well as the four sides. The
mensuration in all the cases reduces to that of the rectangle
and triangle.
(S) The regular polygons with 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, lly
or 12 sides.
Beginning with the equilateral triangle (chap. 17), Heron
proves that, if a be the side and p the perpendicular from
a vertex on the opposite side, a2: p2 = 4:3; whence
a*:p2a2 = 4:3 = 16 : 12,
so that 
a4: (A ABC)2 =16:3,
and t(AABG)2 = T\a4. In the particular case taken a = 10
and A2 = 1875, whence A = 43| nearly.
Another method is to use an approximate value for Vs in
the formula </3 . a2/4. This is what is done in the Geometrica
14 (10, Heib.), where we are told that the area is (^ + xV)a2i
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE REGULAR POLYGONS 
327
now | + -j^ = | | = \ (|f), so that the approximation used by
Heron for V3 is here ff. 
For the side 10, the method gives
the same result as above, for §§ . 100 = 43^.
The regular pentagon is next taken (chap. 18). Heron
premises the following lemma.
Let ABC be a right-angled triangle, with the angle A equal
to fiJ. Produce AC to 0 so that C0 = AC
If now AO is divided'in extreme and
mean ratio, AB is equal to the greater
segment. (For produce AB to D so that
AD = AO, and join BO, DO. Then, since
A DO is isosceles and the angle at -A = f R,
I ADO = £A0D = ±R, and, from the
equality of the triangles ABO, OBC,
LAOB = LBAO = %R. It follows that
the triangle ADO is the isosceles triangle of Eucl. IV. 10, and
AD is divided in extreme and mean ratio in JB.) Therefore,
says Heron, (BA + AO)2 = 5 AC2. 
[This is Eucl. XIII. 1.]
Now, since lB0C= 
%R, if BC be produced to E so that
CE = BC, BE subtends at 0 an angle equal to |JR, and there-
fore BE is the side of a regular pentagon inscribed in the
circle with 0 as centre and OB as radius. (This circle also
passes through D, and BD is the side of a regular decagon in
the same circle.) If now BO = AB — r, OC = p, BE — a,
we have from above, (r+p)2 = 5p2, whence, since V5 is
approximately f, we obtain approximately r = f p, 
and
| a = |_p, so that p — %a. Hence \pa — ^a2, and the area
of the pentagon = fa2. 
Heron adds that, if we take a closer
approximation to </5 than f, we shall obtain the area still
more exactly. In the Geometry * the formula is given as x
T
2-a2.
The regular hexagon (chap. 19) is simply 6 times the
equilateral triangle with the same side. If A be the area
of the equilateral triangle with side a, Heron has proved
that A2 = T^(x4 (Metrica I. 17), hence (hexagon)2 = -2^7-a4. If,
e.g. a = 10, (hexagon)2 = 67500, and (hexagon) = 259 nearly.
In the Geometry 2 the formula is given as --^-a2, while ' another
book' is quoted as giving 6(J + TV)^2; it is added that the
latter formula, obtained from the area of the triangle, (^ 4- x^) a2>
represents the more accurate procedure, and is ful]y set out by
1 Geom. 102 (21, H, Heib.). 
2 Ib. 102 (21, 16, 17, Heib.).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3*28
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Heron. As a matter of fact, however, 6 (§ + T
XQ ) = --$- exactly,
and only the Metrica gives the more accurate calculation.
The regular heptagon.
Heron assumes (chap. 20) that, if a be the side and r the
radius of the circumscribing circle, a = |r, .being approxi-
mately equal to the perpendicular from the centre of the
circle to the side of the regular hexagon inscribed in it (for |
is the approximate value of \ \/3). This theorem is quoted by
Jordanus Nemorarius (d. 1237) as an 'Indian rule'; he pro-
bably obtained it from Abul Wafa (940-98). The Metrica
shows that it is of Greek origin, and, if Archimedes really
wrote a book on the heptagon in a circle, it may be due to
him. If then p is the perpendicular from the centre of the
circle on the side (a) of the inscribed heptagon, r/(§ <x) = 8/3±
or 16/7, whence p2/(^a)2 
= -2
5°g7-, and p/\a 
= (approxi-
mately) 14|/7 or 43/21. 
Consequently the area of the
heptagon = 7 . \pa = 7 . f|a2 = ff a2.
The regular octagon, decagon and dodecagon.
In these cases (chaps. 21, 23, 25) Heron finds p by drawing
the perpendicular OC from 0, the centre of the
circumscribed circle, on a side AB, and then making
the angle OAD equal to the angle AOD.
For the octagon,
I ADC = £22, and /> = | a ( l + </2) = £a(l +f|)
or | a . f | approximately.
For the decagon,
/.ADC — f 22, and ^4.2):
hence 
AD : J.C = 5
For the dodecagon,
= 5 : 4 nearly (see preceding page);
3, and p = £<&(§+§) = -§a
Accordingly ^48 = %9-c6
the side in each case.
(2 + V3) = J a ( 2 + | )
approximately.
J.1O = ^-a2, A12 = ^5-<x2, where a is
The regular enneagon and hendecagon.
In these cases (chaps. 22, 24) the Table of Chords (i e.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE REGULAR POLYGONS 
329
presumably Hipparehus's Table) is appealed to. If AB be the
side (a) of an enneagon or hendecagon inscribed in a circle, AC
the diameter through A, we are told that the Table of Chords
gives ^ and -fa as the respective approximate values of the
ratio AB/'AC. 
The angles subtended at the centre 0 by the
side AB are 40° and 32X
8
T° respec-
tively, and Ptolemy's Table gives,
as the chords subtended by angles of
40° and 33° respectively, 41? 2' 33"
and 34P 4' 55" (expressed in 120th
parts of the diameter); Heron's
figures correspond to 40^ and 33^
36' respectively. For the enneagon
AC2 = 9AB\ whence BC2 = $AB*
or approximately 2££-AB2, and
BC = *£-a; 
therefore 
(area of
enneagon) = § . AABC=-5£-a2. For
the hendecagon AC2 = -%%S-AB2 and BC2 = ^£-AB\ 
so that
BC = -2
T
4-a, and area of hendecagon = \x- • A ABC = -\6-a2.
An ancient formula for the ratio between the side of any
regular polygon and the diameter of the circumscribing circle
is preserved in Geepon. 147 sq. (= Pseudo-Dioph. 23-41),
namely dn — n—. 
Now the ratio nan/dn 
tends to TT as the
o
number (n) of sides increases, and the formula indicates a time
when 7r was generally taken as = 3.
(e) The Circle.
Coming to the circle (Metrica I. 26) Heron uses Archi-
medes's value for 7r, namely -2
T
2-, making the circumference of
a circle ^-r and the area y|cZ2, where r is the radius and d the
diameter. It is here that he gives the more exact limits
for 7T which he says that Archimedes found in his work On
Plinthides and Cylinders, but which are not convenient for
calculations. The limits, as we have seen, are given in the
text as 2$i*T£.<ir < -Wm8-' a n d w i t n Tannery's alteration to
2 a r e q u i t e satisfactory.1
See vol. I, pp. 232-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

330 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
(C) Segment of a circle.
According to Heron (Metrica I. 30) the ancients measured
the area of a segment rather inaccurately, taking the area
to be 4 (6 + h) h, where b is the base and h the height. He
conjectures that it arose from taking w = 3, because, if we
apply the formula to the semicircle, the area becomes \ . 3r2,
where r is the radius. Those, he says (chap. 31), who have
investigated the area more accurately have added ^(i'')*
to the above formula, making it \ (b + h) h + •£% (•§ b)2, and this
seems to correspond to the value 3^ for n, since, when applied
to the semicircle, the formula gives -|(3r2 + ^r2). He adds
that this formula should only be applied to segments of
a circle less than a semicircle, and not even to all of these, but
only in cases where b is not greater than 3h. Suppose e.g.
that b = 60, h = 1; in that case even T\(J6)2= T* • 9 0 0 = 64f >
which is greater even than the parallelogram with 60, 1 as
sides, which again is greater than the segment. Where there-
fore b > 3 h, he adopts another procedure.
This is exactly modelled on Archimedes's quadrature of
a segment of a parabola. Heron proves (Metrica I. 27-29, 32)
that, if ADB be a segment of a circle, and D the middle point
of the arc, and if the arcs AD, DB be
similarly bisected at B, F,
A ADB < 4 (A AED + A DFB).
Similarly, if the same construction be
made for the segments AED, BFD, each
of them is Tess than 4 times the sum of the two small triangles
in the segments left over. It follows that
(area of segmt. ADB) > A ADB {1 ] £ + (£)*+ ...}
> | A ADB.
'If therefore we measure the triangle, and add one-third of
it, we shall obtain the area of the segment as nearly as
possible/ 
That is, for segments in which b > 3 k, Heron
takes the area to be equal to that of the parabolic segment
with the same base and height, or \bh.
In addition to these three formulae for 8, the area of
a segment, there are yet others, namely
Mensurae 29,
„ 
31.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SEGMENT OF A CIRCLE 
331
The first of these formulae is applied to a segment greater
than a semicircle, the second to a segment less than a semi-
circle.
In the Metrica the area of a segment greater than a semi-
circle is obtained by subtracting the area of the complementary
segment from the area of the circle.
From the OeometrLca1 we find that the circumference of the
segment less than a semicircle was taken to be V(b2 + 4h2) -f \h
or alternatively V(b2 + 4h2) + { V (b2 + 4 h2) - b} ^ •
(77) Ellipse, parabolic segment, surface of cylinder, right
cone, sphere and segment of sphere.
After the area of an ellipse {Metrica I. 34) and of a parabolic
segment (chap. 35), Heron gives the surface of a cylinder
(chap. 36) and a right cone (chap. 37); in both cases he unrolls
the surface on a plane so that the surface becomes that of a
parallelogram in the one case and a sector of a circle in the
other. For the surface of a sphere (chap. 38) and a segment of
it (chap. 39) he simply uses Archimedes's results.
Book I ends with a hint how to measure irregular figures,
plane or not. 
If the figure is plane and bounded by an
irregular curve, neighbouring points are taken on the curve
such that, if they are joined in order, the contour of the
polygon so formed is not much different from the curve
itself, and the polygon is then measured by dividing it into
triangles. If the surface of an irregular solid figure is to be
found, you wrap round it pieces of very thin paper or cloth,
enough to cover it, and you then spread out the paper or
cloth and measure that.
Book II. Measurement of volumes.
The preface to Book II is interesting as showing how
vague the traditions about Archimedes had already become.
(After the measurement of surfaces, rectilinear or not, it is
proper to proceed to the solid bodies, the surfaces of which we
have already measured in the preceding book, surfaces plane
and spherical, conical and cylindrical, and irregular surfaces
as well. The methods of dealing with these solids are, in
1 Cf. Geotn., 94, 95 (19. 2, 4, Heib.), 97. 4 (20. 7, Heib.).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

332 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
view of their surprising character, referred to Archimedes by
certain writers who give the traditional account of their
origin. But whether they belong to Archimedes or another,
it is necessary to give a sketch of these methods as well/
The Book begins with generalities about figures all the
sections of which parallel to the base are equal to the base
and similarly situated, while the centres of the sections are on
a straight line through the centre of the base, which maybe
either obliquely inclined or perpendicular to the base ; whether
the said straight line (' the axis') is or is not perpendicular to
the base, the volume is equal to the product of the area of the
base and the "perpendicular height of the top of the figure
from the base. The term ' height' is thenceforward restricted
to the length of the perpendicular from the top of the figure
on the base.
(a) Cone, cylinder, 'parallelepiped (prism), pyramid, and
frustum.
II. 1-7 deal with a cone, a cylinder, a 'parallelepiped' (the
base of which is not restricted to the parallelogram but is in
the illustration given a regular hexagon, so that the figure is
more properly a prism with polygonal bases), a triangular
prism, a pyramid with base of any form, a frustum of a
triangular pyramid; the figures are in general oblique.
(j8) Wedge-shaped solid (PcofjLio-Kos or o-
II. 8 is a case which is perhaps worth giving. It is that of
a rectilineal solid, the base of which is a rectangle ABGD and
has opposite to it another rectangle EFGH, the sides of which
are respectively parallel but not necessarily proportional to
those of ABGD. Take AK equal to EF, and^BZ equal to FG.
Bisect BK, CL in V, W, and draw KRPU, VQOM parallel to
AD, and LQRN, WOPT parallel to AB. 
Join FKy GB, LG,
GU, EN
Then the solid is divided into (1) the parallelepiped with
AR, EG as opposite faces, (2) the prism with KL as base and
FG as the opposite edge, (3) the prism with NU as base and
GH as opposite edge, and (4) the pyramid with RLGU as base
and G as vertex. Let h be the ' height' of the figure. Now
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF SOLIDS 
333
the parallelepiped (1) is on A R as base and has height h ; the
prism (2) is equal to a parallelepiped on KQ as base and with
height h\ the prism (3) is equal to a parallelepiped with NP
as base and height h; and finally the pyramid (4) is equal to
a parallelepiped of height h and one-third of RG as base*
W
Therefore the whole solid is equal to one parallelepiped
with height h and base equal to 
R
or AO + $RO.
Now, if AB = a,BC= b, EF = c, FG = d,
AV = ±(a + c),AT = ±(b + d),RQ = i(a-c), RP = J(6-
Therefore volume of solid
The solid in question is evidently the true (3a)fiL<TKo? (c little
altar'), for the formula is used to calculate the content of
a PcofjLio-Kos in Stereom. II. 40 (68, Heib.) It is also, I think,
the a-(/)7ji/i(rK09 (' little wedge'), a measurement of which is
given in Stereom. I. 26 (25, Heib.) It is true that the second
term of the first factor -£% (ct — c) (b — d) is there neglected,
perhaps because in the case taken (a =•• 7, b = 6, c = 5, d = 4)
this term (= §) is small compared with the other (=30). A
particular o-fyrjvio-Kos, in which either c = a or d = 6, was
called ovv£\ the second term in the factor of the content
vanishes in this case, and, if e.g. c = a, the content is |(6 + d)ah.
Another ftayfticKos is measured in Stereom. I. 35 (34, Heib.),
where the solid is inaccurately called 'a pyramid oblong
and truncated (icoXovpo?) or half-perfect \
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

334 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
The method is the same mutatis mutandis as that used in
II. 6 for the frustum of a pyramid with any triangle for base,
and it is applied in II. 9 to the case of a frustum of a pyramid
with a square base, the formula for which is
where a, a' are the sides of the larger and smaller bases
respectively, and h the height; the expression is of course
easily reduced to | h(a2 4- aa' H- a'2).
(y) Frustum of cone, sphere, and segment thereof.
A frustum of a cone is next measured in two ways, (1) by
comparison with the corresponding frustum of the circum-
scribing pyramid with square base, (2) directly as the
difference between two cones (chaps. 9, 10). The volume of
the frustum of the cone is to that of the frustum of the
circumscribing pyramid as the area of the base of the cone to
that of the base of the pyramid; i.e. the volume of the frus-
tum of the cone is \TT, or -|~|, times the above expression for
the frustum of the pyramid with a2, a'2 as bases, and it
reduces to -^nh (a2H-aa/ + a/2), where a, a/ are the diameters
of the two bases. For the sphere (chap. 11) Heron uses
Archimedes's proposition that the circumscribing cylinder is
1^ times the sphere, whence the volume of the sphere
= I • d. \%d2 or ±\dz; for a segment of a sphere (chap. 12) he
likewise uses Archimedes's result {On the Sphere and Cylinder,
II. 4).
(8) Anchor-ring or tore.
The anchor-ring or tore is next measured (chap. 13) by
means of a proposition which Heron quotes from Dionyso-
dorus, and which is to the effect that, if a be the radius of either
circular section of the tore through the axis of revolution, and
c the distance of its centre from that axis,
7ra2: ac = (volume of tore): nc2 . 2a
(whence volume of tore = 2n2ca2]. 
In the particular case
taken a = 6, c = 14, and Heron obtains, from the proportion
113^:84 = 7:7392, F=9956f 
But he shows that he is
aware that the volume is the product of the area of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MEASUREMENT OF SOLIDS 
335
describing circle and the length of the path of its centre.
For, he says, since 14 is a radius (of the path of the centre),
28 is its diameter and 88 its circumference. 
'If then the tore
be straightened out and made into a cylinder, it will have 88
for its length, and the diameter of the base of the cylinder is
12; so that the solid content of the cylinder is, as we have
seen, 9956f' (= 88 . ^ . 144^.
(e) The two special solids of Archimedes's 
'Method'.
Chaps. 14, 15 give the measurement of the two remarkable
solids of Archimedes's Method, following Archimedes's results.
(£) The jive regular solids.
In chaps. 16-1§ Heron measures the content of the five
regular solids after the cube. He has of course in each case
to find the perpendicular from the centre of the circumscrib-
ing sphere on any face. Let p be this perpendicular, a the
edge of the solid, r the radius of the circle circumscribing any
face. Then (1) for the tetrahedron
a2 = 3r2, p2 = a 2--|a 2 = §a2.
(2) In the case of the octahedron, which is the sum of two
equal pyramids on a square base, the content is one-third
of that base multiplied by the diagonal of the figure,
i. e. ^ . a2. \/2 a or § \/2. a3; in the case taken a = 7, and
Heron takes 10 as an approximation to <%/(2. 72) or ^98, the
result being §.10.49 or 163§. (3) In the case of the icosa-
hedron Heron merely says that
p: a = 93 :127 (the real value of the ratio is \ 
!7 + S N/ 5\ .
(4) In the case of the dodecahedron, Heron says* that
p\a = 9 : 8 (the true value is \ 
I 
— 
> and, if </5 is
put equal to | , Heron's ratio is readily obtained).
Book II ends with an allusion to the method attributed to
Archimedes for measuring the contents of irregular bodies by
immersing them in water and measuring the amount of fluid
displaced.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

336 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Book III. Divisions of figures.
This book has much in common with Euclid's book On divi-
sions (of figures), the problem being to divide various figures,
plane or solid, by a straight line or plane into parts having
a given ratio. In III. 1-3 a triangle is divided into two parts
in a given ratio by a straight line (1) passing through a vertex,
(2) parallel to a side, (3) through any point on a side.
III. 4 is worth description: ' Given a triangle ABO, to cut
out of it a triangle DEF (where D, E, F are points on the
sides respectively) given in magnitude and such that the
triangles AEF, BFD, OED may be equal in area/ Heron
assumes that, if D, E, F divide the sides so that
A F: FB = BD: D 0 = CE: EA,
the latter three triangles are equal in area.
He then has to find the value of
each of the three ratios which will
result in the triangle DEF having a
given area.
Join AD.
•Since BD:OD = CE:EA,
BC:CD=CA:AEy
and AABO: AADC=AADO: AADE.
Also 
AABOiAABD = A ADO: AEDO.
But (since the area of the triangle DEF is given) AEDO is
given, as well as AABO. Therefore AABD x A A DC is given.
Therefore, if AH be perpendicular to BO,
AH2.BD.DCis 
given;
therefore BD. DC is given, and, since BC is given, D is given
in position (we have to apply to BC a rectangle equal to
BD. DC and falling short by a square).
As an example Heron takes AB =13, BC — 14, CA = 15,
ADEF = 24. A ABC is then 84, and AH = 12.
Thus AEDC = 20, and AH2. BD. DC = 4 . 84 . 20 = 6720 ;
therefore BD .DC = 6720/144 or 46| (the text omits the §).
Therefore, says Heron, BD = 8 approximately. 
For 8 we
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVISIONS OF FIGURES 
337
should apparently have 8J, since DC is immediately stated to
be 5^ (not 6). That is, in solving the equation
= 0,
which gives x = 7 ± V(2%), Heron apparently substituted 2£ or
f for 2^, thereby obtaining 1^ as an approximation to the
surd.
(The lemma assumed in this proposition is easily proved.
Let mm be the ratio AF:FB = BD:DC = GE:EA.
Then AF= mc/(m + n), FB = nc/(m + n), CE = mb/(m + n),
EA = nb/(m + ri), &c.
Hence
AAFE'/AABC = 
mn 
= ABDF/AABO = ACDE/AABC,
and the triangles AFE, BDF, GDE are equal.
Pappus* has the proposition that the triangles A BC, DEF
have the same centre of gravity.)
Heron next shows how to divide a parallel-trapezium into
two parts in a given ratio by a straight line (1) through the
point of intersection of the non-parallel sides, (2) through a
given point on one of the parallel sides, (3) parallel to the
parallel sides, (4) through a point on one of the non-parallel
sides (III. 5-8). III. 9 shows how to divide the area of a
circle into parts which have a given ratio by means of an
inner circle with the same centre. For the problems begin-
ning with III. 10 Heron says that numerical calculation alone
no longer suffices, but geometrical methods must be applied.
Three problems are reduced to problems solved by Apollonius
in his treatise On cutting off an area. The first of these is
III. 10, to cut off from the angle of a triangle a given
proportion of the triangle by a straight line through a point
on the opposite side produced. III. 11, 12, 13 show how
to cut any quadrilateral into parts in a given ratio by a
straight line through a point (1) on a side (a) dividing the
side in the given ratio, (b) not so dividing it, (2) not on any
side, (a) in the case where the quadrilateral is a trapezium,
i.e. has two sides parallel, (b) in the case where it is not; the
last case (b) is reduced (like III. 10) to the ' cutting-off of an
1 Pappus, viii, pp. 1034-8. Cf. pp. 430-2 post
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

338 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
area'. These propositions are ingenious and interesting.
III. 11 shall be given as a specimen.
Given any quadrilateral A BCD and a point E on the side
AB, to draw through E a straight line EF which shall cut
the quadrilateral into two parts in
the ratio of AE to EB. 
(We omit
the analysis.) 
Draw CG parallel
to BA to meet AB produced in G.
Join BE, and draw GH parallel
to BE meeting BG in H.
Join CE, EH, EG.
Then AGBE= AHBE and, adding A ABE to each, we have
A AGE = (quadrilateral ABHE).
Therefore (quadr. ABHE): AGEB = A GAE: ACEB
= 
AE;EB.
But (quadr. ABHE) and ACEB are parts of the quadri-
lateral, and they leave over only the triangle EHC. We have
therefore only to divide AEHC in the same ratio AE-.EB by
the straight line EF. This is done by dividing HC at F in
the ratio AE: EB and joining EF.
The next proposition (III. 12) is easily reduced to this.
If AE: EB is not equal to the given ratio, let F divide AB
in the given ratio, and through F
draw FG dividing the quadri-
lateral in the given ratio (III. 11).
Join EG, and draw FH parallel
to EG. Let FH meet BC in H,
and join EH.
p 
£ 
Then is EH the required straight
line through E dividing the quad-
rilateral in the given ratio.
For AFGE = AHGE. 
Add to each (quadr. GEBC).
Therefore (quadr. CGFB) = (quadr. CHEB).
Therefore EH divides the quadrilateral in the given ratio,
just as FG does.
The case (III. 13) where E is not on a side of the quadri-
lateral [(2) above] takes two different forms according as the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVISIONS OF FIGURES
339
two opposite sides which the required straight line cuts are
(a) parallel or (6) not parallel. In the first case (a) the
problem reduces to drawing a straight line through E inter-
secting the parallel sides in points F, G such that BF+AG
is equal to a given length. In the second case (b) where
BC, AD are not parallel Heron supposes them to meet in H.
The angle at H is then given, and the area ABU, 
It is then
a question of cutting off from a triangle with vertex H a
triangle HFG of given area by a straight line drawn from E}
which is again a problem in Apollonius's Gutting-off of an
area. The auxiliary problem in case (a) is easily solved in
III. 16. Measure AH equal to the given length. Join BH
and bisect it at M. Then EM meets BC, AD in points such
that BF+ AG = the given length. For, by congruent triangles,
BF = GH.
The same problems are solved for the case of any polygon
in III. 14, 15. A sphere is then divided (III. 17) into segments
such that their surfaces are in a given ratio, by means of
Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, II. 3, just as, in
III. 23, Prop. 4 of the same Book is used to divide a sphere
into segments having their volumes in a given ratio.
III. 18 is interesting because it recalls an ingenious pro-
position in Euclid's book On Divisions. 
Heron's problem is
' To divide a given circle into three equal parts by two straight
Z 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

340 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
lines', and he observes that, ' as the problem is clearly not
rational, we shall, for practical convenience, make the division,
as exactly as possible, in the follow-
ing way.' 
AB is the side of an
equilateral triangle inscribed in the
circle. 
Let CD be the parallel
diameter, 0 the centre of the circle,
and join A0, BO, AD, DB. Then
shall the segment ABD be very
nearly one-third of the circle. For,
since AB is the side of an equi-
lateral triangle in the circle, the
sector OAEB is one-third of the
circle. And the triangle AOB forming part of the sector
is equal to the triangle ADB\ therefore the segment AEB
plus the triangle ABD is equal to one-third oi the circle,
and the segment ABD only differs from this by the small
segment on BD as base, which may be neglected. Euclid's
proposition is to cut off one-third (or any fraction) of a circle
between two parallel chords (see vol. i, pp. 429-30).
III. 19 finds a point D within any triangle ABC such that
the triangles DBC, DO A, DAB are all equal; and then Heron
passes to the division of solid figures.
The solid figures divided in a given ratio (besides the
sphere) are the pyramid with base of any form (III. 20),
the cone (III. 21) and the frustum of a cone (III. 22), the
cutting planes being parallel to the base in each case. These
problems involve the extraction of the cube root of a number
which is in general not an exact cube, and the point of
interest is Heron's method of approximating to the cube root
in such a case. Take the case of the cone, and suppose that
the portion to be cut off at the top is to the rest of the cone as
m to n. We have to find the ratio in which the height or the
edge is cut by the plane parallel to the base which cuts
the cone in the given ratio. The volume of a cone being
^7rc2h, where c is the radius of the base and h the height,
we have to find the height of the cone the volume of which
is 
. i7rc2A, and, as the height h' is to the radius c' of
its base as Ji is to c, we have simply to find h' where
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVISIONS OF FIGURES 
341
= m/(m + ri). Or, if we take the edges e, er instead
of the heights, e/3/e3 = m/(m + n). 
In the case taken by
Heron m: n = 4 :1, and e = 5. Consequently e'3 = -f. 53 = 100.
Therefore, says Heron, e'= 4T
9
? approximately, and in III. 20
he shows how this is arrived at.
Approximation to the cube root of a non-cube number.
'Take the nearest cube numbers to 100 both above and
below; these are 125 and 64.
Then 
125-100 = 25,
and 
100- 64 = 36.
Multiply 5 into 36; this gives 180. Add 100, making 280.
(Divide 180 by 280); this gives T
9
?. Add this to the side of
the smaller cube: this gives 4T\. This is as nearly as possible
the cube root ("cubic side") of 100 units.'
We have to conjecture Heron's formula from this example.
Generally, if a3 < A < (a+ I)3, suppose that A — a3 = d19 and
(a+1)3 — A = d2. The best suggestion that has been made
is Wertheim's,1 namely that Heron's formula for the approxi-
mate cube root was a + ,—-—, . 
1 
« The 5 multiplied
\a + 1) d1 + ad2
into the 36 might indeed have been the square root of 25 or
Vd2, and the 100 added to the 180 in the denominator of the
fraction might have been the original number 100 (A) and not
4.25 or ad2, but Wertheim's conjecture is the more satisfactory
because it can be evolved out of quite elementary considera-
tions. This is shown by G. Enestrom as follows.2 Using the
same notation, Enestrom further supposes that x is the exact
value of *\/A, and that (x — af = Sv \a + 1 — xf = S2.
Thus
S^x3 
— 3x2a + 3xa2 — a3, and 3ax(x — a) = x3 — a3 — S1^dl — Sv
Similarly from S2 — (a + 1— xf we derive
3(a + l)x(a+ 1 — x) = (a + l) 3-# 3 — S2 = d2-S2.
Therefore
d2 — S2 __ 3(a+ \)x (a+ 1— x) 
(a+ 1) {1 — (x — a)}
d1—-S1~ 
3ax(x — a) 
~~ 
a(x — a)
_ 
a+1 
a + 1 m
a{x — a) 
a 
'
1 Zeitschr.f. Math. it. Phijsik, xliv, 1899, hist.-litt. Abt., pp. 1-3.
2 Bibliotheca Maihernatica, viii3, 1907-8, pp. 412-13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

342 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
and, solving for x — a, we obtain
or
=a +
Since S19 82 are in any case the cubes of fractions, we may
neglect them for a first approximation, and we have
III. 22, which shows how to cut a frustum of a cone in a given
ratio by a section parallel to the bases, shall end our account
of the Metrica. I shall give the general formulae on the left
and Heron's case on the right. Let ABED be the frustum,
let the diameters of the bases be a, a\ and the height h.
Complete the cone, and let the height of ODE be x.
Suppose that the frustum has to be cut by a plane FG in
such a way that
(frustum DG): (frustum FB) = m:n.
In the case taken by Heron
a = 28, a'= 21, h = 12, m = 4, n = 1.
Draw Dif perpendicular to AB.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVISIONS OF FIGUKES
343
Since (DO) : (FB) = m:n,
(DB):(DG) = (m + n):m.
Now
(DB) = r\7rh (a2 + aa! + a'2),
m
and 
(DO) =
(DB).
Let y be the height (CM) of the
cone CFG.
Then D#: 422 = CK : 
,
or h : | ( a - O = (as + A): ^a,
whence x is known.
Cone CDE=^7ra'*x,
cone CFG=(CDE) +
(DB),
cone 0 ^ 5 = (CDE) + (i)5).
Now, says Heron,
(CAB) + (CDE)
(CFG) 
~ 
if
[He might have said simply
(CDE):(CFG) = xz:y\]
This gives y or CM,
whence LM is known.
Now
so that AD is known.
Therefore DF =
. 42) is
known.
(DG):(FB) = 4:1,
(2)5): (2)(?) = 5:4.
(2)JB) = 5698,
(DG) = 4558J.
, 
14.12
and 
a? = 48 — 12 = 36.
(cone (72)^)1=4158,
(cone
= 4158+4558f=a8716§,
(cone CAB) =4158 + 5698 = 9856.
V = — 8716f
(483 + 363)
9856 + 4158
= 8716| • V4W48- = 97805,
whence y = 46 approximately.
Therefore iilf = y — x— 10.
= 156J,
and 
4 2 ) = 1 2 | .
Therefore 2)2^= J§
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

344 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
Quadratic equations solved in Heron.
We have already met with one such equation (in Metrica
III. 4), namely a2-14a5 + 46§ = 0, the result only (x = 8i)
being given. There are others in the Geometrlca where the
process of solution is shown.
(1) Geometrica 24, 3 (Heib.). ' Given a square such that the
sum of its area and perimeter is 896 feet: to separate the area
from the perimeter': i.e. x2 + 4# = 896. Heron takes half of
4 and adds its square, completing the square on the left side.
(2) Geometrica 21, 9 and 24, 46 (Heib.) give one and the same
equation, Geom. 24, 47 another like it. 'Given the sum of
the diameter, perimeter and area of a circle, to find each
of them/
The two equations are
H ¥ - < & = 212,
and 
iid2+29_d = 
6 7i #
Our usual method is to begin by dividing by ^i throughout,
so as to leave d2 as the first term. Heron's is to multiply by
such a number as will leave a square as the first term. In this
case he multiplies by 154, giving ll2d2 + 58 . lid = 212 . 154
or 67^.154 as the case may be. 
Completing the square,
he obtains (11 d + 29)2 = 32648 + 841 or 10395 + 841. Thus
llcZ + 29 = V (33489) or -/(11236), that is, 183 or 106.
Thus lid — 154 or 77, and d = 14 or 7, as the case may be.
Indeterminate problems in the Geometrica.
Some very interesting indeterminate problems are now
included by Heiberg in the Geometrica.1 Two of them (chap.
24, 1-2) were included in the Geeponicus in Hultsch's editipn
(sections 78, 79); the rest are new, having been found in the
Constantinople manuscript from which Schone edited the
Metrica. As, however, these problems, to whatever period
thejr belong, are more akin to algebra than to mensuration,
they will be more properly described in a later chapter on
Algebra.
1 Heronis Alexandrini opera, vol. iv, p. 414. 28 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DIOPTRA 
345
The Dioptra (nepl 5tO7rrpay).
This treatise begins with a careful description of the
dioptra, an instrument which served with the ancients for
the same purpose as a theodolite with us (chaps. 1-5). 
The
problems with which the treatise goes on to deal are
(a) problems of ' heights and distances', (b) engineering pro-
blems, (c) problems of mensuration, to which is added
(chap. 34) a description of a 'hodometer', or taxameter, con-
sisting of an arrangement of toothed wheels and endless
screws on the same axes working on the teeth of the next
wheels respectively. 
The book ends with the problem
(chap. 37), 'With a given force to move a given weight by
means of interacting toothed wheels', which really belongs
to mechanics, and was apparently added, like some other
problems (e.g. 31, '.to measure the outflow of, i.e. the volume
of water issuing from, a spring'), in order to make the book
more comprehensive. The essential problems dealt with are
such as the following. To determine the difference of level
between two given points (6), to draw a straight line connect-
ing two points the one of which is not visible from the other
(7), to measure the least breadth of a river (9), the distance of
two inaccessible points (10), the height of an inaccessible point
(12), to determine the difference between the heights of two
inaccessible points and the position of the straight line joining
them (13), the depth of a ditch (14); to bore a tunnel through
a mountain going straight from one mouth to the other (15), to
sink a shaft through a mountain perpendicularly to a canal
flowing underneath (16); given a subterranean canal of any
form, to find on the ground above a point from which a
vertical shaft must be sunk in order to reach a given point
on the canal (for the purpose e.g. of removing an obstruction)
(20); to construct a harbour on the model of a given segment
of a circle, given the ends (17), to construct a vault so that it
may have a spherical surface modelled on a given segment
(18). The mensuration problems include the following: to
measure an irregular area, which is done by inscribing a
rectilineal figure and then drawing perpendiculars to the
sides at intervals to meet the contour (23), or by drawing one
straight line across the area and erecting perpendiculars from
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

346 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
that to meet the contour on both sides (24) ; given that all
the boundary stones of a certain area have disappeared except
two or three, but that the plan of the area is forthcoming,
to determine the position of the lost boundary stones (25).
Chaps. 26-8 remind us of the Metrical to divide a given
area into given parts by straight lines drawn from one point
(26); to measure a given area without entering it, whether
because it is thickly covered with trees, obstructed by houses,
or entry is forbidden! (27); chaps. 28-30 = Metrica III. 7,
III. 1, and I. 7, the last of these three propositions being the
proof of the ' formula of Heron' for the area of a triangle in
terms of the sides. Chap. 35 shows how to find the distance
between Rome and Alexandria along a great circle of the
earth by means of the observation of the same eclipse at
the two places, the analemma for Rome, and a concave hemi-
sphere constructed for Alexandria to show the position of the
sun at the time of the said eclipse. It is here mentioned that
the estimate by Eratosthenes of the earth's circumference in
his book On the Measurement of the Earth was the most
accurate that had been made up to date.1 Some hold that
the chapter, like some others which have no particular con-
nexion with the real subject of the Dioptra (e.g. chaps. 31, 34,
37-8) were probably inserted by a later editor, ' in order to
make the treatise as complete as possible \2
The Mechanics.
It is evident that th# Mechanics, as preserved in the Arabic,
is far from having kept its original form, especially in
Book I. 
It begins with an account of the arrangement of
toothed wheels designed to solve the problem of moving a
given weight by a given force; this account is the same as
that given at the end of the Greek text of the Dioptra, and it
is clearly the same description as that which Pappus3 found in
the work of Heron entitled BapovXicos ('weight-lifter') and
himself reproduced with a ratio of force to weight altered
from 5 :1000 to 4 :160 and with a ratio of*2 :1 substituted for
5:1 in the diameters of successive wheels. It would appear
that the chapter from the BapovXKos was inserted in place of
1 Heron, vol. iii, p. 302. 13-17. 
2 Ib, p. 302. 9.
3 Pappus, viii, p. 1060 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE MECHANICS 
347
the first chapter or chapters of the real Mechanics which had
been lost. The treatise would doubtless begin with generalities
introductory to mechanics such as we* find in the (much
interpolated) beginning of Pappus, Book VIII. It must then
apparently have dealt with the properties of circles, cylinders,
and spheres with reference to their importance in mechanics ;
for in Book II. 21 Heron says that the circle is of all figures
the most movable and most easily moved, the same thing
applying also to the cylinder and sphere, and he adds in
support of this a reference to a proof ' in the preceding Book \
This reference may be to I. 21, but at the end of that chapter
he says that 'cylinders, even when heavy, if placed on the
ground so that they touch it in one line only, are easily
moved, and the same is true of spheres also, a matter which
we have already discussed'; the discussion may have come
earlier in the Book, in a chapter now lost.
The treatise, beginning with chap. 2 after the passage
interpolated from the Bapov\Ko$, is curiously disconnected.
Chaps. 2-7 discuss the motion of circles or wheels, equal or
unequal, moving on different axes (e.g. interacting toothed
wheels), or fixed on the same axis, much after the fashion of
the Aristotelian Mechanical problems.
Aristotle's Wheel.
In particular (chap. 7) Heron attempts to explain the puzzle
of the ' Wheel of Aristotle', which remained a puzzle up to quite
modern times, and gave rise to the proverb, ' rotam Aristotelis
magis torquere, quo magis torqueretur \1 ' The question is \ says
the Aristotelian problem 24/ why does the greater circle roll an
equal distance with the lesser circle when they are placed about
the same centre, whereas, when they roll separately, as the
size of one is to the size of the other, so are the straight lines
traversed by them to one another ??2 Let AC, BD be quadrants
of circles with centre 0 bounded by the same radii, and draw
tangents AE, BF at A and B. In the first case suppose the
circle BD to roll along BF till D takes the position H\ then
the radius ODC will be at right angles to AE, and G will be
at G, a point such that AG is equal to BH. 
In the second
1 See Van Capelle, Aristotelis quaestiones mechanicae, 1812, p. 263 sq
2 Arist. Mechanica, 855 a 28.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

348
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
case suppose the circle AC to roll along AE till ODG takes
the position O'FE; then D will be at F where AE = BF.
And similarly if a whole revolution is performed and OB A is
again perpendicular to AE. 
Contrary, therefore, to the prin-
ciple that the greater circle moves quicker than the smaller on
the same axis, it would appear that the movement of the
smaller in this case is as quick as that of the greater, since
BH= AG, and BF — AE. 
Heron's explanation is that, e.g.
in the case where the larger circle rolls on AE, the lesser
circle maintains the same speed as the greater because it has
tivo motions; for if we regard the smaller circle as merely
fastened to the larger, and not rolling at all, its centre 0 will
move to 0' traversing a distance 00' equal to AE and BF\
hence the greater circle will take the lesser with it over an
equal distance, the rolling of the lesser circle having no effect
upon this.
The parallelogram of velocities.
Heron next proves the parallelogram of velocities (chap. 8);
he takes the case of a rectangle, but the proof is applicable
generally.
The way it is put is this. A
point moves with uniform velocity
along a straight line AB, from A
to B, while at the same time AB
moves with uniform velocity always
parallel to itself with its extremity
A describing the straight line AC.
Suppose that, when the point arrives at B, the straight line
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE PARALLELOGRAM OF VELOCITIES 
349
reaches the position CD. 
Let EF be any intermediate
position of AB, and 0 the position at the same instant
of the moving point on it. Then clearly 
AE:AC=EG:EF;
therefore AE:EG = AG:EF = AC: CD, and it follows that
Q lies on the diagonal AD, which is therefore the actual path
of the moving point.
Chaps. 9-19 contain a digression on the construction of
plane and solid figures similar to given figures but greater or
less in a given ratio. Heron observes that the case of plane
figures involves the finding of a mean proportional between
two straight lines, and the case of solid figures the finding of
two mean proportionals; in chap. 11 he gives his solution of
the latter problem, which is preserved in Pappus and Eutocius
as well, and has already been given above (vol. i, pp. 262-3).
The end of chap. 19 contains, quite inconsequently, the con-
struction of a toothed wheel to move on an endless screw,
after which chap. 20 makes a fresh start with some observa-
tions on weights in equilibrium on a horizontal plane but
tending to fall when the plane is inclined, and on the ready
mobility of objects of cylindrical form which touch the plane
in one line only.
Motion on an inclined plane.
When a weight is hanging freely by a rope over a pulley,
no force applied to the other end of the rope less than the
weight itself will keep it up, but, if the weight is placed on an
inclined plane, and both the plane and the portion of the
weight in contact with it are smooth, the case is different.
Suppose, e.g., that a weight in the form of a cylinder is placed
on an inclined plane so that the line in which they touch is
horizontal; then the force required to be applied to a rope
parallel to the line of greatest slope in the plane in order to
keep the weight in equilibrium is less than the weight. For
the vertical plane passing through the line of contact between
the cylinder and the plane divides the cylinder into two
unequal parts, that on the downward side of the plane being
the greater, so that the cylinder will tend to roll down; but
the force required to support the cylinder is the ' equivalent',
not of the weight of the whole cylinder, but of the difference
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

350 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
between the two portions into which the vertical plane cuts it
(chap. 23).
On the centre of gravity.
This brings Heron to the centre of gravity (chap. 24). Here,
a definition by Posidonius, a Stoic, of the ' centre of gravity'
or ' centre of inclination' is given, namely ' a point such that,
if the body is hung up at it, the body is divided into two
equal parts' (he should obviously have said ' divided by any
vertical plane through the point of suspension into two equal
parts'). But, Heron says, Archimedes distinguished between
the ' centre of gravityJ and the ' point of suspension', defining
the latter as a point on the body such that, if the body is
hung up at it, all the parts of the body remain in equilibrium
and do not oscillate or incline in any direction. '"Bodies", said
Archimedes, " may rest (without inclining one way or another)
with either a line, or only one point, in the body fixed ".' The
' centre of inclination', says Heron, * is one single point in any
particular body to which all the vertical lines through the
points of suspension converge.' Comparing Simplicius's quo-
tation of a definition by Archimedes in his KtvrpofiapiKd, to
the effect that the centre of gravity is a certain point in the
body such that, if the body is hung up by a string attached to
that point, it will remain in its position without inclining in
any direction,1 we see that Heron directly used a certain
treatise of Archimedes. So evidently did Pappus, who has
a similar definition. 
Pappus also speaks of a body supported
at a point by a vertical stick: if, he says, the body is in
equilibrium, the line of the stick produced upwards must pass
through the centre of gravity.2 Similarly Heron says that
the same principles apply when the body is supported as when
it is suspended. Taking up next (chaps. 25-31) the question
of ' supports', he considers cases of a heavy beam or a wall
supported on a number of pillars, equidistant or not, even
or not even in number, and projecting or not projecting
beyond one or both of the extreme pillars, and finds how
much of the weight is supported on each pillar. He says
that Archimedes laid down the principles in his 'Book on
1 Simplicius on De caelo, p. 543. 31-4, Heib.
2 Pappus, viii, p. 1032. 5-24.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ON THE CENTRE OF GRAVITY 
351
Supports \ 
As, however, the principles are the same whether
the body is supported or hung up, it does not follow that
this was a different work from that known as wept £vyS>v.
Chaps. 32-3, which are on the principles of the lever or of
weighing, end with an explanation amounting to the fact
that ' greater circles overpower smaller when their movement
is about the same centre', a proposition which Pappus says
that Archimedes proved in his work nepl {vycov.1 In chap. 32,
too, Heron gives as his authority a proof given by Archimedes
in the same work. 
With I. 33 may be compared II. 7,
where Heron returns to the same subject of the greater and
lesser circles moving about the same centre and states the
fact that weights reciprocally proportional to their radii are
in equilibrium when suspended from opposite ends of the
horizontal diameters, observing that Archimedes proved the
proposition in his work ' On the equalization of inclination'
(presumably laoppoTriai).
Book II. The five mechanical powers.
Heron deals with the wheel and axle, the lever, the pulley,
the wedge and the screw, and with combinations of these
powers. The description of the powers comes first, chaps. 1-6,
and then, after II. 7, the proposition above referred to, and the
theory of the several powers based upon it (chaps. 8-20).
Applications to specific cases follow. Thus it is shown how
to move a weight of 1000 talents by means of a force of
5 talents, first by the system of wheels described in the
Bapov\KO9, next by a system of pulleys, and thirdly by a
combination of levers (chaps. 21-5). It is possible to combine
the different powers (other than the wedge) to produce the
same result (chap. 29). The wedge and screw are discussed
with reference to their angles (chaps. 30-1) and chap. 32 refers
to the effect of friction.
Mechanics in daily life; queries and answers.
After a prefatory chapter (33), a number of queries resem-
bling the Aristotelian problems are stated and answered
(chap. 34), e.g. 'Why do waggons with two wheels carry
a weight more easily than those with four wheels ?', f Why
1 Pappus, viii, p. 1068. 20-3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

352 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
do great weights fall to the ground in a shorter time than
lighter ones?', 'Why does a stick break sooner when one
puts one's knee against it in the middle ?', ' Why do people
use pincers rather than the hand to draw a tooth ?', ' Why
is it easy to move weights which are suspended % \ and
' Why is it the more difficult to move such weights the farther
the hand is away from them, right up to the point of suspension
or a point near it ?', ' Why are great ships turned by a rudder
although it is so small ?', (Why do arrows penetrate armour
or metal plates but fail to penetrate cloth spread out ?'
Problems on the centre of gravity, &c.
II. 35, 36, 37 show how to find the centre of gravity of
a triangle, a quadrilateral and a pentagon respectively. Then,
assuming that a triangle of uniform thickness is supported by
a prop at each angle, Heron finds what weight is supported
by each prop, (a) when the props support the triangle only,
(b) when they support the triangle plus a given weight placed
at any point on it (chaps. 38, 39). Lastly, if known weights
are put on the triangle at each angle, he finds the centre of
gravity of the system (chap. 40); the problem is then extended
to the case of any polygon (chap. 41).
Book III deals with the practical construction of engines
for all sorts of purposes, machines employing pulleys with
one, two, or more supports for lifting weights, oil-presses, &c.
The Catoptrica.
This work need not detain us long. Several of the theoretical
propositions which it contains are the same as propositions
in the so-called Catoptrica of Euclid, which, as we have
seen, was in all probability the work of Theon of Alexandria
and therefore much later in date. In addition to theoretical
propositions, it contains problems the purpose of which is to
construct mirrors or combinations of mirrors of such shape
as will reflect objects in a particular way, e.g. to make the
right side appear as the right in the picture (instead of the
reverse), to enable a person to see his back or to appear in
the mirror head downwards, with face distorted, with three
eyes or two noses, and so forth. 
Concave and convex
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE GATOPTRICA 
353
cylindrical mirrors play a part in these arrangements. The
whole theory of course ultimately depends on the main pro-
positions 4 and 5 that the angles of incidence and reflection
are equal whether the mirror is plane or circular.
Heron's proof of equality of angles of incidence and reflection.
Let AB be a plane mirror, G the eye, D the object seen.
The argument rests on the fact that nature ' does nothing in
vain'. Thus light travels in a straight line, that is, by the
quickest road. Therefore, even
when the ray is a line broken
at a point by reflection, it must
mark the shortest broken line
of the kind connecting the eye
and the object. 
Now, says
Heron, I maintain that the
shortest of the broken lines
(broken at the mirror) which
connect 0 and D is the line, as
CAB, the parts of which make equal angles with the mirror.
Join DA and produce it to meet in F the perpendicular frpm
G to AB. 
Let B be any point on the mirror other than A,
and join FB, BD.
Now 
LEAF^LBAD
= Z CAE, by hypothesis.
Therefore the triangles AEF, AEG, having two angles equal
and AE common, are equal in all respects.
Therefore CA = AF, and CA + AD = DF.
Since FE = EG, and BE is perpendicular to FG, BF = BG
Therefore 
CB + BD = FB + BD
>FD,
i.e. > CA+AD.
The proposition was of course known to Archimedes. We
gather from a scholium to the Pseudo-Euclidean Gatoptrica
that he proved it in a different way, namely by reductio ad
absurdum, thus: Denote the angles GAE, DAB by a, /3 re-
spectively. Then, a is > = or < /3. Suppose a > /?. Then,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

354 
HERON OF ALEXANDRIA
reversing the ray so that the eye is at D instead of C, and the
object at G instead of D, we must have (3 > a. But ft was
less than a, which is impossible. (Similarly it can be proved
that (x is not less than /3.) Therefore oc = /?.
In the Pseudo-Euclidean Catoptrica the proposition is
practically assumed; for the third assumption or postulate
at the beginning states in effect that, in the above figure, if A
be the point of incidence, GE: EA — DH: HA (where DH is
perpendicular to AB). It follows instantaneously (Prop. 1)
that IGAE = ID AH.
If the mirror is the convex side of a circle, the same result
follows a fortiori. 
Let GA, AD meet
the arc at equal angles, and CB, BD at
unequal angles. Let AE be the tan-
gent at Ay and complete the figure.
Then, says Heron, (the angles GAC,
BAD being by hypothesis equal), if we
subtract the equal angles GAE, BAF
from the equal angles GAC, BAD (both
pairs of angles being 'mixed', be it
observed), we have AEAC = AFAD. 
Therefore 
CA+AD
< GF+FD and a fortiori < GB-\-BD.
The problems solved (though the text is so corrupt in places
that little can be made of it) were such as the following:
11, To construct a right-handed mirror (i.e. a mirror which
makes the right side right and the left side left instead of
the opposite); 12, to construct the mirror called polyiheoron
('with many images'); 16, to construct a mirror inside the
window of a house, so that you can see in it (while inside
the room) everything that passes in the street; 18, to arrange
mirrors in a given place so that a person who approaches
cannot actually see either himself or any one else but can see
any image desired (a 'ghost-seer').
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600583.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

